JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000
Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS
OF INFLUENCE GOALS
Similarities in Perceived
Face Threats and Facework
Across Sex and Close Relationships
STEVEN R. WILSON
Northwestern University

ADRIANNE W. KUNKEL
University of Kansas

This study tests the generalizability of Wilson, Aleman, and Leatham's revised analysis of
face threats and facework during compliance-gaining episodes. According to this revised
analysis, threats to face arise from tacit knowledge about (a) specific influence goals (e.g.,
giving advice, asking favors) and (b) the rules for directives (e.g., requests) that underlie
any attempt to seek compliance. Both types of knowledge are shared widely; hence, the distinct face threats of advice versus favors should generalize across sex and close relationships. Message sources give reasons as facework to redress particular face threats in an
episode defined by a specific influence goal; hence, patterns of reason giving also should
differ in advice versus favor episodes. Participants (N = 231 undergraduates) recalled an
actual conversation in which they either gave advice to or asked a favor of a close same-sex
friend, opposite-sex friend, or romantic partner and then rated threats to the message target's face and their own. Results for both perceived face threats and reason giving are consistent with the revised analysis. Comparisons with Brown and Levinson's politeness theory, as well as implications for future research, are drawn.

Seeking compliance can be complex, especially when issues with
regard to rights and responsibilities are raised and identities are challenged. Scholars often draw upon Brown and Levinson's (1987) politeness theory to account for the potential complexity of compliance gaining. Attempting to alter another person's behavior inherently is face
threatening; consequently, individuals use politeness to balance their
competing desires to be clear about what they want and to support
their interaction partner's face. Unfortunately, politeness theory has
difficulty explaining how people, as they seek compliance, (a) create
multiple threats to their own and to the target's face and (b) attempt to
redress this full range of face threats (Craig, Tracy, & Spisak, 1986;
Wilson, Kim, & Meischke, 1991/1992).
In a revised analysis of face threats during compliance-gaining episodes, Wilson, Aleman, and Leatham (1998) claim that individuals
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, Vol. 19 No. 2, June 2000 195-221
 2000 Sage Publications, Inc.

195

196

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

associate specific influence goals, such as giving advice or asking a
favor, with distinct potential threats to the message target's face and
their own. Potential face threats arise from tacit knowledge about (a)
specific influence goals (e.g., giving advice) and (b) rules for directives
(e.g., requests) that underlie any attempt to gain compliance. Both
types of knowledge are shared widely; thus, the potential face threats
created by giving advice as opposed to asking favors should be similar
when female or male young adults seek compliance from close friends
or romantic partners.
The present study evaluates how far this revised analysis can be
generalized. An initial study (Wilson et al., 1998) showed that young
adults anticipated distinct face threats as they imagined giving advice,
asking a favor, or enforcing an unfulfilled obligation with a same-sex
friend. Participants in that study also varied the number of reasons in
their compliance-gaining messages across scenarios defined by different influence goals. We extend this earlier study by (a) examining how
young adults give advice and ask favors across a broader range of close
relationships, (b) analyzing the focus rather than only the quantity of
reason giving, and (c) using a different data collection method. To
develop our rationale, we describe Wilson et al.'s (1998) revised analysis in greater detail and then derive research hypotheses.

A REVISED ANALYSIS OF
FACE THREATS AND FACEWORK
Our revised analysis makes assumptions about (a) the origins of
face threats during compliance-gaining episodes, (b) how participants
manage face threats, and (c) the generality of face and facework.
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE ORIGIN OF FACE THREATS

Drawing from politeness theory (Brown & Levinson, 1987), we presume that individuals in all cultures desire to maintain face, which can
be subdivided into two wants. Positive face is the desire to have one's
attributes and actions approved of by significant others. Negative face
is the desire to maintain one's autonomy and be free from unnecessary
constraint. Face wants are interdependent; hence, persons have
motives to support their interaction partner's face while maintaining
their own.
We also concur that many speech acts intrinsically threaten face or,
by definition, run contrary to the face wants of the speaker or hearer.
Speech act theory, with its analysis of the constitutive rules that define
speech acts, contains part of the answer to how face threats arise from
seeking compliance. Directives (Searle, 1976), or speech acts designed
to get a hearer to perform an action that he or she otherwise would not

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

197

have performed (e.g., requests, recommendations), are defined by a set
of constitutive rules, including that (a) there is a need for the desired
action to be performed; (b) there is a need for a directive (i.e., the target
already was not planning to perform the action); (c) the target plausibly might be willing or obligated, as well as able, to perform the desired
action; (d) the source has the right to issue this directive; and (e) the
source sincerely wants the desired action performed (Labov & Fanshel,
1977, pp. 77-82; Searle, 1969, pp. 64-71). Seeking compliance presumes that the message target plausibly may be willing to perform a
desired action (or else there is no sense in asking) and that the target
was not planning on performing the action already (or else there is no
need to ask). Presuming that a target may be willing to change his or
her behavior, by definition, constrains that person's autonomy (Brown
& Levinson, 1987, p. 144).
Unlike politeness theory, our revised analysis highlights influence
goals, or the reasons why a message source tries to alter a target's
behavior. Individuals interpret compliance-gaining episodes based on
their understanding of specific influence goals. During such an episode, the influence goal "brackets the situation. It helps segment the
flow of behavior into a meaningful unit; it says what the interaction is
about" (Dillard, Segrin, & Harden, 1989, p. 21). Advice and favors are
examples of specific influence goals meaningful to everyday actors
(Cody, Canary, & Smith, 1994; Dillard, 1989; Rule, Bisanz, & Kohn,
1985). Giving advice is recognized as a distinct influence goal due to
the fact that the message source (a) perceives that the target may
choose a less-than-optimal course of action, (b) believes that his or her
recommended course of action primarily benefits the target (other)
rather than him- or herself, and (c) feels motivated to advise out of concern for the target's well-being (Goldsmith & Fitch, 1997).1 Asking a
favor is recognizable because the message source makes a request that
(a) primarily benefits him- or herself rather than the target (other); (b)
imposes on the target's time, effort, and/or resources; and (c) goes
beyond what the target strictly is obligated to do (Goldschmidt, 1998).
When a speaker utters the prerequest, "Can I ask you a favor?" participants have a sense of what is about to unfold. They will expect something different if the speaker instead says, "Can I offer you some
advice?"
We also distinguish potential from intrinsic threats to face. According to Brown and Levinson (1987, pp. 65-68), a speech act creates one
and only one threat to face, and this face threat is intrinsic (i.e., it
arises by definition from necessary conditions for performing a speech
act). Our revised analysis, in contrast, assumes that a speech act
simultaneously can threaten multiple types of face. Unlike constraint
on the target's autonomy, however, other face threats are not intrinsic
to directives. Potential face threats are those that plausibly could, but
not necessarily will, occur when a directive is performed in pursuit of a

198

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

specific influence goal. As we show below, message sources do not
always appear nosy when giving advice, but concerns about appearing
nosy are relevant to advice situations in a way that they are not to
favor situations. A variety of negative qualities plausibly might be
attributed to a message source who asks too many favors, but nosy is
not one of those qualities (i.e., it is not a potential face threat in situations defined by the influence goal of asking favors).
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT REASON GIVING AS FACEWORK

Following Brown and Levinson (1987), we assume that speakers use
politeness, or deviations from literal adherence to Grice's (1975) maxims, to mitigate threats to their interaction partner's face. Brown and
Levinson identify reason giving as one linguistic form of politeness.
Reason giving is defined here as the extent to which a rationale for the
request and/or the desired action is stated explicitly in a compliance-gaining message. Message sources give reasons when they justify
why they are seeking compliance as well as why the target should comply. Reason giving refers to the mere presence of a rationale and not to
its perceived quality. According to politeness theory, speakers can
redress threats to a hearer's autonomy (negative face) as well as
approval (positive face) by giving reasons. A message source who performs a face-threatening act (FTA) such as a request can "claim that he
[sic] has overwhelming reasons for doing the FTA (for example, his
own incapacity), thereby implying that he normally wouldn't dream of
infringing on the hearer's negative face" (Brown & Levinson, 1987,
p. 189). With regard to positive politeness, a source also may give reasons so that the target "is led to see the reasonableness of the [source's]
FTA. . . . giving reasons is a way of implying `I can help you' or `You can
help me,' and, assuming cooperation, a way of showing what help is
needed" (Brown & Levinson, 1987, p. 128).
We conceptualize reason giving not only as politeness, but also more
broadly as facework that shapes the identities of both self and other
(Goffman, 1967). Message sources give reasons to redress the full
range of potential face threats associated with a specific influence goal.
When giving advice, for instance, sources may offer reasons to avoid
making themselves look nosy (their own positive face) and not just to
justify constraint on the target's autonomy (the other's negative face).
Our view of reason giving as facework suggests a distinction
between self-focused and other-focused reasons. When seeking compliance, message sources may explain why the target should comply with
their request or recommendation. This first type of reasoning focuses
primarily on the target (other), explaining why he or she should be able
or willing to comply. Examples of other-focused reasons include explanations about how the target (or people close to the target) (a) will benefit from compliance; (b) will suffer negative physical, emotional, or

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

199

monetary consequences from noncompliance; and (c) has the ability
and/or right to comply. Aside from explaining why the target should
comply, message sources also may justify why they are making a
request or recommendation. This second type of reasoning, which
focuses primarily on the message source (self), typically explains the
need for the desired action and/or the source's sincerity. Examples of
self-focused reasons include explanations about why the source (a)
needs help, (b) is not taking action him or herself, and (c) is concerned
about and/or cares about the target.
Aside from giving reasons, message sources may manage some
potential threats to face by withholding or suppressing reasons that
could have been given (Hample & Dallinger, 1990). As one example,
message sources who ask a favor often feel obligated to repay a favor
back in the future (Goldschmidt, 1998). Sources who give lots of reasons about why they need a favor risk implying that the favor must be a
large one (Brown & Levinson, 1987, p. 83). Putting these two ideas
together, message sources may avoid giving too many reasons when
asking favors not only to avoid pressuring the target but also out of fear
that, should the target comply, they will owe a large future favor in
return.
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE GENERALITY OF
POTENTIAL FACE THREATS AND FACEWORK

One purpose of our study is to evaluate whether the preceding analysis applies when young adults of either sex seek compliance with a
variety of relational partners. Some may question whether the potential threats of giving advice versus asking favors can be identified in
isolation from relationship type and gender.2 After all, young adults
make distinct assumptions about romance versus friendship (see
Werking, 1997, pp. 26-37). Romantic relationships contain potential
trajectories to long-term commitment and marriage (Honneycutt,
Cantrill, & Greene, 1989), whereas friendship is seen as an end in itself
(Rawlins, 1992). Romantic partners also may negotiate exclusivity,
whereas young adults typically expect their friends to have other
friends as well. Gender also infuses how young adults enact friendships and romantic relationships. Although the hypothesis that
women and men constitute different cultures is substantially overblown (Kunkel & Burleson, 1998), young adult women appear to
form friendships that are, on average, higher in communality
though similar in levels of agency relative to male friendships (see
Wright, 1998). Cross-sex friends face unique challenges such as presenting an authentic and credible depiction of their friendship to
external audiences in light of society's heterosexist assumptions and
celebration of romantic relationships (Monsour, 1997; Rawlins, 1992;
Werking, 1997).

200

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

Despite the gendered nature of close relationships, we expect both
women and men to perceive distinct face threats when giving advice
versus asking favors with close friends or romantic partners. Our
revised analysis presumes that individuals identify potential threats
to the target's face and their own based on their knowledge of (a) specific influence goals and (b) defining conditions for seeking compliance.
College-age women and men appear to share similar ideas about what
counts as advice and favors (Cody et al., 1994; Dillard, 1989), and these
ideas should not vary depending on whether the target is a close friend
or a romantic partner. The rules for directives are logical preconditions
for performing these speech acts; hence, knowledge of these conditions
also should be widely shared. Put simply, both sexes rely on the same
sources of tacit knowledge to make judgments about potential face
threats.3 Because women and men may perceive similar face threats
when giving advice or asking favors and give reasons as a means of
redressing potential face threats associated with either influence goal,
we also anticipate that differences in facework will generalize across
sex and relationship type. In light of these assumptions about face
threats and facework, we derive hypotheses for the current study.

RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
By treating the rules for directives as a template that can be overlaid onto situations defined by different influence goals, we can predict
potential face threats of asking favors versus giving advice. Potential
face threats are relevant in compliance-gaining episodes defined by a
specific influence goal. In Table 1, we specify predictions about relevant and irrelevant face threats in advice and favor situations.
Like Brown and Levinson (1987), we assume that seeking compliance for any reason intrinsically places some constraint on the target's
autonomy; hence, threat to the target's negative face is relevant in both
advice and favor situations. Our revised analysis suggests that the
degree of intrinsic constraint on the target's autonomy, as well as
potential threats to the target's desire for approval and to the source's
own face, depend on whether a source is giving advice or asking a favor
(see Wilson et al., 1998).
Message sources who give advice should perceive potential threats
to the target's and to their own positive face (see Table 1). By giving
advice, message sources assume that the target is considering a
less-than-optimal course of action (or else there is no need for advice),
and thereby risk implying that the target lacks competence or foresight (Goldsmith & Fitch, 1997). By giving advice, message sources
also presume that they know the optimal course of action for the target
and that they have the right to advise. Message sources who make
these presumptions too liberally risk appearing to be someone who is

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

201

Table 1
Predictions and Descriptive Data About Relevant Face Threats in
Advice and Favor Situations (N = 231; 121 advice, 110 favor)
Type of Influence Goal
Type of Face Threat
Message target's (other's) face
Target's negative face
M (SD)
Target's positive face (incompetence)
M (SD)
Message source's (own) face
Source's negative face
M (SD)
Source's positive face (lazy)
M (SD)
Source's positive face (nosy)
M (SD)

Giving Advice

Asking Favors

Relevant
3.00 (1.48)
Relevant
2.98 (1.59)

Relevant
3.93 (1.47)
Irrelevant
1.88 (1.06)

Irrelevant
2.05 (1.01)
Irrelevant
1.60 (0.99)
Relevant
2.59 (1.61)

Relevant
4.32 (1.47)
Relevant
2.69 (1.26)
Irrelevant
1.90 (1.23)

nosy and butts in to other people's affairs (Goldsmith & Fitch, 1997).
Based on this reasoning, we predict (Hypothesis 1): Message sources
who recall giving advice, compared with those who recall asking a
favor, will perceive greater threat to (a) the target's positive face and
(b) their own positive face (in that they may appear nosy).
Message sources who ask favors should perceive strong constraint
on the target's negative face. Asking a favor presumes that the target
may be willing to provide assistance even though the source's request
primarily benefits him- or herself. Sources who give advice also should
perceive some constraint on the target's autonomy because they are
encouraging the target to consider a course of action that the target
otherwise might not have taken. Asking a favor, however, should place
even greater constraint on the target's autonomy because advice is
offered out of concern for the target and presumes only that he or she is
willing to listen. Aside from strongly constraining the target's autonomy, asking favors also should create potential threats to the source's
own positive and negative face (see Table 1). By asking a favor, sources
imply that they cannot or will not handle the situation alone (or else
there is no need for action) and thereby risk appearing lazy rather than
self-reliant (Craig et al., 1986). People may refrain from asking for help
out of fear of looking like they are doing so when they should be able to
handle their own problems (Goldsmith, 1992). Assuming that they are
sincere, message sources who ask favors also may incur a debt to reciprocate help at a later time and hence constrain their own autonomy
(Goldschmidt, 1998). This suggests (Hypothesis 2): Message sources
who recall asking a favor, relative to those who recall giving advice,
will perceive greater threat to (a) the target's negative face, (b) their

202

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

own positive face (in that they may appear lazy), and (c) their own negative face.
As noted above, young adults of either sex are expected to perceive
distinct face threats when giving advice versus asking favors with
close friends or romantic partners. Consistent with this claim, Wilson
et al. (1998) found that women and men perceived the same potential
face threats when giving advice versus asking favors with same-sex
friends. Hence, we predict (Hypothesis 3): The predictions made in
Hypotheses 1 and 2 will not be moderated by participant sex nor by the
type of relationship shared with the target (same-sex friendship,
cross-sex friendship, romantic relationship).
Based on the distinct face threats of advice and favors, it seems
likely that message sources will vary their use of self- versus otherfocused reasons across advice versus favor episodes. Wilson et al. (1998)
found that message sources gave a larger number of reasons when giving advice than when asking favors. That study, however, failed to distinguish self- and other-focused reasons.
Message sources, when giving advice, should be especially aware of
the target's face. Advice has the potential to communicate disapproval
of the target (i.e., positive face threat) as well as to constrain the target
(i.e., negative face threat; see Table 1). In contrast, sources who ask
favors constrain the target's autonomy but do not communicate disapproval. Asking a favor itself implies that the target possesses desired
abilities and resources. Assuming that message sources give reasons
to redress those face threats made salient by the influence goal defining their situation, we expect that (Hypothesis 4): Sources who recall
giving advice, relative to those who recall asking favors, will report giving more other-focused reasons.
Message sources, when asking favors, should be especially aware of
their own face. Asking a favor potentially can threaten the source's
own desires for approval and autonomy (see Table 1). Sources who give
advice may threaten their own positive, but not their negative, face.
Hence, (Hypothesis 5): Sources who recall asking favors, compared with
those who recall giving advice, will give more self-focused reasons.
Wilson et al. (1998) found that women (M = 2.83 reasons) as a group
included slightly more reasons in their compliance-gaining messages
than did men (M = 2.42 reasons). Both sexes, however, varied the
quantity of their reason giving in similar fashion across influence
goals. Based on our assumptions that both women and men will perceive distinct face threats when giving advice versus asking favors and
give reasons as a means of redressing those particular face threats, we
expect that (Hypothesis 6): The predictions in Hypotheses 4 and 5 will
not be moderated by participant sex nor by the type of relationship
shared with the target (same-sex friendship, cross-sex friendship,
romantic relationship).
Message sources give reasons, in part, to redress perceived face
threats. If true, then perceptions of the five specific face threats in Table 1

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

203

should predict the degree to which participants give or withhold reasons.
More specifically, (Hypothesis 7): Sources' ratings of five specific face
threats will be associated with the number of self- and other-focused
reasons present in their recalled compliance-gaining messages.

METHOD
This study used a situational recall procedure to assess perceived
face threats and reason giving as students sought compliance with a
close same-sex friend, cross-sex friend, or romantic partner. Participants described an actual conversation in which they had either given
advice or asked a favor and then completed ratings of perceived face
threats and other situational dimensions. Like any method, this situational recall procedure has advantages and limitations. The procedure
allowed us to compare a large sample of naturally occurring advice and
favor episodes. These episodes had taken place fairly recently: The
majority of participants (63%) described a conversation from within
the last month, and most (89%) described a conversation less than 3
months old. Despite this, participants' memories of compliance-gaining
episodes may have faded over time and become subject to systematic
distortion. Participants also may have been more likely to recall memorable advice and favor episodes rather than more typical but mundane episodes that occur frequently in daily interaction. This study is
one in a series of reports; hence, it will be important to compare the
results reported below with studies using other data collection
methods.
PARTICIPANTS

A total of 231 undergraduates (107 males, 118 females, 6 no
response; mean age = 22 years) enrolled in communication courses at
two large Midwestern universities completed an interpersonal persuasion questionnaire. At University A, students (n = 89) completed the
questionnaire in groups of 40 to 50 outside of regular class meetings in
exchange for extra course credit. Students at University B (n = 142)
voluntarily completed the questionnaire during regular class meetings
and did not receive extra credit. Responses from a few students were
lost due to missing data or illegible handwriting; hence, sample sizes
for the analyses varied from N = 223 to 231.
PROCEDURES

Six versions of the interpersonal persuasion questionnaire were
developed to assess two influence goals (advice, favors) across three
types of close relationships. Each participant responded to one of the

204

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

six questionnaire versions, which were identical except for initial
instructions. To manipulate the type of influence goal defining the situation, participants randomly assigned to the advice condition (n =
121) were asked to "describe a real life situation in which you gave
advice to a close same-sex friend [opposite-sex friend; or romantic partner]," whereas those in the favor condition (n = 110) were asked to
"describe a real life situation in which you tried to persuade a close
same-sex friend [opposite-sex friend; romantic partner] to do a favor
for you." To ensure that participants recalled an appropriate situation,
those in the advice condition also were instructed that their situation
should be one that occurred as recently as possible (preferably within
the last 2 months) and one (a) where they decided to say something primarily out of concern for their friend's [partner's] well-being rather
than to help themselves and (b) where their friend [partner] did not
have to follow their advice, that is, where their friend [partner] was
free to choose whether or not to do what they suggested. Similarly, participants assigned to the favor condition were told that their situation
should be one that occurred as recently as possible (preferably within
the last 2 months) and one (a) where they asked their friend [partner]
to do something that would benefit primarily them [the participant]
rather than their friend [partner] and (b) where their friend [partner]
did not have to say yes, that is, where their friend [partner] was free to
choose whether or not to do the favor.
Recall instructions also were used to manipulate type of relationship with the target. Participants randomly assigned to the same-sex
friend condition (n = 76) were asked to recall an advice or favor situation involving one of their close same-sex friends, whereas those
assigned to the cross-sex friend condition (n = 82) were asked to recall a
situation involving one of their close opposite-sex friends. These participants also were instructed that "By opposite-sex friend, we mean
someone whom you feel close to but not someone with whom you are (or
have been) romantically involved (i.e., not your spouse, boyfriend, or
girlfriend)." Participants in the romantic relationship condition (n =
73) were asked to recall a situation involving a romantic partner (i.e.,
girlfriend, boyfriend, spouse, lover). Participants not currently
involved in a romantic relationship were asked to recall the last time
that they had given advice to/asked a favor of a romantic partner.
Throughout the questionnaire, the term friend was used to describe
the target in the same-sex and cross-sex friend conditions, whereas
partner was used in the romantic relationship condition.
After reading their instructions, participants initially provided an
open-ended description of the circumstances that led up to the situation. Participants then were asked to write out exactly what they said
when they gave advice/asked a favor. Participants were instructed to
try to remember the conversation in as much detail as possible and to
use as much space as they needed. These instructions appeared at the

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

205

top of a new page that was blank except for the alternating series of
prompts "I said:" and "My friend [partner] said:". Each prompt was followed by several blank lines where participants described that part of
their recalled conversation. After describing the conversation, participants answered closed-ended questions about how long they had
known the message target, how often they saw the target, and when
the interaction had taken place. Participants also answered
open-ended questions about their relationship to the target, where the
interaction took place, whether the topic had occurred before or since,
and whether the target had complied with their request/suggestion.
After describing their influence situation, participants initially
completed a measure of conversational cognitions unrelated to the current report. Participants then responded to questions about what
threats to their own and to the target's face had occurred during their
influence episode. Finally, participants completed measures of the perceived dimensions of their influence situation and of their relationship
with the message target. These latter measures were included as
manipulation checks on the instructions for type of influence goal and
type of relationship.
MEASURES

Face threats. Participants responded to a total of 20 7-point Likert
scales tapping five specific threats to face. Specifically, they evaluated
the degree to which seeking compliance had threatened (a) the message target's negative face (e.g., "My friend [partner] may have felt
strong pressure to do what I asked/suggested in this situation," 5 items,
 = .89), (b) the message target's positive face/incompetence (e.g., "My
saying something in this situation may have made it look like my
friend [partner] couldn't figure out what to do on his/her own," 5 items,
 = .89), (c) the source's own negative face (e.g., "I could have felt that I
was in my friend's [partner's] debt if s/he did what I asked/suggested,"
4 items,  = .83), (d) the source's own positive face/lazy (e.g., "I could
have looked like I was too lazy to solve my own problems by making
this request/suggestion," 3 items,  = .65), (e) the source's own positive
face/nosy (e.g., "I could have looked like I was putting my nose in where
it didn't belong by saying something to my friend [partner] in this situation," 3 items,  = .88). All scales were bounded by the endpoints
strongly disagree and strongly agree, such that higher scores indicated
greater perceived face threat. Scales tapping different face threats
were intermixed.
Reason giving. The coding of reason giving proceeded in two steps:
(a) identifying the total number of reasons in each recalled interaction
(unitizing) and (b) classifying each reason as self- or other-focused
(categorizing). For the first step, two trained coders, masked to the

206

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

research hypotheses, read each of the 231 written descriptions of influence conversations and counted the total number of reasons that each
participant gave over the course of his or her entire conversation. Both
coders were undergraduate students who earned independent study
credit. Reasons were defined as any statement in which a participant
explained or justified why he or she was seeking compliance and/or
why the message target should comply. Coders were instructed to
identify the point at which a participant made his or her request or recommendation in the recalled conversation and then to count each additional phrase that justified this request or recommendation as a reason. Each justification was counted as a separate reason; thus, a single
sentence could contain one or more than one reason, and a single reason occasionally extended over two sentences. Two statements in
which a participant used the exact same words to explain her- or himself were counted as a single reason; however, two statements in which
a participant used different words to explain a similar idea were coded
as two separate reasons.
The two coders initially practiced identifying reasons using written
messages from an earlier study. To assess intercoder agreement, they
then independently scored the total number of reasons in each of 17%
(n = 40) of the conversations recalled for this study. For these 40 conversations, the correlation between the number of reasons identified
by the two coders was r = .81. Guetzkow's U, which assesses disagreement about the total number of reasons across the 40 conversations,
was .07. Both coders then independently scored the total number of
reasons given by each participant in the remaining 191 recalled conversations. As a check on coder drift, we assessed interrater agreement
on the final 20 recalled conversations. The number of reasons independently identified by two coders was highly correlated (r = .67), and
Guetzkow's index of disagreement (U = .05) remained low. Disagreements about the total number of reasons in a recalled conversation
were resolved through discussion. Across the 231 recalled conversations, the coders identified a total of 605 reasons.
In the second step, two different undergraduate coders, also masked
to the research hypotheses, categorized each of these 605 reasons as
other-focused or self-focused. Other-focused reasons explained why
the target should be able and/or willing to comply, whereas
self-focused reasons explained why the participant (message source)
was making the request or recommendation. Detailed descriptions of
these two types of reasons appear in the appendix. After reviewing
these instructions, the two coders independently categorized 11% of
the data set (n = 71 reasons from 27 recalled conversations). The coders
independently agreed on how they classified 85% of the reasons given
by participants (Cohen's kappa = .70). Fleiss (1981) describes kappas
of .60 and higher as reflecting "good" levels of agreement. Both coders
then independently classified each of the remaining 534 reasons. As a

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

207

check on coder drift, we assessed interrater agreement on the final 20
recalled conversations. The coders independently agreed on how they
classified 82% of the reasons (kappa = .64). Disagreements about
whether a reason was self- or other-focused were resolved through
discussion.
Situational dimensions and relationship qualities. Participants finished by rating levels of source benefits, target benefits, rights to
request, target resistance, relational consequences, and power over
the target present in their advice or favor situation. Each of these six
dimensions was assessed using three-item, 7-point Likert scales
drawn from Cody et al. (1986). Reliabilities for these measures ranged
from .60 to .96; all but one exceeded  = .74. Scales for the six dimensions were intermixed, and the poles of five individual scales were
reversed to prevent response sets.
To clarify differences between the three types of message targets
(same-sex friends, cross-sex friends, romantic partners), participants
completed Rubin's (1970) measures of romantic love and liking. Rubin
conceptualizes romantic love as including the three components of
affiliative and dependent need, a predisposition to help, and an orientation of exclusiveness and absorption. Liking is conceptualized as
including elements traditionally associated with interpersonal attraction, such as perceived similarity, respect, and favorable evaluation.
Both measures are composed of 13 Likert scales. The 26 scales were
intermixed. Reliabilities were  = .87 for romantic love and .90 for liking. Ratings of loving and liking for the target were strongly associated, r(216) = .72, p < .001.

RESULTS
MANIPULATION CHECKS

Our first manipulation check compared perceptions of situational
dimensions for participants who recalled conversations defined by the
influence goal of advice versus favors. As expected, participants who
recalled advice situations perceived that compliance would benefit the
target (M = 5.52) much more than those who recalled favor situations
(M = 3.11), t(224) = -12.83, p < .001, r2 = .42. Participants who recalled
favor situations perceived much greater self-benefits from compliance
(M = 5.37) than did those who recalled advice situations (M = 2.84),
t(224) = 12.82, p < .001, r2 = .42. With regard to other situational dimensions, rights to request were seen as high in both advice (M = 5.61)
and favor (M = 5.55) situations. Participants who recalled giving
advice (M = 3.77) anticipated greater resistance from the target than
those who asked favors (M = 2.17), t(224) = -9.24, p < .001, r2 = .28.

208

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

Relational consequences were slightly greater in advice (M = 2.03)
than favor (M = 1.69) situations, t(224) = -2.00, p < .005, r2 = .02,
although they were not high for either type of situation. Participants
also perceived that they possessed greater power over the target in
favor (M = 3.47) than in advice (M = 2.67) situations, t(224) = 4.10, p <
.001, r2 = .07.4 In sum, participants appeared to recall situations that
fit the meaning of advice and favor.
Our second manipulation check compared ratings of liking and loving for participants who recalled episodes in which the target was a
close same-sex friend, cross-sex friend, or romantic partner. As
expected, ratings of loving were significantly higher with targets who
were romantic partners (M = 5.54) than with targets who were close
same-sex (M = 4.82) or cross-sex (M = 4.90) friends, F(2, 223) = 8.03, p <
.001, 2 = .07. Ratings of liking followed a similar, albeit weaker, pattern, being significantly higher with romantic partners (M = 5.42)
than with close same-sex (M = 5.05) or cross-sex (M = 5.06) friends, F
(2, 223) = 2.91, p < .05, 2 = .03. All three relationships appear close,
however, in the sense that mean ratings for liking exceeded 5.00 on the
7-point scale for all three types of targets.
Aside from these measures, participants also completed single-item
scales about how long they had known the target (1 = less than 1
month, 5 = longer than 4 years) as well as how often they typically saw
the target (1 = less than once a month, 6 = several times a day). Participants did not differ in how long they had known the three types of targets; however, participants seeking compliance from close same-sex
friends (M = 4.72) indicated that they saw the target more frequently
than those seeking compliance from cross-sex friends (M = 3.30) or
romantic partners (M = 3.70), F(2, 223) = 13.39, p < .001, 2 = .11.5
FINDINGS WITH REGARD TO PERCEIVED FACE THREATS

Hypotheses 1 and 2 predicted that participants who recalled giving
advice, compared with those who asked favors, would perceive different degrees of threat to the target's negative face as well as distinct
potential threats to the target's positive face and to their own desires
for approval and autonomy (for specific predictions with regard to each
type of face threat, see Table 1). Hypothesis 3 predicted that differences in perceived face threats in advice versus favor situations would
not be moderated by participant sex nor by the type of relationship
shared with the target (same-sex friendship, cross-sex friendship,
romantic relationship). Initially these predictions were tested via a 5 x
2 x 3 x 2 mixed-model ANOVA, crossing the repeated measures factor
of type of face threat (target's negative face, target's positive face/
incompetence, source's negative face, source's positive face/lazy, and
source's positive face/nosy) with the between-groups factors of type of
influence goal (advice or favor), type of relationship (same-sex friend,

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

209

cross-sex friend, or romantic partner), and participant sex (female or
male). The dependent variable was degree of face threat. Assuming
 = .05 and medium effect size, statistical power was .95 for the influence goal and participant sex main effects and for their two-way interaction. Power was .87 for the relationship type main effect and for its
interaction with influence goal or participant sex. Given that none of
the main or interaction effects involving participant sex approached
statistical significance, we collapsed the data across the sexes and conducted a 5 x 2 x 3 mixed-model ANOVA crossing the repeated measures factor of type of face threat and the between-groups factors of
influence goal and type of relationship.6
The mixed-model ANOVA revealed that all three main effects were
significant. The main effect for type of face threat, averaged F(4, 884) =
61.51, p < .001, 2 = .17, indicated that across influence goals and relationships, some types of face were perceived to be threatened more
than others. The main effect for influence goal, F(1, 221) = 19.86, p < .001,
2 = .08, indicated that across types of face threats and relationships, participants rated the overall degree of face threat as higher
when they asked favors (M = 2.94) than when they gave advice (M =
2.44). Finally, the main effect for type of relationship, F(1, 221) = 4.63,
p < .02, 2 = .04, indicated that across types of face threats and influence goals, the overall degree of face-threat was rated higher when
participants sought compliance from same-sex friends (M = 2.85) and
romantic partners (M = 2.77) than when the target was a cross-sex
friend (M = 2.45). These three main effects, however, are qualified by
significant interaction effects.
With regard to two-way interactions, the Influence Goal x Type of
Face Threat interaction was significant, averaged F(4, 884) = 79.62, p
< .001, accounting for substantial variation in ratings of degree of face
threat (2 = .21). As predicted in Hypotheses 1 and 2, the degree to
which the target's and the source's negative or positive face was threatened depended on whether participants were asking favors or giving
advice. The specific nature of this interaction is described below. A
Type of Relationship x Type of Face Threat interaction, F(4, 884) =
1.96, p < 05, 2 = .01, reflected that regardless of influence goal, differences in degree of face threat between the three types of close relationships occurred more often for the message target's than for the source's
own face. Both two-way interactions must be interpreted in light a significant three-way Influence Goal x Relationship Type x Type of Face
Threat interaction, F(4, 884) = 2.53, p < .01, 2 = .01.
To interpret the three-way interaction, we conducted 2 x 3 factorial
analyses of variances (ANOVAs) crossing influence goal (advice or
favor) and relationship type (same-sex friend, cross-sex friend, or romantic partner) separately for each of the five specific types of face-threats.
Results for four of the five types of face threat are consistent with
Hypotheses 1 and 2. With regard to the message target's negative face,

210

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

significant main effects occurred both for influence goal, F(1, 227) =
22.61, p < .001, 2 = .14, and relationship type, F(2, 227) = 5.00, p < .002,
2 = .04. Consistent with Hypothesis 2, participants perceived substantially greater constraint on the target's autonomy when they asked
favors than when they gave advice (see Table 1). A Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc test revealed that participants also perceived significantly greater threat to the target's negative face when
they sought compliance from a romantic partner (M = 3.81) than from a
cross-sex friend (M = 3.06), with same-sex friends falling in the middle
and not differing from the other groups (M = 3.55). The Influence Goal
x Relationship type interaction, however, was not significant, F(2, 227)
= 1.65, n.s. As predicted in Hypothesis 3, asking favors imposed more
on the target's autonomy than giving advice within all three
relationships.
With regard to the message target's positive face/incompetence, significant main effects occurred for both influence goal, F(1, 227) = 35.52,
p < .001, 2 = .13, and relationship type, F(2, 227) = 3.44, p < .04, 2 =
.03. As predicted in Hypothesis 1, participants who had given advice
perceived greater chance that they had made the target look incompetent than did those who had asked favors (see Table 1). Participants
also perceived greater threat that they had made the target look incompetent when they sought compliance from romantic partners (M =
2.67) or same-sex friends (M = 2.51) than when the target was a
cross-sex friend (M = 2.15). Consistent with Hypothesis 3, the Influence Goal x Relationship Type interaction was not significant, F < 1.00,
n.s., indicating that giving advice was seen as a greater threat to this
aspect of the target's positive face than was asking favors across all
three types of relationships.
With regard to the source's own negative face, a substantial main
effect for influence goal, F(1, 227) = 188.23, p < .001, 2 = .45, revealed
that participants, as predicted in Hypothesis 2, were much more likely
to believe that they had constrained their own future autonomy after
asking favors than after giving advice (see Table 1). Neither the main
effect for relationship type, F(2, 227) = 2.82, n.s., nor the Influence Goal
x Relationship Type interaction, F(2, 227) = 2.12, n.s., were significant.
Consistent with Hypothesis 3, this difference between influence goals
occurred within all three types of relationships.
With regard to the source's positive face/lazy, a substantial main
effect for influence goal, F(1, 227) = 50.83, p < .001, 2 = .18, indicated
that participants, as predicted in Hypothesis 2, perceived greater
chance that they had made themselves appear lazy by asking favors
than by giving advice (see Table 1). Once again, neither the main effect
for relationship type, F(2, 227) = 1.55, n.s., nor the Influence Goal x
Relationship Type interaction, F < 1.00, n.s., were significant, reflecting that this difference between influence goals held across all three
relationships.

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

211

Finally, for the source's positive face/nosy, a main effect for influence goal, F(1, 227) = 13.88, p < .001, 2 = .06, indicated that participants, as predicted in Hypothesis 1, perceived greater chance that they
had appeared nosy when giving advice (M = 2.58) than when asking
favors (M = 1.90). In this case, however, the main effect for influence
goal was qualified by a significant Influence Goal x Relationship Type
interaction, F(2, 227) = 3.43, p < .04, 2 = .03. As a follow up, t tests were
performed comparing the risk of appearing nosy when giving advice
versus asking favors separately for each of the three relationships.
Consistent with Hypothesis 1, participants perceived greater threat
that they had appeared nosy when giving advice (M = 2.88) than when
asking favors (M = 1.97) with a same-sex friend, t(73) = -2.78, p < .01.
The same pattern occurred when the target was a cross-sex friend
(advice M = 2.58, favor M = 1.45; t(80) = -4.28, p < .001). When the target was a romantic partner, however, participants who had given
advice (M = 2.30) did not perceive greater risk of appearing nosy than
those who had asked favors (M = 2.31), t(71) = 0.09, n.s. In this single
case, a particular face threat appeared to be associated with giving
advice rather than asking favors only within specific message/source
target relationships.
In sum, significant and large main effects for influence goal (advice
vs. favor) were detected for all five types of face threats (four of five
2s > .12). All five cases were consistent with Hypotheses 1 and 2. Significant but small main effects for type of relationship also were
detected for two of the five face threats (target's negative face, target's
positive face/incompetence). In both cases, seeking compliance from
romantic partners created the most face threat, whereas seeking compliance from cross-sex friends created the least threat. For one of the
five types of face threats (source's positive face/nosy), a significant
Influence Goal x Relationship Type interaction occurred. With regard
to the risk of appearing nosy, participants saw greater threat when
giving advice than when asking favors when the target was a friend
but not when the target was a romantic partner. Although this one
finding is inconsistent with Hypothesis 3, results for the other four specific types of face threat were not moderated by relationship type, and
none of the findings were qualified by participant sex.
FINDINGS WITH REGARD TO REASON GIVING

Across influence goals, participants reported giving between zero
and nine reasons in their recalled compliance-gaining attempt (M =
2.62, SD = 1.86). Eighty-seven percent of participants included one or
more reasons at some point in their recalled conversation, whereas
13% made an unelaborated request or recommendation without any
reasons. With regard to types of reasons, participants recalled giving

212

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

between zero and eight other-focused reasons about why the target
should comply with their request or recommendation (M = 1.66, SD = 1.69).
Sixty-six percent of participants included one or more other-focused
reasons, whereas 34% did not explain why the target should comply.
Participants recalled giving between zero and five self-focused reasons
about why they were making the request or recommendation (M =
0.96, SD = 1.16). Fifty-four percent of participants included one or
more self-focused reasons, whereas 46% did not justify why they
were making their request or recommendation. A small, but significant, inverse correlation occurred between number of self- and otherfocused reasons, r(229) = -.19, p < .01. In sum, participants recalled
giving more other- than self-focused reasons. Of the 605 reasons coded
in this study, 63% (n = 383) were other-focused whereas 37% (n = 222)
were self-focused. This finding, however, is qualified by the type of
influence goal defining the situation (see below).
Hypothesis 4 predicted that participants who recalled advice situations would report giving more other-focused reasons than those who
recalled favor situations. Hypothesis 5 predicted that participants who
recalled favor situations would report giving more self-focused reasons
than those who recalled advice situations. Hypothesis 6 predicted that
differences in reason giving across influence goals would not be moderated by sex or type of close relationship. To address these predictions,
we conducted a 2 x 2 x 3 x 2 mixed-model ANOVA, crossing the
repeated measures factor of type of reason (self- versus other-focused)
with the between groups factors of type of influence goal (advice or
favor), type of relationship (same-sex friend, cross-sex friend, and
romantic partner), and participant sex (female or male). The dependent variable was amount of reason giving. Assuming  = .05 and N =
231, statistical power for effects of medium size was .95 for the influence goal and sex main effects and for their two-way interaction. Power
was .87 for the relationship type main effect and for its interaction with
influence goal or participant sex.
The mixed-model ANOVA revealed that two main effects were statistically significant. The main effect for type of reason, F(1, 213) =
23.23, p < .001, 2 = .08, indicates that participants, in general,
included more other- than self-focused reasons in their recalled conversations (see above). The main effect for type of influence goal, F(1,
213) = 24.82, p < .001, 2 = .10, indicates that participants who recalled
giving advice (M = 3.18), in general, included a larger number of total
reasons than did those who recalled asking favors (M = 2.00). Both
main effects, however, were qualified by a substantial two-way Type of
Reason x Type of Influence Goal interaction, F(1, 213) = 60.63, p < .001,
2 = .20.
To interpret this two-way interaction, simple main effects were conducted examining the effects of influence goal separately for self- and
other-focused reasons. Means and standard deviations for the

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

213

Table 2
Quantity of Other- and Self-Focused Reasons in
Advice and Favor Situations (N = 231; 121 advice, 110 favor)
Type of Influence Goal
Type of Reason Giving

Giving Advice

Asking Favors

Other-focused
Self-focused

2.44
0.74

0.80
1.20

(1.71)
(1.11)

(1.17)
(1.15)

Note. Numbers outside parentheses are means; numbers inside parentheses are standard deviations.

quantity of these two types of reasons within advice and favor situations appear in Table 2. Consistent with Hypothesis 4, participants
who recalled giving advice included more than three times the number
of other- focused reasons than did those who recalled asking favors,
t(229) = 8.40, p < .001 (see Table 2, Row 1). As predicted in Hypothesis
5, participants who recalled asking favors included over 50% more
self-focused reasons than did those who recalled giving advice, t(229) =
3.05, p < .005 (see Table 2, Row 2).
With regard to Hypothesis 6, neither the main effect for participant
sex, F(1, 213) = 1.23, n.s., nor for type of close relationship, F(2, 213) =
1.75, n.s., were reliable. More important, none of the two-way,
three-way, or four-way interactions involving participant sex and/or
relationship type approached significance. Differences in patterns of
reason giving in advice versus favor situations held up across sex and
relationship type. These findings suggest that participants, in general,
gave reasons to redress specific face threats associated with the influence goal that defined their recalled episode (advice or favors). If true,
then perceptions of the five specific face threats outlined in Table 1
should be associated with the number of self- and other-focused reasons present in participants' recalled conversation (Hypothesis 7).
To address Hypothesis 7, we conducted two hierarchical multiple
regression analyses. In the first, number of other-focused reasons was
the criterion variable. Ratings of the five types of face threats (i.e.,
degree of threat to the target's negative face, the target's desire to
appear competent, the source's own negative face, the source's own
desire to avoid looking nosy, and the source's own desire to avoid looking lazy) were forced simultaneously into the regression analysis as
predictor variables. In the second analysis, the number of self-focused
reasons was regressed simultaneously onto the five specific face
threats.
Table 3 summarizes the hierarchical regression analyses for both
types of reason giving. Several findings in this table merit attention.
As predicted in Hypothesis 7, participants' ratings of the five types of
face threats were associated with their use of both other- and
self-focused reasons. The five types of face threats, as a set, explained
9% of the variance in number of other-focused reasons and 6% of the

214

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

Table 3
Hierarchical Regression Analysis of Other- and
Self-Focused Reasons Onto Five Types of Face-Threats (N = 227)
Overall Regression
Variable Entered
Number of other-focused reasons
Target's negative face
Target's positive face
(incompetence)
Source's negative face
Source's positive face (lazy)
Source's positive face (nosy)
Number of self-focused reasons
Target's negative face
Target's positive face
(incompetence)
Source's negative face
Source's positive face (lazy)
Source's positive face (nosy)

 at Step of Entry

R

R2

df

F

p

.03

.30

.09

5, 221

4.42

.01

.24

.06

5, 221

2.66

.03

.18**
-.20**
-.07
-.05
.16**
-.15*
.10
-.03
.13*

*p < .10. **p < .05.

variance in number of self-focused reasons from the recalled conversations (see the R2s in Table 3).
Another finding is that participants' use of self- versus
other-focused reasons was predicted by different types of face threats.
Consistent with Brown and Levinson's (1987) politeness theory, participants did recall giving more self-focused reasons when they perceived greater threat to the target's negative face. In other words, participants were more likely to justify why they were seeking compliance
when they perceived that their request or recommendation constrained the target's autonomy. Participants also were marginally
more likely to give a larger number of self-focused reasons when they
perceived greater risk that they themselves might appear nosy and
fewer self-focused reasons when they perceived that their request or
recommendation might make the target appear incompetent. In contrast to these findings for self-focused reasons, participants did not
give more other-focused reasons when they perceived greater threat to
the target's negative face. This finding appears contrary to politeness
theory. Instead, participants gave more other-focused reasons when
they perceived that their advice or favor might make the target appear
incompetent and fewer target-focused reasons when they perceived
that they would incur a future debt should the target comply with their
current request.
In sum, the two types of reasons functioned differently as facework.
Participants focused more on the target and less on themselves when
they feared that their compliance-gaining appeal might imply that the
target was incompetent. Participants justified themselves more if they

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

215

were placing substantial constraint on the target's autonomy or if they
might appear to be butting into the target's affairs.

DISCUSSION
This article evaluates the generalizability of Wilson et al.'s (1998)
revised analysis of face threats and facework during compliance-gaining episodes. According to politeness theory (Brown & Levinson, 1987),
attempts to seek compliance inherently constrain the target's negative
face. People give reasons as one politeness strategy for mitigating such
constraint. Although attempts to gain compliance do constrain the target's autonomy, they also can create threats to the target's positive face
as well as to the message source's own face. According to Wilson et al.'s
(1998) revised analysis, people identify potential face threats based on
tacit knowledge of (a) the influence goal defining the current episode as
well as (b) preconditions for seeking compliance in general (i.e., the
rules for directives). By analyzing what is implied when the preconditions for performing directives are framed by the influence goals of giving advice and asking favors, we predicted that (a) participants who
recalled advice versus favor episodes would report distinct face
threats, (b) participants would give reasons to mitigate the full range
of potential face threats in their compliance-gaining situation, and (c)
differences in face threats and facework in advice versus favors situations would generalize across sex and relationship type.
Findings for perceived face threats are consistent with the revised
analysis. Participants who recalled giving advice, compared with those
who recalled asking a favor, reported greater risk of having made the
target appear incompetent and greater chance that they themselves
appeared nosy. Participants who recalled asking a favor, relative to
those who recalled giving advice, reported more constraint on the target's autonomy, more constraint on their own future autonomy, and
greater chance that they themselves appeared lazy. Wilson et al.
(1998) found these exact results for face threats when college students
imagined themselves in hypothetical advice or favor scenarios with
same-sex friends. Thus, the claim that different face threats are associated with different influence goals in a predictable fashion appears
tenable.
Results for reason giving also are consistent with the revised analysis of facework in three respects. First, participants gave reasons to
redress multiple face threats. Participants provided more self-focused
reasons as they perceived greater constraint on the target's autonomy,
but they also gave self-focused reasons to avoid making themselves
appear nosy. Participants gave more other-focused reasons when they
perceived that seeking compliance implied that the target lacked

216

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

competence. Second, participants varied the focus of their reason giving depending on the specific influence goal. Participants gave reasons
focused primarily on the message target rather than on themselves in
conversations involving advice, whereas the opposite pattern occurred
in conversations involving favors. Third, participants at times withheld reasons in response to perceived face threats. For example, participants gave fewer other-focused reasons when they perceived that they
might incur a large future debt if a target complied with their current
request.
Findings also are largely consistent with the view that the identity
implications of influence goals transcend sex and close relationships.
We failed to detect significant sex differences for any of the five specific
face threats or for either type of reason giving, despite excellent statistical power. For four of the five specific face threats, differences
between giving advice and asking favors also did not vary regardless of
whether the target was a close same-sex friend, cross-sex friend, or
romantic partner. The one exception involved the risk of seeming nosy.
As predicted, participants who recalled giving advice to close same-sex
or cross-sex friends reported greater risk that they had made themselves appear nosy than those who recalled asking a favor of these targets. Within romantic relationships, however, young adults who gave
advice were no more likely to believe they had appeared nosy than
those who asked favors. Due to high levels of interdependence and
altruistic concern, these participants may have felt greater latitude to
give advice to their romantic partner without worrying that they were
butting into their partner's affairs.
Future research might explore whether romantic partners do worry
about appearing nosy when giving advice on particular topics or at particular moments in their relationship. Aside from this single exception,
however, our findings suggest that face threats arise from assumptions about influence goals that are shared widely by young adult
women and men participating in friendships and romantic relationships. The effects of influence goals on reason giving also did not vary
across sex or type of close relationship.
Using Brown and Levinson's (1987) politeness theory, as originally
formulated, makes it difficult to explain many of our findings. Politeness theory assumes that seeking compliance intrinsically constrains
only the target's negative face. The theory has little to say about why
different threats to face would be associated with different influence
goals. By extension, politeness theory also assumes that message
sources, when seeking compliance, give reasons primarily to mitigate
constraint on the target's autonomy. The theory has little to say about
why people would give reasons as a self-presentation strategy, or why
face threats besides constraint on the target's autonomy would predict
self- and other-focused reasons.

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

217

We also acknowledge limits on the predictive ability of Wilson et
al.'s (1998) revised analysis. Put simply, the revised analysis is sufficient to predict potential but not actual threats to face. Potential face
threats are those that plausibly could, but not necessarily will, occur in
any compliance-gaining episode defined by an influence goal. Asking
favors, for example, potentially can make the message source appear
lazy, whereas appearing lazy is not relevant to advice situations (see
Table 1). Participants who recalled asking favors, on average, were significantly more likely to perceive that they had appeared lazy than
were those who gave advice. As is apparent in Table 1, however, many
participants who recalled asking favors did not perceive that they had
appeared lazy. To put the issue somewhat differently, our revised analysis offers precise predictions about which face threats potentially may
occur in situations defined by a specific influence goal (e.g., asking
favors), and these predictions generalize across sex and close relationships. Our revised analysis also offers precise predictions about which
specific face threats will not occur in any particular favor (or advice)
episode as evidenced by the low mean ratings for all four irrelevant
face threats in Table 1. In both cases, the revised analysis offers much
more precise predictions than does politeness theory. Our revised
analysis is less precise, however, in predicting which potential face
threats actually will occur in a particular favor (or advice) episode.
Whether a message source actually appears lazy by asking a particular
favor no doubt depends on numerous factors such as the nature of the
favor, how the request is phrased, the parties' history of asking and
doing favors, the source's history of asking favors of other targets, the
parties' roles and cultural values, and so forth.
In light of this distinction between potential and actual face threats,
some may question whether our revised analysis is cast too generally.
What is gained by analyzing potential face threats if the actual likelihood of any such threat depends on details of a particular advice or
favor episode? Keep in mind, however, that our revised analysis sets
boundaries on what face threats actually will and will not occur during
any advice or favor episode and clarifies the origins of those face
threats that do arise. We believe that these boundaries can be mapped
quite broadly because message sources identify potential threats by
relying on widely shared knowledge about influence goals and constitutive rules (see Note 3). Sources who ask favors risk appearing lazy
whenever others may question whether a legitimate need to request a
favor exists in the current situation. Sources who give advice risk
appearing nosy whenever others may question whether they have the
right to advise in the current situation. Two parties may disagree
about whether a legitimate need to request a favor or right to offer
advice exists, but both understand the potential relevance of these
questions because both rely on the same sources of tacit knowledge.

218

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

Given the possibility of divergent perspectives, future research
should consider the view of both parties in close relationships. Considering both parties raises a number of interesting questions: Do close
friends and romantic partners typically agree about which influence
goal defines their talk? When both parties agree that a source is giving
advice or asking a favor, do they perceive similar threats to face? What
occurs if the parties disagree about the influence goal, such as when a
message source believes he or she is enforcing a prior obligation while
his or her friend believes that he or she is asking a favor? These questions suggest several directions for future research evaluating our
revised analysis of face threats and facework.
APPENDIX
Directions for Coding Two Types of Reasons
Category 1: Other-Focused Reasons
Other-focused reasons are target focused--they often include frequent use
of pronouns such as you, you've, yours, we, and us (the last two pronouns include the other as well as the self). Other-focused reasons explain/justify why
the target should be willing and/or able to comply with the participant's request or recommendation. Examples of target-focused reasons include:
* explaining that the target will suffer negative physical consequences by not

complying (e.g., illness)

* explaining that the target will suffer negative psychological or emotional

consequences by not complying (e.g., depression, loneliness)

* explaining that the target will suffer negative monetary consequences by not

complying

* arguing that a third party close to the target (e.g., spouse) will suffer negative
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

consequences if the target does not comply
arguing that not complying violates a rule (e.g., a doctor's orders)
arguing that the target will benefit from complying
offering the target a bargain or reward in return for complying
arguing that complying is the fair thing to do
suggesting rules that the target should use to make decisions (e.g., "follow
your head, not your heart")
telling the target "don't do it for the wrong reasons"
explaining why it is okay for the target to comply
explaining why it is easy for the target to comply
explaining why the target is able to comply
explaining why the target will not be inconvenienced by complying

Category 2: Self-Focused Reasons
Self-focused reasons focus on the participant him- or herself--they often include frequent use of pronouns such as I, I've, and me. These reasons explain/justify why the requested action needs to be performed or express the
participant's sincerity in wanting the desired action performed. Examples of
self-focused reasons include:

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

219

* explaining why the participant is concerned about the target
* citing concern for the target as a rationale for the participant's message ("I'm

saying this because I care")

* explaining why the participant needs help
* explaining the nature of the participant's problem
* explaining why the participant is making a request rather than just doing it

him- or herself

* explaining an event that the participant is planning that justifies the re-

quest/recommendation

* explaining what negative consequences will occur to the participant if the

target does not comply
Note. Some messages include both self (I) and target (you) focused pronouns. In such
cases, look at the focus of the reason. If it is primarily a statement about the message target, put it in Category 1. If it is primarily a statement about the participant him- or herself, put it in Category 2.

NOTES
1. Advice, like all communication, is multifunctional. Health care professionals, for
instance, may offer advice about a range of treatment options both to help patients make
informed choices and to limit their own future legal liability. Although sources at times
offer advice in part to protect themselves, advice is widely recognized as expressing care
and concern about the target (Goldsmith & Fitch, 1997). Messages must be motivated by
concern about the target's well-being to be heard as genuine advice. As an example, financial planners who purposefully recommend bad investments solely to benefit themselves will be accused of manipulating unsuspecting clients rather than offering financial advice.
2. The term sex refers to whether an individual biologically is female or male. Gender
refers to society's beliefs and values about femininity and masculinity; it is "a social construction that varies across cultures, over time within a culture, and in relation to the
other gender" (Wood, 1999, p. 22). We use the term sex when referring to whether a participant is male or female, but gender when referring to society's current views about appropriate relationships among and between women and men.
3. To state our position even more strongly, we believe that giving advice and asking
favors are associated with different potential threats to face regardless of age group, biological sex, relationship type, institutional context, and culture (see Wilson, Aleman, &
Leatham, 1998, pp. 90-92). With regard to culture, advice and favors appear to be meaningful influence goals in many societies (e.g., Fitch, 1994; Kim & Wilson, 1994). Constitutive rules also should be understood similarly across culture if they specify logical preconditions for performing speech acts (for debate on this point, see Brown & Levinson,
1987, pp. 25-27). We recognize, however, that our claim here goes well beyond the data in
this study, which are drawn from predominately European American college students.
This study evaluates the generalizability of our revised analysis across sex and relationship type. Future research will need to examine whether our analysis holds across nationality, ethnicity, social class, and other dimensions of cultural difference.
4. Cody et al.'s (1986) scales tapping power ask about the degree to which the message
source controls the target in the particular situation; hence, they may measure specific

220

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / June 2000

attempts to constrain the target's negative face rather than stable perceptions of power
in the source-target relationship.
5. Subsidiary analyses for sex differences showed that females (M = 5.06; n = 40)
rated their same-sex friendships slightly higher on the loving scale than did males (M =
4.56, n = 33), t(71) = -1.96, p = .054. Ratings for liking, length of time they had known the
target, and frequency of contact did not differ significantly for female-female and
male-male friendships. No significant sex differences were detected between women and
men who reported on cross-sex friendships or romantic relationships.
6. After removing participant sex as a factor in the design, we were able to break
same-sex friendships into the two subcategories of female-female versus male-male
friendships and then compare both subcategories with cross-sex friendships and romantic relationships. In all such analyses, the findings were virtually identical regardless of
whether female-female and male-male friendships were analyzed separately or as one
group. When degree of face-threat was the dependent variable, for example, we obtained
a significant three-way Influence Goal x Relationship Type x Type of Face Threat interaction both when female-female and male-male friends were analyzed separately or together, and the interpretation of this interaction was the same in both cases. Given the
similarity in findings, we decided to collapse female-female and male-male friends into a
single group.

REFERENCES
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cody, M. J., Canary, D. J., & Smith, S. W. (1994). Compliance-gaining goals: An inductive analysis of actors' goal types, strategies, and success. In J. Daly & J. Weimann
(Eds.), Strategic interpersonal communication (pp. 33-90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cody, M. J., Greene, J. O., Marston, P. J., O'Hair, H. D., Baaske, K. T., & Schneider, M. J.
(1986). Situation perception and strategy selection. In M. L. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication yearbook 9 (pp. 391-420). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Craig, R. T., Tracy, K., & Spisak, F. (1986). The discourse of requests: Assessment of a
politeness approach. Human Communication Research, 12, 437-468.
Dillard, J. P. (1989). Types of influence goals in personal relationships. Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, 6, 293-308.
Dillard, J. P., Segrin, C., & Harden, J. M. (1989). Primary and secondary goals in the production of interpersonal influence messages. Communication Monographs, 56,
19-38.
Fitch, K. L. (1994). A cross-cultural study of directive sequences and some implications
for compliance-gaining research. Communication Monographs, 61, 185-209.
Fleiss, J. L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and proportions. New York: John Wiley.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays in face-to-face behavior. Chicago: Aldine.
Goldschmidt, M. M. (1998). Do me a favor: A descriptive analysis of favor asking
sequences in American English. Journal of Pragmatics, 29, 129-153.
Goldsmith, D. (1992). Managing conflicting goals in supportive interaction: An integrative theoretical framework. Communication Research, 19, 264-286.
Goldsmith, D., & Fitch, K. (1997). The normative context of advice as social support.
Human Communication Research, 23, 454-476.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and
semantics: Vol. 3. Speech acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Hample, D., & Dallinger, J. M. (1990). Arguers as editors. Argumentation, 4, 153-169.
Honneycutt, J. M., Cantrill, J. G., & Greene, R. W. (1989). Memory structures for relational escalation: A cognitive test of the sequencing of relational actions and stages.
Human Communication Research, 16, 62-90.

Wilson, Kunkel / IDENTITY IMPLICATIONS

221

Kim, M. S., & Wilson, S. R. (1994). A cross-cultural comparison of implicit theories of
requesting. Communication Monographs, 61, 210-235.
Kunkel, A. W., & Burleson, B. R. (1998). Social support and the emotional lives of men
and women: An assessment of the different cultures perspective. In D. J. Canary &
K. Dindia (Eds.), Sex differences and similarities in communication: Critical essays
and empirical investigations of sex and gender in interaction (pp. 101-126). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Labov, W., & Fanshel, D. (1977). Therapeutic discourse: Psychotherapy as conversation.
New York: Academic Press.
Monsour, M. (1997). Communication and cross-sex friendships across the life cycle: A
review of the literature. In B. R. Burleson (Ed.), Communication yearbook 20 (pp.
375-414). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rawlins, W. K. (1992). Friendship matters: Communication, dialectics, and the life
course. New York: Adline de Gruyter.
Rubin, Z. (1970). Measurement of romantic love. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 265-273.
Rule, B. G., Bisanz, G. L., & Kohn, M. (1985). Anatomy of a persuasion schema: Targets,
goals, and strategies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1127-1140.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1976). A classification of illocutionary acts. Language in Society, 5, 1-23.
Werking, K. (1997). We're just good friends: Women and men in nonromantic relationships. New York: Guilford Press.
Wilson, S. R., Aleman, C. G., & Leatham, G. B. (1998). Identity implications of influence
goals: A revised analysis of face-threatening acts and application to seeking compliance with same-sex friends. Human Communication Research, 26, 64-96.
Wilson, S. R., Kim, M. S., & Meischke, H. (1991/1992). Evaluating Brown and Levinson's
politeness theory: A revised analysis of directives and face. Research on Language
and Social Interaction, 25, 215-252.
Wood, J. T. (1999). Gendered lives: Communication, gender, and culture (3rd ed.).
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Wright, P. H. (1998). Toward an expanded orientation to the study of sex differences in
friendship. In D. J. Canary & K. Dindia (Eds.), Sex differences and similarities in
communication: Critical essays and empirical investigations of sex and gender in
interaction (pp. 41-64). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

