JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001
Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT
AND RELATIONAL QUALITY
PAMELA J. KALBFLEISCH
University of Wyoming

This study examines the popular belief that deception is necessary for maintaining relational quality. A total of 517 undergraduate students involved in close relationships
served as research participants in this study. Eighty-nine participants were married,
engaged, and/or living together, 200 were seriously dating, 100 were casually dating, and
128 were involved in close friendships. Members of relationships with low suspicion and
high relational quality reported less use of deceptive messages and more use of other types
of communication strategies to sustain their relationships than those in relationships
with higher suspicion and lower relational quality. Additionally, lies told with the intent
to protect a partner were related to higher suspicion levels in a relationship, as were lies
told with the intent to benefit self or hurt a partner. Other types of messages designed to
contribute to a positive relational environment were not strongly related to deceptive
messages.

Given the Zeitgeist in both the United States and the United Kingdom, it
may well be that lies and other forms of deception will continue to increase in incidence and range. The drift toward individualism per se,
where obligations toward state, community, and family decline and concern for self becomes increasingly the only constant in life, dictates that
winning for the self should transcend other objectives and constraints.
--Robinson (1996, p. 326)
Question: "Why shouldn't you tell lies?" Answer: "Because it's naughty.
Because then they tell lies."
--Robinson and Rackstraw (1972, p. 1)

W. Peter Robinson has spent more than 25 years contemplating the
use of lies by children and adults in a variety of contexts (see also Robinson, 1994; Robinson, Shepherd, & Heywood, 1998). From the lies of
countries to the lies of relationships, deceptive communication has
been an ongoing concern for Robinson, along with his work in many
other areas of study.
In his research, Robinson (1996) suggests that certain environments are so fraught with peril that individuals feel compelled to lie to

AUTHOR'S NOTE: I would like to thank Sally Vogl-Bauer and Jan Gierman for their assistance with this article.
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 20 Nos. 1 & 2, March/June 2001 214-230
(c) 2001 Sage Publications, Inc.

214

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

215

survive. One thinks of people living under totalitarian governments or
striving to exist in deplorable working conditions when one reads Robinson's references to such environments that promote lies for the survival of self.
What may not spring to mind immediately when contemplating
Robinson's perspective on environments conducive to deception are
the lies told in our close relationships. It is hard to reflect on our personal relationships as environments in which we may feel the need to
lie to preserve our interests in these relationships. Instead of an environment of safety and openness, could our relationships be such perilous environments that deception would be a reasonable self-protective
strategy?
In examining the deception literature, it appears that personal relationships are environments in which people resort to deception.
DePaulo and Kashy (1998) found that deception is actually quite common in personal relationships, with 1 out of 10 communicative acts
between spouses being reported as deceptive.
When looking at justifications for these lies, it appears that
researchers have described these lies as other-oriented, or lies to protect their relational partner or to protect the relationship itself (Vrij,
2000). Such lies are described as polite and necessary to preserve the
fabric of a relationship (Metts, 1989). Anderson, Ansfield, and DePaulo
(1999) further suggest that deception may be used in relationships
when the truth threatens the relationship.
In light of the perspective advanced in the scholarly literature that
deceptive messages serve a relational maintenance function, the study
presented in this article will examine deceptive messages as they
relate to other techniques for preserving relationships. Although
implicitly considering deception to be a communicative action for
maintaining relationships, to date, deception researchers have not
examined the association of deceptive messages with other communication intended to sustain relationships. Furthermore, Robinson's
(1996) work suggests that environments conducive to deception are
ones in which individuals feel threatened and insecure. In this study,
the current perspective that lies are positive communicative techniques for maintaining relationships will be specifically investigated
in the context of the overall relational environment that may be conducive to the perceived need for using deceptive communication.
MESSAGES IN RELATIONSHIPS

If an individual is lucky enough to have a relationship that brings
some level of pleasure, it is easy to see how one may endeavor to keep
this relationship a continuing part of one's existence. Researchers have
studied the techniques that relational partners may employ in sustaining their relationships (such as Flora & Segrin, 1998; Messman,

216

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Canary, & Hause, 2000; Weigel & Ballard-Reisch, 1999). These techniques can be such things as sharing feelings with a partner, doing
activities with partner, and listening to a partner.
Primarily, investigators have used one of several categorical sets of
strategies in their studies. The Stafford and Canary (1991) set of relational maintenance strategies is the most frequently used in recent
research. These strategies consist of messages designed to encourage
(a) positivity (having cheerful, friendly interaction with partner), (b)
openness (having discussions and self-disclosure with partner), (c)
assurance (reaffirming commitments to partner), (d) networking
(interacting with partner's friends and family), and (e) tasks (helping
the partner meet responsibilities). Dindia and Baxter's (1987; Baxter &
Dindia, 1990) set of relational maintenance strategies is also used in
studying relational maintenance. It differs from Stafford and Canary
(1991) most notably in their inclusion of antisocial and prosocial action
strategies in their list of possible relational maintenance behaviors.
Antisocial strategies would be actions such as being rude, insulting,
impolite, or disrespectful toward one's partner, whereas prosocial
strategies would be actions such as spending time with one's relational
partner. The Stafford and Canary and the Dindia and Baxter strategies form a complimentary set of messages and actions that can be
used in keeping relationships alive.
The underlying premise of these relational maintenance strategies
is that the intent of the relational partners is one of honesty. This
becomes interesting when considered in light of the literature on
deception in relationships, which contends that deceptive messages
are used to maintain relationships in light of information that one
would prefer not to share with a relational partner.
Vrij (2000) describes lies as social devices that allow for smooth conversation, which would be unnecessarily rude if the conversational
partners were honest in their true perspectives. In this case, lies seem
merely to be linguistic devises designed to keep order. Kashy and
DePaulo (1996) further describe lies as being self-oriented and
other-oriented. Self-oriented lies would be lies that make the deceiver
look better than he or she really is, and which may give the deceiver an
advantage over the other person. Other-oriented lies would be lies that
appear to protect another person, whether it be his or her self-esteem,
livelihood, or whatever may matter to the other person. Researchers
have focused closely on selfless motives; for example, Metts and
Chronis (1986) looked at lies to avoid hurting the relational partner,
lies to avoid relational trauma, and lies to protect the partner's
self-image. Other researchers, such as Hample (1980), have focused on
more selfish motives for deceit and lies that may be designed to harm a
partner.
Whether to obtain an advantage, avoid a punishment, make a good
impression, or simply ease social interaction, it would seem that one

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

217

way to categorize lies is along three deceptive intents: the most socially
acceptable "lies to spare other," the more clearly self-serving "lies to
benefit self," and the most blatantly malevolent "lies to harm other."
Although there is no doubt an infinite variety of other ways to categorize intentions to lie, these three deceptive motives that emerge from
the literature provide a broad perspective on deceptive messages.
When considering the use of these differing message intents in relationships, it is important to consider Duck, Rutt, Hurst, and Strejc's
(1991) finding that the conversations held between relational partners
may differ significantly across relational types. This may help explain
the difference found in the types of deceptive communication used by
relational partners at varying relational stages. For example, DePaulo
and Kashy (1998) found a lower rate of lying in closer relationships
than in more casual ones. Metts (1989) and Metts and Hippensteele
(1988) also note that the type of deception used by relational partners
varies in accordance to relational development, with less intimate relationships relying on falsifying information and more developed relationships on adopting methods of concealment. Kalbfleisch (1992) suggests that members of close relationships feel the impact of deceptive
communication more acutely than individuals in relatively public or
social encounters. Simply put, the repercussions for deception may
increase as relational intimacy increases, which may account for lowered use of deception and the type of deceptive message evident in a
relationship.
It is reasonable to assume that common threads exist when comparing significant relationships across contexts; the differences in these
relational types could affect the other types of messages under consideration in this study. Specifically, Stafford and Canary (1991) and
Canary and Stafford (1993) also found differences in the usage of maintenance strategies across relational types. Therefore, a careful examination of the use of relational maintenance strategies and deceptive
messages should consider the type of relationship in which these messages occur, and the potential association of relational type with use of
relational maintenance strategies and deceptive communication. This
leads to further consideration of the relational environment in which
deceptive messages occur and in which partners may strive to sustain
their relationships.
RELATIONAL ENVIRONMENT

In examining the complexities of deceptive communication, Robinson (1996) would suggest that the underlying tenor of the relationship
warrants attention. Relational partners experiencing distrust of their
partner and poor relational quality could be expected to communicate
differently than those who are less suspicious of their partners and
who are more satisfied with their relationship. Consideration of these

218

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

issues is particularly important when investigating efforts to maintain
relationships and the types of lies that may be implemented in these
relationships.
Relational trust/suspicion. Trust is an ingredient that researchers
have previously referenced as an important part of human relationships. For example, Rempel, Holmes, and Zanna (1985) state that past
studies on trust suggest: (a) Trust appears to evolve from past experiences and prior interactions; (b) dispositional attributions are made
about relational partners regarding their reliability and dependability; (c) trust entails a willingness to be vulnerable or put oneself at risk,
in terms of self-disclosure or belief in another's promises; and (d) trust
is characterized by feelings of security and confidence in one's relational partner, and is viewed as a relational symbol of strength or
weakness. Thus, trust appears to be a variable that underlies the significance of relational communication patterns and behaviors.
LaFollette and Graham (1986) suggest that there is more to honesty
than just providing a truthful response. The key is that the listener (or
relational partner) must be able to assemble an honest picture of the
speaker. Thus, merely telling the truth may not be enough if the message is not communicated in a context built on trust.
Relational suspicion appears to be the primary indication that a
partner's perceived trust may be in question. Research has focused on
the impact of relational outcomes when members begin to question the
honesty of their relational partners (Aune, Metts, & Ebesu-Hubbard,
1998; McCornack & Levine, 1990; Sagarin, Rhoads, & Cialdini, 1998).
In particular, McCornack and Levine (1990) found that the ability to
detect deception in romantic relationships was influenced by the relational partner's degree of suspicion. In other words, those partners who
were moderately suspicious were the most successful at detecting
deception. A further link to deception is drawn by Sagarin et al. (1998),
who found that individuals who deceived their partner were also more
suspicious of their partner than individuals not employing deceptive
messages. This leads us to a consideration of the element of the overall
quality of the relational environment.
Relational quality. Relational quality is a global assessment of the
express nature of a relationship. Research on relational satisfaction
offers the strongest indicators of how relational quality impacts friendships and dating relationships. Although the majority of relational satisfaction research has focused on comparing relational dimensions of
happy versus unhappy couples (Bowman, 1990; Noller & Fitzpatrick,
1990), factors impacting relational satisfaction also appear to impact
satisfaction levels for different relational contexts. For example, Kelley
and Burgoon (1991) found that intimacy, noncomposure/arousal, and

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

219

equality/trust were central components in determining levels of marital satisfaction. Jones (1991) and Monsour (1992) studied friendship
satisfaction and intimacy, and also found that self-disclosure, trust,
and friendship enjoyment had the greatest impact on friendship satisfaction. Monsour (1992) noted that self-disclosure, emotional expressiveness, unconditional support, physical contact, and trust were
important factors when evaluating relational intimacy in friendships.
Thus, the findings suggest that relational satisfaction in friendships
and marriages may share many intrinsic qualities at the onset, with
the degree of relational intimacy magnifying the significance of these
variables.
When considering deceptive communication, Lawson (2000) reports
that deceivers perceived the relationships in which they used deception to be less pleasant than other relationships, and they felt less close
in these relationships. DePaulo, Kashy, Kirkendol, Wyer, and Epstein
(1996) found a similar effect for deception, in which respondents
reported less intimate and less pleasant interactions when lies were
told than when lies were not told in interactions. It would seem that
use of deception would have a definite impact on the overall quality in a
relationship. Likewise, Zak (1995) reports that trusting behaviors
increase relational trust, whereas nontrusting behaviors decrease
trust in a relational partner, and Wieselquist, Rusbult, Foster, and
Agnew (1999) suggest that commitment to a relationship, prosocial
behavior, and trust are closely related.
It seems clear from the deception literature and the literature concerning relational maintenance that lies and maintenance strategies
do not occur in a relational vacuum. It also appears that the more positive relational maintenance strategies and deceptive message intents
may not appear in tandem, whereas the more antisocial maintenance
strategies and deceptive messages intending to harm a relational partner may occur in concert.
Overall, these variables, along with the relational environment,
have not been considered together previously, and such a study is necessary at this point in our development of research on deceptive communication. If we do not first look to the overall relational environment
in which deceptive messages are likely to occur and examine the
co-occurrence of strategies designed to maintain relationships, we do
not have a picture of the environment in which relational partners
decide to enact deceitful messages. Because relational partners have
communication options for maintaining relationships other than
deceit, these other options are also relevant to building theory on the
use of deception in relationships.
With this in mind, the following hypotheses and research question
are proposed:

220

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Hypothesis 1: Deceptive messages will be negatively associated with
positivity, openness, assurance, networks, tasks, and prosocial relational
maintenance messages.
Hypothesis 2: Deceptive messages intending to harm others will be positively associated with antisocial relational maintenance messages.
Hypothesis 3: Participants in relationships with high relational quality will
use fewer deceptive messages than participants in relationships with
low relational quality.
Hypothesis 4: Participants in relationships with high relational quality will
use more positivity, openness, assurances, networks, tasks, and prosocial
relational maintenance messages and less antisocial relational maintenance strategies than will participants in relationships with low relational quality.
Hypothesis 5: Participants in relationships with low suspicion will use fewer
deceptive messages than participants in relationships with high suspicion.
Hypothesis 6: Participants in relationships with low suspicion will use more
positivity, openness, assurances, networks, tasks, and prosocial relational maintenance messages and less antisocial relational maintenance
messages than will participants in relations with high suspicion.
Research Question 1: How does relational type affect the use of deceptive
messages and relational maintenance messages?

METHOD
PARTICIPANTS

A total of 517 undergraduate students from a large state university
took part in this study. Research participants were offered extra credit
to complete a questionnaire on communication in close relationships.
These participants were asked to identify the most intimate relationship in which they were currently involved. Of the research participants, 89 identified married, engaged, and/or living together relationships; 200 identified seriously dating relationships; 100 identified
casually dating relationships; and 128 identified friendships.
On the average, the research participants identifying married,
engaged, or living together relationships had been with their partners
for 3.8 years; those referencing seriously dating partners had been
together an average of 1.65 years, casual daters had been involved for
an average of 9 months, and the friends had been together for an average of 4.98 years. The average age of the participants was 21.5 years,
and the equivalent reported age of their relational partners was 22.1
years. The majority of participants (81%) classified themselves as
full-time students, as well as their relational partners (66.2%). In
terms of ethnic background, most participants were White (80.2%),
with the rest being drawn from Asian (6.1%), Black (5%), Native American (2.7%), or other ethnic groups (6.0%). The majority of the relational partners were also reported to be White (82.4%). There was

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

221

approximately an equal distribution of males (50.8%) and females
(49.2%) participating in this study.
PROCEDURE

Participants were first given an orientation to the study by a
researcher. They were told that this study was one that examined communication in close relationships and how relational partners communicate. Participants were told to refer to the most intimate relationship
that they were currently involved in when answering the questionnaire. They were asked to label the type of relationship they would be
referencing when they filled out the instrument. Scale items were written so that the respondents could apply them to one of several types of
relationships through the use of the term partner. For example, the
prosocial strategy of "give partner gifts" and the antisocial strategy of
"give partner cold shoulder" both list the relational partner simply as
partner rather than spouse, friend, and so forth. Responses to scale
items were recorded on 7-point Likert-type scales ranging from 1
(strongly agree) to 7 (strongly disagree). Respondents also answered
demographic questions pertaining to their own and their relational
partner's background.
INSTRUMENTATION

Maintenance. Stafford and Canary's (1991) maintenance strategies
(positivity, openness, assurance, networking, and tasks) were used in
this study to measure techniques to sustain relationships. The means
and reliabilities for these strategies in this study were: positivity, 2.456
(a = .89); openness, 3.0678 (a = .89); assurance, 2.526 (a = .89); networking, 2.85 (a = .91); and tasks, 2.66 (a = .81). In addition, two sets of
Dindia and Baxter's (1987) marital maintenance strategies (prosocial
and antisocial strategies) were included, because they approached
maintenance from a slightly different perspective than Stafford and
Canary (1991) by emphasizing positive and somewhat negative elements in relational maintenance. The means and alpha coefficients for
these measures were as follows: prosocial strategies, 2.378 (a = .73);
and antisocial strategies, 5.36 (a = .80). Forty-five items were used to
measure these types of messages and actions. See Table 1 for listing of
the categories of relational maintenance messages.
Deceptive message intent. The deceptive message intent scale was
composed of nine items. These items were categorized by the intent of
the deception: (a) to harm relational partner, (b) to benefit self, or (c) to
spare relational partner. Each of these categories is further broken
down into lies that are direct falsification, lies that are distortion of the

222

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Table 1
Relational Messages
Deceptive message intent scale items
Deceptive intent: Harm other
Make things up to hurt him or her in some way
Distort information to hurt partner
Don't tell partner important information that he or she needs to know
Deceptive intent: Benefit self
Invent stories to make yourself look good
Exaggerate personal praise received to partner
Don't discuss personal weaknesses
Deceptive intent: Spare other
Make things up to spare partner's feelings
Minimize severity of problem(s) to not upset partner
Don't discuss problems that would trouble or worry partner
Relational maintenance message categories
Positivity: Have cheerful, friendly interaction
Openness: Encourage discussions and self-disclosure
Assurance: Reaffirm commitments to partner
Networks: Willing to interact with the relational partner's friends and family
Tasks: Help the relational partner meet responsibilities
Prosocial: Spend time with relational partner
Antisocial: Be rude, insulting, impolite, or disrespectful toward partner

truth, and lies of omission. The means and alpha coefficients for these
three message intents were: harm other, 5.946 (a = .66); benefit self,
5.189 (a = .53); and spare other, 4.288 (a = .68). Nine items were used to
measure deceptive message intent (see Table 1 for scale items).
Relational trust. Levine and McCornack's (1991) suspicion scale
was used to evaluate perceived levels of trust and suspicion by relational partners. This scale was selected over other measures of trust
because the Levine and McCornack scale items are communication
based and are germane to the study of relational deception. Modifications were made to make this scale applicable across relational types.
Examples from this measure include: "My partner seldom lies to me,"
"My partner rarely tells me what he or she is thinking," and "My partner only tells me what he or she thinks I want to hear." The mean and
alpha coefficient for this scale were 2.525 and .89. Study participants
who were married, engaged, or living together had a mean suspicion of
2.273. Serious dating participants had a mean of 2.51, casual dating
participants had a mean of 2.959, and participants who were in friendship relationships had a mean of 2.474, where lower mean suspicion
ratings were indicative of less relational suspicion. Ten items were
used to measure participants' level of relational suspicion in this study.
Relational quality. Norton's (1983) Quality of Marriage Index (QMI)
was chosen because it has been cited as a strong, global self-report for

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

223

relationships (Fincham & Bradbury, 1987; Sabatelli, 1988). Examples
of relational quality items include: "The relationship is very stable,"
"The relationship makes me very happy," and "I feel like part of a
team." Norton's (1983) QMI scale has been previously applied to relationships other than marital relationships. For example, Stafford and
Canary (1991) used a modified version of this scale to measure relational satisfaction and maintenance strategy usage in difference relational types. The mean and alpha coefficient for this measure were 2.32
and .90. In this study, participants who were married, engaged, or living
together had a mean relational quality of 1.915. Participants in serious
dating relationships had a mean of 2.242, participants in casual dating
relationships had a mean of 3.116, and participants in friendships had
a mean of 2.180, where lower means indicate higher relational quality.
Five relational quality items were used in this measure.

RESULTS
To examine the association of deceptive messages with corresponding relational maintenance strategy usage, seven sets of maintenance
strategies (positivity, openness, assurance, networking, tasks,
prosocial, antisocial) were regressed on the intent of the deceptive
intent messages (harm other, benefit self, spare other) using stepwise
multiple regression. Table 2 reports the stepwise multiple regressions
for each set of relational maintenance strategies.
As Table 2 indicates, relational maintenance strategy usage was
predicted by the intent of deceptive communication. Although the
magnitude of variance predicted for the maintenance strategies varied
across the intent of the deceptive communication (.45 to .04), several
patterns did emerge.
First, deceptive communication designed to "harm other" was the
primary predictor of antisocial strategies, accounting for 41% of the
variance; positivity and prosocial strategies accounted for 20% of
the variance for each strategy; and tasks, assurance, and networks
accounted for 12%, 7%, and 6% of the variance, respectively. Although
the deceptive strategy of harm other was not the primary predictor of
openness, it was still significant and explained 5% of the variance.
Interestingly, all of the maintenance strategies can be predicted (in
varying degrees) from deceptive communication that harms the other.
However, the expected relationship of the maintenance strategies
(other than the antisocial strategies) with harms-other deceptive communication is negative, with increased usage of this form of deceptive
communication associated with lower levels of positivity, openness,
assurance, networking, tasks, and prosocial strategies. Conversely, the
antisocial strategies are strongly positively related to deceptive communication designed to harm other. Thus, if the deceptive motivation is

224

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Table 2
Stepwise Regression of Relational Maintenance Strategies
Dependent
Variable

Independent
Variable

Positivity

Harm other
Spare other
Benefit self
Benefit self
Harm other
Harm other
Benefit self
Harm other
Spare other
Harm other
Harm other
Benefit self
Spare other
Harm other
Benefit self

Openness
Assurance
Networks
Tasks
Prosocial

Antisocial

F Value
-.45
-.15
-.10
-.20
-.11
-.26
-.13
-.25
-.17
-.34
-.45
-.09
.10
.65
.20

131.65
73.89
51.32
21.75
13.63
38.75
13.63
34.43
25.01
68.80
132.49
69.14
48.12
375.71
213.91

R2
.20
.22
.23
.04
.05
.07
.08
.06
.09
.12
.20
.21
.22
.41
.45

Note. All items are significant at p < .001.

to harm a relational partner, it would appear that antisocial maintenance strategies could be predicted to accompany this form of deceptive communication.
Second, the deceptive strategy of "benefit self" was also shown to
predict additional variance in antisocial strategies, accounting for 45%
of the variance; positivity, 23% of the variance; prosocial strategies,
21% of the variance; and assurance, 8% of the variance. The deceptive
strategy of benefit self was the primary predictor of openness, although
it only accounted for a small portion of the variance (4%). The relationship between the deceptive messages designed to benefit self and the
antisocial strategies is positive, whereas the relationship between
these deceptive messages and positivity, prosocial strategies, assurance, and openness is negative. In general, it appears that individuals
may use deceptive communication designed to benefit themselves
while employing antisocial maintenance strategies. However, it should
be noted that the additional variance accounted for by this type of
deception is small in relation to that accounted for by deceptive communication that harms other.
Finally, the deceptive strategy of "spare other" was found to have
some predictability for relational maintenance strategies. Spare other
was the second predictor for positivity and networks, accounting for
22% and 9% of the variance, respectively. Spare other was the third
predictor for prosocial strategies, accounting for 22% of the variance in
that maintenance strategy. Thus, it would seem that lying to spare a
relational partner is negatively related to the maintenance strategies
of positivity and networks, and not predictive of any other mainten-

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

225

ance strategies, with the exception of a positive relationship to the
prosocial strategies. However, spare other provides only minimal prediction beyond that provided by the deceptive strategies of harm other
and benefit self. Specifically, the spare other intent accounts for .02
additional variance for positivity, .03 additional variance for networks,
and .01 additional variance for the prosocial strategies.
In examining how maintenance and deceptive strategies might vary
according to relational type, relational quality, and trust, a
multivariate analysis of variance was employed. The dependent variables in this analysis were the seven sets of maintenance strategies
(positivity, openness, assurance, networking, tasks, prosocial, antisocial) and the three deceptive message types (benefit self, harm other,
spare other). The independent variables were relational type (married/living together, seriously dating, casually dating, friends), quality
level (high/low), and trust/suspicion level (high/low). The high and low
relational quality was split at the mean, as was the high and low
trust/suspicion level.
No significant three-way interaction was identified in this analysis,
F(3, 502) = 1.17, p > .05. However, there was a significant two-way
interaction reported between relational type and quality, F(3, 502) = 1.6,
p < .05. Subsequent univariate effects were significant for positivity,
F(3, 502) = 4.24, p < .01; harm other, F(3, 502) = 2.76, p < .05; and antisocial strategies, F(3, 502) = 4.89, p < .01. Examination of the means
showed that the perceived relational quality differentially affects
reported usage of maintenance strategies and deceptive messages
across relational types. Whereas participants in high-quality serious
and casual dating relationships and friendships reported increased
use of positivity and decreased use of messages designed to harm other
and antisocial strategies, participants in high- and low-quality committed relationships (married/living together) were unlikely to use
antisocial strategies and were the least likely of any of the groups to
report use of deceptive communication that harmed the relational
partner.
Significant multivariate effects were found for relational type, F(3,
502) = 7.77, p < .001; quality, F(1, 502) = 16.98, p < .001; and suspicion,
F(1, 502) = 21.10, p < .001. Significant univariate effects for relational
type included positivity, F(3, 502) = 5.92, p < .001; openness, F(3, 502) =
16.98, p < .001; assurance, F(3, 502) = 52.19, p < .001; tasks, F(3, 502) =
7.05, p < .001; and prosocial strategies, F(3, 502) = 15.79, p < .001. Analysis of the means revealed that relationships having greater levels of
intimacy (married/living together or seriously dating) used significantly more openness, assurance, and prosocial strategies than the
casual daters and friends. Additionally, research participants in married/living together relationships used significantly more tasks than
casual daters and friends, and the serious daters used significantly
more tasks than the friends.

226

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Univariate analyses of quality levels were significant for all maintenance strategies and two of the deceptive strategies at the .05 level:
positivity, F(1, 502) = 80.80; openness, F(1, 502) = 24.07; assurance, F(1,
502) = 60.24; networks, F(1, 502) = 34.01; tasks, F(1, 502) = 61.09;
prosocial strategies, F(1, 502) = 72.24; antisocial strategies, F(1, 502) =
57.86; harm other, F(1, 502) = 9.07; and benefit self, F(1, 502) = 8.77.
The deceptive strategy of spare other was not significant, F(1, 502) =
.10, p > .05. Additional analyses of the means indicated that relational
partners reporting high levels of relational quality had greater usage
of all relational maintenance strategies and less usage of antisocial
maintenance strategies. Furthermore, those participants involved in
high-quality relationships reported significantly less usage of the
deceptive strategy of benefiting self.
The univariate analysis of suspicion levels indicated that suspicion
was significantly related to all of the strategies analyzed at the .001
level: positivity, F(1, 502) = 42.98; openness, F(1, 502) = 7.72; assurance,
F(1, 502) = 14.85; networks, F(1, 502) = 11.71; tasks, F(1, 502) = 17.04;
prosocial strategies, F(1, 502) = 30.32; antisocial strategies, F(1, 502) =
142.07; harm other, F(1, 502) = 123.74; benefit self, F(1, 502) = 51.34;
and spare other, F(1, 502) = 23.14. Examination of the means revealed
that low levels of perceived suspicion in relationships is associated
with greater usage of all relational maintenance strategies except
antisocial strategies, and reduced use of antisocial strategies and
deceptive communication that harmed other, spared other, and benefited self. Finally, it is interesting to note that the respondents reporting lower levels of suspicion in their relationship also reported using
fewer deceptive strategies that spared their relational partner.

DISCUSSION
What is striking about this data is the relationship of the use of
deceptive messages to other messages designed to maintain relationships, and the overall relational environment in which these messages
occur. Hypotheses 1 and 2 were confirmed in this study, with deceptive
messages intending to spare other, benefit self, and harm other all
being negatively associated with positive messages designed to sustain relationships, such as positivity, openness, assurance, networks,
tasks, and prosocial strategies, whereas deceptive messages intending
to harm other were positively associated with antisocial relational
maintenance strategies. This was as expected, with messages with
deceptive intent not associated with other positive message strategies
designed to maintain relationships. Antisocial relational maintenance
strategies were positively associated with deceptive messages
designed to harm other, and also positively associated with deceptive
messages designed to benefit self.

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

227

Hypotheses 3 and 4 found support with participants in high-quality
relationships reporting less use of deceptive messages intending to
harm other and benefit self, less use of antisocial relational maintenance messages, and more use of positivity, openness, assurance, networks, tasks, and prosocial relational maintenance messages. However, use of deceptive messages intending to spare other was not
related to relational quality.
Hypotheses 5 and 6 were confirmed with participants in relationships with low suspicion levels using fewer deceptive messages than
participants in relationships with high suspicion. Furthermore, participants in relationships with low suspicion levels used more positivity,
openness, assurances, networks, tasks, and prosocial relational maintenance strategies and less antisocial relational maintenance strategies than participants in relationships with high suspicion levels.
In answer to the research question, the type of relationship is associated with message use with participants in married, living together,
and engaged relationships being the least likely of any group to use
deceptive communication intending to harm the partner or antisocial
relational maintenance strategies, regardless of their relational quality. Furthermore, participants in committed relationships and in serious dating relationships used more openness, assurance, and prosocial
strategies than other study participants.
It appears that Robinson's (1996) prediction regarding environments conducive to deceptive communication applies to relational
environments and larger societal milieus. In this study, participants in
relational environments with higher suspicion and lower relational
quality were more likely to use deceptive messages than participants
in less suspicious, higher quality relational environments.
It also appears that for the most part, messages with deceptive
intention and messages designed for relational maintenance are not
positively related. This raises questions about the assumed use of
deceptive communication for relational maintenance purposes. Only
the messages designed to harm other and the antisocial relational
maintenance strategies were positively related in this study. From this
study, it is apparent that there may be more going on in our message
use than what our common sense would tell us.
To get at this issue, several things must occur. First, there needs to
be further development of a measure of intent in deceptive messages.
The scale used in this study had lower reliability than is optimal for
this research. The inclusion of the three types of lies (falsification, distortion, and omission) within each message intent category is no doubt
the culprit. In an effort to streamline the questionnaire and minimize
the number of questions that participants are asked to respond to, the
questionnaire loses reliability, requiring more messages per category
for a better measure.

228

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Second, this research should go live, with actual interactions
between relational partners in response to experimental dilemmas.
The interpersonal deception theory research by Buller, Burgoon, and
their associates (e.g., Buller, Burgoon, White, & Ebesu, 1994; Burgoon,
Buller, White, Afifi, & Buslig, 1999) would be one model for studying
deceptive interactions in relationships.
Third, this research needs to become more international in focus.
The majority of research on communication in relationships has taken
place in the United States, Canada, and Great Britain. We know virtually nothing about how individuals use deception in relationships
where English is not their primary language. We also have little understanding about how other cultural morals and expectations may affect
the use of deception in relationships, whatever its purpose may be.
In the end, it comes down to the relationship and the environment.
Robinson suggests that lies beget lies, and this should give us cause for
pause when lying to our intimate partners and close friends and associates. What relational environment do we create with our deceit, and
what environment fosters the use of deceptive messages? In any case,
simply believing that we are telling lies for the good of our partner and
our relationship may well be the biggest deceit of all.

REFERENCES
Anderson, D. E., Ansfield, M. E., & DePaulo, B. M. (1999). Love's best habit: Deception in
the context of relationships. In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman (Eds.), The social context
of nonverbal behavior: Studies in emotion and social interaction (pp. 372-409). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Aune, R. K., Metts, S., & Ebesu-Hubbard, A. S. (1998). Managing the outcomes of discovered deception. Journal of Social Psychology, 138, 677-689.
Baxter, L. A., & Dindia, K. (1990). Marital partners' perceptions of marital maintenance
strategies. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7, 187-208.
Bowman, M. L. (1990). Coping efforts and marital satisfaction: Measuring marital coping and its correlates. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52, 463-474.
Buller, D. B., Burgoon, J. K., White, C. H., & Ebesu, A. S. (1994). Interpersonal deception
theory VII: Behavioral profiles of falsification, equivocation and concealment. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 13, 366-395.
Burgoon, J. K., Buller, D. B., White, C. H., Afifi, W., & Buslig, A.L.S. (1999). The role of conversational involvement in deceptive interpersonal interactions. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 669-685.
Canary, D. J., & Stafford, L. (1993). Preservation of relational characteristics: Maintenance strategies, equity, and locus of control. In P. J. Kalbfleisch (Ed.), Interpersonal
communication: Evolving interpersonal relationships (pp. 237-259). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
DePaulo, B. M., & Kashy, D. A. (1998). Everyday lies in close and casual relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 63-79.
DePaulo, B. M., Kashy, D. A., Kirkendol, S. E., Wyer, M. M., & Epstein, J. A. (1996). Lying
in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 979-995.
Dindia, K., & Baxter, L. A. (1987). Strategies for maintaining and repairing marital relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 4, 143-158.

Kalbfleisch / DECEPTIVE MESSAGE INTENT

229

Duck, S., Rutt, D. J., Hurst, M. H., & Strejc, H. (1991). Some evident truths about conversations in everyday relationships: All communications are not created equal. Human
Communication Research, 18, 228-267.
Fincham, F. D., & Bradbury, T. N. (1987). The assessment of marital quality: A reevaluation. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 49, 797-809.
Flora, J., & Segrin, C. (1998). Joint leisure time in friend and romantic relationship: The
role of activity type, social skills, and positivity. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 15, 711-718.
Hample, D. (1980). Purposes and effects of lying. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 46, 33-47.
Jones, D. C. (1991). Friendship satisfaction and gender: An examination of sex differences in contributors to friendship satisfaction. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 8, 167-185.
Kalbfleisch, P. J. (1992). Deceit, distrust and the social milieu: Application of deception
research in a troubled world. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 20,
308-334.
Kashy, D. A., & DePaulo, B. M. (1996). Who lies? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1037-1051.
Kelley, D. L., & Burgoon, J. K. (1991). Understanding marital satisfaction and couple type
as functions of relational expectations. Human Communication Research, 18, 40-69.
Lawson, T. J. (2000). Are kind lies better than unkind truths? Effects of perspective and
closeness of relationship. Representative Research in Social Psychology, 24, 11-19.
LaFollette, H., & Graham, G. (1986). Honesty and intimacy. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 3, 3-18.
Levine, T. R., & McCornack, S. A. (1991). The dark side of trust: Conceptualizing and
measuring types of communicative suspicion. Communication Quarterly, 39,
325-340.
McCornack, S. A., & Levine, T. R. (1990). When lovers become leery: The relationship
between suspicion and accuracy in detecting deception. Communication Monographs, 57, 219-230.
Messman, S. J., Canary, D. J., & Hause, K. S. (2000). Motives to remain platonic, equity,
and the use of maintenance strategies in opposite-sex friendships. Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, 17, 67-94.
Metts, S. (1989). An exploratory investigation of deception in close relationships. Journal
of Social and Personal Relationships, 6, 159-179.
Metts, S., & Chronis, H. (1986, May). An exploratory investigation of relational deception.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Chicago.
Metts, S., & Hippensteele, S. (1988). Characteristics of deception in close relationships.
Advances in Interpersonal Communication Research, 33-50.
Monsour, M. (1992). Meanings of intimacy in cross- and same-sex friendships. Journal of
Social and Personal Relationships, 9, 277-295.
Noller, P., & Fitzpatrick, M. A. (1990). Marital communication in the eighties. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 52, 832-843.
Norton, R. (1983). Measuring marital quality: A critical look at the dependent variable.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 45, 141-151.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 95-112.
Robinson, W. P. (1994). Reactions to falsifications in public and interpersonal contexts.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 13, 497-513.
Robinson, W. P. (1996). Deceit, delusion, and detection. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Robinson, W. P., & Rackstraw, S. J. (1972). A question of answers. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.

230

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Robinson, W. P., Shepherd, A., & Heywood, J. (1998). Truth, equivocation/concealment,
and lies in job applications and doctor-patient communication. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 17, 149-164.
Sabatelli, R. M. (1988). Measurement issues in marital research: A review and critique of
contemporary survey instruments. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 50, 891-915.
Sagarin, B. J., Rhoads, K. L., & Cialdini, R. B. (1998). Deceiver's distrust: Denigration as a
consequence of undiscovered deception. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
24, 1167-1176.
Stafford, L., & Canary, D. J. (1991). Maintenance strategies and romantic relationship
type, gender and relational characteristics. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 8, 217-242.
Vrij, A. (2000). Detecting lies and deceit. Sussex, UK: Wiley.
Weigel, D. J., & Ballard-Reisch, D. S. (1999). How couples maintain marriages: A closer
look at self and spouse influences upon the use of maintenance behaviors in marriage.
Family Relations, 48, 263-269.
Wieselquist, J., Rusbult, C. E., Foster, C. A., & Agnew, C. R. (1999). Commitment, pro-relationship behavior, and trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 942-967.
Zak, A. (1995). Recollection of trusting and nontrusting behaviors in intimate relationships. Psychological Reports, 76, 1194-1195.

