JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001
Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

COOPERATIVE AND
INTRUSIVE INTERRUPTIONS IN
INTER- AND INTRACULTURAL
DYADIC DISCOURSE
HAN Z. LI
University of Northern British Columbia

This study examined whether culture plays a role in the use of interruption in simulated
doctor-patient conversations. Participants were 40 Canadians and 40 Chinese who
formed 40 dyads in four experimental conditions: Canadian speaker-Canadian listener,
Chinese speaker-Chinese listener, Chinese speaker-Canadian listener, and Canadian
speaker-Chinese listener. All conversations were videotaped and microanalyzed. The data
generated four findings: (a) In the Chinese speaker-Chinese listener interactions, cooperative interruptions occurred more frequently than intrusive interruptions; (b) when Canadians served as doctors, the doctors performed significantly more intrusive interruptions
than cooperative ones; (c) the two intercultural groups engaged in more unsuccessful
interruptions than the two intracultural groups; and (d) in the intercultural conditions,
the occurrences of intrusive interruptions were greater than cooperative interruptions.
This phenomenon provides unequivocal support for communication accommodation theory. The findings point to a hypothesis that conversational interruption may be a pancultural phenomenon, whereas interruption styles may be culture specific.

"I am afraid I am interrupting you."
"It does not follow that interruptions are unwelcome."
--Jane Austen

E. T. Hall's (1959) saying that "culture is communication" and "communication is culture" (p. 169) crystallizes the intricate relationship
between culture and communication. People communicate according
to their cultures' dictation (Crago & Eriks-Brophy, 1992; Gumperz,
1982; Hymes, 1974). In some cultures, the self-other relationship is
construed as more interdependent or collectivistic, whereas in other
AUTHOR'S NOTE: The author would like to thank Janet B. Bavelas for crucial guidance
in designing and conducting the experiment, Michael H. Bond for enlightening suggestions on the design of the experiment, the three scorers for scoring the data, and all the participants for their time and efforts in making this study possible. I also thank Megan
Terepocki for insightful comments on the article. Finally, I thank the editor and the two
anonymous reviewers for constructive comments on earlier versions of the article. Correspondence should be directed to Han Li, Department of Psychology, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George, B. C. Canada, V2N 4Z9; e-mail: lih@unbc.ca.
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 20 No. 3, September 2001 259-284
 2001 Sage Publications

259

260

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

cultures, the self-other relationship is perceived as more independent
or individualistic (Hofstede, 1980; Markus & Kitayama, 1991;
Triandis, Bontempo, Villareal, Asia, & Lucca, 1988). To mirror culture
in communication, the interdependent selves would send to fellow
interlocutors signals of "solidarity" (Tannen, 1994), and the independent selves would exhibit linguistic cues to clearly mark their individual boundaries (H. Z. Li, 1999a, 1999b). Interruption, a communicative
act, has been employed by conversationalists to either connote "cooperation" or "intrusion" (Goldberg, 1990; Kennedy & Camden, 1983;
Murata, 1994; Ng, Brook, & Dunne, 1995), depending on the cultural
contexts.
The main goal of this study was to examine whether culture plays a
role in the use of interruption in conversations. For example, do
collectivistic Chinese use interruptions differently from individualistic Canadians? When people of different cultural backgrounds converse, does one group accommodate (Bourhis, 1979; Giles, Bourhis, &
Taylor, 1977; Giles & Johnson, 1987; Giles, Mulac, Bradac, & Johnson,
1987; Giles & Smith, 1979; Larsen, Martin, & Giles, 1977) to the interruption styles of the other? The target groups were Anglo-Canadians
and mainland Chinese. A Chinese is either paired with another Chinese or with a Canadian, and a Canadian is either paired with another
Canadian or with a Chinese.
In the following sections, research on the nature of interruption as
well as on culture and interruption will be reviewed, followed by
Hypothesis 1. Literature on intercultural communication and interruption will then be reviewed, followed by Hypothesis 2.

THE NATURE OF CONVERSATIONAL INTERRUPTIONS
According to Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson (1974), an ideal conversation is organized so that no interruption occurs. The coordination
between the speaker and listener is perfect in that the speaker sends
the right signals--verbal and/or nonverbal--to the listener when a
turn change is due. The listener understands and takes the signals for
a turn change. Any violation of the orderliness of this turn-exchange
principle is considered a deep intrusion of the rights of the current
speaker, as well as a severe disruption of the flow of the ongoing
conversation.
Following this view, interruption has been found to be a power
device, imposed on the interruptee by the interrupter (Ferguson, 1977;
Jacob, 1974; Mishler & Waxler, 1968). Consequently, all interruptions
are, without exception, considered power displays (Zimmerman &
West, 1975), and conversation is a constant battle for control over the
floor between interlocutors (Hawkins, 1991; Rogers & Jones, 1975).

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

261

This contention of equating interruption to power, control, or dominance has been contested (Beattie, 1982; Goldberg, 1990; Meltzer, Morris, & Hayes, 1971; Murray, 1987). A number of researchers have proposed a more balanced view of interruption (Beattie, 1981; Coon &
Schwanenflugel, 1996; Ng et al., 1995; Tannen, 1981, 1994). Two broad
types of interruptions have been identified--intrusive and cooperative
(Murata, 1994)--although they are termed variably. For example,
Goldberg (1990) differentiated interruptions as power and nonpower,
Kennedy and Camden (1983) distinguished them as disconfirming and
confirming, whereas Bennett (1981) preferred the terms conflicting
and less conflicting. Ng et al. (1995) detected disruptive and supportive
types of interruptions.
Kennedy and Camden (1983) videotaped conversations of six
multiple-member groups in an American university. Of the 225 interruptions observed, about half functioned to confirm the speaker, and
the other half were either disconfirming or rejecting of the speaker.
Goldberg (1990) analyzed excerpts from a variety of sources and found
distinct types of interruptions. One type, power interruption, was
clearly intended by the interrupter to seize control of the process
and/or content of the conversation by taking the floor and/or the topic
from the current speaker at midutterance. Another type, rapport interruptions, facilitated the process and/or the content of the conversation
by encouraging the speaker's ongoing talk.
In line with Goldberg's (1990) rapport interruptions, Tannen (1981)
observed that in some situations frequent interruptions created high
involvement among the conversational partners, thus promoting feelings of mutual interest, enthusiasm, and solidarity.
Ng et al. (1995) studied interruption patterns among six 4-person
group conversations, two male-male, two female-female, and two
mixed groups. They found that interruptions could be disruptive of the
speech of the current speaker but not necessarily domineering over the
speaker or the flow of the conversation. On the contrary, some interruptions serve to rescue or promote the current speaker, or elaborate on
the content of the speech. In form, all interruptions may be disruptive.
In essence, some interruptions are supportive of the current speaker
and/or the flow of the conversation.
In summary, interruption could be power related (intrusive) or
non-power related (cooperative), depending on the function it assumes
in the context (Dunne & Ng, 1994).
CULTURE AND INTERRUPTIONS: HYPOTHESIS 1

Although there are two discernible types of interruptions, intrusive
and cooperative, different cultural groups appear to use one type more
often than the other. Mizutani (1988) observed that more cooperative
than intrusive interruptions were performed when Japanese

262

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

conversed with each other. When the speaker talks, the listener tries to
help. This phenomenon is called kyowa, which literally means
"coproduce" or "cooperate." Interruption is a means for the cospeakers
to achieve a "conversational duet." Hayashi (1988) found that cooperative interruptions were more frequent in conversations among Japanese than among Americans. Moerman (1988) observed that Thai conversationalists tended to interrupt each other for the purpose of
coordinating on the process and content of a story.
This cooperative nature of interruption may reflect deep-rooted cultural norms and values in interpersonal relations (Crago & EriksBrophy, 1992). In Asian or collectivistic cultures, members
see themselves as part of an encompassing social relationship and recognize that their behavior is determined, contingent on, and to a large
extent organized by what the actor [actress] perceives to be the thoughts,
feelings, and actions of others in the relationship. (Markus & Kitayama,
1991, p. 227)

When engaged in a conversation with other members, collectivists
tend to use cooperative interruptions to demonstrate loyalty and solidarity. Interruptions are other oriented (e.g., helping a partner along)
more than self-oriented (e.g., seizing a chance to talk).
On the other hand, in individualistic cultures in which an individual
constructs the self "primarily by reference to one's own internal repertoire of thoughts, feelings, and actions" (Markus & Kitayama, 1991,
p. 226), one may be more inclined to use intrusive interruptions. By
using intrusive interruptions, one may express feelings of being different and self-assertive, qualities highly valued in individualistic cultures (Markus & Kitayama, 1991).
In view of Markus and Kitayama's (1991) independent-interdependent
self-construals, Hypothesis 1 predicted that intrusive interruptions
would be seen more frequently than cooperative interruptions in
Canadian speaker-Canadian listener conversations (Hypothesis 1a).
Conversely, cooperative interruptions would be seen more frequently
than intrusive interruptions in Chinese speaker-Chinese listener
interactions (Hypothesis 1b). The assumption for Hypothesis 1 was
that Canadians are more individualistic and less collectivistic than
Chinese. This assumption was based on two lines of evidences. First, in
numerous studies (Bond, Leung, & Wan, 1982; Cheng, Bond, & Chan,
1995; The Chinese Culture Connection, 1987; Hofstede, 1980; C. Li,
Kwan, & Bond, 1998), Canadians have been found to be more individualistic and less collectivistic than Hong Kong Chinese in spite of the
fact that Hong Kong has been a British colony for a century and Hong
Kong Chinese have been greatly exposed to Western influence. The
Hong Kong participants in these studies were university students
speaking fluent Cantonese and English.

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

263

Second, mainland Chinese have been found to be more collectivistic
and less individualistic than Anglo-Canadians (H. Z. Li, 1998). In a
sample of 170 Anglo-Canadians from a university in Western Canada
and 225 Chinese from a university in Wuhan, People's Republic of
China, significant differences were found on a number of individualisticcollectivistic measures. Mainland Chinese and Anglo-Canadians displayed consistent patterns of collectivism and individualism, respectively. The background of the Chinese in H. Z. Li's study and the current
study was identical except that in the latter the Chinese were studying
in Canada as international students at the time of the experiment (see
Method section for details).
INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATION AND
INTERRUPTIONS: HYPOTHESIS 2

Intercultural communication differs from intracultural interactions in that one participant speaks a second language and functions
in a foreign culture (Erickson, 1975; Gass & Varonis, 1991; Gumperz,
1978; H. Z. Li, 1999a, 1999b; Tannen, 1981). Researchers have identified several fundamental difficulties in intercultural interactions.
First, intercultural interlocutors are less successful than intracultural
interactants in transmitting information from the speaker to the listener even when the second-language speaker has sufficient language
capacity to participate in the conversation (H. Z. Li, 1999a). Second,
intercultural communicants are less involved in the conversation than
intracultural participants in terms of topic initiation (Chen, 1995) and
process coordination (H. Z. Li, 1999b). Third, intercultural interactants
experience high levels of uncertainty and anxiety (Gao & Gudykunst,
1990; Gudykunst & Ting-Toomey, 1988). Fourth, intercultural interlocutors are often observed to encounter style clashes with each other
(Erickson, 1975; Gumperz, 1978; Pierson & Bond, 1982; Scollon &
Scollon, 1981, 1995; Tannen, 1981).
These difficulties have been attributed to a lack of shared common
ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991), which includes conversational rules
(e.g., Gudykunst, 1991). Because humans converse according to culturally shaped rules for discourse (Labov & Fanshel, 1977), intercultural
interlocutors are bound to display different conversation styles. Interruption, an essential element of conversation style (Erickson, 1975;
Gumperz, 1978; Tannen, 1981), would pose an interesting challenge for
intercultural interlocutors. For example, if one partner comes from an
individualistic cultural background, the other from a collectivistic culture, and if the former uses mostly intrusive interruptions and the latter, cooperative interruptions, what would be the pattern of their interruptions? Whose interruption habit, the individualist's intrusive or the
collectivist's cooperative, would they follow?

264

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

Murata (1994) reported that in Japanese-American dialogues, the
Japanese participants tended to switch their usual interruption style
(cooperative) to the more intrusive North American style when they
were engaged in conversations in English. She found that the number
of intrusive interruptions was higher in Japanese-American conversations than in Japanese-Japanese conversations. Bond and Yang (1982)
and Gallois and Callan (1991) also observed that in native-nonnative
interactions, the second-language speaker frequently switched to the
speech style of the first-language speaker.
Ross and Shortreed (1990) had Japanese university students listen
to 16 recordings of Japanese-American conversations and then asked
them to rate their impressions of the Japanese participants. The code
switchers, or Japanese who converged to the speech style of the Americans, were perceived as sophisticated, which is symbolic of high educational attainments.
The code-switching phenomenon was also reported by Ervin-Tripp
(1964), who found that Japanese bilinguals used different speech
styles when conversing with another Japanese or with an American.
Gallois and Markel (1975) observed a code-switching tendency among
Cuban bilinguals, who exhibited different turn-taking behaviors when
talking with another Cuban in Spanish than when talking with
another Cuban in English.
Communication accommodation theory (CAT) has provided a powerful explanatory framework for the code-switching phenomenon in
intercultural communication. CAT states that interlocutors have a
tendency to converge or diverge their linguistic codes either for power
and/or desire for social approval (Giles et al., 1977; Giles et al., 1987;
Giles & Johnson, 1987; Giles & Smith, 1979). Bourhis (1979, 1984)
pointed out that in intercultural interactions, the minority group usually had less social and economic power than the majority; thus, the
minority group would often switch to the linguistic code of the majority
group. Giles, Taylor, and Bourhis (1973) demonstrated that speech convergence promoted mutual liking between Anglo- and French Canadian students. Anglo-Canadians perceived French Canadians more
favorably if the latter switched to English and vice versa. In two studies, Genesee and Bourhis (1982, 1988) also found that Anglo-Canadians
rated French Canadians more favorably if they switched to English
when conversing with an Anglo-Canadian.
Conversely, the French Canadians rated Anglo-Canadians more
favorably if they switched to French when conversing with a French
Canadian. Based on CAT and its contingent literature, it was argued
that Chinese participants in the present study would converge their
interruption style to that of their Canadian interlocutors due to their
wish to be accepted and/or their perceived subordinate social status.
Hypothesis 2 predicted that in intercultural communications
(Canadian speaker-Chinese listener and Chinese speaker-Canadian

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

265

listener), interruption patterns would be similar to that in Canadian
speaker-Canadian listener interactions but different from that in Chinese speaker-Chinese listener conversations. That is, intrusive interruptions would be seen more frequently than cooperative interruptions in both Canadian speaker-Chinese listener (Hypothesis 2a)
and Chinese speaker-Canadian listener conditions (Hypothesis 2b).
The rationale for Hypothesis 2 was that the Chinese participants
would switch interruption styles for two possible reasons. First, as
international students studying in Canada, they wanted acceptance by
Canadian students. Second, the Chinese participants had lower social
status. Although Chinese students who could make it to Canada were a
social and academic elite in their home country, they lost their position
in society once they stepped on foreign soil. In view of the discriminatory treatment the Chinese have received in Canada throughout the
past century (Berry & Kalin, 1995; Dion & Kawakami, 1996; Lai & Yue,
1990; P. S. Li, 1988; Reitz, 1980; Reitz & Sklar, 1997), it is likely that
they would perceive themselves as socially, economically, and linguistically disadvantaged. Although both Chinese and Canadian participants were university students at the time of the experiment, the
social status of the two groups was not equal. As noted by Bourhis
(1979), the majority group (in this case, the Canadian students) would
perceive themselves as having more social status than the minority
group (in this case, the Chinese students). Therefore, the Chinese participants would converge their interruption styles to that of their
Canadian interlocutors due to their subordinate social status and/or
desire for acceptance.
COMPARING DOCTOR-PATIENT INTERRUPTION PATTERNS

Besides testing the two hypotheses stated above, interruption patterns of doctors and patients were also examined. Although numerous
researchers have studied doctor-patient face-to-face interactions, few
have examined interruption patterns per se. Krysko (1998) analyzed
36 audiotaped conversations between physicians and patients in a
group family practice setting. The data were coded for intrusive and
cooperative interruptions using the same schema as the present study.
Doctors and patients had similar frequencies of intrusive and cooperative interruptions. Doctors interrupted to regulate the flow of the conversation, whereas patients interrupted to elaborate on their symptoms. Irish and Hall (1995) examined 50 videotaped interviews
between doctors and patients in an ambulatory care center of a hospital. Results showed that patients interrupted physicians significantly
more than vice versa. Patients' interruptions were characterized with
statements, whereas doctors' interruptions were mostly questions.
Given the inconclusive findings of doctor-patient interruption patterns in past research, as well as the nature of the design of the current

266

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

study (i.e., simulated rather than real doctor-patient interaction),
doctor-patient interruption patterns were examined in an exploratory
fashion rather than a directive hypothesis.
In addition, communication convergence was also examined.
According to CAT, participants with lower social status converge to the
interruption style of the more powerful interlocutors (Bourhis, 1979,
1984; Giles et al., 1977). When applied to the current study, participants in the patient role would be expected to converge to the interruption style of participants in the doctor role. In a study of conversation
styles between physicians and hospitalized patients in Canada,
Bourhis, Roth, and MacQueen (1989) reported that doctors mostly
used medical talk and patients used everyday language when they
interacted with each other. In view of the speech maintenance tendency found in doctors and patients in Bourhis et al. (1989) and the
particular experimental design of the present study (simulated medical conversations between and within cultural groups), the direction of
convergence was left open to exploration.

METHOD
PARTICIPANTS

Eighty-four participants volunteered to participate in this study, of
which 44 were males and 40 were females. The participants formed 42
same-gender dyads, 2 of which were dropped from data analysis
because they did not follow the instructions. Participants were
3rd-year, 4th-year, or graduate students from the University of Victoria, Canada. The majority of the participants were in their 20s or earlier 30s, with an average age of 29.11. The mean ages for the Chinese
and the Canadian participants were 30.00 and 28.22, respectively,
with no significant difference, t(78) = -1.90, p < .05. Participants were
solicited in classrooms, university cafeterias, and graduate students'
offices in various departments at the University of Victoria.
Of the 80 participants, 40 were Chinese (20 males and 20 females)
whose first language was Mandarin Chinese, and 40 were Caucasian
Canadians (20 males and 20 females) whose first language was English. All Chinese participants grew up in mainland China and were
studying at the University of Victoria. At the time of the experiment,
the Chinese participants had been in Canada for an average of 27
months, the range being 0.5 to 60 months. Care was taken to ensure
that the Chinese participants had sufficient English-language ability,
as measured by peer evaluation and self-evaluation and referenced by
scores on the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) to participate in the conversations. All Chinese participants had a TOEFL
score of 575 or greater (for details, see H. Z. Li, 1999a).

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

267

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND PROCEDURES

A between-subjects design was used for the four experimental conditions: Canadian speaker-Canadian listener, Chinese speakerChinese listener, Canadian speaker-Chinese listener, and Chinese
speaker-Canadian listener. According to the time of their availability,
participants were either paired with a partner from their own culture
(Canadian speaker-Canadian listener or Chinese speaker-Chinese listener) or someone from a different culture (Chinese speaker-Canadian
listener or Canadian speaker-Chinese listener). All dyads were
same-gender; that is, males were paired with males and females with
females.
All dyads (10 in each of the four experimental conditions) engaged in
the same communication task, which involved simulating a doctorpatient interview. The patients (speakers) were given a simple case
history to memorize, and then during the experimental session, they
presented the case history to the doctors (listeners). The case history
was developed in Chinese, translated into English, and then translated back into Chinese to check for accuracy. The Chinese
speaker-Chinese listener condition used the Chinese version, whereas
the other three conditions used the English version.
On arrival at the lab and after the role of a patient (speaker) or a doctor (listener) was randomly assigned by a draw, the speakers were
given sufficient time to study the case history. Then a multiple-choice
test (as manipulation check) was given to the speakers to ensure that
they had mastered the content. Meanwhile, the listeners were given a
list of information that they should get from the speaker during the
conversation (for more details, see H. Z. Li, 1999b). The list of information was relevant to the doctor-patient interview in general (e.g., what
the exact problem was, whether the patient had a previous occurrence
of the problem) but not specific to the content of the case history. The
listener was also instructed to feel free to ask the speaker questions
during the conversation. The dyads were then instructed to engage in
the conversation in a "talking manner." To prevent pure memory
errors, the speaker was allowed to refer to the information sheet while
engaging in the conversation but was not permitted to read from it
word for word. After this role-play, the listener completed an
open-ended test designed to examine how much information was successfully communicated from the speaker to the listener. All conversations were videotaped with the informed consent of the participants.
The average time for participants to finish the conversation was 5 minutes and 29 seconds across conditions. The mean time was 4 minutes
and 48 seconds for the Canadian speaker-Canadian listener condition
(288.0 seconds), 5 minutes and 16 seconds for the Chinese

268

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

speaker-Chinese listener condition (316.0 seconds), 5 minutes and 22
seconds for the Chinese speaker-Canadian listener condition (322.0
seconds), and 6 minutes and 32 seconds for the Canadian speakerChinese listener condition (392.0 seconds). Univariate F tests showed
that no two groups were significantly different from each other, F(3,
36) = 0.85, p < .05; MSE = 23,049.95 seconds.
DIMENSIONS OF INTERRUPTIONS

Interruptions were divided into successful and unsuccessful. Both
can occur with or without overlapping. Successful interruptions were
differentiated into intrusive, cooperative, and other categories. Unsuccessful interruptions were not classified. Examples for each category
are available from the author on request. All examples are from the
data set of the current study.
Successful interruptions: An interruption is judged successful if the second
speaker cuts off the first speaker before he or she finishes a complete utterance (more than the last word of the utterance), and the second
speaker continues to talk until he or she finishes an utterance, whereas
the first speaker stops talking abruptly (Beaumont & Cheyne, 1998; Jacob, 1974; Mishler & Waxler, 1968; Ng et al., 1995).
Unsuccessful interruptions: These were instances when the second speaker
begins talking before the first speaker finishes an utterance, and either
both speakers continue talking and complete their utterances (Beaumont & Cheyne, 1998; Jacob, 1974; Ng et al., 1995) or the second speaker
stops before finishing the intruding speech, although the first speaker
continues talking and holding the floor.
Interruptions without overlapping: This type of interruption is also termed
silent interruption (Ferguson, 1977). These are instances when the second speaker starts talking while the first speaker's utterance is not completed. The utterances of the two speakers do not overlap. As pointed out
by Bull and Mayer (1988), this situation poses special difficulties for
scorers when deciding whether the first speaker intends to continue
talking or use the silence as a turn-yielding signal (Duncan, 1972;
Duncan & Fiske, 1977), for "conversations don't always follow rules of
standard grammar" (Bull & Mayer, 1988, p. 37). Following Duncan
(1972), the possibility of an interruption was excluded if one or more of
the following turn-yielding signals occurred: a rise or fall in pitch at the
end of a clause or a drawl on the final syllable. An interruption was determined when there is no change in the tone of speech in the final syllable,
if the lips are still moving during the pause, or the lips start to move following a short pause.
Complex interruptions: Sometimes speakers interrupt each other, or one
speaker interrupts the other, consecutively. Roger, Bull, and Smith
(1988) (also see Bull & Mayer, 1988) coded these sequences as one special
category, whereas others coded them as a series of independent events
(Ferguson, 1977; Kennedy & Camden, 1983). The present study followed
the latter because complex interruptions were infrequent and an independent category would not allow for meaningful analysis.

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

269

CATEGORIES OF INTERRUPTION: COOPERATIVE

According to Murata (1994), cooperative interruptions intended to
help the speaker by coordinating on the process and/or content of the
ongoing conversation. Murata's cooperative interruption had no subcategories. The cooperative category used in the present study contained three subcategories: assistance, agreement, and clarification.
Agreement and clarification were borrowed from Kennedy and Camden (1983), whereas assistance was developed by the author based on
the nature of the present data.
Agreement: According to Kennedy and Camden (1983), an agreement interruption enables the interrupter to show concurrence, compliance, understanding, or support. Sometimes, the interruption also serves as an extension or elaboration of the idea being presented by the speaker.
Assistance: The interrupter perceives that the speaker needs help. The interrupter provides the current speaker with a word, phrase, sentence, or
idea.
Clarification: This type of interruption is usually initiated by the listener,
with the intention to understand the message being sent by the speaker
(Kennedy & Camden, 1983). The ultimate goal of the interruption is to
have the current speaker clarify or explain a previously elicited piece of
information that the listener is unclear about.
CATEGORIES OF INTERRUPTION: INTRUSIVE

According to Murata (1994), intrusive interruptions pose threats to
the current speaker's territory by disrupting the process and/or content of the ongoing conversation (Goldberg, 1990). Murata's intrusive
category has three subcategories: disagreement, floor taking, and topic
change. The intrusive category used in the present study contains four
subcategories: disagreement, floor taking, topic change, and
tangentialization. The last subcategory is borrowed from Kennedy and
Camden (1983).
Disagreement: When the interlocutor in the role of the listener disagrees
with what the current speaker is saying and wants to voice his or her
opinion immediately, disagreement interruption occurs.
Floor taking: In the case of floor taking, the interrupter does not intend to
change the topic of the current speaker. Instead, the interrupter usually
develops the topic of the current speaker and does so by taking over the
floor from the current speaker.
Topic change: In this conversational act, the interrupter is somewhat more
aggressive than in the floor-taking situation because he or she has to accomplish the task of changing the topic.
Tangentialization: This is defined as a speech reflecting the listener's
awareness, usually by way of summarization, of the information being
sent by the current speaker (Kennedy & Camden, 1983). By summarizing a piece or pieces of previously elicited information, the interrupter

270

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

may make light of, or in some way minimize, the message being sent by
the current speaker. Tangentialization prevents the interrupter from listening to an unwanted piece of information, either because the information has been presented previously or the information is already known
to the listener through other channels.
OTHER INTERRUPTIONS

In addition to cooperative and intrusive interruptions, six accounts
of interruptions in the data were not classifiable in any of the seven
subcategories. Following Kennedy and Camden (1983), they were categorized as "other interruptions."
SCORING AND INTERSCORER RELIABILITY

Two trained research assistants, one English speaking and one
bilingual, made verbatim transcripts of the videotaped conversations.
Three trained research assistants and the researcher coded the data
for frequencies of successful and unsuccessful interruptions using the
coding scheme presented above.
Before scoring the data, scorers received a training session with the
following instructions: (a) Read the criteria at least twice, (b) watch the
tape while reflecting on scoring criteria, (c) score for the first time by
watching the tape and listening to the dialogue, and (d) score for the
second time by listening to but not watching the tape so you can just
concentrate on the conversations.
Following the training session, four persons independently scored
the videotaped conversations. The interscorer reliability (Pearson correlation) was between 0.89 and 0.93. In scoring the data, scorers were
required to write down all identifiable details of interruptions including the provider and the exact time (minute and second) they occurred.
Although transcripts were available, scorers were required to score
interruptions from the videotape, using transcripts as references.

RESULTS
TREATMENT OF THE DATA

The frequencies of cooperative, intrusive, other, and unsuccessful
interruptions were summed across the four experimental conditions.
The frequencies from three subcategories--agreement, assistance, and
clarification--were summed to make the score for cooperative inter-

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

271

Table 1
Means for Rates of Cooperative, Intrusive, and Unsuccessful
Interruptions as a Function of Condition
Condition

Dyad

Speaker/Listener

n

Canadian/Canadian
Chinese/Chinese
Chinese/Canadian
Canadian/Chinese

10
10
10
10

Cooperative
M
4.04
13.41
5.85
4.04

Intrusive

Unsuccessful

SD

M

SD

M

5.61
9.38
5.82
6.14

6.93
3.68
7.15
7.49

7.89
2.89
7.62
8.26

1.34
0.00
2.74
4.09

SD
2.42
0.00
2.51
4.19

Note. n represents the number of dyads. All dyads were same-gender; males and females
were evenly distributed in all conditions.

ruption. The frequencies of disagreement, topic change, floor taking,
and summarization were added to make the score for intrusive interruption. The total frequency was 132 for cooperative interruption, 109
for intrusive interruption, 6 for other interruption, and 35 for unsuccessful interruption. Total talking time for all 40 conversations was
13,180 seconds.
Due to the differences in talking time for each individual, frequencies of interruptions do not make meaningful comparisons. Following
standard practices in treating this kind of data (e.g., Bull & Mayer,
1988; Roger & Schumacher, 1983; Rogers & Jones, 1975), all frequencies were converted into rates, which are derivations of frequencies
divided by talking time. Because of the small numerators and large
denominators (talking time was measured in seconds), the rates were
very small. Following Beaumont and Cheyne (1998), the rates were
multiplied by the grand mean of the talking time.
The data could also be treated using each partner's total number of
words as the denominator when converting frequencies to rates (Hill,
1988; Kollock, Blumstein, & Schwartz, 1985). This approach takes each
individual's speech speed into consideration. The present study could
not adopt this method because two languages were used in the conversations. The Canadian speaker-Canadian listener, Chinese
speaker-Canadian listener, and Canadian speaker-Chinese listener
conditions used English in their conversations, whereas the Chinese
speaker-Chinese listener condition conversed in Mandarin Chinese.
Means of rates for intrusive, cooperative, and unsuccessful interruptions were calculated across the four experimental conditions; they are
presented in Table 1. The unit of analysis in each condition was a dyad
rather than an individual speaker or listener because conversation is a
joint activity between conversational partners (Bavelas & Segal, 1982;
Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Goffman, 1967;
Goodwin, 1981; Grice, 1975; Roger & Nesshoever, 1987; Schegloff, 1982;
Tannen, 1994).

272

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

The Canadian Speaker-Canadian
Listener Condition: Testing Hypothesis 1a
Hypothesis 1a predicted that intrusive interruptions would be seen
more frequently than cooperative interruptions in Canadian
speaker-Canadian listener conversations. As shown in Table 1, the
mean rate for intrusive interruption was higher than the mean rate for
cooperative interruption, but no statistically significant difference was
reached. Thus, Hypothesis 1a was not supported.
The Chinese Speaker-Chinese
Listener Condition: Testing Hypothesis 1b
Hypothesis 1b predicted that cooperative interruptions would be
seen more frequently than intrusive interruptions in Chinese
speaker-Chinese listener interactions. As indicated in Table 1, the
mean rate for cooperative interruption was higher than the mean rate
for intrusive interruption. ANOVA revealed that the difference was
statistically significant, F(1, 9) = 12.41, p < .005. Thus, Hypothesis 1b
was highly supported by the data.
The Canadian Speaker-Chinese Listener Condition:
Testing Hypothesis 2a
Hypothesis 2a predicted that intrusive interruptions would be seen
more frequently than cooperative interruptions in the Canadian
speaker-Chinese listener condition. The mean rate for intrusive interruption was higher than the mean rate for cooperative interruption.
ANOVA indicated a significant difference, F(1, 9) = 7.17, p < .05. Thus,
Hypothesis 2a was supported by the data.
The Chinese Speaker-Canadian Listener Condition:
Testing Hypothesis 2b
Hypothesis 2b predicted that intrusive interruptions would be seen
more frequently than cooperative interruptions in the Chinese
speaker-Canadian listener condition. As shown in Table 1, the mean
rates for intrusive interruption and cooperative interruption were similar for this condition. Thus, Hypothesis 2b was not supported.
COMPARING DOCTOR-PATIENT INTERRUPTION PATTERNS

The mean rates for cooperative and intrusive interruptions for doctors and patients are presented in Table 2. To test for role (doctor vs.
patient) main effects, ethnicity main effects (4 experimental conditions), and role-by-ethnicity interactions, a 2 x 4 MANOVA was con-

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

273

Table 2
Means for Rates of Cooperative and Intrusive Interruptions as a Function of Role
Cooperative
Role
Canadian doctor
Canadian patient
Chinese doctor
Chinese patient
Chinese doctor
Canadian patient
Canadian doctor
Chinese patient

Condition
Intracultural
Intracultural
Intracultural
Intracultural
Intercultural
Intercultural
Intercultural
Intercultural

n
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Intrusive

M

SD

M

SD

0.00
4.04
6.08
7.33
2.26
1.78
3.15
2.70

0.00
5.61
5.03
7.84
3.62
2.72
4.09
3.46

4.09
2.84
1.90
1.78
4.18
3.31
5.41
1.74

4.94
4.26
2.05
1.74
5.89
3.68
6.12
2.13

Note. All dyads were same-gender; males and females were evenly distributed in all conditions.

ducted. The analysis showed no role main effect, no role-by-ethnicity
interaction, but a significant ethnicity main effect, F(6, 142) = 3.25, p =
.005, Wilks's Lambda = .77. Exploratory post hoc multiple comparisons
at an  level of .05, using LSD, were performed. Results indicated that
the Chinese doctor-Chinese patient condition performed significantly
more cooperative interruptions than the other three conditions. No
other significant differences were found among other cultural conditions in terms of the amount of cooperative and intrusive interruptions
performed.
Within-condition comparisons for cooperative interruptions indicated that the mean rates for those who played the roles of a doctor and
a patient were similar in the Chinese doctor-Chinese patient, Chinese
doctor-Canadian patient, and Canadian doctor-Chinese patient conditions. In the Canadian doctor-Canadian patient condition, the doctors
made no cooperative interruptions in the entire conversation (M = 0).
All the cooperative interruptions were made by the patients. ANOVA
showed that the difference was statistically significant, F(1, 9) = 5.20,
p < .05.
Within-condition comparisons for intrusive interruptions indicated
that the mean rates for doctors and patients were similar in the Chinese doctor-Chinese patient, Canadian doctor-Canadian patient, and
Chinese doctor-Canadian patient conditions. In the Canadian doctorChinese patient condition, the doctors made more intrusive interruptions than the patients. This difference was statistically significant,
F(1, 9) = 5.23, p < .05.
Communication Accommodation
Because MANOVA showed no role main effect, it was an indication
that doctors and patients did not systematically differ in their interruption styles. Thus, it is unknown whether speech convergence

274

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

occurred. In the two conditions that the doctor role was played by
Canadians, significant differences were found. The doctors exhibited
more intrusive interruptions than did patients, and the patients displayed more cooperative interruptions than did doctors.
Unsuccessful Interruptions
The mean rates for unsuccessful interruptions are presented in
Table 1. As shown in Table 1, the mean rates for the two intercultural
conditions (Canadian speaker-Chinese listener and Chinese
speaker-Canadian listener) were higher than mean rates in the two
intracultural conditions (Canadian speaker-Canadian listener and
Chinese speaker-Chinese listener).
ANOVA indicated a significant difference among the means, F(3,
36) = 4.78, p < .01. Exploratory post hoc multiple comparisons at an 
level of .05, using LSD, were performed. Results showed no difference
between the two intracultural groups (the Canadian speaker-Canadian listener and Chinese speaker-Chinese listener conditions) or
between the two intercultural groups (the Canadian speaker-Chinese
listener and Chinese speaker-Canadian listener conditions). There
were, however, significant differences between the Chinese
speaker-Canadian listener and Chinese speaker-Chinese listener conditions. There were also significant differences between the Canadian
speaker-Chinese listener and the two intracultural groups, the Canadian speaker-Canadian listener and Chinese speaker-Chinese listener
conditions.
Questionnaire Data
To measure their perceived relationship, participants in the two
intercultural conditions (Chinese speaker-Canadian listener and
Canadian speaker-Chinese listener) filled out a questionnaire immediately after their conversations. Of the 40 intercultural participants, 38
completed the questionnaire; 2 did not because the experimenter forgot to distribute the questionnaire. The questionnaire was made up of
11 questions, of which 8 had a 7-point Likert-type scale, whereas the
remainder had an open-ended format. Results of the 7 questions relevant to the perceived relationship of the partners are presented in
Table 3.
Because English was the first language of the Canadian participants, their English-language fluency was not rated. The first question
in Table 3 asked the Chinese participants to rate their own Englishlanguage fluency and the Canadians to rate the English-language fluency of their Chinese partners. As indicated in Table 3, there was no
statistically significant difference between the mean ratings by the
Chinese and Canadians in terms of the English fluency of the Chinese.

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

275

Table 3
Mean Scores of Questionnaire Data for Chinese and Canadians in the Intercultural
Conditions
Chinese
(n = 19)
Question
How would you rate your
(your partner's) Englishlanguage fluency?
How knowledgeable is your
partner about your culture?
Did you have difficulties
communicating with him
or her?
Do you think your partner
had difficulty communicating
with you?
How different was this from
a conversation with
someone of your own
culture?
Overall, how much did you
enjoy the conversation?
If you run into this person
again in the future, would
you be willing to talk with
him or her?

LikertType Scale

Canadians
(n = 19)

M

SD

M

SD

Not fluent = 0;
very fluent = 6

3.32

1.75

4.00

0.66

Not knowledgeable = 0;
very knowledgeable = 6
Not at all = 0;
very difficult = 6

2.95

1.72

4.36

0.95

1.42

1.50

1.32

1.29

Not at all = 0;
very difficult = 6

1.16

1.30

1.89

1.20

Not different = 0;
very different = 6

2.12

1.93

2.37

1.53

Not at all = 0;
very much = 6
Not at all = 0;
very much = 6

4.84

1.39

5.00

0.66

5.53

0.77

5.26

1.44

Interestingly, the Chinese were rated more knowledgeable about the
Canadian culture than the Canadians about the Chinese culture, F(1,
36) = 9.96, p < .005. No statistically significant difference was found
between the means of the Chinese and the Canadians for the remaining five questions in Table 3.

DISCUSSION
The data generated four findings. Each is intriguing and important,
be it a support or a negation of the hypotheses. Each will be discussed
below.
COOPERATIVE INTERRUPTIONS IN
THE CHINESE SPEAKER-CHINESE LISTENER CONDITION

The hypothesis that in Chinese-Chinese interactions, cooperative
interruptions would occur more frequently than intrusive interruptions was strongly supported by the data. Participants engaged in

276

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

significantly more cooperative than intrusive interruptions regardless
of their roles (doctor or patient). In performing cooperative interruptions, the second speaker intends to assist and/or agree with the current speaker and/or have the current speaker clarify or explain a previously elicited piece of information. Cooperative interruptions
functioned to coordinate on the process and/or content of the ongoing
conversation. By interrupting cooperatively, interlocutors showed solidarity (Tannen, 1989), connectedness (Geertz, 1975) or GuanXi (H. Z.
Li, 1998), and interdependence (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). This finding has provided strong support for Markus and Kitayama's theory
(1991) that collectivists construe the self-other relationship
interdependently.
Similar interruption patterns were observed by Moerman (1988) in
Thai conversations and by Hayashi (1988) in Japanese conversations.
Mizutani (1988) reported that cooperative interruption is called kyowa
in Japanese, which literally means coproduce or cooperate. The Japanese see a conversation as a duet, the success of which requires perfect
coordination between the speaker and the listener.
ROLE AND INTERRUPTION PATTERNS:
THE CANADIAN DOCTOR CASE

Role was not a factor in the type of interruptions displayed in conversations when Chinese played the role of a doctor (Chinese doctorChinese patient and Chinese doctor-Canadian patient conditions). In
these two conditions, doctors and patients engaged in similar frequencies of intrusive and cooperative interruptions. There are two logical
explanations for this puzzling but intriguing phenomenon. First, the
Chinese culture does not encourage intrusive interruptions regardless
of conversation partner. To maintain harmony is more important than
to convey one's intentions or messages (H. Z. Li, 1999b). Second, the
income discrepancy between doctors and the general population is
small since China implemented a more egalitarian salary system in
1949. Furthermore, the Communist system encourages comradeship
in the interactions of its citizens. These economic, social, and political
factors may have been indoctrinated into the conversational behavior
of the Chinese.
In the two conditions in which the Canadians played the role of a
doctor (Canadian doctor-Canadian patient and Canadian doctorChinese patient conditions), there were significant differences
between the doctors and patients in the frequencies of intrusive and
cooperative interruptions. In the Canadian doctor-Canadian patient
condition, the doctors performed no cooperative interruptions. All
interruptions were intrusive. This seems to indicate that Canadian
doctors, as simulated in this study, assumed intrusive rather than

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

277

cooperative interruption styles. A possible explanation for this phenomenon is that the Canadians assumed the role they were playing
and the preference for intrusive interruption style is attributable to
the high-status doctor role.
In the Canadian doctor-Chinese patient condition, the Canadian
doctors contributed significantly more intrusive interruptions than
the Chinese patients. The difference between doctors and patients in
the Canadian doctor-Chinese patient condition in the use of intrusive
interruptions was significantly larger than in the Canadian doctorCanadian patient condition. This phenomenon may be attributable to
the existence of a double status asymmetry. When Canadian doctors
interacted with Chinese patients, there were doctor-patient roles as
well as majority-minority status differences. Armed with double
power, the Canadian doctors intrusively interrupted the Chinese
patients to a larger extent than with Canadian patients.
These findings could bear important implications for health communication between doctors and patients in general and between
mainstream doctors and minority patients in particular. Being constantly interrupted in an intrusive manner by their doctors not only
makes patients feel disrespected but also prevents them from explaining their symptoms clearly, resulting in misdiagnosis, unnecessary
hospitalization, and ineffective utilization of the health care system
(Diaz-Duque, 1989; DiMatteo & DiNicola, 1982; Makoul, Arntson, &
Schofield, 1995; Sharf, 1990). The following example by a Filipino
immigrant in Northern British Columbia illustrates the consequence
of intrusive interruptions by his doctor (H. Z. Li & Browne, 2000).
Once I went to the doctor when I had a severe stomach pain. After a brief
checkup, he presumed I had mental health problems. Though this was
not the case, I had to stay in the hospital for five days. The tests done on
me were okay. The doctor didn't listen to me when I told him I did not
have such a problem. He kept interrupting me so I did not explain myself
clearly. I was given medicines to no effect and told to do exercises. The
pain subsided after a long time. (p. 153)

Speech maintenance was another phenomenon observed in the two
conditions when Canadians played the role of a doctor. It seemed that
the doctors and patients maintained their respective interruption
styles: the doctors, intrusive, and the patients, cooperative. This is consistent with the pattern found by Bourhis, Giles, Leyens, and Tajfel
(1979) and Bourhis et al. (1989); the latter reported that doctors and
patients used their respective speech styles--the doctors' medical talk
and the patients' everyday language. The finding of the current study,
together with reports by Bourhis et al. (1989), seemed to document a
speech maintenance pattern in doctor-patient interaction.

278

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

CULTURE AND UNSUCCESSFUL INTERRUPTIONS

The finding that the two intercultural groups (Canadian speakerChinese listener and Chinese speaker-Canadian listener) engaged in
more unsuccessful interruptions than the two intracultural groups
(Canadian doctor-Canadian patient and Chinese speaker-Chinese listener) is very revealing. It clearly indicates that intracultural conversations are more coordinated than intercultural interactions. This
finding is consistent with observations made by Gumperz (1978), who
reflected that intracultural discourse is more synchronized than
intercultural interactions. Tannen (1981) asserted that intracultural
conversations are more congruent than intercultural conversations.
The numerous unsuccessful interruptions in intercultural interactions undoubtedly indicate a lack of congruity to the extent that interlocutors cannot successfully insert an interruption.
This finding also sheds light on the phenomenon of the
miscommunication and noncommunication in intercultural interactions (Erickson, 1975; Gumperz, 1978; Scollon & Scollon, 1981, 1995;
Taylor & Simard, 1975). H. Z. Li (1999a) reported that listener recall
scores were significantly lower in intercultural situations than in
intracultural interactions even when the second-language speaker
had sufficient language capacity to participate in the conversation. In
a follow-up study, H. Z. Li (1999b) observed that dyads who achieved
higher listener recall scores also performed more grounding (Clark &
Brennan, 1991; Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Goffman, 1967; Goodwin,
1981; Grice, 1975), which is defined as a verbal activity by the listener
or the speaker causing a previously elicited unit of information to be
repeated, partially repeated, paraphrased, explained, confirmed, or
clarified by reformulating or repairing. It is therefore argued that successful interruptions, like grounding activities, may be a means to
effective communication. Contrary to previous belief that all interruptions are disruptive (Ferguson, 1977; Jacob, 1974; Mishler & Waxler,
1968; Roger & Nesshoever, 1987; Roger & Schumacher, 1983;
Zimmerman & West, 1975), it is reasoned that some types of interruptions, when performed successfully, may facilitate content
transmission.
COMMUNICATION ACCOMMODATION: CONVERGENCE

In the two intercultural conditions (Chinese speaker-Canadian listener and Canadian speaker-Chinese listener), the occurrences of
intrusive interruptions were greater than cooperative interruptions.
The Canadian participants maintained their intrusive interruption
style, whereas the Chinese participants switched from their usual
cooperative style to the more intrusive style of their Canadian partners. This finding has provided strong support for CAT (Bourhis, 1979;

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

279

Giles et al., 1977, 1987; Giles & Johnson, 1987; Giles & Smith, 1979;
Larsen et al., 1977). CAT states that in conversations, one party may
converge to the other's conversation style for power and/or social acceptance (Bourhis, 1979, 1984; Giles et al., 1977, 1987).
Although perceived power was not measured, one variable in the
questionnaire--which was filled out by intercultural dyads immediately after the conversations--provided an indirect measure. When
asked, "How knowledgeable is your partner about your culture," the
Chinese were rated more knowledgeable about the Canadian culture
than the Canadians about the Chinese culture. It can be inferred that
the more powerful majority group tends to ignore the culture of the less
powerful minority group, whereas the minority group must know the
culture of the majority group. It is argued that answers to this question
reflect power differences between the Chinese and the Canadian participants. Previous research has documented that in intercultural
interactions, the majority group (usually speaking its native language)
holds more social, economic, and linguistic power than the minority
group that speaks the language of the majority group (Bourhis, 1979,
1984, 1994; Giles et al., 1977). Given the subordinate social status that
Chinese students hold in Canada and the discriminatory treatment
that Chinese have received in Canada throughout the past century
(Berry & Kalin, 1995; Dion & Kawakami, 1996; Lai & Yue, 1990; P. S. Li,
1988; Reitz, 1980; Reitz & Sklar, 1997), it can be reasoned that the Chinese participants converged to the interruption style of the Canadians
due to the higher social status of the latter. For a more definitive explanation of interruption convergence in intercultural settings, future
research needs to directly measure perceived social status.
Results from the questionnaire filled out by both Canadian and Chinese participants immediately after the interactions seem to indicate
that the Chinese participants were well accepted by the Canadians. In
spite of the differences and difficulties they experienced in their conversations, both Chinese and Canadian participants claimed that they
enjoyed the conversations immensely and were decidedly willing to
talk with their partners again should they meet in the future. Taken
together, the results showed that the Chinese participants converged
their interruption style to that of their Canadian partners, and they
were well accepted by their Canadian partners.
The interruptions-style convergence of the Chinese participants in
this study is consistent with previous observations in native-nonnative
conversations (Bond & Yang, 1982; Ervin-Tripp, 1964; Gallois &
Callan, 1991; Gallois & Markel, 1975; Murata, 1994), although these
researchers termed this phenomenon code switching. Based on the
results of the current study, it is argued that speech convergence as a
discourse phenomenon is unquestionably existent in intercultural conversations. More studies of a similar nature (i.e., face-to-face inter-

280

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

action) but in other cultural groups are needed to expand the scope of
this theory.
This research considerably advances our understanding of conversational interruptions in several dimensions. By applying CAT to the
intercultural data, it was documented that convergence in interruption style occurred in intercultural interactions. It was also found that
Canadians in the doctor role preferred intrusive interruptions to cooperative interruptions. In employing Markus and Kitayama's (1991)
independent-interdependent self-construals in intercultural and
intracultural data, it was demonstrated that this theory may be
extremely useful in explaining the relationship dimension
(Watzlawick, Bavelas, & Jackson, 1967) of human communication.
This study supports and extends Murata's (1994) theory of categorizing interruptions into intrusive and cooperative types. The scoring
method used in this study has substantiated and systematized
Murata's categories by adding several subcategories. Finally, findings
of the current study point to a hypothesis that conversational interruption may be a pancultural phenomenon, whereas interruption styles
may be culture specific.

REFERENCES
Bavelas, J. B., & Segal, L. (1982). Family systems theory: Background and implications.
Journal of Communication, 32, 89-107.
Beattie, G. W. (1981). Interruption in conversational interaction, and its relation to the
sex and status of the interactants. Linguistics, 19, 15-35.
Beattie, G. W. (1982). Turn-taking and interruption in political interviews: Margaret
Thatcher and Jim Callaghan compared and contrasted. Semiotica, 39, 93-114.
Beaumont, S. L., & Cheyne, J. A. (1998). Interruption in adolescent girls' conversations:
Comparing mothers and friends. Journal of Adolescent Research, 13, 272-292.
Bennett, A. (1981). Interruptions and the interpretation of conversation. Discourse Processes, 4, 171-188.
Berry, J. W., & Kalin, R. (1995). Multiculturalism and ethnic attitudes in Canada: An
overview of the 1991 national survey. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 27,
301-320.
Bond, M. H., Leung, K., & Wan, K. C. (1982). How does cultural collectivism operate? The
impact of task and maintenance contributions on reward distribution. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 13, 186-200.
Bond, M. H., & Yang, K. S. (1982). Ethnic affirmation versus cross-cultural accommodation: The variable impact of questionnaire language on Chinese bilinguals in Hong
Kong. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 12, 169-181.
Bourhis, R. Y. (1979). Language in ethnic interaction: A social psychology approach. In
H. Giles & B. Saint Jacques (Eds.), Language and ethnic relations (pp. 117-142).
Oxford, UK: Pergamon.
Bourhis, R. Y. (1984). Cross-cultural communication in Montreal: Two field studies since
the charter of the French language. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 46, 33-47.
Bourhis, R. Y. (1994). Introduction and overview of language events in Canada. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 105/106, 5-36.

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

281

Bourhis, R. Y., Giles, H., Leyens, J., & Tajfel, H. (1979). Psycholinguistic distinctiveness:
Language divergence in Belgium. In H. Giles & R. St. Clair (Eds.), Language and
social psychology (pp. 158-185). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Bourhis, R. Y., Roth, S., & MacQueen, G. (1989). Communication in the hospital setting: A
survey of medical and everyday language use amongst patients, nurses, and doctors.
Social Science and Medicine, 28, 339-346.
Bull, P., & Mayer, K. (1988). Interruptions in political interviews: A study of Margaret
Thatcher and Neil Kinnock. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 7, 35-46.
Chen, L. (1995). Interaction involvement and patterns of topical talk: A comparison of
intercultural and intracultural dyads. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 19, 463-482.
Cheng, C., Bond, M. H., & Chan, S. C. (1995). The perception of ideal best friends by Chinese adolescents. International Journal of Psychology, 30, 91-108.
The Chinese Culture Connection. (1987). Chinese values and the search for culture-free
dimensions of culture. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 18, 143-164.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. A. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M.
Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perceptives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149).
Washington, DC: APA.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Collaborating on contributions to conversations. In
R. Dietrich & C. F. Graumann (Eds.), Language processing in social context (pp. 123152). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Coon, C. A., & Schwanenflugel, P. J. (1996). Evaluation of interruption behavior by naive
encoders. Discourse Processes, 22, 1-24.
Crago, M., & Eriks-Brophy, A. (1992). Culture, conversation, and interaction: Implications for intervention. San Diego, CA: Singular.
Diaz-Duque, O. F. (1989). Communication barriers in medical settings: Hispanics in the
United States. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 79, 93-102.
DiMatteo, M. R., & DiNicola, D. D. (1982). Achieving patient compliance: The psychology
of practitioner's role. New York: Pergamon.
Dion, K. L., & Kawakami, K. (1996). Ethnicity and perceived discrimination in Toronto:
Another look at the personal/group discrimination discrepancy. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science, 28, 203-213.
Duncan, S. (1972). Some signals and rules in taking speaking turns in conversations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 23, 283-292.
Duncan, S., & Fiske, D. W. (1977). Face to face interaction: Research, methods and theory.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dunne, M., & Ng, S. H. (1994). Simultaneous speech in small group conversation:
All-together-now and one-at-a-time? Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 13,
45-71.
Erickson, F. (1975). Gatekeeping and the melting pot: Interaction in counseling encounters. Harvard Educational Review, 45, 44-70.
Ervin-Tripp, S. M. (1964). Interaction of language, topic, and listener. American Anthropologist, 66, 86-102.
Ferguson, N. (1977). Simultaneous speech, interruptions, and dominance. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 16, 295-302.
Gallois, C., & Callan, V. J. (1991). Interethnic accommodation: The role of norms. In
N. Coupland, J. Coupland, & H. Giles (Eds.), Context of accommodation: developments
in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 245-269). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gallois, C., & Markel, N. N. (1975). Turn taking: Social personality and conversational
style. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 1134-1140.
Gao, G., & Gudykunst, W. B. (1990). Uncertainty, anxiety, and adaptation. International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 14, 301-317.
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1991). Miscommunication in non-native speaker discourse. In
N. Coupland, H. Giles, & J. Wiemann (Eds.), Miscommunication and problematic talk
(pp. 121-145). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

282

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

Geertz, C. (1975). On the nature of anthropological understanding. American Scientist,
63, 47-53.
Genesee, F., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1982). The social psychological significance of code switching in cross-cultural communication. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 1,
1-27.
Genesee, F., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1988). Evaluative reactions to language choice strategies:
The role of sociostructural factors. Language and Communication, 8, 229-250.
Giles, H., Bourhis, R. Y., & Taylor, D. (1977). Toward a theory of language in ethnic group
relations. In H. Giles (Ed.), Language, ethnicity and intergroup relations (pp. 307348). London: Academic Press.
Giles, H., & Johnson, P. (1987). Ethnolinguistic identity theory: A social-psychological
identity approach to language maintenance. International Journal of the Sociology of
Language, 68, 69-99.
Giles, H., Mulac, A., Bradac, J. J., & Johnson, P. (1987). Accommodation theory: The last
decade and beyond. In M. L. Mclaughin (Ed.), Communication yearbook (Vol. 10, pp. 1348). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Giles, H., & Smith, P. M. (1979). Accommodation theory: Optimal levels of convergence.
In H. Giles & R. N. St. Clair (Eds.), Language and social psychology (pp. 45-65).
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Giles, H., Taylor, D., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1973). Towards a theory of interpersonal accommodation through language: Some Canadian data. Language in Society, 2, 177-192.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual. New York: Anchor.
Goldberg, J. (1990). Interrupting the discourse on interruptions: An analysis in terms of
relationally neutral, power- and rapport-oriented acts. Journal of Pragmatics, 14,
883-903.
Goodwin, C. (1981). Conversational organization: Interaction between speakers and hearers. New York: Academic Press.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and
semantics: Volume 3. Speech acts (pp. 225-242). New York: Seminar.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1991). Bridging differences: Effective intergroup communication.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Ting-Toomey, S. (1988). Culture and interpersonal communication.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gumperz, J. J. (1978). The conversational analysis of interethnic communication. In E. L.
Ross (Ed.), Interethnic communication. Southern Anthropological Society Proceedings, No. 12 (pp. 13-31). Athens, Greece: University of Georgia.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982). Language and social identity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. New York: Doubleday.
Hawkins, K. (1991). Some consequences of deep interruption in task-oriented communication. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 10, 185-203.
Hayashi, R. (1988). Simultaneous talk--from the perspective of floor management of
English and Japanese speakers. World Englishes, 7, 269-288.
Hill, J. P. (1988). Adapting to menarche: Familial control and conflict. In M. Gunnar (Ed.),
21st Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology (pp. 43-77). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture's consequences: International differences in work-related
values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hymes, D. H. (1974). The ethnography of speaking. In B. G. Blount (Ed.), Language, culture, and society: A book of readings (pp. 189-223). Cambridge, MA: Winthrop.
Irish, J., & Hall, J. (1995). Interruptive patterns in medical visits: The effects of role, status, and gender. Social Science Medicine, 41, 873-881.
Jacob, T. (1974). Patterns of family conflict and dominance as a function of child age and
social class. Developmental Psychology, 10, 1-12.

Li / INTERRUPTION IN INTERCULTURAL CONVERSATIONS

283

Kennedy, C. W., & Camden, C. T. (1983). A new look at interruption. Western Journal of
Speech Communication, 47, 45-58.
Kollock, P., Blumstein, P., & Schwartz, P. (1985). Sex and power in interaction: Conversational privileges and duties. American Sociological Review, 50, 34-46.
Krysko, M. (1998). Doctor-patient communication: Analyzing interruptions in a family
practice setting. Unpublished honor's thesis, University of Northern British Columbia, British Columbia, Canada.
Labov, W., & Fanshel, D. (1977). Therapeutic discourse. New York: Academic Press.
Lai, M. C., & Yue, K. M. (1990). The Chinese. In N. Waxler-Morrison, J. M. Anderson, &
E. Richardson (Eds.), Cross-cultural caring: A handbook for health professionals in
Western Canada (pp. 68-90). Vancouver, Canada: University of British Columbia.
Larsen, K., Martin, H., & Giles, H. (1977). Anticipated social cost and interpersonal
accommodation. Human Communication Research, 3, 303-308.
Li, C., Kwan, V. S., & Bond, M. H. (1998, August). Nomological network of relationship
harmony for Chinese. Paper presented at the 14th International Association of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, Bellingham, WA.
Li, H. Z. (1998, August). Self-construals: A cross-cultural comparison. Paper presented at
the 14th International Association of Cross-Cultural Psychology, Bellingham, WA.
Li, H. Z. (1999a). Communicating information in conversations: A cross-cultural comparison. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 23, 387-409.
Li, H. Z. (1999b). Grounding and information communication in inter- and intracultural
dyadic discourse. Discourse Processes, 28, 195-215.
Li, H. Z., & Browne, A. (2000). Defining mental health illness and accessing mental
health services: Perspectives of Asian immigrants. Canadian Journal of Community
Mental Health, 19, 143-159.
Li, P. S. (1988). Ethnic inequality in a class society. Toronto, Canada: Wall & Thompson.
Makoul, G., Arntson, P., & Schofield, T. (1995). Health promotion in primary care: Physicianpatient communication and decision making about prescription medications. Social
Science Medicine, 41, 1241-1254.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition,
emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Meltzer, L., Morris, W. N., & Hayes, D. (1971). Interruption outcomes and vocal amplitude: Explorations on social psychophysics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18, 392-402.
Mishler, E. G., & Waxler, N. E. (1968). Interaction in families: An experimental study of
family process and schizophrenia. New York: John Wiley.
Mizutani, O. (1988). Hanaskikotoba no tokushoku [Characteristics of Spoken Japanese].
In Y. Miyaji & O. Mizutani (Eds.), Nihongo (pp. 55-65). Tokyo: NHK.
Moerman, M. (1988). Finding life in dry dust. In M. Moreman (Ed.), Talking culture: Ethnography and conversation analysis (pp. 19-30). Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania.
Murata, K. (1994). Intrusive or cooperative? A cross-cultural study of interruption. Journal of Pragmatics, 21, 385-400.
Murray, S. O. (1987). Power and solidarity in "interruption": A critique of the Santa
Barbara School conception and its application by Orcutt and Harvey (1985). Symbolic Interaction, 10, 101-110.
Ng, S. H., Brook, M., & Dunne, M. (1995). Interruption and influence in discussion group.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 14, 369-381.
Pierson, H. D., & Bond, M. H. (1982). How do Chinese bilinguals respond to variations of
interviewer language and ethnicity? Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 1,
123-139.
Reitz, J. G. (1980). The survival of ethnic groups. Toronto, Canada: McGraw-Hill.
Reitz, J. G., & Sklar, S. M. (1997). Culture, race, and economic assimilation of immigrants.
Sociological Forum, 12, 233-277.

284

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2001

Roger, D. B., Bull, P., & Smith, S. (1988). The development of a comprehensive system for
classifying interruptions. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 7, 27-35.
Roger, D. B., & Nesshoever, W. (1987). Individual differences in dyadic conversational
strategies: A further study. British Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 247-255.
Roger, D. B., & Schumacher, A. (1983). Effects of individual differences on dyadic conversational strategies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 700-705.
Rogers, W. T., & Jones, S. W. (1975). Effects of dominance tendencies on floor holding and
interruption behaviour in dyadic interaction. Communication Research, 1, 113-122.
Ross, S., & Shortreed, I. M. (1990). Japanese foreign talk: Convergence or divergence?
Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 1, 135-145.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking in conversation. Language, 50, 697-735.
Schegloff, E. A. (1982). Discourse as an interactional achievement: Some uses of uh-huh
and other things that come between sentences. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Analyzing discourse: Text and talk. (Georgetown University Roundtable on Languages and Linguistics). (pp. 71-93). Washington, DC: Georgetown University.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (1981). Narrative, literacy, and face in interethnic communication. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (1995). Intercultural communication. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Sharf, B. F. (1990). Physician-patient communication as interpersonal rhetoric: A narrative approach. Health Communication, 2, 217-231.
Tannen, D. (1981). Indirectness in discourse: Ethnicity as conversational style. Discourse
Processes, 4, 221-238.
Tannen, D. (1994). Gender and discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, D. M., & Simard, L. M. (1975). Social interaction in a bilingual setting. Canadian
Psychological Review, 16, 240-254.
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M. J., Asia, M., & Lucca, N. (1988). Individualism
and collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives on self-ingroup relationships. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 323-338.
Watzlawick, P., Bavelas, J. B., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). Pragmatics of human communication. New York: Norton.
Zimmerman, D. H., & West, C. (1975). Sex, roles, interruptions, and silences in conversations. In B. Thorne & N. Henley (Eds.), Language and sex: Difference and dominance
(pp. 105-129). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.

