Semantic Representation and
Naming in Children With
Specific Language Impairment
Karla K. McGregor
Robyn M. Newman
Renee M. Reilly
Nina C. Capone
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL

When 16 children with SLI (mean age = 6;2) and 16 normally developing agemates named age-appropriate objects, the SLI cohort made more naming errors.
For both cohorts, semantic misnaming and indeterminate responses were the
predominant error types. The contribution of limited semantic representation to
these naming errors was explored. Each participant drew and defined each item
from his or her semantic and indeterminate error pools and each item from his or
her correctly named pool. When compared, the drawings and definitions of items
from the error pools were poorer, suggesting limited semantic knowledge. The
profiles of information included in definitions of items from the correct pool and
the error pools were highly similar, suggesting that representations associated
with misnaming differed quantitatively, but not qualitatively, from those associated
with correct naming. Eleven members of the SLI cohort also participated in a
forced-choice recognition task. Performance was significantly lower on erroneous
targets than on correctly named targets. When performance was compared
across all three post-naming tasks (drawing, defining, recognition), the participants evinced sparse semantic knowledge for roughly half of all semantic
misnaming and roughly one third of all indeterminate responses. In additional
cases, representational gaps were evident. This study demonstrates that the
degree of knowledge represented in the child's semantic lexicon makes words
more or less vulnerable to retrieval failure and that limited semantic knowledge
contributes to the frequent naming errors of children with SLI.
KEY WORDS: lexicon, semantics, naming, specific language impairment

T

he focus of this paper is the quality of semantic representations in
the lexicons of children who have specific language impairment
(SLI). It is often reported that children with SLI have smaller lexicons than their age-mates. Late onset of lexical acquisition is frequently
the first sign of SLI, and estimates of lexical knowledge obtained from
parent-report instruments, standardized vocabulary tests, and spontaneous language samples all serve to differentiate children with SLI from
normally developing children (e.g., Bishop, 1997; Watkins, Kelly, Harbers,
& Hollis, 1995). In experimental word-learning situations, children with
SLI are deficient at establishing initial maps of new words compared to
their age-mates. This deficiency is manifested as a small quantity of
words learned (e.g., Rice, Buhr, & Nemeth, 1990; Rice, Buhr, & Oetting,
1992; Rice, Oetting, Marquis, Bode, & Pae, 1994).

Much less attention has been paid to the quality of stored lexical knowledge of these children. The only relevant studies have focused on the robustness of phonological representations. Dollaghan (1987) demonstrated
998

Journal
Journal of
of Speech,
Speech, Language,
Language, and
and Hearing
Hearing Research
Research ** Vol.
Vol. 45
45 ** 998-1014
998-1014 ** October
October 2002
2002 * (c)American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/02/4505-0998

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

that children with SLI could map the referent and context of a new word after minimal exposure but, unlike
normally developing age-mates, could not map enough
of its phonological form to support production. Bishop
(1997), reviewing many studies wherein children with
SLI demonstrated recognition but not production of new
words, suggests that underspecified, global phonological representations characterize the SLI lexicon for a
longer than expected period of development. This hypothesis is supported by children's word- recognition performance under conditions of gating (wherein increasingly greater portions of the spoken word are presented).
School-age children with SLI must hear significantly
more of the spoken word than their normally developing age-mates to recognize newly learned words, but not
to recognize familiar words (Dollaghan, 1998). Although
semantic representations may also be underdeveloped
in children with SLI, empirical data are lacking.
Children with SLI also demonstrate difficulties with
retrieval from their long-term lexical memory. When
compared to their normally developing age-mates, they
make more naming errors during object naming, action
naming, and story retelling (McGregor, 1997). Frequently, their errors bear semantic relations to their targets. Semantic coordinate substitutions such as mouse
for kangaroo are especially common. Nearly as often,
the relation to the target cannot be determined. These
indeterminate responses are typically "don't know" answers (McGregor, 1997; McGregor & Waxman, 1998).
Even when children with SLI name correctly, they take
a longer time to retrieve names than do their peers (e.g.,
Katz, Curtiss, & Tallal, 1992; Lahey & Edwards, 1996;
Leonard, Nippold, Kail, & Hale, 1983).
We hypothesize that the word-retrieval problems of
children with SLI are one manifestation of slow language
development in general and underdeveloped semantic
representations in long-term lexical memory in particular. This hypothesis parallels posited relations between
memory development and increasing automaticity of
retrieval in normally developing children. In his theory
of children's memory, Bjorklund (1987) argued that
growth in the content and organization of semantic
memory during childhood influences the ease with which
information can be retrieved. He posited that items
within a detailed knowledge base are represented robustly in terms of semantic features and semantic relationships and that this robust representation results in
low activation thresholds and a high likelihood of spreading activation during retrieval and other aspects of cognitive processing. Among other data, Bjorklund reviewed
an interesting case study of a 4-year-old "dinosaur expert" to support his hypothesis. In this case study, conducted by Chi and Koeske (1983), the likelihood of the
child's recalling a given dinosaur name during a shortterm memory task (list recall) was positively influenced

by the number of relationships between that name and
others in his dinosaur lexicon. Additional studies reveal
that children can retrieve more words from short-term
memory than adults can when those words are more
familiar to the children (Lindberg, 1980; Roth, 1983).
Children demonstrate effects of familiarity on retrieval
during tasks that tap long-term lexical memory as well
(Leonard et al., 1983).
Further evidence of the interrelatedness of representation and retrieval is evident in a U-shaped developmental phenomenon. After a few months of talking,
normal toddlers experience a transient increase in wordretrieval disruptions. These disruptions often manifest
as the substitution of a previously retrieved, semantically similar word for a target word (Dapretto & Bjork,
2000; Gershkoff-Stowe, 2001; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith,
1997). Gerskhoff-Stowe and Smith concluded that this
temporary word-retrieval problem results, in part, from
the fragility of representation characteristic of all words
in the lexicons of children so young, together with the
increased opportunities for competing activation that
arise when these lexicons are newly expanded.
To date, the relation between robustness of semantic representation and word retrieval in children with
SLI has not received direct attention. A monograph on
word retrieval in children with SLI (Kail & Leonard,
1986) thoroughly documented short-term and long-term
naming deficits but did not include evidence about the
quality of stored semantic representations associated
with these deficits. Later treatment studies, wherein
naming improved after children learned new information about selected words (McGregor & Leonard, 1989;
Wright, 1993) did demonstrate a relation between robustness of storage and retrieval; however, these studies did not establish the relation before intervention and,
therefore, are not ideal tests.
In an initial attempt to explore the robustness of
semantic storage in children and to test for links between representation and retrieval problems, McGregor
and Appel (2002) introduced the comparative picturenaming/picture-drawing procedure. A single 5-year-old
boy with SLI participated in the prototype procedure.
He first named a set of age-appropriate, pictured objects, and then he drew pictures of these same objects
from memory. A panel of judges rated the accuracy of
the drawings with the result that drawings of objects
that were named with semantic errors such as hat for
helmet were significantly poorer than drawings of correctly named objects. Because both naming and drawing tap common semantic representations but involve
disparate perceptual and motor processes (Hillis &
Caramazza, 1991; Snodgrass, 1984), the association between naming errors and poor drawings suggests that
limited semantic representations are related to these

McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

999

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

problems. Importantly, this case study demonstrated
links between sparse representations and poor naming
of specific words.
McGregor, Friedman, Reilly, and Newman (2002)
extended the comparative picture-naming/picturedrawing procedure to a group of normally developing
children. The prediction was that the naming errors of
normally developing children, though more rare than
in SLI, would also reflect limited semantic knowledge.
To test this prediction, 25 5-year-olds named and drew
20 age-appropriate objects. Semantic naming errors were
their most frequent error type. As predicted, items from
this semantic error pool were drawn significantly less
accurately than items from the correctly named pool.
The results of a definition task, involving the same 20
items, yielded parallel results. In a second experiment,
the drawing results were replicated with a new group of
16 normally developing children. McGregor and colleagues concluded that semantic word retrieval errors
of young normally developing children are related to
degree of semantic knowledge.

Purpose of the Current Study
In the current study, we extended the comparative
picture-naming/picture-drawing procedure to a group of
children with SLI, and we used the procedure to examine the source of not only semantic misnaming but of
indeterminate errors as well. As in McGregor et al.
(2002), we also included a more conventional task--word
defining--to provide evidence of concurrent validity for
the comparative picture-naming/picture-drawing procedure and to provide additional evidence relevant to our
hypothesis. We compared the performance of children
with SLI to that of their normally developing (ND) agemates. Our goal was two-fold: to explore the robustness
of semantic representations in the lexicons of children
with SLI and to test for relationships between semantic
representations and naming errors.
Our focus on semantic representation, as opposed
to phonological representation, was motivated by several factors. First, the building of semantic representations normally requires a long developmental course
(Bloom, 2000), and therefore we would expect underdevelopment to be particularly persistent in children with
SLI. Second, semantic naming errors are the most frequent naming error type among children with SLI
(Lahey & Edwards, 1999; McGregor, 1997; McGregor &
Waxman, 1998). Finally, Leonard (1999) proposed that
the lexical storage problems associated with SLI compromise semantic representation. He viewed "...SLI as
a type of filter such that some but not all experiences
with a word are registered in semantic memory" (p. 47,
emphasis added). Therefore, an exploration of semantic

1000

representation in children with SLI is important for
developmental, clinical, and theoretical reasons.
With these motivations and a hypothesized link between semantic representation and retrieval problems
in mind, we predicted:
*

Children with SLI will make more naming errors
than their ND peers.

*

For both groups, drawings of misnamed objects will
be poorer than drawings of correctly named objects.

*

For both groups, definitions of misnamed objects will
be poorer than definitions of correctly named objects.

Finally, the information included in the definitions
was explored to determine whether there were qualitative differences in the type of stored semantic knowledge associated with correct and erroneous naming.

Method
Participants
Participants were 16 children with SLI and 16 normally developing children. The performance of 10 of the
children in the ND group was also reported in Experiment 1 of McGregor et al. (2002). Age was balanced between groups by matching each child with SLI to a child
in the ND group by 3 months. The mean ages for the
SLI and ND groups were 6;2 (range = 5;0 to 7;11) and
6;1 (range = 4;9 to 8;1), respectively, with no statistical
difference between groups, t(30) = .18, p = .86. Gender
was balanced both within and between groups. Ethnicity
was balanced between groups. Within each group, 70%
of the sample were Caucasian, and 30% represented
minority groups--either African American or Hispanic.
This representation closely mimics that in the U.S. population as a whole (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001: Caucasian = 75%; Minority = 25%). Between-group differences
in socioeconomic status, as measured by years of maternal education, approached significance [SLI: M = 14.25,
SD = 2.38; ND: M = 15.75, SD = 2.14; t(30) = 1.87, p =
.07]. For this reason, the between-group statistical comparison of the naming data employed years of maternal
education as a covariate.
The children with SLI were selected on the basis of
two criteria: (1) current enrollment in language or reading intervention and (2) a score more than 1.3 standard
deviations below the expected mean for total phonemes
correct on the Nonword Repetition Task (NWRT;
Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998). Intervention status was
used as a selection criterion because enrollment in intervention reflects decisions made on the basis of more data
(e.g., test scores, classroom observation, and parent report), collected in more naturalistic environments, for
longer periods of time, and judged in a more integrative

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

manner than the data that could be collected for the
purposes of this project alone. Furthermore, such clinical decisions are shown to have moderately high
interrater and intrarater reliability (Records & Tomblin,
1994).
The NWRT was used as a selection tool because it is
accurate in screening for SLI (Dollaghan & Campbell,
1998; Ellis Weismer et al., 2000) and unbiased against
minority participants (Campbell, Dollaghan, Needleman,
& Janosky, 1997; Ellis Weismer et al., 2000). Furthermore, deficient nonword repetition ability is a proposed
phenotypic marker of SLI (Bishop, North, & Donlan,
1996). Although the norms published by Dollaghan and
Campbell (1998) did not include children under 6;0, our
pilot testing on 21 normally developing 5-year-olds and
15 normally developing 6-year-olds yielded means of 83%
and 84%, respectively, with no significant differences
between groups [t (34) = 0.39, p = .70]. The combined
mean score for the 5- and 6-year-olds was 84%, with a
SD of 7.8-- figures nearly identical to those reported by
Dollaghan and Campbell. Therefore, we used their normative data, and we applied the same -1.3 SD cutoff
criterion to both 5- and 6-year-old participants. In the
current study the mean scores for percentage of total
phonemes correct on the NWRT were 68.73% (SD = 4.43)
and 85.71% (SD = 5.68) for the SLI and ND groups, respectively. This was a significant difference [t (34) = 1.7,
p < .001, d = 2.9].
Children were excluded from participation if they
scored at or below 70 on the Columbia Mental Maturity
Scale (CMMS; Burgemeister, Blum, & Lorge, 1972); if
they failed a pure tone audiometric screening administered per ASHA (1985) guidelines on the first day of selection testing; or if they presented with physical, sensory, or emotional deficits that affect speech and

language development via parent report. We set the
CMMS cutoff at 70 (rather than the more frequently
used cutoff of 85) because children with nonverbal IQ
levels of 70 to 84 and children with nonverbal IQs of 85
and above score similarly on standardized language tests
(Tomblin & Zhang, 1999), perform similarly on auditory
processing measures (Bishop et al., 1999), and demonstrate similar growth in grammatical skills over time
(Fey, Long, & Cleave, 1994). The ND children also met
all exclusionary criteria, but unlike the SLI children, they
had negative histories of language impairment and scores
better than 1.3 standard deviations below the mean on
the NWRT. Although both the SLI and ND groups scored
within normal limits on the CMMS, the SLI group did
exhibit significantly lower nonverbal IQs than their peers
[SLI: M = 92.88, SD = 10.3; ND: M = 106.6, SD = 12.72;
t(30) = 3.35, p = .002, d = 1.1]. For this reason, nonverbal
IQ was also used as a covariate in the between-group
statistical comparison of the naming data.
To further describe the language abilities of the two
participant groups, the results of a conversational sample,
a narrative sample, and three standardized language tests
are presented in Table 1. The conversational sample was
collected as the examiner and child played with a standard toy set on the first day of testing. Mean length of
utterances (MLU) in morphemes and number of different words (NDW) were calculated for 50 consecutive utterances per child. The narrative sample was elicited with
the wordless picture book Frog, where are you? (Mayer,
1969) on the final day of testing. MLU and length of narrative as measured by the number of different words per
story were calculated. The examiner administered the
Expressive Vocabulary Test (Williams, 1997), the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test-III (PPVT-III; Dunn & Dunn,
1997), and one omnibus language test (either the Test of

Table 1. Mean group performance on language measures.
Conversationa
Group

NDW

MLU

Narrativeb
NDW

MLU

Standardized testsc
EVT

PPVT

Omnibus

SLI

M
SD

84.25
12.58

4.31
0.81

57.31*
20.59

7.64
1.87

M
SD

93.19
13.08

4.75
0.71

74.71
25.23

9.31
2.83

84.75*
14.56

89.06*
15.56

82.00*
11.78

ND
109.30
15.03

111.25
15.33

110.19
15.54

Note. NDW = Number of Different Words, MLU = Mean Length of Utterance in Morphemes, EVT = Expressive
Vocabulary Test, PPVT = Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised or Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III,
Omnibus Test = Woodcock Language Proficiency Battery-Revised, Test of Language Development-Primary (2nd
ed.), or Test of Language Development-Primary (3rd ed.).
a
Calculated per 50 utterances. bCalculated per story. cStandard scores.
*p < .04 (all comparisons are between group).

McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1001

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Language Development-Primary-3 [TOLD-P3; Newcomer & Hammill, 1997] or the Woodcock Language
Proficiency Battery-Revised [WLPB-R; Woodcock, 1991])
to all children with the following exception. If a child
had taken any of these tests, in their current or previous editions, within a year of participation, we used the
score(s) in the child's educational file and did not readminister the test(s). The two participant groups differed on narrative length measured by number of word
types, as well as on expressive and receptive vocabulary and overall language ability as measured by standardized tests. Each SLI participant scored poorer than
one standard deviation below the mean for his or her
chronological age on at least two language sample scores
and/or standardized language tests.

Stimuli
Twenty object words from the Snodgrass and
Vanderwart (1980) corpus constituted the stimuli (see
Appendix A). To balance the need to elicit errors with
the likelihood that the children would have some knowledge of the stimuli, we selected words that were relatively low in frequency of occurrence (<50 per million)
but age-appropriate (age of acquisition norms: M = 4.09
years; range = 3.12 to 5.48 years). Line drawings of the
20 objects provided by Snodgrass and Vanderwart were
the stimuli for the picture-naming task.

Data Collection
The participants were tested individually at a school
or at the Northwestern University Child Language Laboratory by either a graduate student or a speech-language
pathologist with expertise in child language.

involved associations (e.g., milk for pitcher), circumlocutions (e.g., something that you chop with for axe), novel
derivatives (e.g., chopper for axe), coordinate substitutions (e.g., mouse for kangaroo), and superordinate substitutions (e.g., animal for kangaroo). Though not technically errors, superordinate substitutions were counted
as such because they are not as specific as the names
the stimuli typically elicit. Errors that were not semantic in nature were coded as either indeterminate ("don't
know" or nonspecific responses), phonologic (real-word
or nonword approximations of the target word form), or
other (unintelligible or visual misperceptions). Four randomly selected SLI files and four randomly selected ND
files were coded independently for error type by a second coder. Point-to-point agreement between the two
coders averaged 98% (range = 86% to 100%). Disagreements were resolved by consensus.
The drawing and defining analyses concerned only
the correct, semantic error, and indeterminate error
pools. The phonologic and other error pools were not
studied further because they were expected to be rare.
Five adults (4 women and 1 man), who were blind
to the naming responses of the children, served as drawing raters. They first examined the child's self-portrait
to gauge his or her drawing aptitude. This baseline was
meant to avoid confounding poor drawing ability with
poor semantic knowledge. They then rated the accuracy
of each drawing by marking a level of agreement (with
1 being strongest disagreement and 7 being strongest
agreement) with the statement, "This young child's
drawing reflects accurate and complete knowledge of X."
The ratings for each object drawn by 10 children (5 randomly selected SLI, 5 randomly selected ND) were compared across raters. Interrater agreement, measured by
Cronbach's alpha, was .92 (range = .77 to .97).

There were three tasks: naming, drawing, and defining. Because all tasks involved the same 20 stimuli,
the drawing and defining followed the naming task to
minimize the child's exposure to the target words
before naming. Therefore, we administered the naming
task in session one, half of the drawing and defining
tasks in session two, and the remaining half of the drawing and defining tasks in session three. The order of the
defining and drawing tasks was counterbalanced across
participants. Within tasks, items to be drawn or defined
during each session were randomly selected, with the
caveat that the participants never drew and defined the
same item within the same session. There were 2 to 10
days between sessions. The procedures for the three
tasks are detailed in McGregor et al. (2002).

We coded the definitions for the amount and type of
accurate information units they contained (see Table 2).
In a definition such as, "A kite is a toy that flies," there
are two accurate information units: one categorical (toy)
and one functional (flies). The definitions of 8 children
(4 randomly selected SLI, 4 randomly selected ND) were
coded independently by a second coder. Point-to-point
agreement between the two coders was 85% (range =
55% to 98%) and 94% (range = 80% to 100%) for number
and type, respectively, and any disagreements were resolved by consensus.

Data Analysis

According to a one-way, between-subjects ANCOVA
(with maternal education and nonverbal IQ as
covariates), children with SLI made significantly fewer

The naming responses were coded by type. Responses coded as semantic errors were those that
1002

Results
Naming

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2. Coding scheme for accurate information units in definitions.
Type

Definition

Example

Functional

Purpose of the target, people or instruments that act on the
target, the way it is acted upon, or the outcome of the
target's actions. Should answer, "Who uses it?
How is it used? What does it create?" or "What is it for?"

A ladder is to reach high.

Physical

Typical color, size, shape, smell, feel, composition,
life cycle, movement, or features of the target.
Should answer, "What is it like?"

A mountain is tall.

Locative

Characteristic location, circumstances, or time of
occurrence. Should answer, "When or where is it found?"

You get strawberries at the store.

Evaluative

Gives a common opinion of the target.

Cigarettes are bad for you.

Categorical

Category, category coordinate, or exemplar of the
target. Should answer, "What kind of thing is it?
What is it similar to? or "What is an example?"

A kangaroo is an animal.

correct naming responses than their peers [F(1, 28) =
12.00, p = .002, 2 = .20]. (See Figure 1.) The effect of the
covariates was not significant [F(2, 28) = 1.24, p = .31].
For both groups, the majority of errors were semantically related to their targets. Indeterminate responses
were the next most frequent error type. In the SLI group,
11 individuals exhibited semantic errors as their most
frequent error type, and 5 responded more frequently
with indeterminate responses. In the ND group, 14 children exhibited semantic errors as their most frequent
error type, and 2 responded more frequently with indeterminate responses. All participants made some semantic errors. Fourteen of the SLI participants and 10 of
the ND participants produced indeterminate errors.
These were largely "don't know" responses.
If we are correct in thinking that naming performance
in children reflects their level of language development
Figure 1. Mean number of responses by group and type on a 20item naming task.

in general and the integrity of their semantic systems
in particular, we should find that language performance
measures predict naming performance. We tested this
prediction using a multiple regression procedure. Entered into the multiple regression equation were all
measures of language performance (standard score on
the omnibus language test, PPVT-III and EVT raw
scores, conversational and narrative measures, and
NWRT percentages) as well as two non-language variables (years of maternal education and nonverbal IQ).
The dependent variable was the number of items correct on the naming tasks. Consistent with prediction,
two factors (the EVT raw scores and the omnibus standard score) were significant predictors of naming performance (EVT: R2 = .63, p < .001; omnibus test: R2 =
.10, p = .002). Together these scores, one that reflects
lexical semantic knowledge and processing and the other
that reflects general language development, accounted
for 73% of the variance in naming performance.

Drawing
The mean and range of ratings for drawings from
the semantic error, indeterminate error, and correct
naming response pools are given in Table 3. For all pools,
drawing revealed a continuum of semantic knowledge.
To test the prediction that drawings of items from the
correct naming pool reflect richer semantic knowledge
than drawings of items from either the semantic error
or indeterminate error pools, a repeated-measures
ANOVA with naming pool as the within-subjects factor
and mean drawing rating as the dependent variable was
conducted. In cases of missing data, group means for
the relevant pool were substituted. The result was a
McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 3. The grand mean rating of drawings by group and naming response pool and the proportion of
drawings that were rated as low (1-2), moderate (2.01-5.99), or high (6-7) in accuracy.
Naming response pool
Semantic error

SLI

ND

Correct

SD

M

SD

M

grand mean

2.03

(0.85)

2.61

(0.91)

3.75

(1.16)

low
mod
high

0.68
0.28
0.03

(0.21)
(0.18)
(0.09)

0.53
0.43
0.04

(0.27)
(0.26)
(0.09)

0.16
0.72
0.11

(0.20)
(0.24)
(0.21)

grand mean

3.08

(1.52)

3.17

(1.77)

4.54

(1.47)

low
mod
high

0.47
0.34
0.19

(0.30)
(0.25)
(0.26)

0.36
0.50
0.14

(0.37)
(0.32)
(0.25)

0.16
0.56
0.29

(0.19)
(0.25)
(0.33)

significant effect for naming pool [F(2, 62) = 38.74, p <
.001, 2 = .56]. Post hoc application of Tukey's HSD
demonstrated that, compared with the correct naming
pool, both the semantic error pool and the indeterminate error pool elicited significantly lower drawing ratings (ps < .001). Examples of drawings are given in
Appendix B.
For each participant, two drawing difference scores
were calculated: one to compare the semantic error pool
with the correct naming pool and the other to compare
the indeterminate error pool with the correct naming
pool. Because the comparisons were within-subject,
poor overall drawing ability was minimized as a confound. If we were correct in hypothesizing that errors
are associated with more limited semantic representations (and hence poorer drawings) than are correct
names, then each participant's difference score should
be positive.
For the first difference score, the mean drawing rating (averaged across raters) for items in the semantic
error pool was subtracted from the mean drawing rating
for items in the correct pool for each participant. The
mean difference score for the SLI cohort was 1.72 (SD =
.84). Scores ranged from .78 to 3.75. For the ND cohort,
the mean drawing difference score was 1.46 (SD = .93),
and the range was .39 to 2.72.
The second drawing difference score was calculated
by subtracting the mean drawing rating for items in the
indeterminate error pool from the mean drawing rating
for items in the correct naming pool. For the SLI group,
the mean difference score was 1.13 (SD = 1.06), and the
range was -.44 to 3.23. All difference scores, except one,
were positive. For the ND group, the mean difference
score was 1.48 (SD = 1.19), with a range of .20 to 3.54.
Children who presented with minimal or negative difference scores were typically those who demonstrated
floor- or ceiling-level naming performances.
1004

Indeterminate error

M

Group

SD

Post Hoc Measures of Visual Complexity
Differential visual complexity between pools could
confound our interpretations of the data. To rule out this
confound, we conducted post hoc analyses using the visual complexity ratings provided by Snodgrass and
Vanderwart (1980). To ensure that naming accuracy was
not affected by visual complexity, the 20 stimulus objects were divided by median-split into high and low visual-complexity groups. Analysis across participants
revealed that they were no more likely to make errors
on high-visual-complexity items than on low-visual-complexity items [Semantic Errors: t(31) = .34, p = .74, twotailed; Indeterminate Errors: t(23) = 0, p = 1, two-tailed].
Their correct-naming responses as well were not influenced by visual complexity [t(31) = 1.05, p = .30, twotailed]. Furthermore, there was no correlation between
visual-complexity norms for each item and the drawing
ratings obtained by the participants on these items (r =
.12, p < .613). Because neither naming nor drawing performance was related to visual complexity of targets,
we were more confident that the poor naming and drawings of items from the semantic error and indeterminate error pools reflected limitations at the level of semantic representation. The definition results yield
further support for this conclusion.

Defining
The results of the defining task appear in Table 4.
As in the drawing data, accurate definitions for all pools
represented a range of knowledge. To test the prediction that definitions of items from the correct naming
pool reflect richer semantic knowledge than definitions
of items from either the semantic error or indeterminate error pools, a repeated-measures ANOVA with naming pool as the within-subjects factor and mean number
of information units as the dependent variable was

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 4. The grand mean number of accurate information units in definitions by group and naming
response pool and the proportion of definitions that included low (0), moderate (1-2), or high (3+)
numbers of accurate information units.
Naming response pool
Semantic error

ND

Correct

M

SD

M

SD

M

grand mean

0.86

(0.43)

0.73

(0.51)

1.97

(0.82)

low
mod
high

0.49
0.45
0.06

(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.12)

0.52
0.44
0.04

(0.25)
(0.26)
(0.09)

0.04
0.74
0.22

(0.13)
(0.28)
(0.28)

grand mean

1.29

(0.84)

1.69

(1.23)

2.39

(0.80)

low
mod
high

0.40
0.39
0.21

(0.27)
(0.21)
(0.27)

0.31
0.38
0.31

(0.34)
(0.32)
(0.42)

0.02
0.58
0.40

(0.04)
(0.31)
(0.31)

Group
SLI

Indeterminate error

conducted. In cases of missing data, group means for
the relevant pool were substituted. The result was a significant effect for naming pool [F(2, 62) = 47.61, p < .001,
2 = .61]. Post hoc application of Tukey's HSD demonstrated that, compared to the correct naming pool, both
the semantic error pool and the indeterminate error pool
elicited significantly fewer information units (ps < .001).
Two within-subject difference scores were calculated
to compare definition content for the two error pools
relative to the correct naming pool. First, for each participant, the mean number of accurate information units
for items in the semantic error pool was subtracted from
the mean number of accurate information units for items
in the correct pool. For the SLI cohort, the mean definition difference score was 1.11 (SD = .75), and the range
was 0 to 3.11. For the ND cohort, the mean was 1.10
(SD = .44), and the range was .5 to 2.18. The one participant with SLI who demonstrated no difference between definitions of items from the semantic error and
correct naming pools also obtained a minimal difference
score in the drawing task.

SD

Figure 2. Proportion of accurate definition units by type and
naming response pool for the SLI group.

Figure 3. Proportion of accurate definition units by type and
naming response pool for the ND group.

A definition difference score was also calculated for
the indeterminate error pool--again with reference to
the correct naming pool. For the SLI group, the mean
difference score was 1.38 (SD = .60), with a range of 0 to
2.69. One child had a difference score of zero. For the
ND group, the mean difference score was .64 (SD = .23),
with a range of -.31 to 1.65. Three children had difference scores that were zero or negative.
The types of accurate information units that occurred in the participants' definitions appear in Figures
2 and 3. Functional and physical properties were the
most frequently provided information units, whereas
locative, evaluative, and categorical were the least frequent. The profiles of types included in definitions of
items from correct, semantic error, and indeterminate

error pools were similar, suggesting that representations
associated with misnaming, though quantitatively
sparser, were not qualitatively different from those associated with correct naming. The two participant
McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

cohorts were highly similar in profile of types, suggesting that the children with SLI were not atypical in the
types of semantic information they had mapped. The
only apparent exception to these conclusions is the high
proportion of physical features that the ND group included in definitions of items from the indeterminate
error pool.

Post Hoc Analysis of Definition
and Naming Mismatch for the
Semantic Error Pool
The definitions provided an additional opportunity
for examining the semantic representations associated
with semantic misnaming. When a child makes a semantic error such as nail for screw, it could be that he or
she has represented the common features of these related objects, but not enough of their unique features to
differentiate the two. We explored this possibility by
determining the match or mismatch between the
children's naming responses and their definitions for
each item in the semantic error pool. For example, if a
child who produced the error nail for screw defined a
screw as "something you twist into wood," her definition was considered a mismatch; it included a feature
that characterized the target concept but not the concept that was substituted in the naming probe. If a child
with the same naming error defined a screw as "something that you build with," his definition was considered a match; it matched both the target concept and
the substituted concept. The latter instances would constitute evidence of sparse semantic representations that
do not allow distinctions between close semantic coordinates.
Definition mismatch was also coded independently
by a second coder for 4 data sets selected randomly from
the SLI group and 4 data sets selected randomly from
the ND group. Agreement between coders ranged from
67% to 100%, with a mean of 89%. Disagreements were
resolved by consensus.
For the SLI cohort's semantic error pool, 26% (SD =
17) of definitions and substitution errors were matches
and 25% (SD = 18) were mismatches. (Recall from Table
4 that 49% of definitions for the semantic error pool contained no accurate information units and therefore could
not be classified as matches or mismatches.) For the ND
cohort, 18% (SD = 15) of definitions and substitution
errors matched, 42% (SD = 25) mismatched, and 40%
could not be classified because they lacked accurate information. These results suggest that some sparse representations do not permit distinctions between semantic coordinates. Further, these results, like the previous
results, document that gradations of semantic knowledge are associated with semantic errors.

1006

Post Hoc Analysis of Definition and
Drawing Concordance
To discern the level of intertask agreement for specific targets, we conducted a Pearson product-moment
Q correlation between drawing ratings and definition
scores for each participant, treating items as units. Correlations ranged from r = .05 to r = .74. Twenty-two children had significant (p < .05) r values of .44 or above.
Those 10 participants who did not demonstrate significant correlations were typically those who presented
with near-ceiling or floor-level performance on one of
the tasks. We concluded that, for the majority of participants, the definition and drawing tasks led to the same
results for specific targets.

Post Hoc Analysis of Comprehension
A primary finding reported above is that semantic
and indeterminate naming errors in children with SLI
are associated with a (negatively skewed) continuum of
semantic knowledge. We had hypothesized that naming errors are frequently related to limited storage of
semantic information. Our results support this hypothesis. The low and moderate portions of the continuum
suggest the possibility of two types of limitations: missing representations (no knowledge) and sparse representations (minimal knowledge).
To determine to what extent missing versus sparse
semantic representations contributed to the semantic
naming errors of children with SLI, we asked the last
recruited members of the SLI cohort (n = 11) to participate in an additional task. This task, which is traditionally included in word-retrieval assessments, involved
recognition of pictured targets within an array of foils.
Because forced-choice recognition requires only a minimal semantic representation for successful performance
(Carey, 1978; Dollaghan, 1987), we reasoned that correct performance constituted evidence of at least a sparse
semantic representation; whereas incorrect performance
constituted evidence of a missing representation.
In the task itself, each child was presented with the
target and five foils in random order on a single page
(see Appendix A). Two of the five foils were chosen from
the pool of semantic errors produced by the other participants in this project with the intent of maximizing
the possibility of tapping semantic confusions that were
relevant to children. As the examiner named each target, the child pointed to indicate his or her answer. This
task followed the naming, drawing, and defining tasks.
On the recognition task, the participating subgroup
correctly identified 58% (SD = 16) of items from the
semantic error pool, 53% (SD = 16) of items from the
indeterminate error pool, and 90% (SD = 18) of items
from the correct naming pool. The difference between

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

performance on these error pools was significant [F(2,
20) = 15.83, p < .001, 2 = .60]. A post hoc application of
Tukey's HSD revealed that there were differences between the correct and semantic error pools (p < .001)
and between the correct and indeterminate error pools
(p < .001). Although performances on the semantic and
indeterminate error pools were poor, they were better
than chance performance of 17% (p = .056 [approached
significance] and p = .03, respectively). Given that 10%
of items from the correct pool were misidentified and
that children must have had some knowledge of items
that they named correctly, we took 10% to be an estimate of error in this task. Therefore, we concluded that
approximately 32% of items in the semantic error pool
(100% - 58% - 10% = 32%) and 37% of items in the indeterminate error pool (100% - 53% - 10% = 37%) were
associated with missing representations.
To further tease apart sparse from missing representations in cases of semantic or indeterminate misnaming, the responses to the recognition task were compared with the responses to the drawing and defining
tasks on an item-by-item basis. Whereas our strategy
in the planned experimental analysis was to determine
the amount of semantic knowledge elicited within each
task, in this post hoc analysis we compared between
tasks. Our strategy was to determine the number of task
modalities that elicited at least minimal knowledge
(operationalized as correct picture identification on the
recognition task, at least one correct information unit
in the definition task, and a drawing rating higher than
2.0) for each of the misnamed targets. The results, along
with their interpretations, appear in Table 5. The largest percentage of the semantic error pool (45%) was

associated with sparse semantic knowledge of the target--that is, correct performance in only one or two tasks
but not all three. For the indeterminate pool, 33% of
items were associated with sparse semantic knowledge.
Twenty-nine percent of the semantic error pool and 33%
of the indeterminate error pool elicited no knowledge in
any task modality, suggesting missing representations.
These figures are roughly comparable to the 32% and
37% estimates of missing representations based on
within-task performance on the recognition probe.
Although the majority of naming errors were best
attributed to limited storage of either the sparse or missing variety, 26% of semantic errors and 34% of indeterminate errors were produced despite receptive knowledge demonstrated in all three task modalities. Recall
that the within-task comparisons revealed high levels
of semantic knowledge for 3% of drawings and 6% of
definitions of items that the SLI group named with a
semantic error and for 4% of drawings and definitions
of items they named with an indeterminate error. Clearly
some minority of naming errors represents an exception to our hypothesis; these errors occur despite robust
semantic knowledge of the target.
Although not displayed in Table 5, a between-task
comparison was also conducted for the correctly named
items. Of these, 79% (SD = 15%) were associated with
correct performance on all three post-naming tasks,
whereas 16% (SD = 17%) were associated with correct
performance on two of the three tasks. Correct naming
responses associated with correct post-naming performance on only one task or on no task were negligible.
This result is additional evidence of the link between
robust semantic storage and successful retrieval.

Table 5. Task results compared.
Numerical outcome
Conclusion

Semantic storage plays
role in misnaming?

Descriptive outcome

Semantic

Indeterminate

Correct response
on all three tasks

M = 26%
SD = 21

34%
23

Adequate semantic
representation

No

Correct response
on one or two tasks

M = 45%
SD = 24

33%
19

Sparse semantic
representation

Yes. Semantic storage is
inadequate to support
naming.

Correct response
on no task

M = 29%
SD = 19

33%
18

Missing representation
at one or more levels of
the lexicon

Perhaps. Semantic and/or
phonological storage may
be inadequate to support
naming.

Note. This table addresses the following: Given a set of age-appropriate items that elicited semantic naming
errors or indeterminate naming errors from children with SLI (n = 11), what percentage will elicit a correct
response in recognition, drawing, and defining tasks? What conclusions can be drawn about semantic storage
and its role in the misnaming of these items? Outcomes were calculated on an item-by-item basis per child and
then averaged across children.

McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Discussion
In this paper we replicated previous research (e.g.,
Fried-Oken, 1984; Leonard et al., 1983; McGregor, 1997)
by demonstrating that children with SLI make more
errors when naming than do their age-mates. Also, we
documented that for both SLI and ND cohorts, semantic errors and indeterminate errors are the two most
common error types. This has been reported previously
by Dapretto and Bjork (2000), Lahey and Edwards
(1999), McGregor (1997), Wiegel-Crump and Dennis
(1986), and Wijnen (1992).
We hypothesized a link between the name-retrieval
difficulties of children with SLI and their poor language
development. In particular, we predicted that naming
errors would relate to impoverished semantic representations. In support of these predictions, we found the
children's raw scores on the EVT and their standard
scores on either the TOLD-P or the WLPB-R to be significant positive predictors of naming performance. The
former test requires the child to provide synonyms in
response to pictures and spoken labels provided by the
examiner. As such, it measures the integrity of semantic representations and processing. The latter tests are
omnibus batteries that measure knowledge and performance in a variety of language domains. The finding
that measures of both semantics and overall language
development predict naming performance is consistent
with the tenets of hypothesized relations between semantic memory and information retrieval as proposed
by Kail and Leonard (1986) and Bjorklund (1987).

The Association Between Semantic
Representation and Naming Performance
This paper extends our understanding of naming
performance in children with SLI. As hypothesized, we
found that most naming errors are associated with limited semantic representation. Our initial evidence was
collected in a comparative picture-naming/picture-drawing paradigm. This paradigm was developed on the evidence-based assumption that naming and drawing tap
the same underlying semantic representations via different input and output modalities (McGregor & Appel,
2002; McGregor et al., 2002). If performance on both is
poor, deficiency at the level of semantic representation is
the most parsimonious conclusion. If performance is poor
on one task but not the other, the deficiency likely lies at
some level of input or output representation or processing. When comparing within-subject drawing performance for correctly named and misnamed items, we found
the naming errors of SLI and ND groups to be associated
with significantly poorer drawings. The majority of the
drawings of misnamed objects were low to moderate in
accuracy, whereas the majority of drawings of correctly
1008

named objects were moderate to high in accuracy. Converging evidence resulted from a definition task in which
children in SLI and ND cohorts provided significantly
fewer accurate information units for misnamed than correctly named targets. Again, low to moderate and moderate to high amounts of information characterized items
from the error pools and the correct naming pool, respectively, for the SLI participants. Because of these significantly different but overlapping distributions, we conclude
that limited semantic representations are often, but not
always, associated with naming errors.
Finally, for a subset of the children with SLI, recognition of the stimulus items was also assessed. This allowed us to determine the extent to which limited semantic knowledge was a matter of missing or sparse
representations. Approximately one third of semantic
errors and indeterminate responses were associated with
incorrect responses on the recognition probe. When performance per item was compared across tasks (drawing, defining, recognition), again approximately one third
of the items from the error pools were associated with
incorrect responses in all task modalities. We interpret
the one-third figure as a rough estimate of missing representations. In addition, we estimate that roughly half
of semantic misnamings and one third of indeterminate
responses were associated with sparse semantic representations. This estimate was based on the percentage
of items from the error pools that elicited correct performance on only one or two tasks. Therefore, on the basis
of within-child comparisons conducted within tasks, between tasks, and between error pools, we conclude that
(a) children with SLI have limited semantic knowledge
of some age-appropriate words, (b) this limitation affects
naming performance, (c) both semantic and indeterminate errors are often associated with limited semantic
representation, and (d) this limitation involves both missing and sparse representations. A discussion of the nature of missing and sparse representations follows.

Missing Representations
Some cases of misnaming were associated with missing representations. Given that small vocabularies are
characteristic of SLI (e.g., Bishop, 1997), it is not surprising that our participants did not always know ageappropriate object labels. Even errors that bear semantic relations to their targets do not necessarily imply
knowledge. The visual stimuli presented during naming may activate semantically and visually similar objects, allowing participants to unconsciously or strategically use the picture cues to name a semantic
coordinate of the target. Put simply, pictures afford children a chance to make a good guess.
It should also be noted that the participants' lack of
knowledge may not necessarily involve the semantic

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

level. The children may have had semantic representations in some cases but may not have linked those representations to retrievable phonological input and output forms. Because phonological representations were
not a focus of this study, we cannot determine the extent to which missing semantic representations versus
deficits at other levels of the lexicon played a role in
these errors.

correct information on all three post-naming tasks: drawing, defining, and recognition. Therefore, it is unlikely
that sparse or missing semantic representations played
a role in all errors. The possible sources of these errors
are numerous. The most likely would be misperception
of the picture stimuli during naming or difficulty finding the correct phonological form because of storage or
retrieval breakdown (or their interaction) at the level of
the phonological output representation.

Sparse Semantic Representations

Because the lexicon is a memorial system that must
be developed entry by entry, it is a certainty that the
specific percentages of missing, sparse, and robust representations associated with naming errors will not replicate when a new population sample is tested with new
stimuli. The important conclusion is that, given ageappropriate object stimuli, children with SLI will make
many naming errors--at least in part--because they do
not have well-developed semantic representations for
these words. From word to word, this limitation is manifested as either a gap in lexical knowledge or as sparse
knowledge. Although the former relationship is obvious
(children cannot name objects they do not know), the
latter leads to an important conclusion: The degree of
knowledge represented in the semantic lexicon makes
words more or less vulnerable to retrieval failure.

In other cases of misnaming, children demonstrated
semantic knowledge of a target, but that knowledge was
sparse. The nature of these sparse representations is
best revealed by comparing the types of information included in definitions of correct and erroneous items.
Whether defining items from the semantic error pool,
the indeterminate error pool, or the correct pool, children from both SLI and ND cohorts most often mentioned functional and physical object properties. An
emphasis on functional and physical properties is a longnoted characteristic of early definitions (Anglin, 1978;
Nelson, 1985; Watson & Olson, 1987). Furthermore, infants and toddlers depend upon physical similarity, especially similarity of shape, to extend labels to new objects (Baldwin, 1992; Imai, Gentner, & Uchida, 1994);
and they depend upon functional features, especially the
role of objects in events, to guide their inferences about
conceptual categories (Mandler, 2000). The focus on functional and physical properties in definitions given by
both SLI and ND children is continuous with the infant's
focus on shape and function during establishment of
early semantic representations. Therefore, the sparse
semantic representations demonstrated by children with
SLI are consistent with their overall developmental delay in language and are best characterized as a problem
of limited, but not unusual, information.
Finally, a post hoc comparison of semantic substitution errors and definition content provided additional
evidence as to the nature of some sparse semantic representations. For the SLI cohort, roughly one quarter of
definitions applied equally well to the target concept or
the substituted concept. These may be instances where
there is insufficient information represented in semantic memory to allow distinctions between close semantic coordinates.

Robust Semantic Representations
In some cases of naming error, the participants went
on to perform well on tasks of drawing, defining, and recognition. Depending on error pool and task, between 3%
and 6% of drawings and definitions of misnamed items
included high levels of accurate information. Roughly one
quarter and one third of items from the semantic and
indeterminate error pools, respectively, elicited some

Comparison of Semantic and
Indeterminate Naming Errors
Together, semantic and indeterminate errors constituted approximately 90% of all errors produced by
the SLI and ND cohorts during the naming task. The
post-naming tasks reveal that limited semantic knowledge contributes to both of these error types. However,
results on these tasks also suggest some differences between semantic and indeterminate errors. Compared to
semantic errors, indeterminate errors were associated
with less negatively skewed semantic knowledge continua. This was true of the SLI and ND cohorts for the
drawing task and the ND cohort for the definition task.
At first this may seem counterintuitive. Because most
indeterminate errors were "I don't know" responses, it
seems that they should be associated with semantic
knowledge continua that are quite negatively skewed.
However, our results suggest that children answer "I
don't know" in some cases where they do know but are
unsure, cautious, forgetful, or tired, among other possibilities. This is not to say that limited semantic knowledge was not a source of indeterminate errors, but rather
that the sources of such errors may be more varied than
the sources of semantic naming errors.
There was also an apparent between-group difference in indeterminate errors. Compared with the
SLI group, the ND group included a larger proportion
of physical properties in their definitions of items from
the indeterminate error pool. Perhaps the sources of
McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1009

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

indeterminate errors differ somewhat for the two participant groups. This conclusion is based solely on our
post hoc explorations of the data patterns and, as such,
requires replication and further study.

Future Directions
This study does not address the causes of the limited lexical semantic knowledge characteristic of SLI;
however, we suspect that working memory may be a
fruitful place to begin the search. Recall that, as a selection criterion, all of the participants in the SLI cohort
had working memory deficits as measured by the
Nonword Repetition Task (Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998).
Working memory deficits are now a well-documented
characteristic of SLI (Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998; Ellis
Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999; Gathercole &
Baddeley, 1990; Montgomery, 1995). Although the term
working memory is typically used to describe the memorial system responsible for short-term processing and
storage of information, working memory is thought to
play an important role in a range of complex cognitive
activities, including successful long-term learning and
memory. Gathercole and Baddeley (1989) reported
nonword repetition to be correlated with vocabulary size
in normally developing 4-, 6-, and 8-year-olds. Furthermore, at 4 years, nonword repetition is predictive of later
vocabulary size (Gathercole, Willis, Emslie, & Baddeley,
1992). Baddeley, Gathercole and colleagues account for
these relationships by positing that new words must be
held in the phonological store of the articulatory loop
before representations can be established in the longterm store. They hypothesize that a high capacity or
highly efficient phonological store facilitates long-term
representation by influencing the quantity and quality
of the phonological information retained and the decay
rate of that information (Baddeley, Papagno, & Vallar,
1988; Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990).
To date, research on working memory and SLI has
focused on the phonological store of the articulatory loop.
It is not directly evident how deficits in memory for phonological forms relate to the limitations in storage of
semantic knowledge documented in the current study.
However, Storkel (2001) presents experimental support
for just such a relationship. Storkel manipulated the
phonotactic frequency of novel words such that some were
composed of common sound sequences and others of rare
sound sequences. She then measured the impact of
phonotactic frequency differences on normal word learning. In one task, children were given the newly learned
words and were asked to pick the correct object referents from arrays. When they made errors in response to
words of common sequences, these were typically withinsemantic-category, but when they made errors in response to words of rare sequences, these were typically
unrelated to the semantic category of the target. Storkel
1010

concludes that high phonotactic frequency facilitates the
establishment of semantic representations.
Storkel's data are suggestive. When mapping a new
phonological form is difficult, either because of its rare
phonotactic sequence or, in the case of SLI, because of a
phonological memory deficit, perhaps few resources remain for semantic mapping; and thus semantic representations build slowly, if at all. The relationship between phonological working memory and the semantic
lexicon in children with SLI merits study. Alternatively,
the semantic representation problem associated with
SLI may relate to deficits in other working memory components. Given that physical features of objects and their
function in the (visual) environment play an important
role in the establishment of semantic representations,
research on the visual spatial sketch-pad component of
working memory in children with SLI may be useful.

Clinical Implications
Several clinical implications follow from this work.
First, these data suggest the importance of assessing
not only the number of words that children know and
use, but also the robustness of their word knowledge
(but see Vermeer, 2001). The results of fast-mapping
paradigms demonstrate that children require only minimal representations to succeed at forced-choice recognition probes (Carey, 1978; Dollaghan, 1987), the format
typical of receptive vocabulary tests. Because lexical
semantic storage is a matter of degree, children may
know many words well enough to score within normal
limits on receptive vocabulary tests but still not know
them well enough to retrieve and use them consistently.
Indeed, the SLI cohort in this study demonstrated a
mean standard score of 89 on the PPVT-III but went on
to demonstrate limited semantic knowledge on a substantial proportion of the age-appropriate words we examined experimentally.
Second, it is misleading to describe the wordretrieval deficits of children with SLI as "not being able
to find a word even though they know it." In this study,
only a minority of semantic naming errors occurred in
association with robust semantic knowledge. The phenomenon we describe clinically as a word retrieval deficit is more complex and varied than the term implies. It
is not as cleanly dissociated from word knowledge as
was previously thought.
Finally, the link between semantic knowledge and
naming performance suggests a possible intervention strategy. Increasing the robustness of semantic representations
should yield improvements in retrieval. This strategy has
met some success in previous intervention studies
(McGregor & Leonard, 1989; Wright, 1993). With further
understanding of the nature of the semantic storage limitation, more refined interventions should be tested.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Acknowledgments
We thank the children who participated, their families,
and their speech-language pathologists. We are indebted to
the faculty of Walker, Dewey, Greenbriar, and Westgate
Schools for their cooperation. Beth Schiff was particularly
helpful with subject recruitment, and Rosie Carr and Anne
Graham provided invaluable assistance with data analysis.
Five faithful Northwestern graduate students served as
raters. Credit is due to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting the definition-naming mismatch analysis. Finally, we
gratefully acknowledge the National Institute on Deafness
and Other Communication Disorders (award #R29 DC
03698) for support of the first author.

References
Anglin, J. (1978). From reference to meaning. Child
Development, 49, 969-976.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(1985). Guidelines for identification audiometry. Asha, 27,
49-52.
Baddeley, A. D., Papagno, C., & Vallar, G. (1988). When
long-term learning depends on short-term storage.
Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 586-595.
Baldwin, D. A. (1992). Clarifying the role of shape in
children's taxonomic assumption.. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 54, 392-416.
Bishop, D., Bishop, S., Bright, P., James, C., Delaney, T.,
& Tallal, P. (1999). Different origin of auditory and
phonological processing problems in children with
language impairment: Evidence from a twin study.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42,
155-168.
Bishop, D., North, T., & Donlan, C. (1996). Nonword
repetition as a behavioral marker for inherited language
impairment: Evidence from a twin study. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1-13.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1997). Uncommon understanding. East
Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Bjorklund, D. F. (1987). How age changes in knowledge
base contribute to the development of children's memory:
An interpretive review. Developmental Review, 7, 93-130.

word retrieval abilities in the second year and its relation
to early vocabulary growth. Child Development, 71,
543-822.
Dollaghan, C. (1987). Fast mapping of normal and language-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 52, 218-222.
Dollaghan, C. (1998). Spoken word recognition in children
with and without specific language impairment. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 19, 193-207.
Dollaghan, C., & Campbell, T. (1998). Nonword repetition
and child language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1136-1146.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. J. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.
Ellis Weismer, S., Tomblin, J. B., Zhang, X.,
Buckwalter, P., Chynoweth, J. G., & Jones, M. (2000).
Nonword repetition performance in school-age children
with and without language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 865-878.
Fey, M., Long, S., & Cleave, P. (1994). Reconsideration of
IQ criteria in the definition of specific language impairment. In R. Watkins & M. Rice (Eds.), Specific language
impairments in children (Communication and Language
Intervention Series, Vol. 4; pp. 161-178). Baltimore:
Brookes.
Fried-Oken, M. (1984). The development of naming skills in
normal and language deficient children. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Boston University, Boston, MA.
Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1989). Evaluation of
the role of phonological STM in the development of
vocabulary in children: A longitudinal study. Journal of
Memory and Language, 28, 200-213.
Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there
a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29, 336-360.

Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Gathercole, S. E., Willis, C., Emslie, H., & Baddeley, A.
D. (1992). Phonological memory and vocabulary development during the early school years: A longitudinal study.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 887-898.

Burgemeister, B. B., Blum, L. H., & Lorge, I. (1972).
Columbia Mental Maturity Scale. San Antonio, TX:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Gershkoff-Stowe, L. (2001). The course of children's
naming errors in early word learning. Journal of Cognition and Development, 2, 131-155.

Campbell, T., Dollaghan, C., Needleman, H., & Janosky,
J. (1997). Reducing bias in language assessment: Processing-dependent measures. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 40, 519-525.

Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (1997). A curvilinear
trend in naming errors as a function of early vocabulary
growth. Cognitive Psychology, 34, 37-71.

Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In M. Halle, J.
Bresnan, & G. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and
psychological reality (pp. 264-297). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Chi, M. T. H.,, & Koeske, R. D. (1983). Network representation of a child's dinosaur knowledge. Developmental
Psychology, 19, 29-39.
Dapretto, M., & Bjork, E. L. (2000). The development of

Hillis, A. E., & Caramazza, A. (1991). Mechanisms for
accessing lexical representations for output: Evidence
from a category-specific semantic deficit. Brain and
Language, 40, 106-144.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9, 45-75.
Kail, R., & Leonard, L. B. (1986). Word-finding abilities in
language-impaired children (ASHA Monographs 25).
McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Rockville, MD: American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association.
Katz, W., Curtiss, S., & Tallal, P. (1992). Rapid automatized naming and gesture by normal and language
impaired children. Brain and Language, 43, 623-641.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with
specific language impairment name pictures more slowly
than their peers? Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 39, 1081-1098.

The effects of a pause. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 35, 1040-1048.
Rice, M., Oetting, J., Marquis, J., Bode, J., & Pae, S.
(1994). Frequency of input effects on word comprehension
of children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 106-122.
Roth, C. (1983). Factors affecting developmental changes in
the speed of processing. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 35, 509-528.

Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1999). Naming errors of
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 195-205.

Snodgrass, J. G. (1984). Concepts and their surface
representations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 23, 3-22.

Leonard, L. B. (1999). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement,
image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 6, 174-215.

Leonard, L., Nippold, M., Kail, R., & Hale, C. (1983).
Picture naming in language impaired children. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 26, 609-615.
Lindberg, M. A. (1980). Is knowledge base development a
necessary and sufficient condition for memory development? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 30,
401-410.
Mandler, J. M. (2000). Perceptual and conceptual processes
in infancy. Journal of Cognition and Development, 1, 3-36.
Mayer, M. (1969). Frog, where are you? New York: Dial
Press.
McGregor, K. K. (1997). The nature of word-finding errors
of preschoolers with and without word-finding deficits.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 40, 1232-1244.
McGregor, K. K., & Appel, A. (2002). On the relation
between mental representation and naming in a child
with specific language impairment. Clinical Linguistics
and Phonetics, 16, 1-20.
McGregor, K. K., Friedman, R. M., Reilly, R. M., &
Newman, R. M. (2002). Semantic representation and
naming in young children. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 332-346.
McGregor, K. K., & Leonard, L. B. (1989). Facilitating
word-finding skills of language-impaired children. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 54, 141-147.
McGregor, K. K., & Waxman, S. R. (1998). Object naming
at multiple hierarchical levels: A comparison of
preschoolers with and without word-finding deficits.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 419-430.
Montgomery, J. W. (1995). Examination of phonological
working memory in specifically language-impaired
children. Applied Psycholinguistics, 16, 355-378.

Storkel, H. L. (2001). Learning new words: Phonotactic
probability in language development. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 1321-1337.
Tomblin, J. B., & Zhang, X. (1999). Language patterns and
etiology in children with specific language impairment. In
H. Tager-Flusberg (Ed.), Neurodevelopmental disorders:
Developmental cognitive neuroscience (pp. 361-382).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2001). National Demographic Profile
Summary [online]. Available: fttp://www.census.gov/PressRelease/www/2001/demprousmemo.html.
Vermeer, A. (2001). Breadth and depth of vocabulary in
relation to L1/L2 acquisition and frequency of input.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 22, 217-234.
Watkins, R. V., Kelly, D. J., Harbers, H. M., & Hollis, W.
(1995). Measuring children's lexical diversity: Differentiating typical and impaired language learners. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 28, 1349-1355.
Watson, R., & Olson, D. R. (1987). From meaning to
definition: A literate bias on the structure of word meaning. In R. Horowitz & S. J. Samuels (Eds.), Comprehending oral and written language (pp. 329-353). New York:
Academic Press.
Wiegel-Crump, C. A., & Dennis, M. (1986). Development
of word-finding. Brain and Language, 27, 1-23.
Wijnen, F. (1992). Incidental word and sound errors in young
speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 734-755.
Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test. Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

Nelson, K. (1985). Making sense: The acquisition of shared
meaning. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Woodcock, R. W. (1991). Woodcock Language Proficiency
Battery-Revised. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing Co.

Newcomer, P. L., & Hammill, D. D. (1997). Test of
Language Development-Primary 3. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Wright, S. H. (1993). Teaching word-finding strategies to
severely language-impaired children. European Journal of
Disorders of Communication, 28, 165-175.

Records, N. L., & Tomblin, J. B. (1994). Clinical decision
making: Describing the decision rules of practicing speechlanguage pathologists. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 37, 144-156.
Rice, M., Buhr, J., & Nemeth, M. (1990). Fast mapping
word-learning abilities of language-delayed preschoolers.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 33-42.
Rice, M., Buhr, J., & Oetting, J. (1992). Specific-languageimpaired children's quick incidental learning of words:

1012

Received October 31, 2001
Accepted June 5, 2002
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2002/081)
Contact author: Karla K. McGregor, PhD, 2299 N. Campus
Drive, Evanston, IL 60208.
E-mail: k-mcgregor@northwestern.edu

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix A
Stimuli for Naming, Drawing,
Defining, and Recognition Tasks

Foils for Recognition Task
Sem

Sem

Phon

UR

UR

kite

flag

banner

cat

wheel

stove

axe

hammer

jackhammer

X

jar

tie

umbrella

kite

balloon

ambulance

basket

phone

vase

pot

cup

base

arrow

rope

strawberry

cherry

watermelon

straw

car

tent

mountain

hill

volcano

fountain

rake

watch

envelope

letter

postcard

cantaloupe

gloves

radish

blouse

shirt

coat

mouse

spider

lamp

caterpillar

snake

ladybug

water pitcher

chair

wrench

ladder

rail

firetruck

letter

robe

drum

cigarette

smoke

cigar

clarinet

doorknob

key

windmill

golf

pinwheel

treadmill

golfer

peapod

clothespin

paperclip

safety pin

closed pen

stoplight

bear

screw

nail

screwdriver

zoo

fishbowl

hat

iron

clothesdryer

ironing board

island

pencil

star

anchor

hook

ship

hanger

tape

flower

pumpkin

apple

pie

paper

brush

shelves

kangaroo

piglet

reindeer

camera

slippers

lock

pitcher

vase

cup

picture

newspaper

belt

guitar

violin

song

target

measuring cup

fork

Sem = Semantically Related Foil, Phon = Phonologically Related Foil, UR = Unrelated Foil.

McGregor et al.: Semantic Representation in SLI

1013

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix B. Example drawings from a single child with SLI.

"Pitcher" that was rated as low in accuracy (named with semantic error "milk")

"Strawberry" that was rated as moderate in accuracy (named correctly)

"Mountain" that was rated as high in accuracy (named correctly)

1014

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 998-1014 * October 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

