ARTICLE

10.1177/0261927X04269588
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004
O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

MEDIATED IMMEDIACY
A Language of Affiliation
in a Technological Age
PATRICK B. O'SULLIVAN
STEPHEN K. HUNT
LANCE R. LIPPERT
Illinois State University

Evidence shows that computer-mediated communication has the potential to be used in
ways that are important for relationship initiation, development, and maintenance. We
know less about the communication practices that individuals use within various mediated channels. This article describes a series of studies addressing mediated forms of
immediacy. Specifically, the research examines the various ways that individuals can foster psychological closeness via computer-mediated communication and older communication channels, and the relationship of those activities to outcomes in educational settings.
Implications of this research are discussed for mediated communication practices as well
as theory development.
Keywords:

distance education; immediacy; computer-mediated communication;
interpersonal affiliation

As in other areas of social interaction, technology presents a dualedged sword in educational settings. An increasing number of college
teachers are incorporating new communication technologies into their
instruction. Accompanying the diffusion of social technology in teaching, important problems in student reactions have occurred. More than
40% of college courses include Web resources as a course component as
of 2000. Approximately 84% of 4-year colleges were expected to offer
distance-learning courses in 2002, up from 62% in 1998 (Report of the
Web-Based Education Commission, 2000). The World Wide Web is the
fastest growing instructional medium in higher education today
(LaRose & Whitten, 2000), and technology-intensive "hybrid" courses
(incorporating both on-site and online elements) and distance educaAUTHORS' NOTE: Earlier versions of two of the studies presented here have been presented at the 2001 National Communication Association's annual conference in Atlanta,
Georgia, and the 2003 International Communication Association's annual conference in
San Diego, California. The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of Anne Marie
Whyte.
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 23 No. 4, December 2004 464-490
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X04269588
 2004 Sage Publications

464

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

465

tion courses are becoming more common throughout higher education.
Despite the promise of new communication technologies to improve
teaching and learning, progress in developing well-informed, appropriate, and effective applications of technology has been slow and
inconsistent (see Boshier et al., 1997). Low student involvement and
motivation have been cited as one of the drawbacks of technologyintensive instruction (LaRose & Whitten, 2000). Many students report
low involvement and a high sense of isolation in these courses, which
may contribute to relatively high drop-out rates (Anderson, 1996;
Pipes & Wilson, 1996). One of the most significant design issues facing
technology-intensive courses around the social aspects of learning via
communication technologies. Students and instructors who spend little time outside the lecture hall or communicate primarily via mediated communication channels may struggle to establish positive
relationships that can be important for student motivation and their
perceptions of instructors.
These issues in educational technologies parallel long-standing concerns about the perceived limitations of computer-mediated communication (CMC) for social interactions, which have attracted researchers'
attention for several decades. Early views of CMC were that its impersonal nature made it effective only for information exchanges and ineffective and inappropriate for social and relational interactions. Later
research has established that CMC could be used effectively for personal relationships. Scholars have recently turned their attention to
understanding the communication practices that contribute to effective CMC use in social and personal relationships.
This project contributes to this line of scholarship by focusing on the
role of mediated immediacy cues as a language of affiliation. Specifically, we present results of three studies of technology use in educational applications that identify mediated forms of immediacy and
then examine their influence on student perceptions of course and
instructor. First, we embed this scholarship in the larger context of
social uses of communication technologies. After detailing each of the
studies of mediated immediacy in educational settings, we then identify how the findings contribute to the literature on social uses of
communication technologies.
CMC: FROM EFFICIENCY TO AFFILIATION
One of the more significant social developments in recent history
has been the rapid diffusion and widespread use of CMC in industrialized countries around the globe. This expansion in communication
technology use emerged first in the military and the workplace as
managers invested in various CMC systems (primarily text-based
messaging systems) in an effort to increase business efficiency.

466

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Scholars noticed these trends and began to examine the role and consequences of these newer forms of mediated communication in the corporate world. These early observations of initial applications for textbased messaging systems with largely novice users in the distinctive
context of the workplace generated findings and explanations that laid
the foundation for CMC research to come.
That foundation included a number of generalizations about the
nature of CMC in human communication.1 One was that CMC, by its
nature as an asynchronous, text-based system that displayed messages on a computer screen, was devoid of nonverbal signals (e.g.,
Sproull & Kiesler, 1986). When these social cues transmitted
nonverbally are filtered out of messages, the emotional content is also
stripped. When compared to face-to-face, CMC was considered inferior
in conveying elements of interaction considered essential for developing and maintaining relationships, which depended heavily on nonverbal communication and co-presence (e.g., Lea & Spears, 1995). Thus,
the conventional wisdom was that CMC was ineffective and inappropriate for anything other than clear, unequivocal information
exchanges (e.g., Daft & Lengel, 1986). When other scholars encountered significant amounts of social interaction being exchanged via
CMC in organizations and other contexts, that phenomenon was
considered surprising and remarkable (Rice & Love, 1987).
The conditions that bounded those early conclusions about the
impersonalness of CMC were dynamic, however. A small number of
scholars noted these trends in the 1990s and expanded their inquiries
beyond the workplace into social uses of CMC. In effect, they opened a
new area of inquiry that had been largely overlooked in the
interpersonal communication literature: mediated interpersonal
communication. This area of study bridged traditional interpersonal
communication scholarship, with its focus on verbal and nonverbal
communication in face-to-face dyads (often in relationships), and
scholarship on communication technologies (including early work in
organizational CMC).
This scholarship slowly but steadily began to challenge the early
generalizations of workplace CMC scholars. Researchers found that
CMC could be used effectively to initiate, develop, and maintain relationships that were comparable in intimacy and richness to conventional face-to-face relationships (e.g., Parks & Floyd, 1996; Walther &
Burgoon, 1992). The research thus indicated that the prevailing generalizations about CMC in organizations would require revisions when
scholars examined social and relational uses of CMC outside the workplace. Lea and Spears (1995) argued that the findings were convincing
enough to merit a comprehensive revision of what we think we know
about conventional relationships conducted primarily via face-to-face
communication. Documentation of widespread and successful relationships based on CMC suggested that elements long considered

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

467

essential for anything labeled a relationship (e.g., conventional
nonverbals, co-presence, frequent interaction) may not be as
indispensable as scholars had assumed, they said.
A subtheme of some of the scholarship on social uses for interpersonal CMC was a shift in focus away from the technology hardware and
toward communication practices as the key to understanding CMC's
role in society. Early organizational communication research looked to
a technology's characteristics to explain outcomes associated with the
technology. For example, the "cues filtered out" approach (Culnan &
Markus, 1987) emerged from observations that text-based CMC filters
out conventional social cues available in face-to-face interaction, such
as voice intonation, gestures, and facial expressions. Similarly, the
media richness approach is based on evaluating various communication technologies' characteristics (e.g., multiplicity of cue systems, the
availability of immediate feedback, message personalization, and natural language or language variety) to assess a medium's richness (Daft
& Lengel, 1986). Media that rate high on the relevant characteristics
are considered rich, whereas those that rate low are considered lean.
The combination of a medium's richness and the message qualities
(e.g., equivocal or nonequivocal) determine whether the communication is efficient or inefficient. The framework is then used to identify
which channel is appropriate for what type of interaction, based on the
unstated assumption that efficiency is always a workplace manager's
goal. CMC, according to this approach, is considered too lean to be
effective in the emotional, equivocal interactions important in relationships. However, widespread and successful use in relationships of
"lean" interpersonal CMC technologies that filter conventional social
cues (see e.g., Markus, 1994), as noted above, indicated that focusing to
such a degree on the technology was overlooking important factors
that provide a more comprehensive understanding of mediated
communication.
In contrast, some scholarship on mediated interpersonal communication has instead foregrounded the communication process and the
interactants' relational context rather than focusing on the channel of
interaction. Researchers have drawn effectively on existing interpersonal communication literature (Walther, 1992) and generated findings that identify such factors as impression management goals
(O'Sullivan, 2000) and anticipated future interaction (Walther, 1994)
as important determinants of CMC outcomes that dominate the
influence of channel characteristics.
At the same time, technologies gained new capabilities and forms
and technology users expanded their expressive repertoire. CMC systems, which began as basic text-based messaging limited to ASCII
characters, evolved to include a variety of fonts, text colors, and other
typographic characteristics as well as the capacity to attach or embed
nontextual elements. The growing population of CMC users gained

468

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

experience and skills beyond novice level. As CMC technologies were
being used by a wider numbers of users outside the workplace for
socializing rather than information exchange, new elements and conventions emerged and replicated. Thus, the artifacts of the channels
themselves are appropriated by users as expressive devices, and are
applied to interpersonal purposes, in ways that become a language in
and of themselves.
O'Sullivan (2000) developed an Information Management Model to
frame relational uses of interpersonal mediated channels, which incorporated elements of these perspectives and findings. He argued that
communication channels' characteristics are best understood as communicative resources that individuals could use (or could learn how to
use) tactically and strategically in their interactions as guided by their
social and relational goals. Communication channels--from newer
interpersonal CMC to older technologies such as answering machines
and face-to-face interactions--have their specific set of characteristics,
which constitute a potential repertoire from which individuals can
select and use in their interactions. For example, someone who seeks to
hide or ambiguate his or her emotional state for a particular interaction might choose the telephone because the other person cannot see
tearful eyes or a quivering chin.
A person's skill with a particular channel could shape selection and
use. Novices with a particular channel may be less capable at using it
effectively or even perceiving the range of possibilities it presents.
With experience over time and exposure to others, novices could
deepen their understanding of the possibilities that a channel offers as
well as strengthen their ability to and effectively exploit those possibilities. In addition, considerations of normative expectations for channel
use in specific contexts and situations could shape selection and use.
For example, a telephone call might be perceived as appropriate for
many interactions between relational partners such as making
arrangements or sharing daily events but might be seen as
inappropriate for other instances such as conveying bad news.
Scholars have made progress establishing that interpersonal CMC
and other mediated interpersonal channels can be--and are--used for
a wide range of social and personal interactions. And they have elaborated the ways that individuals select channels as a means of pursuing
a range of relational goals. Less attention has been paid to the distinctive set of communication possibilities presented by each channel, and
how individuals conduct their interactions as they take into account--
or creatively employ--a channel's characteristics. Mediated immediacy is proposed here as a way to better understand the communicative
practices that convey affiliation and foster relationships via communication technologies. The next sections will review the immediacy literature and summarize research related to mediated immediacy before
elaborating the current research program and reviewing the

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

469

implications of findings for re lational uses of me diated
communication.
IMMEDIACY: FACE-TO-FACE AND MEDIATED FORMS

Face-to-Face Immediacy
Immediacy refers to communicative behaviors that reduce the physical or psychological distance between individuals and foster affiliation (Mehrabian, 1971). Mehrabian (1971) linked immediacy to the
approach and avoidance construct--the proposition that people generally approach things they like and avoid things they dislike or that
induce fear. Scholars have identified a range of nonverbal and verbal
behaviors that communicate immediacy (P. Andersen & Andersen,
1982; Baringer & McCroskey, 2000; Gorham, 1988; Mehrabian, 1971).
Immediacy includes nonlinguistic approach behaviors, signals of
availability for communication, and communication of interpersonal
closeness. Nonverbal immediacy behaviors include reducing physical
distance, displaying relaxed postures and movements, using gestures,
smiling, using vocal variety, and engaging in eye contact during interactions. Verbal immediacy behaviors include using personal examples,
asking questions, using humor, addressing others by name, praising
others, initiating discussion, and using inclusive pronouns ("we" vs.
"I").
In many social encounters, individuals wish to develop positive relationships with others. They do so in part by adopting interaction
behaviors that signal that they are warm, friendly, and approachable
(see for review, J. Andersen, 1985). This argument is consistent with
intuitive expectations about why individuals might perceive another
person positively. Most people would tend to be positive about someone
who smiles, is expressive, appears relaxed, addresses them by name,
asks them questions, and discloses through personal anecdotes.
Research on immediacy in instructional settings consistently has
found a positive and robust relationship between frequency of immediacy behavior use and a range of desired educational outcomes
(Christophel, 1990). For example, instructor's immediacy behaviors
are associated with positive student affect toward instructors
(Chesebro, 2003; Gorham, 1988; Richmond, 1990; Titsworth, 2001),
increases in student affective learning (Gorham, 1988; Plax, Kearney,
McCroskey, & Richmond, 1986; Thomas, 1994), greater student state
motivation (Christophel, 1990; Richmond, 1990), more positive ratings
of instruction (Abrami, Leventhal, & Perry, 1982), increased perceptions of cognitive learning (Richmond, Gorham, & McCroskey, 1987),
and enhanced retention of course material (Messman & Jones-Corley,
2001; Perry & Penner, 1990; Witt & Wheeless, 2001). In addition,

470

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

teacher immediacy behaviors promote learning by reducing students'
apprehension (Chesebro & McCroskey, 2001).
Several different models attempt to explain the relationship
between immediacy and learning. Kelley and Gorham's (1988) fourstep model proposes that teacher immediacy is related to arousal,
which is related to attention, which is related to memory, which is
related to cognitive learning. Christophel (1990) developed a motivational theory proposing that teacher immediacy first directly affects
students' state motivation, which then positively affects their learning. The affective learning model states that immediacy's influence on
cognitive learning is mediated by affective learning (Rodriguez, Plax,
& Kearney, 1996). Despite differences in the models, the literature
indicates that immediacy plays an important role in student arousal,
affect, motivation, and learning (LaRose & Whitten, 2000). It is also
clear that given the key differences between mediated learning and
traditional classroom instruction, instructors need guidance on effective communication in mediated environments if they seek similar
results found in traditional instruction (Berge & Collins, 1995; Easton,
2003).
In sum, researchers have demonstrated that students learn most
from teachers who are "warm, friendly, immediate, approachable,
affiliative, and fostering of close, professionally appropriate personal
relationships" (J.F. Andersen & Andersen, 1987, p. 57). Use of immediacy has been shown to be important to developing positive relationships between instructors and students as well as facilitating desired
student learning outcomes.
Mediated Immediacy
To date, the immediacy literature almost exclusively examines
immediacy in face-to-face interactions, including traditional classroom settings and "extra-classroom communication" such as studentinstructor interaction after class or during office hours (Gorham, 1988;
Owens, 2000). The implicit assumption that immediacy only occurs
face-to-face ignores the important and increasingly pervasive role of
technologically mediated communication (O'Sullivan, Hunt, Lippert,
Owens, & Whyte, 2001). Only a handful of studies have considered
immediacy behaviors in a channel other than face-to-face (e.g., Carrell
& Menzel, 2001; Comeaux, 1995; Hackman & Walker, 1990; LaRose,
Gregg, & Eastin, 1998; LaRose & Whitten, 2000; McHenry & Bozik,
1995; Walther, Loh, & Granka, in press). The rapid and widespread
expansion of CMC for distance education and on-site instruction--as
well as a wide range of social and personal communication--suggests
that scholars should explore mediated forms of immediacy more fully.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

471

We define "mediated immediacy" as communicative cues in mediated channels that can shape perceptions of psychological closeness
between interactants. Stated another way, immediacy cues can be seen
as a language of affiliation. The existing literature has identified a
vocabulary of verbal and nonverbal behaviors that signal an invitation
and intention for greater closeness. Because it is clear from the literature on CMC in relationships that people have found or invented ways
to develop intimacy using mediated channels, examining the language
of affiliation in mediated channels would further illuminate the means
by which intimacy can be accomplished via newer and older
communication technologies.
MEDIATED IMMEDIACY
RESEARCH PROGRAM
We describe three studies from our research program. The first
sought to lay a foundation for subsequent studies by examining the
forms of mediated immediacy. The second and third used the findings
of the first to test the degree to which the use of mediated immediacy
cues predicted positive perceptions of the sender and some desired
educational outcomes.
STUDY 1

This project (O'Sullivan et al., 2001) was designed to address one
sweeping research question: What forms can immediacy cues take in
mediated communication channels? The goal was to identify a broad
spectrum of mediated immediacy cues, while future research would
address relative importance or prevalence. A total of 24 participants,
all university students in their late teens and early 20s with experience with mediated communication in instructional settings, were
assembled into three focus groups. One group was directed to focus primarily (although not exclusively) on text-based forms of communication (e.g., e-mail), another focused on Web-based and multimedia communication technologies, and the other dealt primarily with mass
media (e.g., television, radio, and movies). Each was provided a widely
used conventional definition of immediacy2 and then asked to describe
what communication practices (if any) convey immediacy via various
mediated channels.
Participants described a wide range of communicative cues across
an array of channels that shaped perceptions of closeness. Following
Corbin and Strauss (1990), analyses of transcripts involved the
researchers (as expert coders) identifying and organizing immediacy

472

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

cues described by focus group participants into emergent categories.
The process involved several coding cycles. Initially, researchers independently identified statements in the entire set of transcripts that
addressed immediacy and then proposed tentative categories to group
those statements at a moderate level of abstraction. Then, researchers
jointly compared their proposed categories for clarity, consistency,
appropriate scope, and accuracy as they referred to the examples that
each had identified as exemplars for each category, similar to
Spradley's (1979) process of identifying semantic relationships. When
differences were identified, revisions to the categories' names and criteria for inclusion were negotiated and approved by consensus.
Revised categories were reapplied individually to the transcripts to resort immediacy behaviors as well as to further refine category criteria.
Recoding stopped at the point of saturation or redundancy of the
category definitions.
Results consist of multiple categories, which were sorted later into
two emergent macro categories that at a higher level of abstraction
encompassed all micro categories. Some mediated immediacy forms
consisted of conventional immediacy cues conveyed via mediated
channels. Others differed from, but closely paralleled, conventional
immediacy behaviors. Some mediated immediacy cues consisted of
novel ways of expressing immediacy that have no parallel with conventional immediacy behaviors. All of the cues, according to respondents,
function the same as the traditional, face-to-face immediacy behaviors
in that they can shape a receiver's sense of closeness with the source.
The two macro categories of mediated immediacy, approachability
and regard for other, represent two related but distinct types of communicative cues related to immediacy. Approachability encompasses
immediacy cues that signal to others that "You can approach me." Individuals invite others to perceive them positively by presenting themselves as friendly and open. Approachability encompasses nine micro
categories of immediacy cues: self-disclosure, expressiveness, accessibility, informality, similarity, familiarity, humor, attractiveness, and
expertise (see Table 1). Regard encompasses immediacy behaviors
that generally signal to others that "I am approaching you." They convey a positive perception of others by being personal and respectful
with them. The macro category of Regard encompasses four categories
of immediacy behaviors (see Table 2). Together, then, the two macro
categories capture a range of immediacy-related options that individuals can control in their efforts to shape others' perceptions of psychological closeness. In terms of physical space, individuals have two
options to become physically closer: (a) invite the other to step closer or
(b) take a step toward the other. The macro categories of mediated
immediacy cues encompass those two options in mediated
communication for shaping perceptions of psychological closeness.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

473

Table 1
Dimensions of Mediated Immediacy: Approachability
Approachability ("You can approach me")
Subcategory

Description

Examples

Self-disclosure

Intentionally revealing
personal information that
allows others to feel that
they know source

* referring to experiences outside
official role
* photos portraying experiences
outside official role

Expressiveness

Varying emphasis, intensity,
vividness, tone of message

* using vocal inflection
* using punctuation
* using colors

Accessibility

Being accessible for
communication

* indicating availability
* providing contact information
* setting time aside for contacts

Informality

Portraying informality and
casualness

* informal postures/settings in
images
* use of slang, colloquialisms

Similarity

Displaying personality
qualities/ personal history
shared by receiver

* revealing interests, experiences,
opinions, backgrounds, and so on,
that match receivers'

Familiarity

Providing for repeated
contacts over time

* frequent encounters and/or
interactions

Humor

Using humor

* sharing jokes
* playful interactions

Attractiveness

Displaying characteristics
perceived as appealing

* presenting attractive appearance
* displaying appealing personality

Expertise

Displaying competence and
skill related to source's role

* demonstrating knowledge

DISCUSSION

The two macro and multiple micro categories represent a preliminary conceptual map that is likely to undergo revisions through future
research. They are not assumed to be independent of one another. For
example, the many ways that we can convey regard for another may
also convey approachability. It may work similarly among the micro
categories. For example, self-disclosure may contribute to perceptions
of similarity and personalness may also be seen as a form of politeness.
In addition, the analyses did not seek to identify the most important or
most prominent micro categories. The goal of this exploratory study
was to compile an array of immediacy behaviors as complete as possible without regard for frequency of mention or other specific measures
of importance. We did not want to preclude the possibility that a behavior identified once or infrequently in this study could be identified in
future research with different participants and different topics as

474

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Table 2
Dimensions of Mediated Immediacy: Regard
Regard ("I Am Approaching You")
Category

Description

Examples

Personalness

Conveying that source views
receivers as individuals

* using synchronous, richer
channels
* remembering, using names
* incorporating knowledge of person
in interactions

Engagement

Indicating attentiveness and
practicing responsiveness to
receivers

* returning phone messages/e-mails
* listening to/reading carefully
messages
* inviting future interaction

Helpfulness

Assisting receivers' efforts to
pursue needs and goals

* clearly designed Web site to aid
navigation
* providing needed into on outgoing
messages

Politeness

Following etiquette, courtesies, * word choices
and other communication
* practicing common courtesies in
procedural norms
interactions

more prominent. Of the many questions that these results raise are
whether mediated immediacy in the forms identified function as
respondents had indicated. In short, does use of mediated forms of
immediacy contribute to perceptions of closeness between individuals?
The next study was designed to begin to address this question.
STUDY 2

This project applied findings from the first study to test whether
there is a relationship between mediated immediacy and anxiety,
uncertainty, and attitude toward the message source at initial mediated contact (Whyte, O'Sullivan, & Hunt, 2003). Forms of mediated
immediacy identified in the first study were used in a manipulation of
Web-based immediacy cues. Consistent with the predominant application of immediacy in instructional settings, the questions were
addressed in terms of students' responses to immediacy cues presented in a Web site for a university-level, technology-intensive course.
Anxiety-Uncertainty Management Theory (Gudykunst, 1988, 1995),
an intercultural communication theory, was the theoretical framework
for the study. The application of this theory to educational uses of CMC
was based on the conjecture that students encountering a new course,
new instructor, and the relatively new use of communication technology for instruction would experience anxiety and uncertainty similar
to those encountering individuals in an unfamiliar culture.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

475

Mediated immediacy cues, which were viewed as a means to convey
an instructor's approachability and positive regard for students, were
expected to mediate anxiety and uncertainty, as well as attitudes
toward the instructor and the course. Hypotheses predicted that mediated immediacy would be negatively related to anxiety (H1) and uncertainty (H2) and positively related to attitudes toward the course (H3)
and the instructor (H4). The results are of interest as a means of
extending findings from conventional immediacy in face-to-face
instructional settings to mediated interaction. More generally, they
also test the proposition that mediated immediacy functions as a language of affiliation, with consequences for perceptions of the source.
A total of 95 undergraduate students were randomly assigned to
view one of two Web sites.3 Both Web sites were for the same hypothetical course, included much of the same content, included the same links,
and had the same instructor. Although these stimuli were constructed
for this study, they were presented as depicting a real course and
instructor. One Web site was developed as a high-immediacy Web site
with multiple immediacy cues throughout. These included specific
operationalizations of self-disclosure, expressiveness, accessibility,
informality, personalness, engagement, and politeness as described by
respondents in Study 1. For example, the Web site included color,
graphics, and the instructor's photo. Language incorporated first- and
second-person pronouns and informal, conversational, and friendly
language. Each page included an e-mail link to the instructor and a
link to his personal homepage, which included the instructor's photo,
his scholarly interests, information about other courses that he taught
and research that he had accomplished, and a summary of personal
interests and family photos.
The low-immediacy condition was identical to the high-immediacy
Web site except that most of the immediacy cues were eliminated. Colors were restricted to black, grey, and white and all graphics or photos
were removed. No link to the instructor's personal Web site or e-mail
was available. Language was formal and included only third-person
pronouns and references. A manipulation check confirmed that the
manipulation was successful. Respondents rated the high-immediacy
Web site as more immediate (M = 5.4 on a 7-point scale, SD = 1.09) than
the low-immediacy Web site (M = 4.27, SD = 1.42), t(93) = 4.37, p < .001.
Participants individually toured their assigned Web site at a computer
terminal and completed an instrument with scales measuring anxiety,
uncertainty, motivation, and affective learning.4
Regression analyses indicated Hypotheses 1 was not supported, as
immediacy's negative relationship with anxiety was not significant (t =
-1.37, p > .05,  = -.13). Hypothesis 2 was supported, as immediacy had
a significant negative relationship with uncertainty, (t = -3.56 p < .01,
= -.31). Hypothesis 3 was also supported, as immediacy had a significant positive relationship with motivation toward the course (t = 5.51,

476

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

p < .001,  = .47). Finally, Hypothesis 4 was also supported, as immediacy had a significant positive relationship with affective learning (t =
6.09, p < .001,  = .51), indicating students' positive attitudes toward
the course, recommended behaviors, and the instructor.
DISCUSSION

Results generally supported the hypotheses. A Web site with multiple immediacy cues produced lower uncertainty and higher motivation
for the course and more positive attitudes toward the course and
instructor. Although higher immediacy cues did not produce significantly lower levels of anxiety, the relationship was in the predicted
direction. Given the strong positive relationship between anxiety and
uncertainty in the literature, future studies might find that immediacy
cues can also reduce anxiety. These results are consistent with prior
research on conventional immediacy cues in face-to-face settings in
which immediacy use was positively related to positive attitudes about
course content, the recommended behaviors, and the instructor
(Christophel, 1990). As a first test of the Study 1 findings, the results
also provide evidence that immediacy cues can be conveyed effectively
via mediated channels and that mediated immediacy can shape
perceptions of a communicator.
STUDY 3

The previous study provided an initial test of mediated immediacy
and its capacity to shape receivers' perceptions of senders. Although it
supports the proposition that immediacy can be conveyed in mediated
channels, it does not address which cues might be more effective than
others. A subsequent study was designed to unpack a subset of the
mediated immediacy cues identified in the first study and incorporated in aggregate in the second study. The first study had identified a
broad range of immediacy cues conveyed via an array of channels: text,
audio, visual, and multimedia.
Of particular interest from Study 1 were respondents' descriptions
of text-based immediacy cues. As a communication method that
excludes many of the familiar expressions of affiliation in conventional
ways face-to-face (e.g., smiling, proximity, vocal inflection, etc.), text
might be expected to have limited effectiveness conveying affiliation
cues. If text-based immediacy cues can effectively convey cues that
facilitate closeness and affiliation, the findings would have implications for better understanding how the many text-based communication technologies (e.g., e-mail, chat rooms, instant messaging, texting,
Web pages, etc.) can be used to affect relationships. They would also
suggest the potential for multimedia forms of mediated immediacy,
which can include conventional (e.g., facial expressions, vocal

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

477

inflections) as well as unconventional forms of mediated immediacy
identified in Study 1, to shape affiliation between communicators.
To refine our understanding of mediated forms of immediacy cues,
this project distinguished between two types of text-based immediacy
cues. A review of the extensive list of text-based immediacy cues from
Study 1 suggested that they could be organized into those dealing with
language and those dealing with the nonlinguistic visual presentational setting for the language. This project examines the relative
influence of linguistic and presentational forms of mediated immediacy cues on receivers' perceptions of message senders.
Similar to Study 2, stimulus materials incorporated Web sites for a
hypothetical course and instructor. The design was a 2 x 2 betweensubjects design, with one independent variable being linguistic immediacy with two levels (high and low) and the other presentational
immediacy with two levels (high and low). Based on traditional immediacy literature and Study 1 results, linguistic immediacy was manipulated by varying such language elements as pronouns (high: first and
second person; low: third person), use of casual or slang words (high:
informal, casual, and slang words; low: formal language), use of greetings and signoffs (high: greetings and signoffs; low: none), and use of
punctuation (high: exclamation marks, dashes, ellipses; low: none).
Presentational immediacy was manipulated by varying the visual presentation (high: graphics, color, photos; low: none) and text formatting
(high: use of bold-face, different-sized fonts, color, san-serif typeface;
low: no text formatting, Times New Roman typeface). Four versions of
a course Web sites were created: (a) high presentational immediacy/
high language immediacy (see Figure 1), (b) high presentational
immediacy/low language immediacy, (c) low presentational immediacy/
high language immediacy, and (d) low presentational immediacy/low
language immediacy (see Figure 2). A manipulation check indicated
that the manipulation was successful. One ANOVA produced a significant main effect for presentational immediacy, F(1, 135) = 117.80, p <
.001, 2 = .47. Respondents in the high presentation immediacy conditions (M = 2.83, SD = 1.29) rated the Web sites as significantly more
immediate compared to those in the low presentation immediacy conditions (M = 5.28, SD = 1.34). The second ANOVA produced a
significant main effect for linguistic immediacy, F(1, 135) = 21.63, p <
.001, 2 = .14. Respondents in the high linguistic immediacy conditions (M = 2.14, SD = .94) rated the Web sites as significantly more
immediate compared to those in the low linguistic-immediacy conditions (M = 3.17, SD = 1.55).
Dependent variables were motivation to take the course, attitude
toward the course, perceptions of the instructor, and instructor credibility. Hypotheses predicted main effects for both presentational
immediacy (H1) and linguistic immediacy (H2) in that we expected a
positive relationship of both with all dependent variables. Regarding

478

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Figure 1.

High Presentational Immediacy--High Linguistic Immediacy
Condition.

possible interactions, there is very little extant research examining the
relative influence of verbal and nonverbal immediacy behaviors on
perceptions of immediacy. However, it is important to understand the
relative influence of linguistic and presentational immediacy cues. Is
one more influential than the other? Is either one more influential
than no immediacy? Are the two experienced concurrently more influential than one or the other alone? Therefore, we posed three research
questions addressing the influence of individual and combined independent variables.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

479

COMMUNICATION 112
Communication and Society
Dr. Peter Sullanger | Spring 2004
Home

This is the homepage for Communication 112 at Illinois State
University for Spring 2004. This is the starting place for the Comm
112 website.

Overview

The course includes both onsite (in the classroom) and online
(this website) experiences. Students will find that this website
complements and extends the in-class parts of the course. Bookmark
this page if using a computer at home and write down (or memorize)
the website address if using a campus lab computer. Students will
be using this website several times a week to access readings,
assignments, exercises, and grades.

Syllabus
News
Calendar
Webboard
Grades

Click on links in the navigation bar on the left-hand side of the page
to access the elements of the website.

Dr. Sullanger

| Home | Overview | Syllabus | News | Calendar | Webboard | Grades |
| Department of Communication | Illinois State University |
Copyright (c) 2003 Peter Sullanger
Last Modified October 27, 2003

Figure 2.

Low Presentational Immediacy--Low Linguistic Immediacy
Condition.

Research Question (RQ) 1: Is there a difference in influence comparing presentational immediacy alone to linguistic immediacy alone on student
motivation, attitude toward the course, and perceptions of the
instructor?
RQ2: Does high presentational immediacy alone and high linguistic immediacy alone influence student motivation, attitude toward the course,
and perceptions of the instructor more positively than minimal
immediacy?
RQ3: Does a combination of presentational immediacy and linguistic immediacy influence student motivation, attitude toward the course, and perceptions of the instructor more positively than presentational immediacy alone and linguistic immediacy alone?

A total of 170 respondents were randomly assigned to one of the four
5
conditions. Respondents explored the purported course Web site on a
lab computer for 15 to 20 minutes and then filled out an instrument.
6
Scales included an immediacy scale constructed for this study ( = .83)
and a student state motivation scale ( = .95) (Christophel, 1990). It
also included a subscale of the affective learning scale that focused on

480

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Table 3
Means and Standard Deviations for Dependent Variables by Condition
Presentation
Immediacy Cues
High

a,b

Immediacy
a
Motivation
b
Instructor
b
Competence
b
Perceived caring
b
Trustworthiness
b
Overall credibility

Linguistic
Immediacy Cues

Low

High

Low

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

2.70
3.22
2.20
2.10
2.76
2.45
2.43

.92
1.11
1.03
.92
1.13
1.03
.91

3.40
4.02
2.43
2.25
3.01
2.50
2.60

1.17
1.19
1.11
.97
1.16
.99
.91

2.77
3.50
1.98
1.99
2.53
2.29
2.28

.99
1.16
.90
.74
1.01
.93
.78

3.30
3.69
2.60
2.33
3.20
2.64
2.72

1.13
1.25
1.14
1.08
1.18
1.07
.98

Note. For all of the scales, lower values represent more positive assessments.
a. Signifies a significant main effect for presentation immediacy cues.
b. Signifies a significant main effect for linguistic immediacy cues.

attitudes about the course instructor ( = .92) (Christophel, 1990). A
teacher credibility scale ( = .93) (Teven & McCroskey, 1997) included
three subscales: instructor competence ( = .87), perceived caring ( =
.84), and trustworthiness ( = .86). Standard demographic information
was also collected.
H1 predicted that higher levels of presentational immediacy would
produce higher evaluations of immediacy, motivation, and perceptions
of the instructor. This hypothesis was supported for immediacy, F(1,
163) = 18.56, p < .001, 2= .10, and for motivation, F(1, 165) = 19.98, p <
.001, 2= .11, but not for any of the measures assessing the instructor.
H2 predicted that higher levels of linguistic immediacy would produce higher evaluations of immediacy, motivation, and perceptions of
the instructor. The hypothesis was supported for immediacy, F(1, 163) =
11.01, p < .01, 2 = .06, and for all of the measures assessing the
instructor, which included the overall evaluation, F(1, 166) = 16.26, p <
.001, 2 = .09, the overall assessment of teacher credibility, F(1, 164) =
10.75, p < .01, 2 = .06, the teacher credibility subscale of competence,
F(1, 164) = 5.58, p < .05, 2 = .03, the teacher credibility subscale of perceived caring, F(1, 166) = 19.15, p < .001, 2 = .09, and the teacher credibility subscale of trustworthiness, F(1, 166) = 5.32, p < .05, 2 = .03 (see
Table 3). Linguistic immediacy did not predict higher levels of motivation regarding the course.
RQ1 examined the relative strength of influence presentational
immediacy cues alone to linguistic immediacy cues alone on the
dependent variables. A planned contrast test of Condition 2 (high
presentational/low linguistic cues) to Condition 3 (low presentational/
high linguistic cues) found that motivation differed significantly,
t(165) = 2.47, p < .05. The high presentational cues condition (M = 3.35,

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

481

SD = 1.10) generated more positive scores on motivation than did the
high linguistic cues condition (M = 3.98, SD = 1.05). Planned comparisons were significant for two of the measures assessing the instructor.
For perceptions of the instructor, the instructor was rated more positively in the high linguistic cues condition (M = 1.95, SD = .84) than in
the high presentational cues condition (M = 2.37, SD = 1.08), t(166) =
1.89, p < .05. For perceived caring, the instructor was also rated more
positively in the high linguistic cues condition (M = 2.65, SD = 1.02)
than in the high presentational cues condition (M = 3.09, SD = 1.16),
t(166) = 1.81, p < .05. There was no significant difference for
immediacy.
RQ2, which examined whether high presentational immediacy cues
alone or high linguistic immediacy cues alone influenced the dependent variables (DVs) significantly more than minimal immediacy
cues, required two sets of planned contrasts. The first compared Condition 2 (high presentational/low linguistic cues) and Condition 4
(low presentational/low linguistic cues) on the DVs. The high presentational cues condition generated significantly more positive evaluations on three of the DVs. For immediacy, the high presentational cues
condition (M = 2.84, SD = .86) was rated as more immediate than the
low cues condition (M = 3.77, SD = 1.19), t (163) = 4.24, p < .001. For
motivation, the high presentational cues condition (M = 3.35, SD =
1.10) was rated more positively than the low-cues condition (M = 4.05,
SD = 1.32), t(165) = 2.85, p < .01. For perceptions of the instructor, the
high presentational cues condition (M = 2.37, SD = 1.08) was rated
more positively than the low-cues condition (M = 2.86, SD = 1.15),
t(166) = 2.25, p < .05. There were no significant differences for perceptions of competence, caring, trustworthiness, and overall credibility.
Planned contrasts compared Condition 3 (low presentational/high
linguistic cues) and Condition 4 (low presentational/low linguistic
cues) on the outcome measures. The high linguistic cues condition generated significantly more positive evaluations on six of the DVs. For
immediacy, the high linguistic cues condition (M = 2.99, SD = 1.00) was
rated as more immediate than the low-cues condition (M = 3.77, SD =
1.19), t(163) = 3.43, p < .01, and all measures evaluating the instructor.
For perceptions of instructor, the high linguistic cues condition (M =
1.95, SD = .84) was rated more positively than the low-cues condition
(M = 2.86, SD = 1.15), t(166) = 3.99, p < .001. For competence, the high
linguistic cues condition (M = 2.01, SD = .71) was rated more positively
than the low-cues condition (M = 2.46, SD = 1.13), t(164) = 2.16, p < .05.
For perceived caring, the high linguistic cues condition (M = 2.65, SD =
1.02) was rated more positively than the low-cues condition (M = 3.77,
SD = 1.19), t(166) = 2.72, p < .01. For trustworthiness, the high linguistic cues condition (M = 2.25, SD = .89) was rated more positively than
the low-cues condition (M = 2.73, SD = 1.05), t(166) = 2.15, p < .05; and
overall credibility, the high linguistic cues condition (M = 2.32, SD =

482

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

.74) was rated more positively than the low-cues condition (M = 2.84,
SD = .99), t(164) = 2.60, p < .05. There were no significant differences
for motivation.
RQ3, which examined whether the combination of presentational
cues and linguistic cues generates significantly more positive DV scores
than presentational or linguistic cues alone, also required two sets of
planned contrasts. The first compared Condition 1 (high presentational/
high linguistic cues) to Condition 2 (high presentational/low linguistic
cues) on the DVs. Two contrasts were significant. For perceived caring,
the combined high-cues condition (M = 2.42, SD = 1.00) was evaluated
more positively than the high presentational cues alone condition (M =
3.09, SD = 1.16), t(166) = 2.90, p < .01. For credibility, the combined
high-cues condition (M = 2.23, SD = .82) was evaluated more positively
than the high presentational cues alone condition (M = 2.62, SD = .97),
t(164) = 2.03, p < .05. The test for perceptions of the instructor
approached significance (p = .05), where again the combined high-cues
condition was evaluated more positively than the high presentational
cues alone condition. Tests for immediacy, motivation, competence, and
trustworthiness were not significant.
The second set of planned contrasts compared Condition 1 (high
presentational/high linguistic cues) to Condition 3 (low presentational/
high linguistic cues) on the DVs. The contrast for motivation was significant, t(165) = 3.46, p < .01. The combined high-cues condition (M =
3.09, SD = 1.11) was rated more positively for motivation than the high
linguistic cues alone condition (M = 3.98, SD = 1.05). The test for immediacy was also significant, t(163) = 1.86, p < .05. Again, the combined
high-cues condition (M = 2.57, SD = .96) was evaluated more positively
than the high linguistic cues alone condition (M = 2.99, SD = 1.00). All
tests for measures evaluating the instructor were not significant.
DISCUSSION

This study sought to test whether text-based immediacy cues--
specifically, two types: presentational and linguistic--influence
assessments of immediacy, motivation, and the message source.
Results partially supported the hypotheses. As predicted, a main effect
was found for presentational immediacy cues on two DVs. Conditions
with higher presentational cues produced perceptions of higher Web
site immediacy and higher levels of motivation to take the course.
However, they did not produce significant results for any of the measures assessing the instructor. Regarding linguistic immediacy cues,
as predicted, main effects were found for immediacy as well as for all
measures assessing the instructor. However, no effect was found for
motivation. This interesting pattern of results suggests that presentational immediacy cues and linguistic immediacy cues have similar
influence on perceptions of immediacy but contrasting influence on the

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

483

appeal of a course and perceptions of the message source. Presentational immediacy cues influenced respondents' motivation to take the
course but not their perceptions of the instructor. In contrast, linguistic
immediacy cues had little influence on motivation to take the course
but a consistently positive influence on evaluations of the instructor.
The three research questions further examined the relationship
between linguistic and presentational forms of text-based immediacy.
The pattern of results is consistent with the findings for the main
effects. RQ1 compared the influence of presentational immediacy cues
alone to linguistic cues alone. Both types of cues appear to convey
immediacy with equal effectiveness. However, the Web site with presentational cues alone was significantly more influential on motivation
to take the course, and linguistic immediacy cues alone consistently (if
marginally) tended to shape perceptions of the course instructor.
RQ2 compared Web sites with each type of immediacy cues alone to
a Web site with minimal immediacy cues. The Web site with presentational cues only was rated as more immediate and prompted higher
motivation but was no better than a Web site with minimal cues on four
of five measures assessing the instructor. A Web site with linguistic
cues only was rated as more immediate and generated more positive
evaluations on all assessments of the instructor than a Web site with
minimal cues but was no different on motivation to take the course.
These findings indicate that higher levels of text-based immediacy
cues of either type are better than few or none in shaping perceptions of
immediacy. However, presentational cues will prompt higher motivation to take a course but have little effect on evaluations of the instructor. Linguistic cues will generate more positive evaluations of the
instructor but have little effect on motivation.
RQ3 examined the question of whether presentational and linguistic immediacy cues together have a cumulative effect on perceptions of
immediacy, motivation, and perceptions of the source. Findings reinforce the pattern of the other RQs and the tests of main effects. Adding
linguistic cues to a high presentational cue-only Web site will generate
improved evaluations of the message source on some measures. However, the addition makes no difference on perceptions of Web site
immediacy and motivation to take the course. Adding presentational
cues to a high linguistic cue-only Web site will generate improved
motivation and weakly improve perceptions of Web site immediacy.
However, the combined cues were no better than linguistic cues alone
Web site regarding positive evaluations of the source.
Overall, the results contribute more evidence that immediacy can
be conveyed in mediated forms--in this case, a text-based channel of a
course Web site. Based on only the language and the visual presentation of the Web site, immediacy manipulations generated significant
differences in Web site immediacy, student motivation, and assessments of the instructor. In addition, the results illuminate parallel

484

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

influence of presentational and linguistic immediacy cues on perceptions of Web site immediacy. However, they also indicate that the two
types differ in their influence on the set of outcome measures included
in this study. Presentational cues shape motivation for the course,
whereas linguistic cues appear to be far more effective at generating
positive evaluations of the message source.
CONCLUSION
This research program sought to engage the issue of how mediated
channels, once chosen, can be used to convey affiliation and to develop
perceptions of closeness. Although the literature has established that
people are able to develop close and even intimate relationships using
mediated channels exclusively or predominantly, researchers have not
yet comprehensively addressed the communication practices that contribute to interpersonal connection. The three research projects presented here illuminate that issue by examining the immediacy construct as it occurs in CMC and other mediated channels.
Results demonstrate first of all that immediacy can be conveyed via
CMC as well as a broad array of other mediated channels, newer and
older. Although that observation may appear to be too obvious to mention, it does further undermine the assumption held by many scholars
and nonscholars alike that the drastic reduction of social cues in CMC
renders CMC impersonal and thus ineffective and inappropriate for
interactions important to relationships. The many people who are successfully managing long-distance relationships (romantic, friend, and
family) and the many individuals who have developed close relationships online are evidence that the early assumptions about CMC
required revision. This research program, along with the handful of
other studies that also addressed mediated immediacy (e.g., Carrell &
Menzel, 2001; Hackman & Walker, 1990; LaRose & Whitten, 2000), further reinforces a more accurate understanding of people's capacity to
connect and affiliate via CMC and other mediated communication.
This research also confirms that immediacy can be conveyed via different mediated channels--even text-based channels--that cannot
convey many of the conventional nonverbal forms of immediacy. Thus,
the results further support our proposition that existing conceptualization of immediacy, based on the single channel of face-to-face interaction, needs to be expanded to include mediated interactions. Also,
the differences between linguistic and presentational forms of immediacy found here not only prompt more interesting research topics in the
study of mediated immediacy but suggest possible distinctions
between conventional verbal and nonverbal immediacy that are worth
exploring.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

485

The specific studies were set in educational settings, where the vast
majority of extant research on immediacy has been conducted. Results
provide preliminary guidance for educators about the importance of
understanding and applying knowledge of mediated immediacy for
shaping student motivation and perceptions of instructors. This is true
for experienced instructors of DE and TI courses as well as for instructors just beginning to incorporate more technologies into their teaching practices. It is clear that some mediated immediacy is usually
better than none and that a teacher does not have to be a skilled
graphic artist but does need to attend to linguistic immediacy cues to
build a course Web site that positively influences student perceptions.
These insights might be of value outside educational settings as
well. Mediated communication in training and development may
closely parallel the institutional educational settings of college classrooms. Whether these findings are replicated in the workplace is worth
scholarly attention, with implications for the effectiveness of corporate
training programs. The findings of these studies might also be of value
in business communication. Mediated communication is an essential
part of just about any organization's daily business processes, and the
ability to use it in facilitating positive business relationships might
play a crucial role in successful business activities. The findings here
could be incorporated into internal and external communication practices in organizations, which would present distinctive issues for scholars to address. Mediated communication is becoming increasingly
important in health care, such as those involving patient-physician
interactions, Web-based health information, and online social support.
The findings also suggest a number of future research projects
examining the use of immediacy in a wide range of older mediated
interpersonal channels (e.g., telephone, answering machines, letters)
as well as newer mediated interpersonal channels (e.g., e-mail, chat
rooms, discussion boards, instant messaging). Immediacy via older
and newer mass-mediated channels (e.g., television, radio, video
games) would also be worth investigating. Perhaps these studies might
help to identify how some mass-mediated personae (e.g., talk-show
hosts such as Oprah Winfrey) have been able to connect with audience
members to such a powerful degree. Findings might contribute to the
literature on parasocial relationships by identifying how affiliation
can develop even with those we know exclusively via mass media.
These research projects have begun to identify specific forms of
mediated immediacy as well as illuminating their role in shaping
receivers' attitudes and perceptions of the source. These forms might
be viewed in terms of Watzlawick, Beavin, and Jackson's (1967) proposition that every message carries both content and relational elements.
The content portion is the message itself (usually the verbal elements),

486

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

whereas the relational content provides context for the message by
conveying the relationship status of the interactants' (usually the nonverbal) elements. Immediacy cues (mediated and face-to-face) could be
viewed as the relational portion of a message, in that they address
senders' orientation toward their relationship with receivers.
Linking this research with Watzlawick et al.'s (1967) ideas, however,
introduces an interesting anomaly. These studies have identified verbal (linguistic) and nonverbal (presentational) forms of text-based
immediacy, both of which appear to be important to receivers' perceptions of the source. Mediated immediacy, conceptualized here as a language of affiliation in CMC and other mediated channels, functions as
a relational element of an interaction in both verbal and nonverbal
forms. This suggests that the long-standing linkage of message content
to verbal communication and relational message to nonverbal communication should be reexamined, which might prompt new insights into
the intertwined roles of verbal and nonverbal communication.
Although it may be that face-to-face immediacy cues are wellestablished in society and generally understood similarly, that may
not be the case for mediated immediacy cues. Although it sometimes
seems to those experienced with CMC that it has been an integral form
of communication deeply embedded in social interaction, in reality
only a short amount of time has passed since CMC diffused into Western cultures. There continues to be a gap between the experienced and
the inexperienced, and differences in experience may contribute to differences in interpretation of mediated immediacy cues. This, of course,
can contribute to miscommunication and all the problems associated
with it--including the possible consequences of mediated immediacy
use opposite to intention (i.e., disliking). Consistent with Watzlawick
et al.'s (1967) arguments, results of these studies suggest that individuals convey immediacy cues in mediated channels whether they
intend to or not. Excluding immediacy cues (intentionally or not) could
be associated with more negative evaluations of the source, particularly if the exclusion was a strong violation of a receiver's expectations.
At a time when many CMC users have low or moderate levels of competency, there may be greater likelihood of miscommunication.
It is important that we learn more clearly and with greater specificity the forms and functions of mediated immediacy cues. That would
provide CMC users the opportunity to make informed, mindful choices
about how to use CMC more effectively when managing the relational
aspects of mediated communication. This would also complement and
extend the literature on strategic and tactical channel selection
(O'Sullivan, 2000; Walther, 1992, 1996), which would have a practical
benefit as well for CMC users seeking to become more effective in their
mediated communications.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

487

NOTES
1. The meaning of computer-mediated communication (CMC) has evolved from its
early use. In the early research, CMC denoted text-based messaging systems of various
hardware and software configurations and implementation policies. Of course, currently
CMC encompasses a far wider range of communication capabilities as the technology has
evolved to include synchronous and asynchronous text, image, audio, video, and
multimedia forms.
2. The definition used, derived from Meherabian (1971), was "The verbal and nonverbal behaviors that reduce the physical and/or psychological distance between people."
3. Descriptive statistics for respondents: Sex--male, 27%, n = 26; female, 73%, n = 69.
Age--M = 19.6 years, SD = 2.72. Education: freshmen, 63.2%, n = 60; sophomores, 15.8%,
n = 15; juniors, 11.6%, n = 11; seniors, 9.5%, n = 9. Ethnicity--Caucasian, 87%, n = 83;
Black, 3%, n = 3; Latino, 1%, n = 1; Asian, 4%, n = 4; Native American, 2%, n = 2; Other, 2%,
n = 2.
4. The instrument included scales measuring immediacy, anxiety, uncertainty, motivation regarding the course, and affective learning. Immediacy was assessed using a
scale generated for this study, which presented four 7-point semantic differential items
using the following sets of anchors: Inviting/Uninviting, Expressive/Nonexpressive,
Friendly/Unfriendly, Warm/Cold ( = .87). Anxiety toward using the Web site as part of a
college course was assessed using a scale modified from Stephan and Stephan (1985) ( =
.79). Uncertainty was assessed using a scale modified from Gudykunst (1995) ( = .81).
Motivation toward taking the class was assessed using a modified version of
Christophel's (1990) student state motivation scale regarding a college course ( = .95).
Affective learning was measured using a modified version of the Affective Learning Scale
(Christophel, 1990) ( = .96). All scale modifications involved minor wording changes to
apply the items to an instructional Web site. Details are available from the first author.
5. Descriptive statistics for respondents: Sex--male, 37%, n = 63; female, 63%, n = 107.
Age--M = 21.74, SD = 3.74. Education--freshmen, 13%, n = 22; sophomores, 6.5%, n = 11;
juniors, 33%, n = 56; seniors, 42%, n = 71, graduate students, 6%, n = 10. Ethnicity--
Caucasian, 78%, n = 133; black, 9%, n = 15; Latino, 3.5%, n = 6; Asian, 6%, n = 10, Native
American, 3%, n = 5; Other, 3%, n = 5.
6. The immediacy scale generated for this study consists of 10 seven-point semantic
differential items with the following anchors: Inviting/Uninviting, Disclosing/
Nondisclosing, Open/Closed, Kind/Unkind, Distant/Close, Engaging/Detached, Inaccessible/Accessible, Expressive/Nonexpressive, Friendly/Unfriendly, Warm/Cold ( = .82).

REFERENCES
Abrami, P. C., Leventhal, L., & Perry, R. P. (1982). Educational seduction. Review of Educational Research, 52, 446-464.
Andersen, J. (1985). Nonverbal immediacy in interpersonal communication. In A. W.
Siegman & S. Feldstein (Eds.), Multichannel integrations of nonverbal behavior (pp.
1-36). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Andersen, J. F., & Andersen, P. A. (1987). Never smile until Christmas? Casting doubt on
an old myth. Journal of Thought, 22, 57-61.
Andersen, P., & Andersen, J. (1982). Nonverbal immediacy in instruction. In L. Barker
(Ed.), Communication in the classroom (pp. 98-120). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.
Anderson, A. A. (1996). Predictors of computer anxiety and performance in information
systems. Computers in Human Behavior, 12, 61-77.

488

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Baringer, D. K., & McCroskey, J. C. (2000). Immediacy in the classroom: Student immediacy. Communication Education, 49, 178-186.
Berge, Z. L., & Collins, M. P. (Eds.). (1995). Computer mediated communication and the
online classroom (Vols. 1-3). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Boshier, R., Mohapi, M., Moulton, G., Quayyum, A., Sadownik, L., & Wilson, M. (1997).
Best and worst dressed web courses: Strutting into the 21st century in comfort and
style. Distance Education, 18, 327-349.
Carrell, L. J., & Menzel, K. E. (2001). Variations in learning, motivation, and perceived
immediacy between live and distance education classroom. Communication Education, 50, 230-240.
Chesebro, J. L. (2003). Effects of teacher clarity and nonverbal immediacy on student
learning, receiver apprehension, and affect. Communication Education, 52, 135-147.
Chesebro, J. L., & McCroskey, J. C. (2001). The relationship of teacher clarity and immediacy with student state receiver apprehension, affect, and cognitive learning. Communication Education, 50, 59-68.
Christophel, D. M. (1990). The relationships among teacher immediacy behaviors, student motivation, and learning. Communication Education, 37, 323-340.
Comeaux, P. (1995). The impact of a distance learning network on classroom communication. Communication Education, 44, 353-361.
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Culnan, M. J., & Markus, M. L. (1987). Information technologies. In F. M. Jablin, L. L.
Putnam, K. H. Roberts, & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organizational communication: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 420-443). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational information requirements, media richness and structural design. Management Science, 32, 554-571.
Easton, S. S. (2003). Clarifying the instructor's role in online distance learning. Communication Education, 52, 87-105.
Gorham, J. (1988). The relationship between verbal teacher immediacy behaviors and
student learning. Communication Education, 37, 40-53.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1988). Uncertainty and anxiety. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.),
Theories in intercultural communication, (pp. 123-156). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1995). Anxiety/uncertainty management theory. In R. L. Wiseman
(Ed.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 8-58). London: Sage.
Hackman, M. Z., & Walker, K. B. (1990). Instructional communication in the televised
classroom: The effects of system design and teacher immediacy on student learning
and satisfaction. Communication Education, 39, 196-206.
Kelley, D. H., & Gorham, J. (1988). Effects of immediacy on recall of information. Communication Education, 37, 198-207.
LaRose, R., Gregg, J., & Eastin, M. (1998). Audiographic telecourses for the web: An
experiment. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 4. Retrieved October 29,
2002, from http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue2/larose.html
LaRose, R., & Whitten, P. (2000). Re-thinking instructional immediacy for web courses: A
social cognitive exploration. Communication Education, 49, 320-338.
Lea, M., & Spears, R. (1995). Love at first byte? Building personal relationships over computer networks. In J. T. Wood & S. Duck (Eds.), Understudied relationships: Off the
beaten track (pp. 197-233). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Markus, M. L. (1994). Electronic mail as the medium of managerial choice. Organization
Science, 5, 502-527.
McHenry, L., & Bozik, M. (1995). Communicating at a distance: A study of interaction in a
distance education classroom. Communication Education, 44, 362-371.
Mehrabian, A. (1971). Silent messages. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Messman, S. J., & Jones-Corley, J. (2001). Effects of communication environment, immediacy, and communication apprehension on cognitive and affective learning. Communication Monographs, 68, 184-200.

O'Sullivan et al. / MEDIATED IMMEDIACY

489

O'Sullivan, P. B. (2000). What you don't know won't hurt me: Impression management
functions of communication channels in relationships. Human Communication
Research, 26, 403-431.
O'Sullivan, P. B., Hunt, S., Lippert, L., Owens, S., & Whyte, A. (2001, November). Mediated immediacy: Affiliation at a distance in educational contexts. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the National Communication Association, Atlanta, GA.
Owens, S. M. (2000). Reduce the distance and let's talk: The relationship between teacher
immediacy and extra classroom communication. Unpublished master's thesis, Illinois State University, Normal.
Parks, M., & Floyd, K. (1996). Making friends in cyberspace. Journal of Communication,
46, 80-97.
Perry, R. P., & Penner, K. S. (1990). Enhancing academic achievement in college students
through attributional retraining and instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology,
82, 262-271.
Pipes, R. B., & Wilson, J. M. (1996). A multimedia model for undergraduate education.
Technology in Society, 18, 387-401.
Plax, T. G., Kearney, P., McCroskey, J. C., & Richmond, V. P. (1986). Power in the classroom
VI: Verbal control strategies, nonverbal immediacy, and affective learning. Communication Education, 35, 43-55.
Report of the Web-Based Education Commission. (2000). The power of the Internet for
learning: Moving from promise to practice. Washington, DC: Web-based Education
Commission.
Rice, R. E., & Love, G. (1987). Electronic emotion: Socioemotional content in a computermediated communication network. Communication Research, 14, 85-108.
Richmond, V. P. (1990). Communication in the classroom: Power and motivation. Communication Education, 39, 181-195.
Richmond, V. P., Gorham, J., & McCroskey, J. C. (1987). The relationship between immediacy behaviors and cognitive learning. In M. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication
yearbook 10 (pp. 574-590). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rodriguez, J. I., Plax, T. G., & Kearney, P. (1996). Clarifying the relationship between
teacher nonverbal immediacy and student cognitive learning: Affective learning as
the central causal mediator. Communication Education, 45, 293-305.
Spradley, J. P. (1979). The ethnographic interview. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in organizational communication. Management Science, 11, 1492-1512.
Stephan, W. G., & Stephan, C. W. (1985). Intergroup anxiety. Journal of Social Issues, 41,
157-166.
Teven, J. J., & McCroskey, J. C. (1997). The relationship of perceived teacher caring with
student learning and teacher evaluation. Communication Education, 46, 1-9.
Thomas, C. E. (1994). An analysis of teacher socio-communicator style as a predictor of
classroom communication behaviors, student liking, motivation, and learning.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, West Virginia University, Morgantown.
Titsworth, B. S. (2001). The effects of teacher immediacy, use of organizational lecture
cues, and students' notetaking on cognitive learning. Communication Education, 50,
283-297.
Walther, J. B. (1992). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: A relational perspective. Communication Research, 19, 52-90.
Walther, J. B. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational
communication in computer mediated interaction. Human Communication
Research, 40, 473-501.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal,
and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23, 3-43.
Walther, J. B., & Burgoon, J. K. (1992). Relational communication in computer-mediated
interaction. Human Communication Research, 19, 50-88.

490

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / DECEMBER 2004

Walther, J. B., Loh, T., & Granka, L. (in press). Let me count the ways: The interchange of
verbal and nonverbal cues in computer-mediated and face-to-face affinity. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). Pragmatics of human communication:
A study of interactional patterns, pathologies and paradoxes. New York: Norton.
Whyte, A., O'Sullivan, P. B., & Hunt, S. (2003, May). Double strangeness: Anxiety and
uncertainty in web-based instruction. Paper presented at the annual conference of the
International Communication Association, San Diego, CA.
Witt, P. L., & Wheeless, L. R. (2001). An experimental study of teachers' verbal and nonverbal immediacy and students' affective and cognitive learning. Communication
Education, 50, 327-342.

Patrick B. O'Sullivan (Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara) is an associate professor at Illinois State University. His research interests include social processes of mediated communication; strategic and tactical uses of communication
technologies (newer and older) in relational, educational, and organizational settings; and "masspersonal" communication.
Stephen K. Hunt (Ph.D., Southern Illinois University) is an associate professor and
co-director of the basic communication course at Illinois State University. His research interests include the communication needs of students at risk, students'
learning/cognitive styles, and instructional communication.
Lance R. Lippert (Ph.D., Southern Illinois University) is an assistant professor at
Illinois State University. His research interests include workplace relationships
and communication in organizations, health care relationships, and instructional
communication.

