ARTICLE

10.1177/0261927X05278388
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005
Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON
LANGUAGE USE
Mood Effects on Performance
Feedback by Experts and Novices
JOSEPH P. FORGAS
GUNASEKRA TEHANI
University of New South Wales

How does mood influence verbal communication? Based on recent affect-cognition theories and communication research on message production, this experiment predicted and
found (a) a significant affect-congruent influence on performance feedback messages, that
(b) was significantly greater for inexperienced rather than expert communicators. Participants, who were either experts (managers) or novices (other staff) in a large consulting
company, received a mood induction and then produced verbal feedback to an employee
whose performance file they previously studied. Negative mood produced more negative
and less polite feedback strategies, and these effects were stronger for novices rather than
experts. The cognitive mechanisms mediating mood effects on verbal communication are
discussed, and the implications of the results for our understanding of verbal communication in organizations, and for recent affect-cognition theories are considered.
Keywords:

affect; verbal communication; performance feedback; mood; language use;
organizational communication

Finding the right words when communicating potentially threatening information can be a complex and demanding cognitive task
(Greene & Burleson, 2004; Wilson, 2002). Surprisingly, we still know
very little about how short-term moods may influence everyday verbal
communication strategies, and the way performance feedback is provided in particular. Yet, the ability to deliver effective verbal feedback
about performance is of critical importance. This article seeks to
extend recent work on the role of affect in language use (Baron, 1993;
Forgas, 1999; George, 1991; George & Jones, 1997) by demonstrating
that temporary good or bad moods can have a systematic and

AUTHORS' NOTE: Financial support from the Australian Research Council to the second author is gratefully acknowledged. Please address all correspondence in connection
with this article to Joseph P. Forgas, School of Psychology, University of New South Wales,
Sydney 2052; jp.forgas@unsw.edu.au.
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 24 No. 3, September 2005 269-284
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X05278388
 2005 Sage Publications

269

270

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

predictable influence on complex verbal communication strategies
such as performance feedback.
Providing performance feedback is a common yet strategically
highly demanding verbal task characterized by multiple conflicting
goals (Tracy & Eisenberg, 1990/1991). Formulating such messages
often presents communicators with a double-avoidance conflict, as
they attempt to satisfy the contradictory requirements of being sufficiently direct in order to maximize effectiveness, yet be sufficiently
polite so as to avoid giving offence (Bavelas, 1985; Forgas, 1985, 1999;
Forgas & Cromer, 2004). Not surprisingly, staff involved in providing
performance feedback do see it as a challenging communication task,
possibly leading to an unfavorable reaction (Waung & Highhouse,
1997). Recent experimental research on affect and cognition suggests
that mood effects tend to be especially marked on such demanding
interpersonal tasks, when more elaborate, substantive processing is
required to deal with a complex, problematic situation (Fiedler, 2001;
Forgas, 1995, 1998; Sedikides, 1995). Based on recent communication
research and theories of affect and cognition (Forgas, 2002; Wilson,
2002), this experiment predicted that mood should have a significant
influence on verbal communication strategies, and that past expertise
in providing performance feedback should reduce these mood effects.
VERBAL COMMUNICATION AND PERFORMANCE FEEDBACK

Organizations must be able to observe and evaluate employees' performance, inform employees of any inadequacies and assist them to
take the necessary steps to close the gap between expected and actual
performance. Successful performance management requires sensitive,
timely, effective and constructive verbal communication that plays a
central role in shaping employee behavior and achieving organizational objectives (Martocchio & Webster, 1992). Managerial performance can also be improved by upward performance feedback from
employees (Walker & Smither, 1999). However, important questions
remain about the effects of feedback and the mechanisms responsible
for its effectiveness. Some studies have failed to find a positive effect
for performance feedback, some have found mixed results, while some
even found adverse effects, especially if the feedback is negative
(Baron, 1988; Fodor & Carver, 2000; Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). In their
meta-analysis of the effects of performance feedback on performance,
Kluger and DeNisi (1996) concluded that on average, feedback does
improve performance, but its effectiveness decreases when it draws
the recipient's attention to himself or herself rather than to the task. In
particular, negative and deprecatory verbal feedback can have adverse
effects (Baron, 1988), as people who receive such feedback feel angrier,
more tense, and less efficacious. The way performance feedback is

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

271

communicated is thus of crucial importance in determining its effectiveness (Baron, 1988).
Communication researchers have done much to develop sophisticated cognitive models of message production (Greene & Burleson,
2004; Wilson, 2002). Such models identify several distinct stages in the
message-production process, including situation interpretation, goal
generation, planning or "action assembly," and enactment (Burleson &
Planalp, 2000; Greene, 1997). This work suggests that the provision of
negative feedback, or criticism, represents a particularly demanding
communication task because it requires the management and reconciliation of multiple, competing goals (Tracy, 1989; Tracy & Eisenberg,
1990/1991). Models such as Greene's (1995, 1997) Action Assembly
Theory explicitly focus on the mechanisms of managing multiple, competing goals, and suggests that practice should play a key role in moderating the cognitive demands of such communication tasks. Extrapolating from this research, we predicted here that mood should have a
significantly greater influence on the communication strategies of novices, for whom planning and managing multiple-goal tasks represent a
significantly greater challenge, than for experts who had much practice in such communications. This prediction is also supported by
recent affect-cognition theories such as the Affect Infusion Model
(AIM; Forgas, 2002), which specifically predicts that communication
tasks recruiting more elaborate processing should magnify affect
infusion effects.
AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON VERBAL COMMUNICATION

Fluctuating good or bad moods are an enduring feature of everyday
life and can play an important role in workplace behaviors (Forgas &
George, 2001). Moods can be elicited by almost anything--noise, lighting, weather, odors, or a fleeting smile (George & Jones, 1997; Knez &
Enmarker, 1998). As moods are so easily produced, yet their existence
is barely registered, they can have a particularly insidious and enduring influence on a person's thoughts and actions without any conscious
awareness (Forgas, 2002). Moods have been found to influence a variety of everyday behaviors and cognitions, including social-influence
strategies, consumer judgments, attributions, persuasion, the use of
requests, negotiation, and bargaining strategies (Baron, 1993; Forgas,
1998; 1999; Sedikides, 1995).
Surprisingly little work has been done so far on the influence of psychological states such as moods on strategic verbal communication,
despite strong evidence that mood states can have an impact on a variety of complex cognitive processes involved in attention, learning,
memory, associations, and judgments (Burleson & Planalp, 2000). By
facilitating the retrieval and use of affect-consistent information,
moods can have a significant influence on every stage of the message-

272

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

production process, especially when people need to rely on memorybased information to interpret and deal with complex and ambiguous
social tasks (Bower, 1991; Fiedler, 2001; Forgas, 2002; Sinclair, 1988;
Wilson, 2002). What are the psychological mechanisms that are
responsible for affect infusion into demanding verbal messages such as
performance feedback?
Early explanations of affective influences on thinking and behavior
were based on psychoanalytic (Feshbach & Singer, 1957) or conditioning principles (Berkowitz, Jaffee, Jo, & Troccoli, 2000). Contemporary
theories in turn focus on the cognitive mechanisms that link affect and
thinking (Bower, 1991; Forgas, 1995, 2002; Sedikides, 1995). Two kinds
of affective influences on cognition have been identified: (a) informational effects, when affect has an impact on what people think (the content of cognition), and (b) processing effects, when mood influences how
people think (the process of cognition). Informational mood effects
largely occur due to the operation of memory mechanisms, as a result
of the selective priming and greater use of mood-related information
(Bower, 1991; Sedikides, 1995).
It is these mood-congruent informational biases that are most likely
to influence how people assess complex social situations, and how they
formulate their verbal communication strategies (Forgas, 1999; Forgas
& George, 2001; Greene, 1997). Affect-priming mechanisms are
typically the dominant source of mood-congruent effects on verbalcommunication strategies, according to contemporary processing theories (Bower, 1991; Forgas, 1995, 2002). Of course, a number of moderating factors can influence if, and to what extent, mood states may come
to infuse people's thinking and language use. According to the recent
AIM (Forgas, 1995, 2002), the extent of affect infusion into cognition
and social behaviors should be greater in circumstances that require
more open, elaborate processing and so allow mood-primed associations to be incorporated into planning and executing a response.
Numerous experiments have now supported this counterintuitive prediction in a range of cognitive and judgmental tasks (Fiedler, 2001;
Forgas, 1998, 1999; Salovey & Birnbaum, 1989). Although many verbal
exchanges can be processed in a relatively "mindless" fashion, theories
of the message-production process suggest that performance feedback
should typically require more elaborate processing, because of the multiple, conflicting goals that need to be managed (Burleson & Planalp,
2000; Clark, 1989; Forgas, 1985; Greene, 1997; Wilson, 2002). We shall
focus on the level of politeness, and the degree of positivity in performance feedback as the key dependent variables here, as it is these
factors that are most likely to influence communication efficacy
(Baron, 1988).
Novice communicators who have little prior experience in dealing
with the demands and conflicting goals that characterize providing
verbal performance feedback, and have no prepared strategies to fall

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

273

back on, may need to engage in more extensive and elaborate processing to formulate a response, increasing the likelihood that affectively
primed ideas will influence their communication strategies. Experts,
in contrast, have greater routine and have direct access to a number of
tried and tested verbal strategies, so they should need to engage in less
online constructive processing, reducing the likelihood of affectively
primed information influencing their responses. This hypothesis will
be evaluated here by comparing the verbal communication strategies
employed by experts (managers) and novices (other staff) who have
been induced to experience good or bad moods.
In summary, this study was designed to test two hypotheses. We
expected that positive and negative mood should produce a significant
overall mood-congruent influence in the valence of the performance
feedback provided; sad communicators should produce more negative
and less polite, and happy communicators should produce less negative and more polite messages. We also expected that there should be a
significant interaction between induced mood and the expert or novice
status of the communicators. We hypothesized that the effects of both
positive and negative moods should be magnified when more elaborate, substantive processing is required by novices to deal with what is,
for them, a more difficult, demanding situation.

METHOD
PARTICIPANTS

Participants were 40 employees of a major firm of management consultants in Sydney, Australia. Their agreement to participate was
obtained after a written request by senior partners asking for their
cooperation. Of the 40 participants, 21 were expert consultants with
extensive prior experience in providing verbal-performance feedback
as part of their duties (experts); whereas 19 participants were administrative, support, finance, and human resources staff (nonexperts)
who were not trained to, and were not normally involved in, giving
verbal-performance feedback.
MATERIALS

A realistic performance file was generated for the purposes of the
study, purporting to be a report on the performance of an employee in
the company. The file contained detailed information about the
employee in six distinct competency categories (e.g., client focus, motivation, verbal and written communication skills, etc.). The performance report contained detailed information both about the expected

274

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

performance standards in each of the six competence categories, and
the employee's actual performance in each category. The performance
file was constructed in such a way that the employee performed adequately in half the categories but inadequately in the others, clearly
suggesting to communicators that at least some critical feedback
would be required.
PROCEDURE

Participants were randomly assigned to either the positive or the
negative affect condition. The study was conducted in individual sessions with each participant seated in a meeting room on the company's
premises. Participants were told that the study was concerned with the
way people perform routine company communication tasks. Participants were first given the performance file and told that the file
described the performance of a person named "Jason." Participants
were asked to read the file carefully and note all aspects of Jason's performance. After participants read the file, they were asked to complete
a brief demographic questionnaire, including questions about the participant's age, length of employment, occupation, and position.
Mood induction. Next, the autobiographical mood-induction procedure was administered. The experimenter explained that the participant was required to complete an "Autobiographical Memory Task"
(the mood-induction procedure) as part of a different, unrelated investigation designed to assess personal histories and life experiences.
Mood was induced by asking participants to try to remember as vividly
as possible and write about a page about their recollections of an emotional event they had experienced that either made them feel really
happy (in the positive affect condition) or made them really sad (in the
negative affect condition). The instructions emphasized that participants should try to remember the emotional aspects of the event, to
picture how they actually felt and responded, and to try to experience
the same thoughts and feelings. This method of mood induction has
been established in numerous previous experiments as an effective
way to generate reliable and enduring positively and negatively
valenced affective states (e.g., Forgas, 2002).
The verbal communication task. After completing the mood induction, participants were told that their next task was to give taperecorded verbal feedback to "Jason" about his performance based on
the information contained in the performance file they had read previously. They were asked to speak their comments for Jason into a handheld tape recorder in front of them. Participants were told that they
could take as much or as little time as they pleased and could decide
how to give feedback and what areas to focus on. The experimenter

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

275

answered any questions and then left the room in order to reduce any
demand effects on the way the performance feedback was delivered.
Participants then tape-recorded their verbal feedback to "Jason" and
informed the experimenter after completing the task.
A careful debriefing completed the procedure. A thorough questioning revealed no awareness by participants of the objectives and manipulations of the study, or any links between the affect induction and the
performance-feedback tasks. As part of the debriefing, participants
were also asked to complete a postexperimental questionnaire designed to validate the effectiveness of the mood induction and the expertise
manipulation. Two questions answerable on 7-point bipolar scales
asked about the participants' prior experience with providing performance feedback ("How much prior experience did you have in providing performance feedback?" none to a lot; and "Did you find the feedback task difficult?" not difficult to difficult). Participants were also
asked to rate their mood state immediately after the autobiographical
memory task. These mood self-ratings on 7-point happy-sad scales
were used to validate the effectiveness of the autobiographical mood
induction (see below). The debriefing session was also used to eliminate any residual mood effects, especially in the negative mood
condition.
Scoring and analysis. First, each participant's tape-recorded performance feedback was carefully transcribed for the purpose of scoring.
The transcriptions, with all identification removed, were then read by
two raters blind to the mood and expertise conditions. Raters counted
the total number of words, and the number of positive words, negative
words, and filled pauses ("um," "ah," etc.) contained in each performance feedback text. To control for absolute differences in the length of
messages, the positivity and negativity of the feedback was
operationalized as the proportion of positive and negative words used
by each communicator. In addition, each rater also rated the politeness
of the feedback on a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 = very impolite and 5 = very
polite. Interrater correlations were consistently high (>.85) and statistically significant at the .01 level on all dependent variables. The two
raters' scores were thus combined and the average of the two ratings
were used as the dependent variables.

RESULTS
VALIDATION OF THE MANIPULATIONS

Manipulation of expertise. The debriefing questionnaire established
that there were significant differences in terms of expertise between

276

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

those assigned to the "expert" and the "novice" groups. Experts were
significantly more likely to report that they had extensive prior experience with performance feedback (M = 6.23 vs. 2.11; t(38) = 24.16; p <
.01; r = .623), and reported that they found the task much easier than
did nonexperts (M = 5.79 vs. 2.83; t(38) = 12.92; p < .01; r = .485). This
manipulation check confirms that there were significant differences
between the two groups in terms of their level of expertise.
Mood manipulation. The analysis of participants' self-rated mood
indicated that the mood-induction procedure was highly effective.
There was a highly significant difference between those instructed to
recall a happy event and those instructed to recall a sad event in selfreported mood, F (1,38) = 19.06, p < .01 (M = 5.00 vs. 2.65; 2 = .471).
Those induced into a happy mood rated their mood as significantly
better than those induced into a sad mood. This confirms the effectiveness of this mood induction method in producing reliable and enduring
affective differences as also found in other studies (Forgas, 2002).

THE EFFECTS OF MOOD AND EXPERTISE
ON PERFORMANCE FEEDBACK
Multiple regression analyses were performed on the dependent
variables with mood and expertise dummy coded as the independent
variables. We created a product term of the two main effects to represent the mood by expertise interaction. The main effect variables were
simultaneously entered at step 1 as there is no theoretical or practical
reason to assume that either expertise or mood should have priority in
influencing responses. The mood by expertise interaction term was
entered at step 2. A number of statistically significant and theoretically interesting results were found.
Level of politeness. The level of politeness of the performance feedback as rated by two raters was significantly influenced by the interaction of mood and the expertise of the participant, t(38) = -2.641, p < .05,
r = .349, although there were no mood or expertise main effects. As
shown in Figure 1, novices were significantly more polite when in a
happy mood than in a sad mood, t(17) = 2.93; p < .01, r = 372; in contrast,
experts were somewhat more polite when in a sad rather than in a
happy mood, t(19) = 2.08, p < .05, r = .286. The regression model predicting politeness from mood and expertise accounted for 16.7% of the variance in politeness. This result confirms our hypothesis that mood had a
significant mood-congruent influence on the valence of performance
feedback, and that this effect was strongest for novice rather than
expert communicators. The reversal of the mood effect for expert communicators is particularly interesting and suggests that negative

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

277

Politeness Rating

4.5
Happy
Sad

4
3.5
3
2.5
2

Novice

Expert
Expert status

Figure 1.

The Effects of Mood and the Communicator's Level of Expertise on
the Politeness of Performance Feedback Messages. Novice Communicators Are More Polite When in a Positive Mood, but Expert Communicators Demonstrate Greater Politeness in a Negative Mood.

affect may have alerted expert communicators to engage in more polite
communication possibly as a controlled attempt to reduce the negative
impact of their messages. Several studies found that such a reversal of
mood effects is often associated with motivated processing to counter
affect infusion (Berkowitz et al., 2000; Forgas & Ciarrochi, 2002).
Level of negativity in verbal communication. The regression analysis indicated a significant effect of expertise on the percentage of negative words used in the performance feedback, t(38) = 3.55; p < .01, r =
277. As Figure 2 shows, overall, novices used significantly more negative words in their performance feedback than did experts. Furthermore, the regression analysis also indicated a significant interaction
between mood and expertise, t(38) = 3.836, p < .01, with r = .302. This
interaction showed that novices were more influenced by temporary
mood in the negativity of their performance feedback than were
experts. Sad novices used a significantly greater proportion of negative
words in their feedback compared to happy novices, t(17) = 4.42; p < .01,
r = .356 (see Figure 2), but mood effects were much less marked for
experts. Together, the main effect of expertise and the interaction
between expertise and mood accounted for 38.5% of the variance in the
percentage of negative words used.
Neither mood, nor expertise, nor the interaction between them significantly influenced the proportion of positively valenced words used
by participants (Power = .881 for effect size .50 at .05 level). Correlation
between mood and the proportion of positive words used was -.018 and

278

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

% Negative message content

50
45

Happy
Sad

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Novice

Expert
Expert status

Figure 2.

The Effects of Mood, and the Communicator's Level of Expertise on
the Negativity of Performance Feedback Messages. Novice Communicators Are More Negative than Experts, and Also Show Greater
Mood Effects, with Sad Novices Producing More Negative Messages
than Happy Novices.

the correlation between expertise and the percentage of positive words
was .028. The results also showed that filled pauses were not influenced by mood, expertise, or their interaction. The correlation between
expertise and filled pauses was -.090, whereas the correlation between
mood and filled pauses was .127.

DISCUSSION
Verbal feedback about performance is an important linguistic tool to
manage employee performance. The present study predicted and
found that mild affective states can have a significant influence on the
way such language tasks are performed by nonexperts. We showed
that people experiencing negative moods displayed greater negativity
when giving verbal feedback compared to happy people. Prior research
suggests that an excessively critical, negative communication style
may well elicit adverse reactions from recipients (Baron, 1988; Forgas
& George, 2001; Wilson, 2002). As expected, these mood effects were
significantly stronger for novice communicators who had little previous experience in managing the multiple goals involved when delivering verbal-performance feedback messages but were reduced or
reversed for expert communicators (Greene, 1997).
It is interesting that despite growing interest in the study of affect in
recent years and the crucial importance of verbal communication and

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

279

performance feedback and in managing organizational effectiveness,
the systematic influence of moods on language use has received relatively little attention in the past (Burleson & Planalp, 2000). These
results are broadly consistent with recent theories of affect and cognition, such as the AIM, that suggest that affect is most likely to inform
people's thoughts and behaviors when more elaborate, complex, and
substantive processing strategies are required to respond to a situation (Forgas, 1995, 2002). These findings have several important theoretical, as well as practical implications for our understanding of mood
effects on language use and interpersonal behavior and verbal communication strategies in organizations in particular.
Theoretical implications. Verbal communication in general, and performance feedback in particular, present communicators with a complex and demanding cognitive task (Bavelas, 1985; Wilson, 2002). The
formulation of potentially critical verbal messages necessarily
requires constructive and elaborate processing as communicators
need to infer the likely costs and benefits associated with various alternative verbal moves (Burleson & Planalp, 2000; Forgas, 1999; Waung
& Highhouse, 1997; Wilson, 2002). Despite considerable recent interest in the pragmatics of everyday language use, little work has been
done on the impact of psychological states, such as transient moods, on
realistic communication strategies (Burleson & Planalp, 2000).
Our findings are broadly consistent with theoretical analyses of
strategic communication (Wilson, 2002) and in particular with
Greene's (1995, 1997) Action Management Theory that focuses on strategic-goal pursuit as the key aspect of the communication process. Our
results also support the Affect Infusion Model (Forgas, 1995, 2002)
that specifically predicts that affect infusion into strategic behaviors
should be mediated by the kind of information processing strategy
used by communicators (Forgas, 1999, 2002).
It is interesting that the nature of the situation seems to moderate
mood effect on communication valence. When the communicator is in
an inferior position and seeks to obtain a favor, as in the case of
requesting, we found that negative mood produced a more pessimistic
assessment of the situation, and the use of more polite requests
(Forgas, 1998). In contrast, providing performance feedback places the
communicator in a position of superiority and negative mood now
seems to promote more negative and less polite messages. The effects
of such situational differences on message production can be broadly
understood in terms of Action Assembly Theory, as different situational goals interact with affective influences (Forgas, 2002; Greene,
1997; Wilson, 2002).
The role of communicator expertise is another critical variable.
When the task is new and unfamiliar to a person, more constructive
processing is required to compute a response, increasing the likelihood

280

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

that affectively primed information will influence the outcome. By definition, novices who found the task more difficult and reported little
prior experience may not possess well-established cognitive schemata
for delivering verbal performance feedback, and may need to engage in
more constructive, elaborate processing, increasing the likelihood of
affectively primed information influencing their responses. This theoretical interpretation is also supported by conceptually similar findings by Sedikides (1995), who found that more difficult and demanding
tasks that required more elaborate processing were more influenced
by moods than were easy tasks. Other experiments also showed that
affective influences on the use of verbal requests were greater when
the task was complex and demanding, rather than simple and straightforward (Forgas, 1999).
In contrast, experts who possess well-rehearsed cognitive schemata
for conveying their messages require less online processing and affectively primed constructs are less likely to impact on their responses.
This is just the pattern of results we obtained here: Those in our
"expert" group indeed found the task easier and reported having
greater prior experience with such tasks. Expert communicators
not only showed smaller mood effects but actually displayed a moodincongruent pattern. How can we explain this interesting effect? There
is recent evidence to suggest that affect congruence can be reduced,
and even reversed, when people become aware of their mood states
(Berkowitz et al., 2000) and when they are motivated to eliminate
affect-induced biases (Forgas & Ciarrochi, 2002). It seems reasonable
to assume that expert communicators were more likely to become
aware of their dysphoric mood state, and employed a targeted, motivated processing strategy to control and reverse the deleterious effects
of their mood, as also found in some previous experiments (Berkowitz
et al., 2000; Forgas & Ciarrochi, 2002). Future studies could further
explore this process by analyzing participants' postcommunication
recall memory about the task and their messages and by recording
their metacognitive thoughts as the communication task is performed.
Follow-up experiments could also include processing measures to
assess the actual time taken to produce messages as a direct indicator
of the processing strategies used (Forgas, 2002).
It should also be noted that we found no mood effect on the use of
positive words here, and the proportion of positive words used was similar across all conditions. Given extensive evidence that positive verbal
communication is more common and normative in everyday life, and is
performed in a more routine way even by novice communicators
(Forgas, 1985), the absence of mood effects on positive words appears
consistent with the less elaborate processing required by such common
and normative terms. Also, the use of positive words is less likely to
involve the kind of goal conflict identified by Tracy and Eisenberg
(1990/1991). These results suggest that affective influences on think-

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

281

ing, judgments, and communication are unlikely to be simple or uniform but should be mediated by the kind of processing strategy used
(Forgas, 2001; Forgas & George, 2001).
Practical implications. Strategic verbal communication plays an
important role in everyday life and in organizational settings. Language is the primary medium of interpersonal behavior, and plays a
critical role in achieving organizational goals and making coordinated
social action possible. The effective communication of performance
feedback requires the skilled management of multiple goals (Tracy,
1986; Tracy & Eisenberg, 1990/1991). Despite accumulating evidence
for the subtle pragmatic rules that govern language use (Clark, 1989;
Forgas, 1985; Wilson, 2002), we still know far too little about the psychological variables that have an impact on the formulation of different verbal strategies (Burleson & Planalp, 2000). It seems that excessive negative affect can produce excessive negativity in performance
feedback by inexpert communicators. Such a style may impair the
effectiveness of feedback and could have detrimental consequences for
job performance and employee satisfaction (Baron, 1988).
Our findings are consistent with accumulating evidence, suggesting
that many interpersonal behaviors requiring complex, strategic information processing and the management of multiple goals are highly
vulnerable to mood-based influences (Baron, 1993; Forgas & George,
2001; George & Jones, 1996; Sinclair, 1988; Wilson, 2002). These
results point to the importance of explicit training in how to recognize
the subtle and subconscious influence that even mild affective states
can have on our communication strategies. Furthermore, training in
the various stages of the message-production process (interpretation,
goal generation, planning, and delivery; Greene, 1997; Wilson, 2002)
should help to reduce such affective biases by helping people to develop
well-ingrained communication expertise.
Limitations and future prospects. There are also some limitations to
these results. One issue concerns the external validity of our findings.
Although our results were based in a real-life organizational setting,
using full-time employees in a consulting company as participants,
and the findings are consistent with some recent research and theories
of mood effects on verbal behavior (Forgas, 1999, 2002), it would be
desirable to demonstrate similar mood effects in other naturalistic situations. Recent studies have provided convergent evidence that mood
plays an important role in other complex and naturalistic encounters
as well, including bargaining, requesting, and helping situations
(Baron, 1993; Forgas, 1998, 1999; Forgas & George, 2001; George &
Jones, 1996; Sinclair, 1988).
Both the AIM and the message-production theories underlying this
work predict that mood effects are mediated by the kind of processing

282

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

strategy adopted by subjects. Processing choices in turn are determined by a variety of external and internal factors, including the inferences, goals, and plans of the communicator as the message is generated (Fiedler, 2001; Forgas, 1995, 1998; Greene, 1997; Sedikides, 1995;
Wilson, 2002). Future experiments may be directed at examining the
role that various pragmatic variables play in recruiting different processing strategies, and thus mediating the ensuing affect infusion
effects. It would also be of interest to develop additional measures to
analyze processing strategies, for example by recording the processing
latencies involved, as was done in some prior work assessing mood
effects on memory and judgments (Forgas, 1995, 2002). The cognitive
and communicative consequences of qualitatively different affective
states beyond happiness and sadness also deserve further investigation (Burleson & Planalp, 2000).
In summary, producing verbal messages in everyday discourse can
be a demanding cognitive task that relies on the speaker's online
access to a rich store of past memories and associations to produce a
response. Despite recent advances in affect research, still far too little
is known about how feelings impact on communication processes (Wilson, 2002). This study extended recent research on affect and social
cognition (Bower, 1991; Fiedler, 2001; Forgas, 1995, 1998, 2001), and
found that moods can also have a significant impact on the way strategic verbal messages are formulated. We also found that mood effects
were dependent on the communicator's level of expertise with inexpert
communicators showing greater affect dependence (Greene, 1997;
Tracy, 1989). It is perhaps reassuring that practice and expertise can
actually reduce the incidence of affect infusion. This finding highlights
the importance of training communicators to recognize the influence that affective states might have on various stages in the messageproduction process. The present results clearly indicate that more
research is needed to explore the precise consequences of affective
states for the message-production process and the cognitive processes
underlying these effects.

REFERENCES
Baron, R. A. (1988). Negative effects of destructive criticism: Impact on conflict, selfefficacy, and task performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 199-207.
Baron, R. A. (1993). Affect and organizational behavior: When and why feeling good (or
bad) matters. In J. K. Murnighan (Ed.), Social psychology in organizations: Advances
in theory and research (pp. 63-88). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bavelas, J. (1985). A situational theory of disqualification: Using language to `leave the
field'. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Language and social situations (pp. 189-213). New York:
Springer.

Forgas, Tehani / AFFECTIVE INFLUENCES ON LANGUAGE USE

283

Berkowitz, L., Jaffee, S. Jo, E., & Troccoli, B. T. (2000). On the correction of feelinginduced judgmental biases. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking: The role of
affect in social cognition (pp. 131-152). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bower, G. H. (1991). Mood congruity of social judgments. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Emotion
and social judgments (pp. 31-53). New York: Pergamon.
Burleson, B. R., & Planalp, S. (2000). Producing emotion(al) messages. Communication
Theory, 10, 221-250.
Clark, H. H. (1989). Language use and language users. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.),
The handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 179-231). New York: Random House.
Feshbach, S., & Singer, R. D. (1957). The effects of fear arousal and suppression of fear
upon social perception. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 55, 283-288.
Fiedler, K. (2001). Affective influences on social information processing. In J. P. Forgas
(Ed.), The handbook of affect and social cognition (pp. 163-185). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fodor, E. M., Carver, R. A. (2000). Achievement and power motives, performance feedback
and creativity. Journal of Research in personality, 34, 380-396.
Forgas, J. P. (1985). Interpersonal behaviour: The psychology of social interaction. Sydney
& Oxford: Pergamon.
Forgas, J. P. (1995). Mood and judgement: the affect infusion model (AIM). Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 39-66.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling good and getting your way: Mood effects on negotiator cognition and bargaining strategies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74,
565-577.
Forgas, J. P. (1999). On feeling good and being rude: Affective influences on language use
and request formulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 928-939.
Forgas, J. P. (Ed.). (2001). The handbook of affect and social cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Forgas, J. P. (2002). Feeling and doing: Affective influences on interpersonal behavior.
Psychological Inquiry, 13, 1-28.
Forgas, J. P., & Ciarrochi, J. V. (2002). On managing moods: Evidence for the role of
homeostatic cognitive strategies in affect regulation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 336-345.
Forgas, J. P., & Cromer, M. (2004). On being sad and evasive: Affective influences on verbal communication strategies in conflict situations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40, 511-518.
Forgas, J. P., & George, J. M. (2001). Affective influences on judgments and behavior in
organizations: An information processing perspective. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 86, 3-34.
George, J. M. (1991). State or trait: Effects of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at
work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 299-307.
George, J. M., & Jones, G. R. (1997). Experiencing work: Values, attitudes, and moods.
Human Relations, 50, 393-416.
Greene, J. O. (1995). Production of messages in pursuit of multiple goals: Action Assembly Theory contributions to the study of cognitive encoding processes. In B. R.
Burleson (Ed.), Communication Yearbook 18 (pp. 151-170). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Greene, J. O. (Ed.). (1997). Message production: Advances in communication theory.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Greene, J. O., & Burleson, B. R. (Eds.). (2004). Handbook of communication and interaction skills. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance:
A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 254-284.
Knez, I., & Enmarker, I. (1998). Effects of office lighting on mood and cognitive performance and a gender effect in work-related judgment. Environment and Behavior, 30,
553-571.

284

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / September 2005

Martocchio, J. J., & Webster, J. (1992). Effects of feedback and cognitive playfulness on
performance in microcomputer software training. Personnel Psychology, 45, 553-578.
Salovey, P., & Birnbaum, D. (1989). Influence of mood on health-relevant cognitions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 539-551.
Sedikides, C. (1995). Central and peripheral self-conceptions are differentially influenced by mood: Tests of the differential sensitivity hypothesis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 69, 759-777.
Sinclair, R. C. (1988). Mood, categorization breadth and performance appraisal. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 42, 22-46.
Tracy, K. (1989). Conversational dilemmas and the naturalistic experiment. In B. Dervin,
L. Grossberg, B. J. O'Keefe, & E. Wartella (Eds.), Rethinking communication: Paradigm Examplars (Vol. 2, pp. 411-423). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Tracy, K., & Eisenberg, E. M. (1990/1991). Giving criticism: A multiple goals case study.
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 24, 37-70.
Walker, A. G., & Smither, J. W. (1999). A five-year study of upward feedback: What managers do with their results matters. Personnel Psychology, 52, 393-423.
Waung, M., & Highhouse, S. (1997). Fear of conflict and empathic buffering: Two explanations for the inflation of performance feedback. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 71, 37-54.
Wilson, S. R. (2002). Seeking and resisting compliance: Why people say what they do when
trying to influence others. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Joseph Forgas is a Scientia Professor of Psychology at the University of New South
Wales. His research focuses on social cognition and interpersonal behavior, and he
has published 18 books and more than 140 chapters and articles in these fields.
Gunasekra Tehani has recently completed a master's degree in Organizational
Psychology at the University of New South Wales and is currently employed as a
professional psychologist.

