Teachers and Laypersons Discern
Quality Differences Between
Narratives Produced by Children
With or Without SLI
Robyn M. Newman
Karla K. McGregor
Northwestern University, Northbrook, IL

Purpose: To examine the functional impact of specific language impairment (SLI).
Specific goals were to determine whether (a) subjective ratings of narrative quality
differentiate children with SLI from their normally developing (ND) age-mates,
(b) laypersons and teachers differ in their ratings of narrative quality, (c) objective
measures confirm previously reported problems in narration among children with SLI,
and (d) objective measures of narrative structure and quality ratings relate.
Method: Twenty-seven laypersons and 21 teachers used interval scaling to rate the
quality of narratives produced by 20 5-7-year-olds, 10 with SLI and 10 ND age-mates.
The narratives were also analyzed objectively for fluency, length, sentence-level syntax,
and story grammar and themes.
Results: Subjective ratings differentiated the SLI and ND groups with 70% nonoverlap.
No differences were observed between the laypersons' and teachers' numeric ratings;
however, laypersons reported that they paid more attention to the "sparkle" or
charm of the narratives. Objective measures of story length, grammaticality, and
thematic development differentiated SLI and ND groups. Mean length of C-unit and
number of thematic units positively predicted quality ratings.
Clinical implications: Intervention efforts aimed specifically at improving the quality of
these children's oral narration may focus on increasing length, grammatical accuracy,
and story development. Future clinical and research efforts aimed at addressing the
broader functional impact of SLI are also critical given that the manifestations of SLI
are noticeable to both teachers and laypersons.
KEY WORDS: specific language impairment, discourse analysis,
functional communication assessment

S

pecific language impairment (SLI) is a diagnostic classification
used in reference to children who demonstrate significant language
limitations as a primary developmental deficit. Affected children
present with language deficits despite normal physical development,
nonverbal intelligence, sensory acuity, and gross neurological functioning. These children are typically identified by a combination of their
poor performance on standardized language tests and by reports that
their language deficit interferes with academic or social functioning
(Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994). In the current study, we were interested in the latter: the functional impact of SLI.
Language is a tool for social exchange. Participants in this exchange
judge the quality of the language they hear via a complex and dynamic

1022

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/06/4905-1022

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

process triggered by not only the language itself but also
the linguistic performance and nonlinguistic behaviors of
the speaker and the experience and biases of the listener
(Bradac, Cargile, & Hallett, 2001; Kent, 1996). In the current study, we evaluated the linguistic performance of
children with SLI as a stimulus for quality judgments. To
do so, we compared quality ratings of narratives produced
by young speakers with SLI and by their age-mates with
normally developing language. We were also interested
in the listener's role in quality judgments, and so we
compared two listener groups: laypersons and teachers.
Laypersons and teachers possess unique perspectives on
children's language because they have the opportunity to
observe children in different settings: social and academic, respectively (Squires, Nickel, & Bricker, 1990).
Classroom teachers have long been promoted as reliable evaluators of children's abilities (Thomas & Chissom,
1973). In particular, their skill at subjective evaluation of
children's speech-language abilities has been explored by
Botting, Conti-Ramsden, and Crutchley (1997). These investigators administered six standardized speech-language
tests to 242 children with language impairments. They
then asked teachers to describe the children's difficulties in four domains: articulation, phonology, syntax /
morphology, and semantics/pragmatics. Teacher opinion corresponded well to the standardized measures
of articulation, phonology, and syntax /morphology, although less so to the measures of semantics/pragmatics.
Given the extensive experience that teachers have with
children and their training in child development and
learning, it is not surprising that they should be relatively
good judges of children's communication abilities.
The judgments of laypersons may help us to understand whether variation in communication abilities is apparent to the naive listener. This is not to say that adult
laypersons are completely unfamiliar with child development, as many are themselves parents; however, they
lack the training in child development and learning that
is required of teachers. In this study, we controlled for
parental status by recruiting only mothers into both the
teacher and layperson groups. We reasoned that if the
functional impact of SLI was a subtle one, then teachers but not laypersons would reliably discriminate children with SLI from their age-mates on the basis of
language quality. On the other hand, if the impact of SLI
was a more dramatic one, then laypersons would be as
reliable as teachers in this discrimination.

Narration as a Functionally Relevant
Language Unit
Due to the importance of narrative skill to successful
functioning in social and academic environments (Hicks,
1991; Paul & Smith, 1993; Peterson, Jesso, & McCabe,
1999), we selected the narrative as the language unit of

focus. The oral narratives of children with SLI are characterized by fewer story grammar components, fewer complete episodes, and less cohesion adequacy than those of
their normally developing peers (Gillam, McFadden, &
van Kleeck, 1995; Liles, 1985a, 1985b; Merritt & Liles,
1987; Roth & Spekman, 1986). In addition, compared with
peers, children with SLI produce significantly fewer syntactically complex sentences, fewer elaborated phrases,
more grammatical errors, and more maze behaviors during narration (Gillam & Johnston, 1992; Greenhalgh &
Strong, 2001; MacLachlan & Chapman, 1988; Norbury &
Bishop, 2003; Roth & Spekman, 1986; Scott & Windsor,
2000). These weaknesses are more apparent in narrative
discourse than conversational discourse (MacLachlan &
Chapman, 1988). Furthermore, narrative construction remains challenging for previously diagnosed children whose
standardized test performance suggests normalization
(Fey, Catts, Proctor-Williams, Tomblin, & Zhang, 2004).
Although the existing objective data convincingly
demonstrate discourse limitations among children with
SLI, one may miss important manifestations of these limitations and may underestimate their functional impact
by applying objective measures alone. Narrative quality exists beyond grammatical and lexical components.
McFadden and Gillam (1996) observed that aspects of
narrative production such as charm and clarity are not
reflected in traditional objective analyses. Peterson and
McCabe (1983) warn that the "freshness, the creativity,
the unpredictability, the amusement, the raw edge of ordinary life" (p. 1)--features they term sparkle--are likely
to go undetected by objective narrative measures. Analysis of listeners' judgments of narrative quality may remedy this gap in our ability to characterize narratives and
may contribute to our understanding of the functional
effects of SLI.

Measurement of Language Quality
One potential obstacle to measurement of narrative
quality is determining the appropriate procedure. Holistic scoring is one possibility. The procedure involves
reading or listening to stories and then rank ordering
them into categories ranging from worst to best; creating
tentative descriptions for each of the quality categories
(called rubrics); selecting a prototypical story for each of
the quality categories (called anchors); and finally, rating
each story (Gillam et al., 1995).
McFadden and Gillam (1996) examined teachers' holistic assessments of the overall quality of spoken and written narratives. Two written and two spoken narratives
were produced by 40 participants (7;7 [years;months]-
11;7) divided into four groups: children with language
impairment, age-matched peers, language-matched peers,
and reading-matched peers. The narratives were objectively evaluated with sentential and textual measures of

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1023

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

language content and form. Quality ratings were assigned
with the holistic scoring procedure. When compared,
children with language impairments produced lower
quality narratives than their age-matched peers. Longer
stories, those with more T-units and more plot development, received higher quality ratings.
Narrative scoring is a second approach to measuring
quality. Fey and his colleagues (2004) ranked the oral and
written narratives of 538 children with or without language impairments by assigning quality scores, largely
based on the use of story grammar and thematic plot
elements. Each narrative earned up to 3 points for expression of characters, physical setting, ending, and language sophistication (this being an exception to the focus
on story grammar) and up to 6 points for plot complexity.
The resulting scores differentiated the narratives told by
the unaffected children from those told by children with
language impairments when tested in the second grade
and again in the fourth grade. Swanson, Fey, Mills, and
Hood (2005) applied the identical scoring procedure as
an outcome measure to determine the feasibility of a
narrative-based language intervention. Eight of 10 children with SLI who received the intervention for 6 weeks
demonstrated a clinically significant improvement in narrative quality scores. Importantly, no objective measure,
whether number of different words per narrative, developmental sentence score per narrative, or accuracy of sentence imitation, was sensitive to this improvement.
Interval scaling (IS) is yet another way to measure
narrative quality. IS procedures are more time efficient
than holistic scoring because development of rubrics and
anchors is not required. They can be more readily applied
by laypersons than narrative quality scoring because they
do not depend on overt knowledge of story grammar constituents. For these reasons, IS was the procedure applied
in the current study. In IS procedures, the behavior to be
rated is explained to a group of raters and operationally
defined. Each rater then assigns a number that reflects
his or her qualitative judgment of adequacy from a preset
continuum (e.g., a 1-7 rating scale).
IS procedures rest on the assumption of measurement in equal intervals, that is, the degree of difference
between a narrative rated as 1 and another rated as
2 should be the same as that between a narrative rated as
4 and another rated as 5. Newman (2003) verified this
assumption. She asked two groups of raters to judge the
quality of children's oral narratives. One group was instructed to use an IS procedure using a 7-point rating
scale. The other used a procedure wherein each rater assigned any number he or she wished to the first narrative
and then was free to assign all additional ratings relative
to the first. Critically, the raters in the second group were
not restricted to an equal-interval scale. Nevertheless,
when the ratings of the two groups were compared, they

1024

correlated in a strictly linear fashion; that is, although not
limited to interval scaling, the raters in the second group
did indeed apply an interval scale. Following interpretative guidelines set forth by Stevens (1975) and recently
used by Eadie and Doyle (2002), the results obtained by
Newman (2003) suggest that IS is a valid procedure for
judgment of narrative quality.
Several investigators have used IS procedures to examine listeners' attitudes about speakers with SLI, but
not about the quality of their narration per se. Rice, Hadley,
and Alexander (1993) played 90-s speech samples of
children from three diagnostic groups (speech problems,
speech and language problems, and normally developing
language) to four groups of adult listeners (kindergarten
teachers, women with college educations, undergraduate
students, and speech-language pathologists). The listeners
judged the social maturity, IQ, academic success, and popularity of the children as well as the education level and
social status of their parents. The children and parents in
the impaired cohorts were rated lower than those in the
normally developing cohort. As well, the children with
both speech and language problems were rated lower than
children with speech problems alone. There were no differences among the four listener groups. Similarly, DeThorne
and Watkins (2001) asked sixth graders as well as adults
who were either speech-language pathologists, teachers,
or undergraduate students to listen to 22-min language
samples from 3 boys, one with SLI, an age-matched peer,
and a language-matched peer. All listener groups rated
the child with SLI lowest.

Current Study
Overall, the research reviewed demonstrates that a
number of different listener groups can perceive variability in communicative skill, that poor communicative
skills are perceived negatively, and that these perceived
quality differences can be measured. These findings motivated the present study. The current study addressed
four questions: (a) Does narrative quality differentiate
groups of children with and without SLI? (b) Do teachers
and laypersons make different subjective judgments of
young children's narrative skill? (c) Do objective measures applied to these narrative samples confirm previously reported problems in narration among children
with SLI? and (d) Do subjective and objective measures
of narration relate? Specifically, do measures of fluency,
length and complexity, syntactic structure, or story grammar account for variance in subjective measures of narrative quality? By comparing the results of both objective
and subjective approaches, we hoped to determine the
extent to which listener judgments contribute to assessment of narratives over and beyond more traditional
structural measures and to further our understanding of
the functional manifestations of SLI.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Characteristics of children producing narratives.
SLI group
Measure

M

SD

Age (years)
ME (years)
CMMS (standard score)
NWRT (% phones correct)
NDW (raw score)
PPVT-III (standard score)
EVT (standard score)
Lang bat (standard score)

6.2
13.8
95
67.5
79.8
84.5
83.2
78.1

0.98
2.1
9.2
4.86
7.7
16.5
7.9
12.4

ND group
Range
5.4-7.11
11-16
81-116
60.4-74
68-88
58-110
73-98
55-97

M

SD

Range

6.2
15.2
102.6
85.3
93.7
106.8
105.2
106.1

1.1
2.1
14.0
5.64
14.1
14.0
15.2
16.9

5.2-8.1
12-18
86-133
76-94.8
79-128
89-129
83-126
75-126

Note. SLI group = children with specific language impairment; ND group = children with normally developing language;
ME = maternal education; CMMS = Columbia Mental Maturity Scale, a measure of nonverbal IQ; NWRT = Nonword Repetition
Task; NDW = number of different words in a 50-utterance language sample collected during play; PPVT-III = Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test--III; EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test; Lang bat = Performance on one of three language batteries: Woodcock
Language Proficiency Battery--Revised; Test of Language Development--Primary, Second Edition; Test of Language
Development--Primary, Third Edition.

Hypotheses
1.

Given the hypothesis that judgment of language
quality results from dynamic interactions between
speakers and listeners, it was predicted that (a) the
narratives produced by children with SLI would be
judged as lower in quality than narratives produced
by children with normally developing language and
(b) laypersons and teachers would judge the narratives differently.

2.

Given that the extant literature provides evidence
that SLI affects narrative production, it was predicted that the narratives produced by children with
SLI and those produced by their normally developing
peers would be differentiated by the objective measures used here. This is essentially a confirmation of
previous work that used objective scoring procedures.

3.

Given that narrative quality can be validly rated via
IS, scores from objective measures should predict listener ratings; however, given the hypothesis that
qualitative ratings may be sensitive to aspects of narration that are difficult to quantify, this predictive relationship may not be absolute.

Method
Participants
Child narrators. Child participants were two groups
of 10 monolingual English speakers recruited from the
greater Chicago area, one group comprising children with
SLI (SLI group) and another comprising children with
normally developing language (ND group). All displayed

within-normal-limits nonverbal IQ (Columbia Mental
Maturity Scale; CMMS; Burgemeister, Blum, & Lorge,
1972), auditory acuity (American National Standards
Institute, 1996), and oral motor function (St. Louis &
Ruscello, 1987). According to parent report, they had no
known gross neurological dysfunction and no social emotional problems characteristic of pervasive developmental disorders, as established in the DSM-IV (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994).
Although all participants scored within normal limits on the CMMS, the similarity of the SLI and ND groups
did not reach a conservative alpha of .5, t(18) = -1.44,
p = .17 (see matching recommendations in Mervis &
Robinson, 1999). Likewise, when compared on years of
maternal education, a proxy for socioeconomic status, the
two groups were not well matched, the SLI group presenting with the lower values, t(18) = -1.47, p = .16 (see
Table 1). Therefore, both nonverbal IQ raw scores and
years of maternal education were covariates in all subsequent between-group comparisons.
Children in the SLI group were on current speechlanguage pathologists' or reading specialists' caseloads
because of diagnosed oral and/or written language impairments. Those with diagnosed articulation impairments
were not selected, as we were interested in whether language rather than speech deficits were noticeable to the
listeners. All children in the SLI group presented with
a standard score at 1.3 standard deviations below the
mean or poorer on the Nonword Repetition Task (NWRT;
Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998) and 1 standard deviation below the mean or poorer on at least two of the language tests
or subtests administered (see Table 1). These tests were
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test--III (PPVT-III; Dunn
& Dunn, 1997), the Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT;

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1025

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Williams, 1997), and one of the following omnibus test batteries (depending on which tests had been administered
by the participants' school speech-language pathologists):
Woodcock Language Proficiency Battery--Revised (WLPB-
R; Woodcock, 1991), the Test of Language Development--
Primary, Second Edition (TOLD-P:2; Newcomer & Hammill,
1988), or the Test of Language Development--Primary,
Third Edition (TOLD-P:3; Newcomer & Hammill, 1997).
The parents of each ND child reported no history of
speech or language intervention services. The children in
the ND group scored at or above 1 standard deviation
from the mean on the NWRT and on the standardized
language tests. The one exception was a child who earned
a standard score of 75 on the WLPB-R, the omnibus language test battery administered to the ND participants.
He was included anyway because he scored well within
normal limits on the NWRT, the PPVT-III, and the EVT.
Each child in the SLI group was age matched to a
child in the ND group by 3 months. The mean ages for
the SLI group and the ND group were 6;2 (range = 5;4-
7;11) and 6;3 (range = 5;2-8;1), respectively, and were not
statistically different, t(18) = -0.04, p = .97. Gender and
ethnicity were balanced between the groups. In the SLI
group, 60% of the children were Caucasian, and 40% of
the children were African American or Hispanic. In the
ND group, 70% of the children were Caucasian, and 30%
of the children were African American or Hispanic.
Adult listeners. Two groups of adults recruited from
the greater Chicago area rated narrative quality. One
group comprised laypersons (LP) who had children the
same age as the children telling the narratives. The other
group comprised teachers (TCH) who worked with children who were the same age as the children telling the
narratives. To control for the effects of parental status
and gender, only mothers were invited to participate.
Neither group had any direct relationship with the children who provided the narrative samples. Listeners who
had experience with children affected by language disorders were represented in both groups, but none of the
listeners had formal training in communication disorders.
The listeners were selected to represent the diverse
ethnicities of the child narrators. Of the 27 listeners
in the LP group, 70% were Caucasian, 8% were African
American or Hispanic, and 22% did not report racial
status. The average age of the listeners in this group was
37.5 years (range = 24-48 years). The average education
of the group was 16.6 years (range = 14-21 years). The
listeners in the TCH group were recruited from a variety
of educational settings so that the children with whom
they worked would reflect the diversity of the children
telling the stories. According to the Illinois State Board of
Education (2002), of the 21 listeners in this group, 14% of
them worked in schools serving a higher socioeconomic
community, 38% in schools serving lower socioeconomic

1026

communities, and 48% in parochial schools serving mixed
socioeconomic communities. Fifty-seven percent of the
listeners in the TCH group were Caucasian, 29% were
African American, and 14% did not report racial status.
The average age of the TCH listeners was 45.8 years
(range = 30-65).
To be included in the LP group, the women could
neither have been trained in nor worked as teachers at
any level. To be included in the TCH group, the women
had to be working as teachers at the kindergarten, first-,
or second-grade levels at least 2 days per week for a
minimum of 2 years. Teacher is defined here as a classroom teacher in a parochial or public school.

Elicitation of the Narratives
Each child was seen individually at the Child Language Laboratory at Northwestern University or in a
quiet room at his or her school. The children used the
wordless picture book Frog, Where Are You? (Mayer, 1969)
to guide their narration. Following the protocol established by Berman and Slobin (1994), the child first looked
at each page to gather the gist of the story then told the
story while looking again at each page. No models or
prompts were provided to the child. The resulting narratives were roughly 4 min long. These were audiotaped
with a Marantz PMD-500 professional tape recorder and
transcribed orthographically into utterances segmented
into communication units (C-units; Loban, 1976). The resulting transcripts were analyzed as follows.

Objective Narrative Analysis
Fluency. The proportion of C-units with maze behaviors, average number of mazes per C-unit, and the
average number of words per maze were calculated using
the Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT;
J. F. Miller & Chapman, 1992).
Length and complexity. Length and complexity
measures included mean length of C-unit in morphemes
(MLC-Um), number of total C-units (NTU), and number of
total words (NTW). These were also calculated via SALT.
Syntactic features. Clause complexity was quantified
by classifying the proportion of C-units containing clausal
strings other than the five strings considered to be the
most early developing (SV, SVO, SVOA, SVA, SVC; Scott,
1988). We also calculated the subordination index, a
quantification of clauses expressed in each C-unit (Scott,
1988). Verb phrase complexity was quantified as the
proportion of verb phrases that had aspect, infinitival to
verbs, or were catenatives (J. F. Miller, 1981; Scott, 1988).
Noun phrase complexity was quantified as the proportion
of noun phrases that had any pre- or postmodification
other than the early developing determiners a or the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(J. F. Miller, 1981; Scott, 1988). The proportion of C-units
that began with the coordinating conjunction and was
also quantified, as was the proportion of C-units that
were ungrammatical.

finally, the ease of presentation on the part of the
speaker. By ease of understanding, we mean how
well you get the gist of what they are saying, not how
well you can hear it or how well they articulate.

Story grammar. Story grammar analysis involved
counts of each plot and theme element in the story, Frog,
Where Are You? as specified by Berman (1988). The six
plot elements include the two initiating events that
denote the onset of the problem: (a) the frog leaving the
jar and (b) the boy and dog discovering that the frog is
gone; the two search events denoting an attempt to attain the goal: (c) searching for the frog inside the house
and (d) searching for the frog outside of the house; and the
two ending events that denote resolution of the problem:
(e) the boy finding the frog and (f ) the frog being the same
frog that escaped. There were also 15 possible theme
elements, each capturing the search, the misadventure of
the boy, or the misadventure of the dog. For a list of these
search theme elements, see Berman (1988).

The listeners were given the picture book that the children had narrated so that they could familiarize themselves with the story line before rating. The listeners were
then presented one of the six tapes to listen to with headphones. A 7-point scale was used to rate all of the samples, as it has widespread use in psychophysical scaling
(e.g. Hadley & Rice, 1993; Kreiman, Gerratt, Kempster,
Erman, & Berke, 1993; Schiavetti, 1984). The listeners
were reminded to use the 7-point scale analogously to the
line judgment practice: A score of 1 represented very low
quality, and a 7 represented very high quality. The rating
procedure lasted 30-45 min, depending on the length of
the particular narratives on each tape.

Subjective Narrative Analysis
Rating task. Six audiotapes were created that contained one narrative produced by each of 8 of the children. In addition, two of the eight original narratives
were randomly selected and presented on the audiotapes
a second time to allow calculation of intrarater reliability.
The tapes were designed so that all of the 20 children
were represented an equal number of times across tapes.
This procedure yielded at least 20 ratings per narrative,
twice the minimum number suggested by Stevens (1975)
for ensuring validity. The same set of tapes was used with
both the LP and TCH rater groups.
Listeners were seen individually or in small groups
at the Child Language Laboratory at Northwestern
University or in a quiet room at a local school. Listeners
were trained to use the IS procedure by rating the length
of six lines (after Campbell & Dollaghan, 1992; Smith,
1999; Stevens, 1975). They were told the following:
You will be presented with six lines of varying length.
Your task is to judge the length of these lines by assigning numbers to them from a 7-point scale. A score
of 1 represents a very short line, a score of 4 represents a mid-length line, and a score of 7 represents a
very long line.
After 5 min of practicing the line judgments, they were
then told the following:
You will be presented with language samples. Each of
these samples contains the telling of a story. Your
task is to judge the quality of information conveyed in
the samples by assigning numbers to them. By quality, we mean three things: the amount of information
conveyed, the ease of understanding of the story, and,

Post-rating interview. After the rating task, the TCH
and LP participants completed a 20-item questionnaire
in which they assigned a number from a 7-point scale to
indicate the extent to which 20 factors influenced their
quality ratings. The 20 factors related to either (a) vocabulary, (b) story grammar, (c) syntax, (d) fluency, or
(e) sparkle (see Appendix A). The factors on the questionnaire were selected on the basis of interviews with
pilot raters and a review of the literature on narrative
quality.

Reliability
Narrative transcription. A second judge independently transcribed 20% of the narrative samples to obtain
point-by-point interjudge transcription agreement. Mean
agreement on NTUs per sample was 98.2% (range =
89%-100%). Mean agreement on total number of morphemes per sample was 98.8% (range = 96.2%-100%).
Mean agreement on morpheme types (determined by percentage of morphemes that were transcribed identically
by both judges) was 97.2% (range = 94.6%-99.1%).
Narrative coding. A second judge analyzed 65% of the
narrative samples to establish interjudge coding reliability.
Point-by-point agreement was 80.8% (range = 50%-100%)
for plot and theme elements; 90% (range = 0%-100%) for
identification of C-units that were ungrammatical; 91%
(range = 79%-100%) for clausal complexity; 100% for the
number of clauses (part of the subordination index); 99%
(range = 97%-100%) for verb phrase complexity; 98%
(range = 92%-100%) for noun phrase complexity; and
100% for the number of C-units beginning with and. Although the mean agreement levels were good, the ranges
for story grammar elements and number of ungrammatical C-units were broad due to cases where failing to agree
on one of a very small number of exemplars (e.g., the only
ungrammatical C-unit in a story) resulted in a very low

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1027

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2. Quantitative narrative data.
SLI group

ND group

Measure

M

SD

Range

M

SD

Range

C-units w/mazes
Mazes per C-unit
Words per maze
NTU
NTW
MLC-Um
Ungrammatical C-units (prop)
Subordination index
NP complexity (prop)
VP complexity (prop)
Clause complexity (prop)
And C-units
Theme
Plot elements per story

.35
.41
2.06
24.4
143.3
6.4
.30
1.17
.17
.27
.23
.36
5.6
3.6

.16
.23
0.68
9.0
66.7
1.2
.02
0.12
.11
.16
.10
.06
3.3
1.6

.16 -.63
.16-.81
1.0-3.1
16-45
57-288
3.2-7.6
.05-.56
1.0-1.4
0-.36
0-.63
.10-.47
0-.8
0-11
0-6

.30
.34
2.5
33.3*
242*
7.8*
.08*
1.25
.26
.23
.26
.59
9.6*
5.3

.14
.17
0.64
11.2
103
1.4
.1
0.18
.10
.07
.02
.1
2.3
1.1

.06-.46
.06-.61
1.8-3.5
17-55
82-401
5.9-10.1
0-.32
1.1-1.6
.12-.43
.12-.35
.08-.48
.25-.90
6-12
3-6

Note. SLI group = children with specific language impairment; ND group = children with normally developing language; NTU =
number of total C-units; NTW = number of total words; MLC-Um = mean length of C-unit in morphemes; prop = measure expressed as
proportion of total C-units; NP = noun phrase; VP = verb phrase.
*p  .02.

level of agreement. To remedy this potential problem, all
disagreements were discussed thoroughly and resolved
by consensus.
Quality rating. Each listener heard two of the narrative samples a second time to assess scaling reliability. Intrarater agreement was calculated by counting
the number of times the ratings given to the narratives the first and second times differed by 1 rating value,
and the number of times they differed by 1 or 2 rating
values and dividing each number by the total number of
rated pairs (Eadie & Doyle, 2002). Average intrarater
reliability using the + 1 rating comparison was 83%, and
that using the + 2 rating comparison was 94%. Correlation
between the raters was calculated with Cronbach's alpha.
As the six different rating tapes used in the study contained different samples, the correlation was calculated
for each subset of LP and TCH raters who heard the same
rating tape. Correlations were .96 for the eight raters
who heard Rating Tape 1; .95 for the seven raters who
heard Rating Tape 2; .97 for the nine raters who heard
Rating Tape 3; .93 for the eight raters who heard Rating
Tape 4; .90 for the eight raters who heard Rating Tape 5;
and .90 for the eight raters who heard Rating Tape 6.

Results
Objective Measures
Objective measures of the children's narratives are
summarized in Table 2.

1028

Fluency. Three one-way, between-subjects analyses
of covariance (ANCOVAs) with years of maternal education and nonverbal IQ raw scores as the covariates and
alpha corrected to .02 for multiple comparisons revealed no
significant differences in the fluency of the SLI and ND
groups, whether the dependent variable was the proportion of C-units with maze behaviors, F(1, 16) = 0.50, p = .49;
average number of mazes per C-unit, F(1, 16) = 0.3, p = .59;
or average number of words per maze, F(1, 16) = 3.38, p = .08.
Length and complexity. Three one-way, betweensubjects ANCOVAs with maternal education and nonverbal IQ as covariates and alpha corrected to .02 for
multiple comparisons revealed significant differences in
the length of narratives told by participants in the ND
and SLI groups. Children with SLI told narratives characterized by lower NTU, F(1, 16) = 15.17, p = .001, d = .79;
lower NTW, F(1, 16) = 20.18, p < .001, d = .96; and lower
MLC-Um, F(1, 16) = 6.9, p = .02, d = .99, as compared with
their ND peers.
The effect of the coefficient of the covariate, maternal
education, was significant for NTU, t(1, 16) = -3.06,
p = .008, and NTW, t(1, 16) = -3.04, p = .008. These
violations increase the likelihood of a Type I error (Wildt
& Ahtola, 1978). As between-group differences were obtained, it appears that Type I error was not a problem.
The coefficient of the maternal education covariate was
not significant for MLC-Um, F(2, 16) = 1.18, p = .33, nor
was the coefficient of the nonverbal IQ covariate for either
NTU, t(1, 16) = -1.39, p = .18, or NTW, t(1, 16) = -1.22,
p = .24.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Syntactic structure. Syntactic structure was statistically analyzed with six one-way between-subject
ANCOVAs with maternal education and nonverbal IQ
as covariates and alpha corrected to .008 for multiple
comparisons. The dependent variables for these six
ANCOVAs were the proportion of ungrammatical C-units,
the subordination index, noun phrase complexity, verb
phrase complexity, clause complexity, and the proportion
of C-units that began with and, respectively. The children
with SLI produced significantly higher proportions of
ungrammatical C-units than their peers, F(1, 16) = 12.28,
p = .003, d = 2.2. The effect of the coefficient of the
covariates was not significant, F(2, 16) = .26, p = .78.
The other syntactic measures did not differentiate
the children with SLI from their ND peers whether those
measures were the subordination index, F(1, 16) = 2.21,
p = .16, noun phrase complexity, F(1, 16) = 2.24, p = .15,
verb phrase complexity, F(1, 16) = .74, p = .40, clause
complexity, F(1, 16) = 0.11, p = .74, or the proportion of
C-units beginning with and, F(1, 16) = 6.65, p = .02.
Story grammar. The children's facility with story
grammar was analyzed via two one-way, between-subject
ANCOVAs with maternal education and nonverbal IQ as
covariates and alpha corrected to .025 for multiple comparisons. The children with SLI produced significantly
fewer theme elements than did their ND peers, F(1, 16) =
12.06, p = .003, d = 1.76. The difference between the
groups in use of plot elements approached but did not
reach adjusted levels of significance (SLI = 3.6, ND = 5.3),
F(1, 16) = 5.2, p = .036, d = 1.03. The effect of the coefficient of the covariates was not significant for either the
plot, F(2, 16) = .45, p = .65, or theme measures, F(2, 16) =
2.7, p = .1.

Quality Ratings
Figure 1 compares the quality ratings assigned by
the listener groups to the narrations of the SLI and ND
groups. A two-way, between-subjects ANCOVA with
maternal education and nonverbal IQ as covariates
Figure 1. Mean quality ratings (SE ) assigned by laypersons and
teachers to narratives produced by the specific language impairment
(SLI ) and normally developing language (ND) groups.

Figure 2. Mean extent (SE) to which laypersons and teachers
reported listening to given aspects of narration when assigning
narrative quality ratings.

revealed a main effect for narrator group with the SLI
cohort receiving lower ratings (SLI M = 2.94, SD = 0.80;
ND M = 4.87, SD = 1.25), F(1, 34) = 36.75, p < .001,
d = 1.54. An effect-size measure, U, demonstrated that
70.7% of the narrative quality ratings assigned to the SLI
and ND groups did not overlap. There was no main effect
for listener group, F(1, 34) = 0.88, p = .36. The effect of the
coefficient of the covariates was not significant, F(2, 34) =
1.87, p = .17. To further illustrate the differences in
quality of narration between groups, Appendix B contains the highest and lowest ranked narratives from each.
To determine whether the two listener groups attended to different factors while rating, we plotted their
post-rating interview responses by rating category (see
Figure 2). A mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with listener group (LP, TCH) as the between-subjects
variable, post-rating interview category (vocabulary, story
grammar, sparkle, fluency, syntax) as the within-subjects
factor, and the average ratings given to each category as
the dependent variable revealed a main effect of category,
F(1, 184) = 46.2, p < .001, :2 = .83, but no main effect of
listener group, F(1, 46) = 1.76, p = .19. A post hoc analysis
of the data with Tukey's honestly significant difference
revealed that both listener groups reported paying more
attention to vocabulary and story grammar elements
than to sparkle, fluency/articulation, or sentence-level
syntax (all ps < .001). There were no differences in weight
given to vocabulary and story grammar (all ps > .05) or
between the importance placed on the fluency/articulation factors, sparkle, and syntax (all p values > .05). The
main effect for category was qualified by an interaction,
F(1, 184) = 3.86, p < .005, so that the LP rater group
reported paying more attention to sparkle than the TCH
rater group ( p = .003).

Variables Predicting Quality
To determine whether objective measures significantly predicted the subjective ratings of narrative

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1029

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

quality, a forward stepwise multiple regression was run.
Due to the small sample, the SLI and ND groups were
collapsed, and only two objective variables could be
entered into the multiple regression equation. We entered
MLC-Um and the number of thematic units because these
are frequently studied variables, both of which differentiated the SLI and ND diagnostic groups in the ANCOVA.
As the quality ratings of the LP and TCH groups did
not differ significantly, they were collapsed for this
analysis.
The regression model yielded a significant fit, accounting for 74% of the variance in quality, R = .86, multiple R2 = .74, adjusted R2 = .71, F(2, 17) = 24.29,
p = .00001. The two objective variables contributed
equally to the fit of the overall regression model: For
MLC-Um, b = .495, t = 3.46, p = .003; for the number of
theme units, b = .497, t = 3.47, p = .003.

Discussion
The overall purpose of this study was to examine
the functional impact of SLI. Narratives were chosen as
the focus of this analysis because of their relevance to
children's lives. Children participate as listeners and
tellers of narratives every day. Furthermore, narratives
exemplify the sort of decontextualized language that both
predicts academic success and provides a foundation for
literacy development (L. Miller, 1990; Paul & Smith,
1993; Snow, 1983).
With few exceptions, prior research on the narratives
produced by children with language impairments has
used only objective measures of narrative structure.
Whereas these measurements are critical for documenting children's skill levels with narrative production
and their changing ability over time, they may not fully
capture the perception of children's communicative ability by listeners. To better determine the functional impact
of SLI, we studied two listener groups: teachers and laypersons. Our reasoning was that if the impact of SLI
was a subtle one, then teachers but not laypersons
would reliably discriminate children with SLI from their
age-mates on the basis of these brief oral narratives.
On the other hand, if the impact of SLI was a more
dramatic one, then laypersons would be as reliable as
teachers in this discrimination. Four primary questions were (a) whether subjective ratings of narrative
quality differentiate children with SLI from their same
age peers, (b) whether laypersons and teachers differ in
their ratings of narrative quality, (c) whether objective
measures would confirm previously reported problems
in narration among children with SLI, and (d) whether
objective measures of narrative structure and quality
ratings relate. We shall answer each of these questions
in turn.

1030

Subjective Ratings of Narrative Qualit y
Differentiate Children With SLI From
Their Unaffected Age-Mates
Laypersons and teachers judged the narration of
children with SLI to be significantly poorer than the
narration of normally developing, age-matched peers.
These results accord with those of McFadden and Gillam
(1996), who also found quality of narration, as judged by
teachers, to differentiate children with SLI and their agemates. Important differences between the studies are,
first, that our participants were younger on average and,
second, that we used a different scoring procedure. Therefore, together, these two studies document that narrative
quality differences characteristic of SLI are discernable
across a broad age range (our youngest participant being
5;4 and McFadden and Gillam's oldest participant being 11;7) and are robust to variations in measurement
procedure.
Another important difference is that the raters in
McFadden and Gillam (1996) had more data to consider
before forming attitudes. They rated two written and two
oral narratives per child, whereas listeners in the current
study rated only a single oral narrative roughly 4 min
long per child. That they differentiated children with SLI
from their age-mates with a nonoverlap of 70% on the
basis of this small sample speaks to how readily manifestations of SLI in narrative discourse contexts are
noticed.
The judgment of language quality is a complex and
dynamic process. The speaker's language behaviors, at
both the semantic and syntactic levels, are hypothesized
to play a key role (Bradac et al., 2001). Our findings
support this hypothesis with data from a clinical population. There is potential value in the language judgments documented here. The sensitivity of laypersons
and teachers to manifestations of SLI suggests their
potential as part of clinical service delivery. Bishop (1998)
used teacher reports as one basis for classifying subpopulations of children with SLI. LaPointe, Katz, and
Braden (1999) noted the role of everyday listeners in
determining the clinical significance of changes obtained
via intervention, and Glogowaska and Campbell (2000)
emphasized the importance of parents' attitudes toward
the intervention process itself in obtaining successful
intervention outcomes for their children. Our findings
speak to the validity of including teachers and laypersons
in these processes.

Both Laypersons and Teachers Discern
Differences Between SLI and ND Groups
An additional purpose of this study was to investigate the differences between the narrative quality ratings

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

provided by laypersons and teachers. We found no significant differences in the numeric ratings they assigned.
On the one hand, this null finding is disappointing, as it
fails to support hypothesized listener differences in formation of language judgments (Bradac et al., 2001). It is,
at first blush, also somewhat of an anomaly given previous reports of generally poor agreement between
laypersons' and teachers' ratings of children's level of
functioning across various domains. For example, parents
of children with language impairments tend to provide
lower ratings than teachers, whereas parents of children
with normally developing language provide significantly
higher ratings than teachers (Hauerwas & Stone, 2000).
Note, however, that the raters in Hauerwas and Stone
were the mothers and teachers of the children being
rated, whereas in our study, the laypersons and teachers
did not know the children they rated. It is possible
that the discrepancies between laypersons' and teachers'
ratings in previous studies may reflect these raters'
diverse experiences with the child outside of the rating
context per se. Furthermore, because we controlled for
maternal status by selecting only teachers who were also
mothers, we may well have minimized the differences
that other investigators have observed, differences that
emerge when maternal status is allowed to vary in the
teacher group. The current study is unique in comparing
laypersons and teachers while controlling for gender,
motherhood status, and experience with children.
On the other hand, our failure to reject the null
hypothesis is remarkable in that laypersons, though not
formally educated about language development or disorders, were as good as teachers in noticing weaknesses
in the narratives of the children with SLI. This constitutes evidence that SLI is more than mere statistical fluctuation; its manifestations are noticeable to untrained
listeners. Even more remarkable is that the particular
children with SLI who participated in this study were
best characterized as having intelligible speech (all children passed an oral motor screening, and none were
diagnosed with articulatory impairments) and only mild-
moderate language deficits (as a group, their standardized test scores averaged 1-1.5 standard deviations below
the mean).
Despite comparable numeric ratings, the post-rating
interview did reveal one difference between the two
listener groups. While both reported paying more attention to vocabulary and story grammar than to sparkle,
laypersons reported significantly more attention to sparkle than did teachers. As professionals, teachers may be
trained to ignore such factors (Becker, Place, Tenzer, &
Frueh, 1991), whereas those without professional training may be more taken by the charm of the narrator.
Stories that sparkle do charm the listener. They sound
storylike, they include emotional content, and they may
be thought cute or funny. Clearly, sparkle will be difficult

to measure objectively though the coding of evaluative
statements to capture emotional content, and the acoustic analysis of prosodic contours to capture storylikeness
is a possible future direction. A fuller understanding of
sparkle is important as listeners, especially those without
formal training, pay attention to sparkle when judging
narrative quality.

Objective Measures Confirmed That
Narration Is Affected by SLI
Structurally, the narratives told by children from the
SLI and ND groups differed in several ways. First, the
children with SLI told shorter stories, as revealed by lower
NTU, lower NTW, and fewer morphemes per C-unit. Such
differences are widely reported in the extant literature
(see Scott, 1988, for a review). In addition, the children
with SLI produced a higher proportion of ungrammatical C-units, another frequent finding (e.g., Norbury &
Bishop, 2003; Scott & Windsor, 2000). Finally, the
children with SLI produced significantly fewer thematic
elements (and marginally fewer plot elements) as compared with their ND peers. This too is consistent with
previous reports (e.g., McFadden & Gillam, 1996; Merritt
& Liles, 1987). These findings confirm that the sample of
children with SLI that were recruited for the current
study were similar to those recruited in other studies in
that, compared with their unaffected age-mates, they had
measurable problems in narration. In particular, their
narratives were briefer, less grammatical, and less well
developed as a discourse unit. Given the importance of
narration to the everyday functioning of children, these
problems are prime targets for intervention with the child
affected by SLI.

Objective Measures Predict
Qualit y Ratings
Whereas the documentation of objectively measurable structural differences in narration is crucial for
describing our participants and linking their profiles to
those previously reported, more germane to the current
purpose was to determine whether these structural differences related to listeners' perceptions of narrative
quality.
A combination of MLC-Um and number of theme
elements per story accounted for 74% of the variance in
narrative quality among the children. That listeners preferred narratives with longer sentences and well-developed
story themes is consistent with previous findings: McFadden
and Gillam (1996) reported raters' preference for longer
stories (more T-units) with many story elements (more
plot constituents); Campbell and Dollaghan (1992)
reported a relationship between MLU and narrative

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1031

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

quality; and Peterson and McCabe (1983) and Schneider
and Winship (2002) reported rater preferences for complex story grammars.
As predicted, the relationship between the objective
measures and the ratings was not absolute. This too was
consistent with previous studies. For example, McFadden
and Gillam (1996) reported only moderate correlations
(.42-.60) between objective measures of textual development and quality ratings obtained via rubrics scoring. We
agree with these investigators and with McCabe and
Peterson (1984) when they note that the features that
make for a good story can be difficult to quantify objectively. It is useful to supplement objective measures
with subjective ratings when attempting to fully characterize children's success at narration.

Conclusions
Whether or not they had been trained as teachers,
listeners discerned differences between children with SLI
and their age-mates on the basis of a single brief oral
narrative. Narratives produced by children with SLI
were judged to be poorer in quality than those produced
by their unaffected age-mates. Shorter utterances and
underdeveloped story themes contributed to the low quality of the narratives told by the children with SLI. Other,
less quantifiable, factors contributed to perception of
narrative quality as well. For laypersons more so than
teachers, one of those factors was sparkle, the degree
to which the story charms and engages the listener. We
conclude that SLI is more than just a statistical aberration; rather, the manifestations of the disorder are noticeable even to laypersons and thereby may limit the
successful functioning of affected children. The functional
impact of SLI should be considered in future research and
clinical efforts.

Acknowledgments
This article is based on a dissertation completed by Robyn
M. Newman under the direction of Karla K. McGregor. The work
was supported by a graduate research grant from the Northwestern University Graduate Research Grants Committee,
awarded to Robyn M. Newman, and National Institutes of
Health Grant 1 R29 DC03698-01, awarded to Karla K.
McGregor. We thank Cheryl Scott, Bruce Smith, and Steven
Zecker for their guidance during this project; Ling Yu Guo for his
assistance with coding; and our dedicated participants for their
time and effort.

References
American National Standards Institute. (1996). Specifications for audiometers (ANSI S3.6-1996). New York:
Author.

1032

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
Becker, J. A., Place, K. S., Tenzer, S. A., & Frueh, B. C.
(1991). Teachers' impressions of children varying in pragmatic skills. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology,
12, 397-412.
Berman, R. A. (1988). On the ability to relate events in
narrative. Discourse Processes, 11, 469-497.
Berman, R. A., & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating events in
narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1998). Development of the children's
communication checklist (CCC): A method for assessing
qualitative aspects of communicative impairment in children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39,
879-891.
Botting, N., Conti-Ramsden, G., & Crutchley, A. (1997).
Concordance between teacher/therapist opinion and formal
language assessment scores in children with language
impairment. European Journal of Disorders of Communication, 32, 317-327.
Bradac, J. J., Cargile, A. C., & Hallett, J. S. (2001).
Language attitudes: Retrospect, conspect, and prospect. In
W. P. Robinson & H. Giles (Eds.), The new handbook of
language and social psychology ( pp. 137-155). Chichester,
U.K.: Wiley.
Burgemeister, B. B., Blum, L. H., & Lorge, I. (1972).
Columbia Mental Maturity Scale. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Campbell, T. F., & Dollaghan, C. (1992). A method for
obtaining listener judgments of spontaneously produced
language: Social validation through direct magnitude estimation. Topics in Language Disorders, 12, 42-55.
DeThorne, L. S., & Watkins, R. V. (2001). Listeners'
perceptions of language use in children. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools, 32, 142-148.
Dollaghan, C., & Campbell, T. F. (1998). Nonword repetition
and child language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1136-1146.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test--III. Circle Pines, MN: AGS.
Eadie, T. L., & Doyle, P. C. (2002). Direct magnitude
estimation and interval scaling of naturalness and severity
in tracheoesophageal (TE) speakers. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 1088-1096.
Fey, M. E., Catts, H. W., Proctor-Williams, K., Tomblin,
J. B., & Zhang, X. (2004). Oral and written story
composition skills of children with language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47,
1301-1318.
Gillam, R., & Johnston, J. R. (1992). Spoken and written
language relationship in language /learning-impaired and
normally achieving school-age children. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 35, 1303-1315.
Gillam, R., McFadden, T. U., & van Kleeck, A. (1995).
Improving narrative abilities: Whole language and language
skills approaches. In M. Fey, J. Windsor, & S. F. Warren
(Eds.), Language intervention: Preschool through the elementary years ( pp. 145-182). Baltimore: Brookes.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Glogowaska, M., & Campbell, R. (2000). Investigating
parental views of involvement in preschool speech and
language therapy. International Journal of Language and
Communication Disorders, 35, 391-405.

Mervis, C. B., & Robinson, B. F. (1999). Methodological
issues in cross-syndrome comparisons: Matching procedure
for sensitivity and specificity. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 64(1), 115-130.

Greenhalgh, K. S., & Strong, C. J. (2001). Literate language
features in spoken narratives of children with typical language and children with language impairments. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 32, 114-125.

Miller, J. F. (1981). Assessing language production in children.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Hadley, P. A., & Rice, M. L. (1993). Parental judgments of
preschoolers' speech and language development: A resource
for assessment and IEP planning. Seminars in Speech and
Language, 14, 278-288.
Hauerwas, L., & Stone, C. A. (2000). Are parents of schoolage children with specific language impairments accurate
estimators of their child's language skills? Child Language
Teaching and Therapy, 16, 73-86.
Hicks, D. (1991). Kinds of narrative: Genre skills among first
graders from two communities. In A. McCabe & C. Peterson
(Eds.), Developing narrative structure ( pp. 55-88). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Illinois State Board of Education. (2002). Illinois school
report card. Retrieved from http://206.166.105.128/
ReportCard /rchome.asp
Kent, R. D. (1996). Hearing and believing: Some limits to the
auditory-perceptual assessment of speech and voice disorders. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 5,
7-23.
Kreiman, J., Gerratt, B. R., Kempster, G. B., Erman, A., &
Berke, G. S. (1993). Perceptual evaluation of voice quality:
Review, tutorial, and a framework for future research.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 21-40.
LaPointe, L. L., Katz, R. C., & Braden, C. L. (1999). Clinical
significance of change in language performance: Social
validation of writing response improvement in aphasia.
Aphasiology, 13, 787-792.
Liles, B. Z. (1985a). Cohesion in the narratives of normal
and language-disordered children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 28, 123-133.
Liles, B. Z. (1985b). Production and comprehension of
narrative discourse in normal and language disordered
children. Journal of Communication Disorders, 18,
409-427.

Miller, J. F., & Chapman, R. S. (1981). The relations
between age and mean length of utterance. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 24, 154-161.
Miller, J. F., & Chapman, R. (1992). SALT: Systematic
analysis of language transcripts [Computer program].
Madison: University of Wisconsin--Madison,Waisman
Center, Language Analysis Laboratory.
Miller, L. (1990). The roles of language and learning in the
development of literacy. Topics in Language Disorders, 12,
1-24.
Newcomer, P. L., & Hammill, D. D. (1988). Test of Language
Development--Primary, Second Edition. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Newcomer, P. L., & Hammill, D. D. (1997). Test of Language
Development--Primary, Third Edition. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Newman, R. M. (2003). Parents' and teachers' perceptions of
narrative quality in young children with specific language
impairment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Norbury, C. F., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2003). Narrative skills of
children with communication impairments. International
Journal of Communication Disorders, 38, 287-313.
Paul, R., & Smith, R. L. (1993). Narrative skills in 4-yearolds with normal, impaired, and late developing language.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 592-598.
Peterson, C., Jesso, B., & McCabe, A. (1999). Encouraging
narratives in preschoolers: An intervention study. Journal
of Child Language, 26, 49-67.
Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental psycholinguistics: Three ways of looking at a child's narrative.
New York: Plenum.
Rice, M. L., Hadley, P. A., & Alexander, A. L. (1993). Social
biases toward children with speech and language impairments: A correlative causal model of language limitations.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 445-471.

Loban, W. (1976). Language development: Kindergarten
through Grade 12 ( Research Report No. 18). Urbana, IL:
National Council of Teachers of English.

Roth, F. P., & Spekman, N. J. (1986). Narrative discourse:
Spontaneously generated stories of learning-disabled and
normally achieving students. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders, 51, 8-23.

MacLachlan, B. G., & Chapman, R. S. (1988). Communication breakdowns in normal and language learning-
disabled children's conversation and narration. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 53, 2-7.

Schiavetti, N. (1984). Scaling procedures for quantification of
speech, language, and hearing variables. In R. G. Daniloff
(Ed.), Articulation assessment and treatment issues
( pp. 237-253). San Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.

Mayer, M. (1969). Frog, where are you? New York: Dial Press.

Schneider, P., & Winship, S. (2002). Adults' judgments of
fictional story quality. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 45, 372-383.

McCabe, A., & Peterson, C. (1984). What makes a good
story? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 13, 457-480.
McFadden, T. U., & Gillam, R. B. (1996). An examination of
the quality of narratives produced by children with language
disorders. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 27, 48-56.
Merritt, D. D., & Liles, B. Z. (1987). Story grammar ability in
children with and without language disorder: Story generation, story retelling, and story comprehension. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 30, 539-552.

Scott, C. M. (1988). Spoken and written syntax. In M. A.
Nippold (Ed.), Later language development ( pp. 49-95). San
Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Scott, C. M., & Windsor, J. (2000). General language
performance measures in spoken and written narrative and
expository discourse of school-age children with language
learning disabilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 324-339.

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1033

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Smith, C. H. (1999). Oral and oropharyngeal perception
of fluid viscosity across the age span. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL.
Snow, C. E. (1983). Literacy and language: Relationships
during preschool years. Harvard Educational Review, 53,
165-189.

Wildt, A., & Ahtola, O. (1978). Analysis of covariance (Sage
University Paper Series on Quantitative Applications in the
Social Sciences, No. 07-012). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test. Circle
Pines, MN: AGS.
Woodcock, R. W. (1991). Woodcock Language Proficiency
Battery--Revised. Chicago: Riverside.

Squires, J., Nickel, R., & Bricker, D. (1990). Use of parentcompleted developmental questionnaires for child-find and
screening. Infants and Young Children, 3, 46-57.

Received April 15, 2005

Stevens, S. S. (1975). Psychophysics. New York: Wiley.

Revision received August 15, 2005

St. Louis, K. O., & Ruscello, D. M. (1987). Oral Speech
Mechanism Screening Exam--Revised. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Accepted January 25, 2006

Swanson, L. A., Fey, M. E., Mills, C. E., & Hood, L. S.
(2005). Use of narrative-based language intervention with
children who have specific language impairment. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 14, 131-143.

Contact author: Karla K. McGregor, Department of Speech
Pathology and Audiology, 121C Wendell Johnson Speech
and Hearing Center, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242-1012. E-mail: karla-mcgregor@uiowa.edu.

Thomas, J. R., & Chissom, B. S. (1973). Relationship
between teacher ratings and objective tests of aptitude for
early elementary school children. Measurement and Evaluation in Guidance, 6, 54-56.

DOI: 10.1044 /1092-4388(2006 / 073)

Robyn M. Newman is now at the Ariella Joy Frankel Keshet Day
School, Northbrook, IL.
Karla K. McGregor is now at The University of Iowa.

Appendix A. Post-rating interview.
Category

1034

Statements to be rated

Vocabulary

I listened for the use of specific (vs. general) vocabulary words.
I listened for the variety of vocabulary words a child used.
I listened to see if the details included were relevant to the story.
I listened for the amount of detail that the child included.

Story grammar

I listened for the inclusion of dialogue between the characters.
I listened to see if all the critical parts of the story were included.
I listened for how well the child's thoughts flowed together.
I listened to see if the child followed the theme of the story.

Syntax

I listened for the use of correct grammar.
I listened for how complex the child 's sentences were.
I listened for the use of complete sentences.
I listened to the length of the child 's sentences.

Fluency/articulation

I listened for how quickly and/or slowly a child spoke.
I listened for how well the child produced his/her speech sounds.
I listened for how easy it was for the child to tell the story.
I listened for the presence of hesitations, pauses, and/or the use of words like um or uh.

Sparkle

I listened for how funny the child was.
I listened to how cute the child sounded.
I listened to see if the child sounded like he or she was telling a story (vs. having a conversation).
I listened for how much emotion the child put into the telling of the story.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix B (p. 1 of 2). Highest and lowest ranked narratives from each group.
Highest quality rating for SLI group
(He) He has a doggie.
(And he) And he has a froggie (and he) and a person.
And he/'s go/ing to sleep.
And the frog is sneak/ing out.
And he/'s look/ing (if he) if he/'s in his shoe.
The dog has the bowl on his head.
The dog fell out.
And (he) he catch/ed him.
And he/'s call/ing for him.
And he/'s there come/ing out of the tree.
And the dog is bark/ing.
And the kid is look/ing in (um) an animal/z hole.
And the animal came out.
And he look/ed in the tree.
And the dog (make) made the bee place come out.
And the bee/s came out.
And the kid fell off of the tree because (uh) the owl came out.
And the kid had (a tr -) a rock.
And he/'s check/ing on if he/'s in the tree.
And it was/n't really a tree.
It was (um) an animal.
(And he was made) And it made him go into the deep water.
(And he check/ed if) He fell in the pond.
And he check/ed on the log.
(And he was) And the frog (was there) was/n't there.
(And he said the kid) The kid said shh to his dog.
And he climb/ed over (the uh) the treestump.
And the frog was there.
And his wife had baby/s.
And (he took) he took one of the baby/s.

Lowest quality rating for SLI group
Frog.
Gone.
Frog gone.
A dog in (then) then fall down.
Now he not in it.
He fall down.
And he lick.
Dog (get) get the bee/s.
Climb on tree.
And then he fall down.
And hurt himself.
The reindeer.
A reindeer.
They fall down.
He get (on the) on the log.
Frog hop on.
The end.

Highest quality rating for ND group

Lowest quality rating for ND group

Once upon a time(the) there was a little boy that had a frog.
When the boy went to sleep, frog climb/ed out of the house.
When the boy notice/ed when he woke up (the fro-) it was too late.
The frog was gone.
He search/ed for him everywhere.
In his boot/s.
Lookit, he/'s look/ing in his boot/s.
And his dog look/ed in his jar.
But his head got stuck in the jar.
And so, he look/ed out the window.
But he could/n't see him anywhere.
[Are you write/ing or what?]
(But the but the) But the dog fell out the window.
And (the) the jar broke.
(And he and then and then and now f -) And then finally
it was time to search for the frog.
"Frog, Frog" call/ed the little boy.
He search/ed for him everywhere.
In the hole.
In the tree.
In the rock/s.

He/'s sleep/ing.
And he woke up.
But the number/s are move/ing.
He was look/ing in the woods and looking out the window.
The dog fell.
And he/'s mad.
He/'s yell/ing.
He smell/ed the bee/s.
He look/ing in there.
He fell down.
He hurt his head.
He call/ed out.
He fell again and again.
And all of a sudden he found the water.
He look/ed again.
And then in the log (he said) he saw two
little frog/s and frog/s and frog/s.
Lots of frog/s.

Newman & McGregor: Narrative Quality

1035

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix B (p. 2 of 2). Highest and lowest ranked narratives from each group.
Highest quality rating for ND group

Lowest quality rating for ND group

But there was a moose.
And ah [sound effect].
Plop into the water.
"Shh," said the little boy.
He climb/ed over the log.
And there was the frog.
And he ask/ed if he may have one of the frog baby/s.
The frog said "Ribbit, Ribbit," which mean/*3s yes.
The end.
Note.

1036

SLI group = children with specific language impairment; ND group = children with normally developing language.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 49 * 1022-1036 * October 2006

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

