Lexical Representations in Children
With SLI: Evidence From a FrequencyManipulated Gating Task
Elina Mainela-Arnold
Pennsylvania State University

Julia L. Evans
San Diego State University and
University of California, San Diego

Jeffry A. Coady
Boston University

Purpose: This study investigated lexical representations of children with specific
language impairment (SLI) and typically developing, chronological age-matched (CA)
peers on a frequency-manipulated gating task. The study tested the hypothesis that
children with SLI have holistic phonological representations of words, that is, that
children with SLI would exhibit smaller effects of neighborhood density on gating
durations than CA peers and that children with SLI would be as efficient as CA peers in
accessing high-frequency words but that they would differ from their age-matched
peers in accessing low-frequency words.
Method: Thirty-two children (ages 8;5-12;3 [years;months]) participated: 16 children
with SLI and 16 typically developing peers matched on age and nonverbal IQ.
Children's word guesses after different gating durations were investigated.
Results: Contrary to predictions, no group differences in effects of distributional
regularity were found: Children in both groups required equally longer acoustic chunks
to access words that were low in frequency and came from dense neighborhoods.
However, children with SLI appeared to vacillate between multiple word candidates at
significantly later gates when compared with children in the CA group.
Conclusions: Children with SLI did not exhibit evidence for phonologically holistic
lexical representations. Instead, they appeared more vulnerable to competing words.
KEY WORDS: SLI, lexical representation, word frequency, neighborhood density

T

his study investigated lexical access in children with specific language impairment (SLI) and typically developing peers on a frequencymanipulated forward gating task. Specific language impairment refers
to a developmental condition in which children exhibit difficulty acquiring
language in the absence of other neurodevelopmental, frank neurological,
hearing, emotional, or nonverbal intellectual impairments (Leonard, 1998;
Tomblin, Records, & Zhang, 1996). Clinically, delayed onset of lexical acquisition is, in most cases, the first indication of SLI, and children with
SLI can be differentiated from their typically developing peers on the
basis of estimates of vocabulary size, standardized vocabulary tests, and
the number of different words produced in spontaneous language samples (Bishop, 1997; Watkins, Kelly, Harbers, & Hollis, 1995).
Lexical processes have been shown to be compromised in SLI in many
experimental studies. Children with SLI exhibit slower speeds of lexical
processing as compared with their peers. They exhibit slower speed of
naming (Lahey & Edwards, 1996; Leonard, Nippold, Kail, & Hale, 1983)
and slower reaction times in word recognition experiments (Edwards &
Lahey, 1996). Children with SLI also make naming errors, both phonological errors (Lahey & Edwards, 1999) and semantic errors (McGregor

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/08/5102-0381

381

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

& Appel, 2002; McGregor, Newman, Reilly, & Capone,
2002), at higher rates than their peers. Several studies
have shown that in novel word learning tasks, children
with SLI exhibit poorer performance when compared
with their peers (Dollaghan, 1987; Ellis Weismer &
Hesketh, 1993, 1996; Oetting, Rice, & Swank, 1995;
Rice, Oetting, Marquis, Bode, & Pae, 1994). In the study
by Rice and colleagues (1994), children with SLI required up to three times as many exposures to novel
words in order to make gains comparable to their agematched peers. Furthermore, whereas the typically developing children maintained the novel word representations,
the children in the SLI group were more likely to forget
the novel words after a few days had passed. Children
with SLI have also been found to be more susceptible
to external perturbations in novel word learning. Ellis
Weismer and Hesketh (1993, 1996) reported that children with SLI were more adversely affected by the fast
speaking rate than both the age- and language-matched
controls.

has been reported in experiments using a variety of
methods. Adults are faster at recognizing high-frequency
words and slower at recognizing low-frequency words
on tasks like perceptual identification of words in noise,
auditory lexical decisions, and word repetition (Luce &
Pisoni, 1998). The effects of word frequency are also
present in gating tasks; adults require less acoustic information to recognize high-frequency words as compared
with low-frequency words (Grosjean, 1980; Metsala,
1997a; Walley et al., 1995). These effects are also present
in children. In gating tasks, children, like adults, require
less acoustic information to recognize high-frequency
words as compared with low-frequency words (Metsala,
1997a; Walley et al., 1995).

Dollaghan (1998) and Montgomery (1999) used an
interesting paradigm, the gating task, to study lexical
access in children with SLI. In the gating task, the participants hear stimulus words presented in successive
gates--that is, fragments of the auditory stimulus
(Grosjean, 1980). In the most common form of the auditory gating task, the forward gating task, the gates
start from the beginning of the word and become increasingly larger. The participant's task is to guess the
word based on this incomplete acoustic signal. Both
Dollaghan (1998) and Montgomery (1999) found that
children with SLI did not differ from their age-matched
peers in the length of acoustic signal they needed to recognize highly familiar lexical items. However, Dollaghan
observed that children with SLI required significantly
more acoustic-phonetic information (i.e., longer gate durations) to recognize newly taught words as compared
with typical peers. Dollaghan argued that this pattern of
differences in the amount of acoustic-phonetic information needed by children with SLI to activate lexical
representations of familiar and unfamiliar words reflects
difficulty representing phonological information of newly
learned words.

Dollaghan's (1998) notion of difficulty representing
novel phonological information in children with SLI can
be further examined by investigating the effects of phonological neighborhoods. Neighborhood density refers to
the number of similar-sounding words in a language or,
in practice, a language corpus. The concept of neighborhood density reflects a view that words are represented
in terms of their phonological properties, and word recognition is seen as a process of discriminating among
competing representations that share similar phonological properties (Luce & Pisoni, 1998). Words that share
similar phonological features are seen as phonological
neighbors. Consistent with this type of representational
architecture, factors related to neighborhood structure
as well as word frequency have been shown to impact
word recognition in adults. High neighborhood density
has an inhibitory effect on word recognition (Garlock,
Walley, & Metsala, 2001; Luce & Pisoni, 1998; Vitevitch
& Luce, 1998, 1999). Adults are faster and more accurate
at recognizing words that have few similar-sounding
neighbors (i.e., come from sparse neighborhoods) and
slower and less accurate at recognizing words that have
many similar-sounding neighbors (i.e., come from dense
neighborhoods). The inhibitory effects of neighborhood
density are thought to be due to the activated lexical
representations competing with each other during the
process of spoken word recognition; the more neighbors,
the larger the effects of the competition (Luce & Pisoni,
1998).

Effects of Distributional Language
Regularity in Lexical Access

Distributional Language Regularity
in the Developing Lexicon

Effects of distributional language regularity, such as
word frequency, and neighborhood density on lexical
access are well documented in typical populations. Familiarity of words has been shown to impact lexical
access in typical adults (Luce & Pisoni, 1998) as well as
children (Metsala, 1997a; Walley, Michela, & Wood, 1995).
The observation that high-frequency words are processed
more efficiently as compared with low-frequency words

The notion of neighborhood density has been applied to studies of typical development in the context of
arguments for holistic lexical representations in young
children. Treiman and Baron (1981) proposed that young
children do not store words in terms of sequences of individual segments but rather as indivisible wholes. These
holistic lexical representations persist for an extended
period of time, presumably until the acquisition of many

382

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

similar-sounding words forces children to attend to segmental detail. Even though prelinguistic infants can discriminate between phonemic contrasts (Eimas, Siqueland,
Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971), they lack access to the segmental details of words. Preschoolers cannot, for example, repeat a word without a particular segment (Rosner
& Simon, 1971) or group words based on a single phoneme
(Treiman & Zukowski, 1991). Preschoolers also tend to
group words together based on overall similarity, whereas
adults most often group words based on a single shared
phoneme (Treiman & Breaux, 1982). Traditionally, these
findings have been interpreted as evidence for lack of
metalinguistic phonological awareness in young children.
However, evidence from studies of the structure of children's vocabularies and experimental paradigms, such
as the gating task, have led some investigators to believe
that the basic unit in children's phonological representations is not a phoneme but a larger unit (Fowler, 1991;
Metsala, 1997a). Based on analyses of children's vocabularies, Charles-Luce and Luce (1990, 1995) argued that
the phonological neighborhoods of young children are
sparsely populated, enabling holistic lexical representations. Over the course of development, representations
become more detailed as phonological neighborhoods become more densely populated. Supporting this view,
children require significantly more acoustic information
to recognize words in gating tasks when compared with
adults, perhaps reflecting the developmental process of
phonological specification of lexical representations
(Elliot, Hammer, & Evan, 1987; Garlock et al., 2001;
Walley et al., 1995). Furthermore, the inhibitory effects
of high neighborhood density on word recognition are
shown to be emergent in children. Although elementary
school-aged children have shown inhibitory effects of
high neighborhood density in gating and word repetition
tasks (Metsala, 1997a, 1997b; Garlock et al., 2001), these
effects are smaller when compared with adults (Metsala,
1997a, 1997b). Even younger children (preschoolers) do
not show any effects of neighborhood density on gating
durations (Garlock et al., 2001). Also consistent with the
idea of emerging effects of neighborhood structure,
younger children (preschoolers) exhibit the inhibitory
effects of neighborhood density only in repeating early
acquired words but not in repeating later acquired words
(Garlock et al., 2001; Metsala, 1997b). Finally, Storkel
(2002) reported that preschool children's performance on
a similarity classification task is dependent on neighborhood density, suggesting that in their vocabularies, words
in dense neighborhoods are represented with more detail
than words in sparse neighborhoods. Therefore, evidence
from multiple tasks suggests that the organization of
children's lexicons changes developmentally, and at any
given point, factors such as the number of neighbors, age
of acquisition, and word frequency have an impact on
how detailed particular lexical representations are.

Current Study
Given that lexical phonological representations of
typically developing children have been shown to become more detailed over the course the development, as
evidenced by emergent effects of neighborhood density,
and given that it has been suggested that children with
SLI may have difficulty establishing robust phonological
representations, we set out to investigate the effects of
word frequency and neighborhood density on lexical access in children with SLI. We hypothesized that if
children with SLI have holistic lexical representations,
we should find a smaller effect of neighborhood density
in the SLI group as compared with peers on the gating
task. Furthermore, we predicted that children with SLI
would be as efficient as their age-matched peers in accessing words that are high in frequency but less efficient in accessing words that are low in frequency.
The questions to be addressed were (a) would children with SLI and CA peers demonstrate differences in
the length of the acoustic chunks needed to access words
differing in word frequency and neighborhood density?
and (b) would the advantages of high word frequency
and low neighborhood density be greater or the same for
the SLI as compared with the CA group? That is, would
group interact with word frequency and/or neighborhood
density in identifying the gated words?

Method
Participants
Thirty-two children (ages 8;5-12;3), 16 with SLI
and 16 typically developing, chronological age and nonverbal IQ matched peers (CA), participated. The age
range was set to be comparable to the age range Metsala
(1997a, 1997b) used in her gating experiments. We used
a matching criterion of 9 months1 and 7 standard nonverbal IQ points. The children were part of larger ongoing
investigations at the Child Language and Cognitive Processes Laboratory and were originally recruited from the
Madison, Wisconsin, metropolitan area schools.
All children met the following inclusion criteria:
(a) Performance Intelligence Quotient above 85 as measured by the Leiter International Performance Scale
(LIPS; Roid & Miller, 1997); (b) normal hearing based
upon American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
guidelines for hearing screening; (c) normal oral and speech
motor abilities as observed by a certified (Certificate of
1
We used the relatively lenient matching criterion 9 months, as we
assumed that the changes in language development in this older age group
are not as rapid as in younger age groups. This is reflected, for example, in
standardized language tests such as the CELF-3 (Semel et al., 1995) that
provide raw-to-standard score conversions in 11-month intervals for the
older age groups.

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

383

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Clinical Competency) SLP; and (d) a monolingual, English home environment.

none of the typically developing children had a history of
services in speech, language, or learning disabilities.

Children were not eligible to participate if they had
any of the following conditions based upon parent report:
(a) neurodevelopmental disorders besides SLI, (b) emotional or behavioral disturbances, (c) motor deficits or
frank neurological signs, or (d) seizure disorders or use of
medication to control seizures.

As can be seen in Table 1, the SLI and CA groups differed significantly on all of the language measures. The
groups differed significantly on CELF-3 Expressive Language Scale, t(30) = 8.97, p < .05; CELF-3 Concepts and
Directions receptive subtest scores, t(30) = 8.00, p < .01;
PPTV standard scores, t(30) = 4.65, p < .05; and EVT
standard scores, t(30) = 5.43, p < .01. Children in the SLI
and CA groups did not differ significantly on nonverbal IQ
as measured by LIPS performance IQ, t(30) = 1.35, p > .05.

All children completed a series of standardized language testing. Receptive and expressive language skills
were assessed using the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals, Third Edition (CELF-3; Semel,
Wiig, & Secord, 1995). Receptive and expressive vocabulary was assessed using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition (PPVT-III; Dunn & Dunn, 1997)
and the Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT; Williams,
1997), respectively. The results for the standardized
testing are found in Table 1.
The language testing criterion for inclusion in the
SLI group was a score of -1.25 SD below the mean or
lower in one or both of the following: CELF-3 Expressive
Language Score and CELF-3 Receptive Language Score.
In addition, vocabulary knowledge was assessed using
PPVT-III Standard Score or EVT Standard Score. The
language testing criteria for inclusion in the CA group
was a score above -1.00 SD below the mean in all of the
following: CELF-3 Expressive Language Score, PPVT-III
Receptive Vocabulary Standard Score, and EVT Expressive
Vocabulary Standard Score. Typically developing children's
overall receptive language abilities were also screened
using the Concepts and Directions subtest of the CELF-3
receptive battery. None of the children in the typically
developing group received a standard score below -1 SD
in the Concepts and Directions subtest. Furthermore,

In the SLI group, 11 children were White, 3 were
African American, and 2 were biracial. In the CA group,
15 children were White and 1 was African American.

Stimuli
We chose a set of 48 monosyllabic target words based
on word frequency, neighborhood density, and initial
sounds. We obtained the word frequency counts for the
words from the spoken word count of 7-year-olds published by Moe et al. (1982) and the neighborhood density
counts from the Washington University in St. Louis
Speech and Hearing Laboratory (n.d.) neighborhood density calculator. The frequency counts for the calculator
were taken from the Hoosier Mental Lexicon (Nusbaum,
Pisoni, & Davis, 1984) based on the Brown corpus (Kucera
& Francis, 1967). We created four frequency categories,
resulting in 12 words in each category: (a) high word
frequency (WF), high neighborhood density (ND); (b) high
WF, low ND; (c) low WF, high ND; and (d) low WF, low
ND. More information on the choice of words, their
frequency counts, and the balancing of the frequency
counts are presented in the Appendix.

Table 1. The means (M), standard deviations (SD), age ranges in months, and standardized test scores for the specific language impairment (SLI)
and typically developing chronological age-matched (CA) groups.
Group

Age in months

LIPS

ELS

CD

RLS

PPTV

EVT

M
SD
Range

120.00
11.68
101-141

99.88
8.94
89-119

71.50*
11.62
50-84

5.65*
2.25
3-10

67.50
14.04
50-86

91.25*
10.75
69-112

81.44*
7.4
64-93

CA
M
SD
Range

121.25
13.73
101-147

104
8.31
87-119

110.06*
12.69
86-131

12.81*
2.83
8-17

107.19*
8.53
94-119

99.38*
10.92
86-124

SLI

Note. LIPS = Leiter International Performance IQ: Standard Score (M = 100, SD = 15). ELS = Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals: Expressive
Language Score (M = 100, SD = 15). CD = Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals: Concepts and Directions Receptive Standard Subtest Score
(M = 10, SD = 3). RLS = Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals: Receptive Language Score (M = 100, SD = 15). PPTV = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test: Standard Score (M = 100, SD = 15). EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test: Standard Score (M = 100, SD = 15).
*p < .05, two-tailed t test, equal variances assumed.

384

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

For the purpose of controlling for the perceptual
difficulty of the initial sounds of the words, we equated
the words with initial consonants: Each of the four frequency categories included words beginning with the
exact same consonants, with one exception. Whereas for
the three categories (a) high WF, high ND; (c) low WF,
high ND; and (d) low WF, low ND one word began with
the sound /n /, for the (b) high WF, low ND category
we replaced the word beginning with /n / with a word
beginning with /m /. We resorted to this because of
the limited number of words that would fill all the
criteria.
A female speaker with an upper-Midwestern accent
read the words in a soundproof chamber. We recorded
the words directly to a Windows-based waveform program digitizing at 44.1 kHz with 16-bit resolution. Each
of the words was recorded multiple times at varying
speaking rates, and the duration closet to 660 ms was
chosen. We used the Sound Edit program to create the
gated stimuli. Stimuli including gates at 120, 180, 240,
300, 360, 420, 480, 540, 600, and 660 ms duration were
created. We inserted a signal tone to alert the child at the
beginning of each trial and gave 3 s of silence after each
trial to allow for a response. For the presentation of the
words, we followed a duration-blocked format. We did
not present the different gate durations for a particular
word temporally adjacent (successive format), but instead, we presented particular gate durations for all words
temporally adjacent (duration-blocked format). For example, we presented all 120-ms gates for several words before
moving to 180-ms gates. Evidence from typical adults and
children indicate that the most commonly used successive
format produces isolation points at later gates than those
found in a duration-blocked format (Walley et al., 1995).
Investigators have suggested that this is perhaps due to
factors such as perseveration and negative feedback from
the previous gate durations. We speculated that children
with SLI might be more vulnerable to such effects when
compared with typically developing children and chose a
duration-blocked format, unlike Dollaghan (1998) and
Montgomery (1999).
We created four different CDs with 12 gated words
on each of the CDs. Each of the four CDs contained 3 randomly chosen gated words from the four frequency
categories. We counterbalanced the order of the presentation of the four CDs over the two groups.

Procedure
The standardized testing was completed during
three earlier visits to the Child Language and Cognitive
Processes Laboratory. To ensure that we had the most
current testing information, we confirmed that no longer
than 8 months had passed since the standardized testing
was conducted.

For the experimental task, we asked the children to
play a guessing game in which they would hear pieces of
words and try to guess the word after each piece. We
encouraged the children to guess even when they were
not sure. The following instructions were read to the
child: "Now you will play a word guessing game. Your job
is to listen to some pieces of words. First, you' ll hear a
little beep. Then you' ll hear a piece of a word. Then I
want you to guess what the whole word is. Then you'll
hear another beep, another piece of a different word and
you' ll make another guess. At first the pieces will be
short. Then they' ll get longer. You' ll get ten chances to
guess each word. Sometimes you might need to change
your guess, when you hear a bigger piece of the word.
That's fine. I just want you to make your very best guess
after every piece you hear. Let's practice." The children
completed four gated practice words. During the practice, all children learned to respond appropriately after
the gates.
We presented the stimuli to the children in a soundproof chamber at the 75-dB level with the speaker positioned approximately 2 ft away from the child. We
recorded the children's responses using a Sony minidisc
recorder and an external Lavalier microphone and simultaneously handwrote the responses orthographically
on an answer sheet.
Completion of each of the four gating CDs took approximately 10 min. In between the four CDs, children
were offered short breaks and also completed parts of a
categorical perception task (Coady, Evans, MainelaArnold, & Kluender, 2007). The whole session lasted approximately 1.5 hr including a longer snack break halfway
through the session.
Coding. We transcribed the children's responses orthographically after each gate. In determining whether
the word was correctly identified, we allowed minor articulatory errors, with the criterion being whether the
word could be correctly identified by the transcriber.
Further, we did not consider addition of morphemes an
error; for example, played was considered correct for the
word play. We determined three counts for each child:
(a) point of target first sound, or the gate at which the
child first produced a word with the correct initial sound,
for example, bear as a correct target first sound for the
word big; (b) point of isolation, or the gate at which the
child first correctly identified the target word, whether
or not they changed their response at subsequent gate
durations; and (c) point of acceptance, or the gate after
which the child did not change from a correct response.
When determining the point of acceptance, we did not
count cases in which the child did not respond at all after
a gate towards an altering of a word. Not responding after each gate was rare. All children responded to all of the
words. If the child did not correctly repeat the word after
the 10th gate (i.e., after the whole word was presented), a

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

385

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

value of 10.5 was assigned. Consider the hypothetical example of the child hearing progressively larger acoustic
portions of the word big by responding (1) "will," (2) "bear,"
(3) "big," (4) "bit," (5) "big," (6) "big," (7) "big," (8) "big,"
(9) "big," and (10) "big." In this case, the point of target
first sound is the second gate, in which the child first
selected a word starting with the target / b/. The point of
isolation is the third gate, in which the child first correctly identified the target word big, even with the incorrect response at the next gate duration. The point of
acceptance is the fifth gate, after which the child did not
deviate from the correct response.
Reliability. We established reliability of the coding
by having a second person code 19% of the children's answers. Point-to-point reliability for the three variables was
high: 95% for the point of correct first sound, 97% for the
point of isolation, and 97% for the point of acceptance.

Results
Point of Target First Sound
This analysis was aimed at investigating the effects of word frequency and neighborhood density on the

children's perception of the first sounds of the gated
words and children's ability to activate words beginning
with the perceived sound in their lexicons. The means
and standard deviations for this variable are presented
in Table 2. As can be seen, the group differences were
minimal.
We performed a Group x Word Frequency x
Neighborhood Density analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
point of target first sound as the dependent variable. The
group differences did not reach significance. The main
effect of group, F(1, 30) = 3.33, p > .05, h2 = .10, power = .42;
the Group x Word Frequency interaction, F(1, 30) = .00,
p > .05, h2 = 0, power = .05; the Group x Neighborhood
Density interaction, F(1, 30) = .14, p > .05, h2 = 0, power =
.07; and the Frequency x Neighborhood density x Group
interaction, F(1, 30) = 1.38, p > .05, h2 = .04, power = .21,
were all nonsignificant, suggesting that the children in
the SLI and CA groups were equally proficient at perceiving the first sounds of the gated words and activating words beginning with the perceived sound in their
lexicons.
For the two groups collapsed, the Word frequency x
Neighborhood density interaction reached significance,
F(1, 30) = 4.95, p < .05, h2 = .14, power = .68. Children

Table 2. The SLI and CA groups' means (M) and standard deviations (SD) for the point of target first sound, the point
of isolation, and the point of acceptance for the four frequency categories: (a) high word frequency (WF), high
neighborhood density (ND); (b) high WF, low ND; (c) low WF, high ND; and (d) low WF, low ND.
Group

High WF, high ND

High WF, low ND

Low WF, high ND

Low WF, low ND

1.10
0.13

1.15
0.17

1.32
0.29

1.47
0.53

1.46
0.67

1.47
0.64

1.57
0.78

5.38
0.55

4.18
0.96

4.85
0.93

5.48
0.74

4.97
0.54

4.21
0.70

4.66
0.56

4.91
0.55

5.95
0.46

5.25
1.07

5.90
0.79

6.50
0.60

5.58
0.60

5.09
0.65

5.58
0.61

5.65
0.70

Point of target first sound
SLI
M
1.26
SD
0.29
CA
M
SD
Point of isolation
SLI
M
SD
CA
M
SD
Point of acceptance
SLI
M
SD
CA
M
SD
Note.

386

The mean values reflect Gates 1 through 10, ranging from 120 to 660 ms in duration.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

produced words with correct initial sounds at significantly earlier gates when the words were of high rather
than low frequency and came from a sparse neighborhood, F(1, 30) = 5.87, p < .05. No effect of word frequency
was observed when the stimuli words were from a dense
neighborhood, F(1, 30) = .56, p > .05. The main effects of
word frequency and neighborhood density did not reach
significance: word frequency, F(1, 30) = 1.38, p > .05, h2 =
.04, power = .20; neighborhood density, F(1, 30) = .28,
p > .05, h2 = .01, power = .08.

Point of Isolation
We investigated the point of isolation, that is, the
two groups' ability to isolate the target words in their lexicons based on acoustic chunks of the words. The means
and standard deviations for this variable are presented in
Table 2 and Figure 1. Again, the observed group differences were minimal.
We performed a Group x Word Frequency x Neighborhood Density ANOVA with point of isolation as the
dependent variable. We did not find group differences in
children's ability to activate target words in their lexicons. The main effect of group did not reach significance,
F(1, 30) = 2.57, p > .05, h2 = .08, power = .34, nor did the
interactions with the group: Group x Word Frequency x
Neighborhood Density, F(1, 30) = 3.22, p > .05, h2 = .10,
power = .41; Group x Word Frequency, F(1, 30) = .75,
p > .05, h2 = .02, power = .13; and Group x Neighborhood
Density, F(1, 30) = .02, p < .05, h2 = 0, power = .05. This
suggests that children with SLI and CA peers were

Figure 1. The point of isolation by word frequency (WF) and
neighborhood density (ND) for the SLI and CA groups.

equally efficient in activating the correct target words for
all word frequency-neighborhood density combinations.
We did, however, find effects of distributional regularity for the two groups combined. A significant Word
Frequency x Neighborhood Density interaction was
found, F(1, 30) = 39.50, p < .05, h2 = .57, power = 1.0. In
the case of high-frequency words, words with many neighbors were identified at significantly later gates than
words with few neighbors, F(1, 30) = 33.83, p < .05. In the
case of low-frequency words, words with many neighbors
were identified at significantly earlier gates than words
with few neighbors, F(1, 30) = 15.07, p < .05. A significant
main effect of word frequency was also found, F(1, 30) =
7.07, p < .05, h2 = .19, power = .73, indicating that for both
groups, the high-frequency words were identified at earlier gates than the low-frequency words. The main effect of neighborhood density also reached significance,
F(1, 30) = 10.35, p > .05, h2 = .26, power = .88, indicating
that overall, words from dense neighborhoods were identified at later gate durations than words from sparse
neighborhoods.

Point of Acceptance
We then examined the point of acceptance, that is,
the impact of word frequency and neighborhood density
on the two groups' ability to commit to the once-correctly
identified target words in their lexicons. We performed
a Group x Word Frequency x Neighborhood Density
ANOVA with point of acceptance as the dependent
variable. Table 2 and Figure 2 present these data. As can
be seen in both, we did find group differences for this
variable.
Figure 2. The point of acceptance by word frequency (WF) and
neighborhood density (ND) for the SLI and CA groups.

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

387

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

A significant main effect of group, F(1, 30) = 5.32,
p < .05, h2 = .15, power = .61, shows that the SLI group
did not settle on the correct response until a later gate
duration than the CA group, suggesting that the SLI
group appeared to vacillate between multiple word candidates at later gates when compared with the CA group.
Although the SLI group appeared to receive slightly
more facilitation from high word frequency when compared with the CA group, the Group x Word Frequency
interaction did not reach significance: Group x Word
Frequency interaction, F(1, 30) = 3.12, p > .05, h2 = .09,
power = .40. The Group x Neighborhood Density interaction, F(1, 30) = .97, p > .05, h2 = .03, power = .16, and the
Group x Word Frequency x Neighborhood Density interaction, F(1, 30) = 2.46, p > .05, h2 = .08, power = .33, did
not reach significance either.
Collapsed across the levels of group, effects of distributional regularity were found. The Word Frequency x
Neighborhood Density interaction was significant, F(1, 30) =
15.34, p < .05, h2 = .34, power = .97. For high-frequency
words, children narrowed down the correct word candidates from sparse neighborhoods at earlier gates than
words from dense neighborhoods, F(1, 30) = 14.25, p < .05.
For low-frequency words, children narrowed down words
from high density neighborhoods at earlier gates than
words from low density neighborhoods, F(1, 30) = 6.37,
p < .05. In addition, a significant main effect of word frequency, F(1, 30) = 24.49, p < .05, h2 = .45, power = 1.0, was
found, indicating that overall, high-frequency words were
narrowed down at earlier gates than low-frequency words.
The main effect of neighborhood density did not reach
significance, F(1, 30) = 2.80, p > .05, h2 = .09, power = .37.

Statistical Power
Because we did not find significant group differences
for the point of target first sound, isolation, and acceptance ANOVA analyses (with the exception of main effect
of group for the point of acceptance), we considered the
possibility that the lack of significant effects was due to
insufficient statistical power. Indeed, the only significant
group difference, the main effect of group for point of acceptance, had an effect size of h2 = .15 and a power of .61.
This suggests that with power above .80, the effect size
for this significant effect might have been larger and that
the experiment might have lacked statistical power to
detect smaller effects for the other group differences.
Therefore, we conducted the three ANOVA analyses with
3 additional participants added to the both the SLI and
CA groups. This resulted in an SLI group of 19 children
and CA group of 19 children (ages 8;5-12;3). The 3 added
children filled the criteria described in the Participants
section, and the groups were matched for chronological
age but not for nonverbal IQ. With the 6 additional
children added to the two groups, the children in the SLI

388

group had significantly lower LIPS performance IQ scores
in comparison to the CA group, t(36) = 2.67, p < .05. For
the three ANOVA analyses repeated with these larger
groups, the pattern of significance of findings was exactly
the same as we found for the smaller groups. As was the
case for the original ANOVA analyses, the only significant
group difference was a significant main effect of group for
point of acceptance, F(1, 36) = 8.56, p < .05, h2 = .19, power =
.81. Importantly, with the power of .81 combined with a
relatively small detected effect size of h2 = .19, we concluded that our experiment had sufficient power to detect relatively small group differences.

Nontarget Words
Because we found an overall group difference for the
point of acceptance, we performed an analysis of the nontarget words children activated during the gating task.
Children in the SLI group produced significantly more
nontarget words per each gated word than children in the
CA group (SLI: M = 4.30, SD = .68; CA: M = 3.46,
SD = .77), F(1, 30) = 10.5, p < .05, h2 = .26. We then divided the nontarget words the children produced into
(a) words sharing the initial sound with the target word,
(b) words sharing a rhyme with the target word, and
(c) words with no apparent relationship to the target
words. The most common nontarget words the children
produced shared an initial sound with the target word.
The children with SLI produced a slightly smaller percentage of nontarget words that shared initial sounds
(SLI: M = 94%, SD = 6.35; CA: M = 98%, SD = 5.91), but
this difference did not reach significance, F(1, 30) = 3.71,
p > .05, h2 = .11. Children in both groups produced few
nontarget words that shared a rhyme with the target
word (SLI: M = 1.91%, SD = .27; CA: M = 0.80%, SD = .20)
and the difference between the two groups was not significant, F(1, 30) = 1.94, p > .05, h2 = .06. Although
nontarget words that bore no apparent relationship to
the target words were not common in either group,
children with SLI produced a larger percentage of these
types of nontarget words (SLI: M = 5.92%, SD = 2.71; CA:
M = 3.81%, SD = 3.16), F(1, 30) = 4.11, p < .05, h2 = .12.

Discussion
Our main prediction was that lexical representations in children with SLI differ from those found in
typical CA peers; that is, the two groups are differently
affected by word frequency and neighborhood density in
perceiving words in the context of the gating task. More
specifically, we predicted that if children with SLI have
holistic phonological representations of words, we
should see smaller effect of neighborhood density on
gating durations in the SLI group as compared with CA
peers. Furthermore, we predicted that children with SLI

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

would be as efficient as their age-matched peers in accessing words that are high in frequency but that they
would differ from their age-matched peers in accessing
words that are low in frequency. We analyzed three
measures: (a) the point of target first sound--the gate at
which the child expressed a word beginning with the target sound, (b) the point of isolation--the gate at which
the child first expressed the target word, and (c) the
point of acceptance--the gate after which the child did
not alter the once-correctly identified word. Contrary to
what we predicted, we found no interactions between
group and distributional language regularity (i.e., word
frequency and /or neighborhood density) on any of the
measures. This suggests that at least for the words and
the distributional regularity levels and/or the age range
we examined, children with SLI did not exhibit evidence
for holistic lexical representations. Even though we found
that the two groups of children were not differentially
affected by word frequency and neighborhood density, we
did find effects of both for both groups: In the case of highfrequency words, words with many neighbors were identified at significantly later gates than words with few
neighbors. In the case of low-frequency words, words with
many neighbors were identified at significantly earlier
gates than words with few neighbors. For both groups,
high-frequency words were identified at earlier gates
than the low-frequency words, and words from dense
neighborhoods were identified at later gate durations
than words from sparse neighborhoods. These results are
consistent with what have been reported for both typically
developing children and adults (Grosjean, 1980; Metsala,
1997a; Walley et al., 1995) and give further evidence for the
notion that children with SLI (at least in this age range)
may not have holistic representations of lexical items.
In addition to finding no group differences for effects
of distributional regularity, we found no overall group
differences for point of correct first sound and point of
isolation. This suggests that the two groups were close to
equally proficient at perceiving the initial sounds, at
retrieving words beginning with the sound from their
lexicons, and also at activating the correct target words
in their lexicons. This finding is consistent with the gating study conducted by Montgomery (1999) but somewhat different from the gating study conducted by
Dollaghan (1998). Dollaghan found significant group
differences for point of target first sound and for the
point of isolation in the case of newly taught words. We
expected that this might translate into significant group
differences for the point of isolation for low-frequency
words in this study, suggesting these children's representations of low-frequency words are more holistic when
compared with peers. This was not the case; children with
SLI were not differently affected by word frequency when
compared with peers. Our finding suggests that children's representations of words that are well within

their vocabularies are not represented in a holistic manner. It is possible, however, that the low-frequency words
in this study were not "low enough." They were obtained
from vocabulary counts of 7-year-olds, whereas the children participating in this study were older. It is conceivable that the performance of the two groups might
have differed if the words were lower in frequency and if
the neighborhood density differences of the stimuli were
more extreme. Alternatively, if the children with SLI
were younger, we might have found group differences,
which would have suggested a slight delay in development of detailed phonological representations of words
in SLI.
The current results provide no evidence for the
notion that children with SLI have lexical-phonological
representations that are more holistic than those of their
CA peers. However, this finding does not necessarily
mean that children with SLI have lexical representations that are as detailed as those found in typically
developing children. Children with SLI may still exhibit
less robust, imprecise, or inadequate representations of
lexical properties that the word frequency and neighborhood density-adjusted gating task was not suited to
reveal; for example, these children's semantic representations may be less detailed.
For point of acceptance, the gate after which the
children did not alter the once-identified word, we found
significant overall group differences. Children in the SLI
group appeared to vacillate between multiple word candidates at significantly later gates when compared with
children in the CA group. An additional analysis of
nontarget words children produced revealed that children with SLI, like their CA matched peers, were most
likely to produce words sharing the beginning target
sound. Further, children with SLI more often produced
words that bore no apparent phonological relationship to
target words, relative to typically developing children. It
is unclear at this point what underlies this vacillation
and instability. The phenomenon of instability or vulnerability to competition has recently arisen in other
studies using different methodologies. When compared
with peers, children with SLI have been reported to
exhibit poor suppression of unrelated meanings in
sentence processing (Norbury, 2005). Children with SLI
also experienced greater interference in a nonverbal
procedural learning task (Tomblin, Mainela-Arnold, &
Zhang, 2007) and greater activation of competing unrelated words in an eye-tracking experiment (McMurray,
Samuelson, Lee, & Tomblin, 2006). It appears that vulnerability to competition or lack of inhibition may characterize these children's learning and processing across
different modalities. It is also unclear if vulnerability to
competition is directly related to the nature of these
children's lexical representations. It is possible that the
vulnerability to competition is not directly linked to the

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

389

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

specific lexical representations but rather involves some
domain general processes, such as attention. Hoffman
and Gillam (2004) argued that children with SLI have
deficiencies in the executive function of the working
memory. In the Baddeley (1992) model of working memory, the central executive is the "attentional controller"
responsible for coordinating information from the
different slave systems. The concept of central executive
as an attentional controller is descriptive rather than
explanatory in that it does not explain how the central
executive "knows" what to direct the attention to. What
are the determinants of attention switching? To what
extent does the strength of lexical activations impact
attention switching? Finally, the concept of executive
function as a part of working memory implies a system
that is limited in capacity. The gating task does not
involve an apparent memory component that would measure capacity limitation in terms of processing space, and
therefore, the concept of executive function does not
sufficiently explain the results in this study.
Cowan (1999) has proposed a model of working
memory in which attentional control plays a central role
and in which capacity limitations in terms of processing
space are less important. In his model, working memory
capacity reflects the scope of attention, that is, the processes that are attended to in a given task. The developmental changes in processing capacity that occur in
childhood are related to "(1) persistence of information
that is an activated state, (2) the capacity of the focus of
attention, and (3) the rate at which information can be
transferred from activated memory to focus of attention"
(Cowan, 2003, p. 444). Similarly, current developments
in connectionist modeling and neuroscience suggest that
what has been referred to as working memory capacity
may comprise of global competition of activation in largescale neural networks with a top-down attentional bias
from prefrontal cortex (PFC) circuits (for review, see Maia
& Cleeremans, 2005). On one hand, in connectionist models and dynamical systems theory words can be thought of
as "attractors" in the child's "language state space" that
differ in their strength of activation (Elman, 1995). Newly
emerging skills are more vulnerable to interference
effects from competing processes than older, well-learned
processes. As learning occurs, skills become sufficiently
active, and the magnitude of the competitor effect is
altered (Cohen, Dunbar, & McClelland, 1990; Evans,
2007; Magnuson, Tanenhaus, Aslin, & Dahan, 2003). On
the other hand, PFC circuits appear to maintain contextual representations that bias the competition between processes and modify the focus of attention quickly
and flexibly (e.g., Gray, Chabris, & Braver, 2003; Maia
et al., 2005). Thus, contextual task instructions maintained by the PFC activation can influence the outcome
of the global competition by biasing network activations
associated with the target process.

390

Given this dynamic developmental view to vulnerability to competition, the results of the point of acceptance analysis and nontarget word analysis are consistent
with two possibilities. The first possibility is that something in the lexical representations of children with SLI
resembles those of newly learned words in the lexicons of typically developing children. If target lexical
items are weakly represented in children with SLI, this
means that in lexical access tasks, target stimuli will be
more vulnerable to lexical competitors for children with
SLI than for their nonimpaired peers. If this is the case,
this "something" was not captured by the word frequency and neighborhood density analyses and should be a
focus of future research. The second possibility is that
children with SLI may experience weaker contextual
PFC activations and therefore less top-down competition
bias. With the target word representation not receiving
enough biasing activation from the contextual PFC representations, the competing lexical network activations
might occasionally end up as the winning network coalition. In either case, we would anticipate low confidence levels in committing to a lexical target--precisely
what we observed in the point of acceptance analysis. The
nontarget word analysis showed that both children with
SLI and typically developing children experienced the
most interference from words beginning with similar
initial sounds. Furthermore, children with SLI produced
proportionally more nontarget words that bore no
apparent relationship to the target words than did the
CA group. This finding may be explained by the
duration-blocked gating format we chose for this study.
In the duration-blocked format we presented all 120-ms
gates for the words prior to moving on to 180-ms and
later gates, in contrast to presenting the different gate
durations for each word and then moving to the next
word. Given that verbal working memory studies show
that children with SLI are more vulnerable to interference from previously presented words (Ellis Weismer,
Evans, & Hesketh, 1999), it may be that our children with
SLI were vulnerable to competition from words activated
prior to the target stimulus. One possible interpretation
is that children with SLI experienced more interference
from the words they had just said during the previous
trial. As the next word was presented at the same gate
duration, its activation strength would have to compete
with the activation of the word the child had just spoken.
Future research should investigate what governs
the functions of inhibition and competition in lexical processing in other tasks in children with SLI. It is essential
for us to understand how susceptibility to competition
changes as a function of learning and what kind of impairment might produce this susceptibility in children
with SLI. Understanding the lack of inhibition in processing and learning may to bring us closer to understanding cognitive mechanisms associated with SLI.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Acknowledgments
Research reported in this article was supported by two
grants from the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders (F31 DC 6536, Elina Mainela-Arnold,
Principal Investigator, and R01 DC 5650-01, Julia Evans,
Principal Investigator). We thank Lisbeth Heilmann for her
assistance in collecting the data and Karissa Fronk, Majorie
Maack, Mathew Keeler, and Dana Accola for their assistance
in coding the data. We thank Martha Alibali, Maryellen
MacDonald, Susan Ellis Weismer, and Lynn Turkstra for
their helpful comments at different stages of this research, and
Bruce Tomblin, Bob McMurray, and Li Sheng for discussions
on the topic of lexical activation. Finally, we are most grateful
to the parents and children who participated in the study. Parts
of this research were reported in the first author's doctoral
dissertation at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1992, January 31). Working memory.
Science, 25, 556-559.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1997). Uncommon understanding: Development and disorder in language comprehension in children.
Hove, United Kingdom: Psychology Press.
Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity neighbourhoods of words in young children's lexicons. Journal
of Child Language, 17, 205-215.
Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. A. (1995). An examination
of similarity neighbourhoods in young children's receptive
vocabularies. Journal of Child Language, 22, 727-735.
Coady, J. A., Evans, J. L., Mainela-Arnold, E., &
Kluender, K. R. (2007). Children with specific language
impairments perceive speech most categorically when
tokens are natural and meaningful. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 41-57.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332-361.
Cowan, N. (1999). Embedded-processes model of working
memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah ( Eds.), Models of working
memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive
control ( pp. 62-101). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, N. (2003). Comparisons of developmental modeling
frameworks and levels of analysis in cognition: Connectionist and dynamic systems theories deserve attention, but
don't yet explain attention. Developmental Science, 6, 440-447.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1987). Fast mapping in normal and
language-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 52, 218-222.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1998). Spoken word recognition in children
with and without specific language impairment. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 19, 193-207.
Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Edwards, J., & Lahey, M. (1996). Auditory lexical decisions
of children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 1263-1273.

Eimas, P. D., Siqueland, E. R., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, J.
(1971, January 22). Speech perception in infants. Science,
171, 303-306.
Elliot, L. L., Hammer, M. A., & Evan, K. E. (1987).
Perception of gated, highly familiar spoken monosyllabic
nouns by children, teenagers, and older adults. Perception &
Psychophysics, 42, 150-157.
Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. J. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.
Ellis Weismer, S., & Hesketh, L. J. (1993). The influence of
prosodic and gestural cues on novel word acquisition by
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 1013-1025.
Ellis Weismer, S., & Hesketh, L. J. (1996). Lexical learning
by children with specific language impairment: Effects of
linguistic input presented at varying speaking rates.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 177-190.
Elman, J. (1995). Language as a dynamical system. In F. Port
& T. van Gelder ( Eds.), Mind as motion ( pp. 195-225).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Evans, J. L. (2007). The emergence of language: A dynamical
systems account. In E. Hoff & M. Shatz ( Eds.), Blackwell
Handbook of language development ( pp. 128-148). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley.
Fowler, A. (1991). How early phonological development might
set the stages for phoneme awareness. In S. Brady & D.
Shankweiler ( Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy
( pp. 97-117). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Garlock, V. M., Walley, A. C., & Metsala, J. L. (2001). Ageof-acquisition, word frequency, and neighborhood density
effects on spoken word recognition by children and adults.
Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 468-492.
Gray, J. R., Chabris, C. F., & Braver, T. S. (2003). Neural
mechanisms of general fluid intelligence. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 316-322.
Grosjean, F. (1980). Spoken word recognition processes and the
gating paradigm. Perception & Psychophysics, 28, 267-282.
Hoffman, L. M., & Gillam, R. B. (2004). Verbal and spatial
information processing constraints in children with specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 50, 41-57.
Kucera, H., & Francis, V. W. (1967). Computational analysis
of present-day American English. Providence, RI: Brown
University Press.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with
specific language impairment name pictures more slowly
than their peers? Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
39, 1081-1098.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1999). Naming errors of children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 195-205.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L. B., Nippold, M. A., Kail, R., & Hale, C. A.
(1983). Picture naming in language-impaired children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 26, 609-615.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken words:
The neighborhood activation model. Ear and Hearing, 19, 1-36.

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

391

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Magnuson, J. S., Tanenhaus, M. K., Aslin, R. N., & Dahan,
D. (2003). The time course of spoken word learning and
recognition: Studies with artificial lexicons. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 202-227.

Storkel, H. L. (2002). Restructuring of similarity neighborhoods in the developing mental lexicon. Journal of Child
Language, 29, 251-274.

Maia, T. V., & Cleeremans, A. (2005). Consciousness: Converging insights from connectionist modeling and neuroscience. Trends in Cognitive Science, 9, 397-404.

Tomblin, J. B., Mainela-Arnold, E., & Zhang, X. (2007).
Procedural learning in adolescents with and without specific
language impairment. Language Learning and Development, 3, 269-293.

McGregor, K. K., & Appel, A. (2002). On the relation between mental representation and naming in a child with
specific language impairment. Clinical Linguistics and
Phonetics, 16, 1-20.

Tomblin, J. B., Records, N. L., & Zhang, X. Y. (1996). A
system for the diagnosis of specific language impairment in
kindergarten children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 1284-1294.

McGregor, K. K., Newman, R. M., Reilly, R. M., & Capone,
N. C. (2002). Semantic representation and naming in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 998-1014.

Treiman, R., & Baron, J. (1981). Segmental analysis ability:
Development and relation to reading ability. In G. E.
MacKinnon & T. G. Walker ( Eds.), Reading research:
Advances in theory and practice ( pp. 159-198). New York:
Academic Press.

McMurray, B., Samuelson, V., Lee, S., & Tomblin, J. B.
(2006, June). Eye-movements reveal the time course of
spoken word recognition in normal and language-impaired
adolescents. Poster session presented at the Symposium on
Research in Child Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Metsala, J. L. (1997a). An examination of word frequency and
neighborhood density in the development of spoken-word
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 25, 47-56.
Metsala, J. L. (1997b). Spoken word recognition in reading
disabled children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89,
159-169.
Moe, A., Hopkins, C., & Rush, T. (1982). The vocabulary of
first grade children. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Montgomery, J. W. (1999). Recognition of gated words by
children with specific language impairment: An examination of lexical mapping. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 735-743.
Norbury, C. F. (2005). Barking up the wrong tree? Lexical
ambiguity resolution in children with language impairments and autistic spectrum disorders. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 90, 142-171.
Nusbaum, H. C., Pisoni, D. B., & Davis, C. K. (1984). Sizing
up the Hoosier mental lexicon: Measuring the familiarity of
20,000 words. Bloomington, IN: Speech Research Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Indiana University.
Oetting, J. B., Rice, M. L., & Swank, L. K. (1995). Quick
incidental-learning (QUIL) of words by school-age children
with and without SLI. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 38, 434-445.
Rice, M. L., Oetting, J. B., Marquis, J., Bode, J., & Pae, S. Y.
(1994). Frequency of input effects on word comprehension
of children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 106-122.
Roid, M., & Miller, L. (1997). Leiter International Performance Scale, Revised. Wood Dale, IL: Stoelting.
Rosner, J., & Simon, P. D. (1971). Auditory analysis test: An
initial report. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 4, 384-392.

Treiman, R., & Breaux, A. M. (1982). Common phoneme and
overall similarity relations among spoken syllables--Their
use by children and adults. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 11, 569-598.
Treiman, R., & Zukowski, A. (1991). Levels of phonological
awareness. In S. Brady & D. Shankweiler ( Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy ( pp. 67-84). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Vitevitch, M. S., & Luce, P. A. (1998). When words compete:
Levels of processing in perception of spoken words. Psychological Science, 9, 325-329.
Vitevitch, M. S., & Luce, P. A. (1999). Probabilistic phonotactics and neighborhood activation in spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 374-408.
Walley, A. C., Michela, V. L., & Wood, D. R. (1995). The
gating paradigm--Effects of presentation format on spoken
word recognition by children and adults. Perception &
Psychophysics, 57, 343-351.
Washington University Speech and Hearing Lab. (n.d.).
Speech & Hearing Lab neighborhood database. Available
from http://128.252.27.56/neighborhood / Home.asp.
Watkins, R. V., Kelly, D. J., Harbers, H. M., & Hollis, W.
(1995). Measuring children's lexical diversity: Differentiating typical and impaired language learners. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 1349-1355.
Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test. Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Services.
Received January 22, 2007
Accepted July 3, 2007
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/ 028)
Contact author: Elina Mainela-Arnold, Department of
Communication Sciences and Disorders, Pennsylvania
State University, 401K Ford Building, University Park,
PA 16802-3100. E-mail: ezm3@psu.edu.

Semel, E., Wiig, E., & Secord, W. (1995). Clinical Evaluation
of Language Fundamentals-3 (CELF-3). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.

392

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 381-393 * April 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix. Log word frequency (WF) and neighborhood density (ND; number of neighbors) for four categories of
target words: (1) high WF, high ND; (2) high WF, low ND; (3) low WF, high ND; and (4) low WF, low ND.
(1) High WF, high ND

(2) High WF, low ND

(3) Low WF, high ND

(4) Low WF, low ND

Word

WF

ND

Word

WF

ND

Word

WF

ND

Word

WF

ND

Big
Bike
Call
Cut
Fight
Hard
Hot
Leaf
Name
Pick
Sit
Work

6.54
4.62
4.41
4.14
4.20
5.20
5.15
4.25
3.71
4.92
4.65
4.56

20
19
25
25
24
18
28
19
16
34
36
20

Black
Blue
Cold
Count
Fish
High
House
Lunch
Move
Play
Soft
Watch

5.00
4.84
4.45
3.91
4.91
4.29
4.76
3.99
4.50
6.66
4.34
5.69

1
12
11
7
13
9
5
7
8
3
5
5

Bath
Boil
Cash
Comb
Fur
Heel
Hum
Lock
Nest
Poke
Sore
Wit

0
0
0
0
1.39
0.69
1.39
0.69
0
0.69
1.61
0

17
15
26
24
20
29
25
32
15
27
32
31

Beard
Blame
Cough
Cure
Fetch
Hire
Huge
Lamp
Nurse
Plant
Search
Wound

0
0
0
0
0
0
1.79
1.39
0
1.10
0
0

6
7
11
1
8
5
2
11
10
8
11
10

M

4.70

23.70

M

4.82

7.17

M

0.54

24.40

M

0.36

7.50

Note. When defining neighbors for the words, words with an addition, a deletion, or a substitution of one sound were included in the neighborhood.
When using the neighborhood calculator, a familiarity criterion of 6 was applied to exclude words with low familiarity ratings from the neighborhoods.
Because word frequency and neighborhood density are correlated (e.g., many high-frequency words are also high in neighborhood density), the words were
chosen so that the effects of word frequency and neighborhood density can be separated. This was done by making word choices that maintained the
following significant and nonsignificant differences: (a) Word frequency for the high WF, high ND words (mean WF = 4.70) and the high WF, low ND (mean
WF = 4.82) did not significantly differ, t (23) = 0.40, p > .05. (b) Word frequency for the low WF, high ND words (mean WF = 0.54) and low WF, low
ND words (mean WF = 0.36) did not significantly differ, t(23) = 0.80, p > .05. (c) Neighborhood density for the high WF, high ND words (mean ND = 23.7)
and low WF, high ND words (mean ND = 24.4) did not significantly differ, t (23) = 0.3, p > .05. (d) Neighborhood density for the high WF, low ND words
(mean ND = 7.2) and the low WF, low ND words (mean ND = 7.5) did not significantly differ, t(23) = 0.23, p > .05.

Mainela-Arnold et al.: Lexical Representation in SLI

393

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

