Maturation of Visual and
Auditory Temporal Processing
in School-Aged Children
Piers Dawes
Dorothy V. M. Bishop
Oxford Study of Children's Communication
Impairments, Oxford, United Kingdom

Purpose: To examine development of sensitivity to auditory and visual temporal
processes in children and the association with standardized measures of auditory
processing and communication.
Methods: Normative data on tests of visual and auditory processing were collected
on 18 adults and 98 children aged 6-10 years of age. Auditory processes included
detection of pitch from temporal cues using iterated rippled noise and frequency
modulation detection at 2 Hz, 40 Hz, and 240 Hz. Visual processes were coherent form
and coherent motion detection. Test-retest data were gathered on 21 children.
Results: Performance on perceptual tasks improved with age, except for fine temporal
processing (iterated rippled noise) and coherent form perception, both of which were
relatively stable over the age range. Within-subject variability (as assessed by track
width) did not account for age-related change. There was no evidence for a common
temporal processing factor, and there were no significant associations between
perceptual task performance and communication level (Children's Communication
Checklist, 2nd ed.; D. V. M. Bishop, 2003) or speech-based auditory processing
(SCAN-C; R. W. Keith, 2000).
Conclusions: The auditory tasks had different developmental trajectories despite a
common procedure, indicating that age-related change was not solely due to
responsiveness to task demands. The 2-Hz frequency modulation detection task,
previously used in dyslexia research, and the visual tasks had low reliability
compared to other measures.
KEY WORDS: maturation, auditory processing, visual processing, attention

T

he peripheral auditory system--cochlea and brainstem--matures
early in life (Abdala & Sininger, 1996; Eggermont, 1988). Nevertheless, there is protracted development of complex auditory processes such as recognizing degraded speech (Palva & Jokinen, 1975) or
speech in noise (Elliott, 1979), modulation detection (Hall & Grose, 1994),
gap detection (Trehub, Schneider, & Henderson, 1995; Wightman, Allen,
Dolan, Kistler, & Jamieson, 1989), backward masking (Buss, Hall, Grose,
& Dev, 1999; Hartley, Wright, Hogan, & Moore, 2000), masked thresholds
(Allen, Wightman, Kistler, & Dolan, 1989; Schneider & Trehub, 1992),
minimum audible angle (Litovsky, 1997), masking level difference (Hall,
Buss, Grose, & Dev, 2004), and auditory stream segregation (Sussman,
Wong, Horvath, Winkler, & Wang, 2007), where performance continues to
increase throughout childhood, up to adolescence in some cases (Hartley
et al., 2000; Stuart, 2005).
A major question is how far such findings reflect physiological immaturity of central auditory pathways and how far they are explained by

1002 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research *

Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/08/5104-1002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

nonsensory factors, such as poor attention /motivation or
failure to listen strategically to specific cues. The difficulties of disentangling such factors are compounded
by the fact that one typically has to use many fewer trials
and limited practice when doing psychophysics with
young children (Werner, 1992). Even when tasks are
made more "child friendly" by the use of gamelike format
and adaptive procedures that require fewer trials, one
cannot rule out effects of attention, motivation, and strategy (Sutcliffe & Bishop, 2005; Werner, 1992).
Attention is probably the most frequently mentioned nonsensory factor. Wightman and Allen (1992)
simulated the effect of general inattention on a proportion of trials and found that on adaptive psychophysical
tasks, this resulted in higher thresholds and flatter
psychometric functions that were qualitatively similar
to children's actual performance. The authors concluded
that one could not reject the possibility that nonsensory
factors could account for all of the observed adult-child
differences in performance.
Attention itself is not a unitary concept; it encompasses both the ability to selectively attend to relevant
stimuli and filter out irrelevant stimuli (Broadbent, 1958;
Enns & Akhtar, 1989; Pasto & Burack, 1997) as well as
maintaining focus on a particular task for an extended
period (Dember & Warm, 1979). As an illustration of the
former aspect, consider studies by Werner and Bargones
(1991) and Oh, Wightman, and Lutfi (2001) that examined children's pure-tone signal detection with and
without maskers that were spectrally separated from
the target tone. Adults are able to optimize detection of a
tone by listening through a single filter centered on the
target tone, and adult performance of detection of tone in
noise is only substantially affected by noise that falls
within the same auditory filter as the tone (i.e., when the
masker is in the same spectral range as the target; e.g.,
Dai, Scharf, & Buus, 1991; Schlauch & Hafter, 1991).
However, children and infants displayed high levels of
masking even when the masker was in a different spectral range to the target. This suggests that children and
infants have less efficient attentional strategies in that
they seem to monitor output from a wide range of auditor
filter outputs. The conclusion is that attentional effects
are likely to be significant in contributing to age-related
change in masked threshold (Werner, 1992).
In addition, although there is evidence that at least
some aspects of attention, such as inattention and impulsivity, may extend across modalities (Aylward, Brager,
& Harper, 2002), other aspects of attention (involving
processing beyond noticing that a stimulus has occurred)
may be specific to the auditory modality (Bedi, Halperin,
& Sharma, 1994; Cooley & Morris, 1990; Kupietz &
Richardson, 1978). Thus, it may be that a large proportion of developmental change in auditory performance

during childhood is related to changes in modality-specific,
selective attention to sound.
However, although attention may play a role in children's performance, others have argued that it is not the
whole explanation. Schneider, Trehub, Morrongiello, and
Thorpe (1989) noted that inattention should affect the
slope of the group psychometric function for detection of
tones in noise, yet this does not change with age. Some of
the age-related change in auditory thresholds may reflect neurophysiological maturation. Particularly strong
evidence for prolonged maturation of the central auditory
system comes from electrophysiological and neuroanatomical studies (Eggermont & Ponton, 2003). Latency
and morphology of auditory evoked response potential
(ERP) waveforms change substantially throughout childhood and adolescence (Ponton, Eggermont, Kwong, & Don,
2000; Wunderlich & Cone-Wesson, 2006), as do patterns
of refactoriness (Coch, Skendzel, & Neville, 2005).

Perceptual Maturation
and Developmental Disorders
Studies of central auditory maturation assume particular importance in the context of studies of developmental disorders. A range of auditory impairments--including
processing of brief or rapidly presented tones (Tallal, 2004;
Tallal & Piercy, 1973), frequency modulation (FM) detection (Witton et al., 1998), backward masking (Wright et al.,
1997), and auditory stream segregation (Helenius, Uutela,
& Hari, 1999)--have been associated with language and
reading problems in a large body of research. It is hypothesized that a deficit in auditory processing might lead
to speech perception difficulties, which in turn would have
effects on the development of phonological representations
and would have an impact on language and reading. Although highly influential, theories that attribute language
and literacy problems to nonverbal auditory deficits remain controversial, in part because the proposed deficits
are found only in a minority of affected children and in
part because questions remain as to whether these deficits genuinely reflect auditory perceptual problems, or
are due to nonsensory deficits that affect performance
(Bailey & Snowling, 2002; McArthur & Bishop, 2001;
Ramus et al., 2003; Ramus, 2004; Roach, Edwards, &
Hogben, 2004; Rosen, 1999, 2003).
The maturational aspect of central auditory processing has seldom been considered in the course of this
debate but was highlighted by Wright and Zecker (2004),
who suggested that the pattern of auditory processing
deficit seen in developmental disorders is related to
neurodevelopmental immaturity, with some deficits persisting into adulthood if development in that area has
not reached completion by the onset of puberty. Bishop
and McArthur (2004) also found auditory ERP evidence

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

that supported the idea of immature auditory processing
in their study of teenagers with specific language impairment (SLI). These two groups of researchers found
that the pattern of performance on auditory tasks was
dependent on a child's age, the specific task, and the
child's clinical status ("language-based learning disability" or not). The critical idea here is that if a child's central
auditory maturation is, say, 3 years behind age level, then
one needs to know the trajectory of normal development
on an auditory task in order to be able to detect and interpret disordered performance.
Similar arguments have been recently proposed by
researchers investigating development of visual function. Human and primate research suggests a division of
the early visual system into two parallel pathways: magnocellular and parvocellular (Milner & Goodale, 1995).
These are also known as form and motion, dorsal and
ventral streams, or "what" and "where" pathways. Sensitivity to form and motion can be measured psychophysically in terms of the proportion of coherent line
segments or dots in a background noise that is required
to detect a shape (Braddick, Atkinson, & Wattam-Bell,
2003). The line segments or dots are either all static (for
form) or all in motion (for motion). The threshold of coherence required for detection of the hidden shape is
taken as an index of sensitivity to visual cues of either
form or motion, and the task itself is thought to tap dorsal
or ventral processing. Both visual processing streams
continue to develop throughout school age, with sensitivity to form reaching adult levels earlier than sensitivity to
motion (Parrish, Giaschi, Boden, & Dougherty, 2005).
Research in a variety of pediatric disorders also suggests
that the later-maturing magnocellular pathway is more
vulnerable to disruption than the parvocellular system
or that there is "dorsal stream vulnerability" (Braddick
et al., 2003).
These parallels between visual and auditory systems
have led some to propose a general account of dyslexia
and related disorders in terms of a temporal processing
deficit that affects both visual and auditory systems (e.g.,
Stein, 2001). In support of this, Witton and colleagues
(1998) found higher thresholds for 2-Hz and 40-Hz FM as
well as visual motion thresholds in children with dyslexia. Talcott and colleagues (Talcott et al., 2000, 2002)
then found that FM sensitivity related to reading skill in
two samples of unselected children. Visual motion sensitivity explained independent variance in orthographic
skill but not phonological ability, whereas auditory FM
sensitivity covaried with phonological skill but not orthographic skill. Finally, Witton, Stein, Stoodley, Rosner,
and Talcott (2002) found that adults with a history of
dyslexia were less sensitive to 2-Hz FM and 20-Hz amplitude modulation (AM) and that these tasks were also
significant predictors of reading skill for their sample of
adults with normal reading and those with a history of

1004

dyslexia. However, others have argued that auditory and
visual temporal processing tasks do not cluster coherently
and that deficits on these tasks may be due to attentional
factors and problems with task demands rather than
reflecting impaired magnocellular function (Gibson,
Hogben, & Fletcher, 2006).
However, another possible explanation for discrepant findings is that children suffer from a maturational
lag in temporal processing. If this hypothesis is correct,
performance of children with language or reading disorders should match that of typically developing children 2-4 years younger on temporal processing tasks;
significant differences from an age-matched control group
would be apparent only on tasks that have a long developmental trajectory. Currently, however, there is a dearth of
information on typical development on the temporal
processing tasks that are used in the study of disorders.

Hypotheses and Aims
The first aim of this study was to characterize the
development of performance on temporal processing
tasks in the auditory and visual modalities in children
aged 6-10 years as well as adults and to assess retest
reliability. We focused predominantly on those tasks that
have been used in the study of language and reading
disorders--namely, FM detection in the auditory modality
and coherent motion detection in the visual modality. In
addition, we used one nontemporal auditory task (detection of FM at 240 Hz; see Experimental Tests of Auditory
Processing subsection) and one nontemporal visual task
(coherent form detection). We also used a new auditory
temporal task: detection of pitch in iterated rippled noise
(IRN). For the auditory tasks, we examined within-subject
and within-group variability in thresholds as well as mean
thresholds to test the hypothesis that fluctuating attention
might account for age-related differences in thresholds.
As well as documenting developmental trends, we
were interested in testing the hypothesis that processing
of dynamic stimuli relies on common mechanisms in
visual and auditory modalities (Stein, 2001; Witton et al.,
1998); if this were so, one might expect development of
sensitivity to dynamic visual stimuli and auditory stimuli
to be related to each other. Thus, the second aim of this
study was to establish whether thresholds on auditory
tasks were independent of those on visual tasks. Finally,
it has been suggested that that for some children, poor
processing of dynamic auditory stimuli could have an impact on speech perception with knock-on effects on language and literacy (Tallal, 2000; Witton et al., 1998). If
auditory development underlies speech perception and
language development, one might expect a correlation between auditory psychophysical performance and speechbased measures of auditory processing and communicative
ability. A final aim of this study was to relate performance

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

on perceptual tasks to a widely used speech-based clinical measure of auditory processing, the SCAN-C, and
also to a measure of communication skills, the Children's
Communication Checklist (2nd ed.; CCC-2; Bishop, 2003).

Method
Participants
Local schools were approached to help recruit children with normal hearing. The goal was to recruit 20 children (6-10 years of age) per year band, with approximately
equal numbers of boys and girls in each group. This goal
was achieved for all age groups except 6-year-olds (N = 18).
Eighteen adults were also tested. For children, testing was
carried out at school in a specially outfitted testing van
with a sound-attenuating cabin. Adults were tested in a
quiet room. All participants had normal hearing as
indicated by a pure-tone audiometric screening test (at
20 dB HL).

Assessments
Experimental Tests of Auditory Processing
Apparatus. Tones were presented by a laptop computer ( Dell Latitude D505) via Sennheiser HD600
headphones.
Stimuli. Three temporal processing subtests were
selected from the Newcastle Auditory Battery ( NAB;
Griffiths, Dean, Woods, Rees, & Green, 2001). These subtests were used for the detection of FM tones at 2 and
40 Hz and for the detection of IRN. Detection of FM tones
at 240 Hz--not a NAB task--was also selected. For FM
at low modulation rates (0.5-5.0 Hz), the percept experienced is one of a pure tone with fluctuating pitch or a
"wobbly sound" (Moore, 2004; Moore & Sek, 1996; Sek
& Moore, 2000). For intermediate modulation rates
(5-150 Hz), the sensation is of a trill or vibrato ("motorboating"). At high rates of modulation, two or three
separate pitches are heard that correspond to the pitch
of the carrier and the rate of modulation. Both temporal
and spectral mechanisms are thought to contribute to
FM detection, although relative contributions vary depending on modulation rate (Kay, 1982). For low modulation rates, temporal mechanisms are dominant,
although spectral mechanisms become more significant
with higher carrier frequencies and modulation rates. At
the highest rates of modulation, detection is thought to
depend on detection of spectral sidebands in the presence of the carrier component, which acts as a masker
(Moore, 2004; Moore & Sek, 1996; Sek & Moore, 2000).
Witton and colleagues had used 240 Hz as a control task,
as detection of FM at this rate of modulation is thought
to draw especially on spectral rather than temporal

processes (Witton, Stein, Stoodley, Rosner, & Talcott,
2002; Witton et al., 1998). In this study, sensitivity to FM
at several different rates--low, medium, and high (2, 40,
and 240 Hz)--was selected for assessment.
IRN is a new temporal auditory stimulus that has
been used to examine the neuroanatomical basis of fine
temporal processing (Griffiths, Buchel, Frackowiak, &
Patterson, 1998; Griffiths, Uppenkamp, Johnsrude,
Josephs, & Patterson, 2001; Patterson, Uppenkamp,
Johnsrude, & Griffiths, 2002) as well as psychophysical
investigations of pitch perception (Patterson, Handel,
Yost, & Datta, 1996; Yost, Patterson, & Sheft, 1996).
Pitch perception is thought to take place via two mechanisms: (a) a "spectral" or "place" mechanism based on
activity at specific locations along the basilar membrane
according to frequency and ( b) a temporal mechanism
based on the pattern of firing within and across neurons
over time (Moore, 2004). It is thought that both spectral
and temporal information is significant but that their
relative contribution changes depending on the frequency
range and type of sound, with temporal information
becoming more significant at higher frequencies. Temporal pitch processing is thought to take place beyond the
auditory periphery and involves analysis of the temporal
pattern of nerve firings in the form of autocorrelation or
pattern-matching type of function that extracts an overall pitch. Pitch processing based on temporal processes
might be expected to have a longer developmental time
course than spectral processing, as peripheral mechanisms tend to develop earlier than central ones, as
reviewed previously. It was, therefore, of interest to examine the development of sensitivity to IRN, which is
constructed by a repeated delay-and-add process of a random noise (Yost et al., 1996). A random noise is delayed by
d ms and is added to the original noise. This process is
repeated n times. These stimuli produce a sensation with
two components: a pitch sensation that corresponds to the
inverse of the delay d and a hiss sound similar to that of
the original noise. With an increasing number of iterations n, the salience of the pitch becomes stronger and the
noise component becomes weaker. Based as it is on random noise, IRN contains no consistent spectral pattern.
There are no stable, harmonically related peaks in the
auditory spectrum or the associated pattern of neural
activity. An autocorrelation is thought to be applied to the
neural activity pattern, whereby the pattern of neural
activity is compared with a delayed version of itself. The
peaks in the resulting "summary autocorrelogram" are
associated with the most salient pitch (which corresponds
to the inverse of d for IRN).
IRN in this study was constructed as in the NAB
(Griffiths, Dean, et al., 2001) with bandpass noise that
had a passband of 1-4 KHz. The target stimuli contained
IRN with eight iterations plus bandpass noise, whereas
the control contained bandpass noise only. Threshold for

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

detection of IRN was in terms of gain, which is the ratio
of IRN to noise.
Carrier frequency was 500 Hz for FM 2 Hz and 40 Hz
and was 1000 Hz for FM 240 Hz. Stimuli were generated
using MATLAB 6.1 at a sampling rate of 44100, scaled to
have equal root-mean-square values (0.2) and calibrated
using a sound level meter. All stimuli were 1 s in duration, with 20-ms rise/fall times. Note that these parameters
are the same as those used by Witton and colleagues
(Talcott et al., 2000; Witton et al., 1998, 2002) and the NAB
(Griffiths, Dean, et al., 2001). For the FM tasks, threshold
of detection is in terms of the modulation index. All stimuli
were presented at 60 dB SPL.
Procedure. An adaptive threshold estimation procedure was used rather than a full function estimation as
used in the NAB because an adaptive method was thought
to be less time consuming and thus more suitable for use
with young children. Apart from the stimuli themselves,
the testing procedure was similar to that used by Sutcliffe
and Bishop (2005) and was as follows.
Modulation depth (for FM) and gain (for IRN) were
adaptively altered using an adaptive parameter estimation by sequential testing ( PEST) procedure (Taylor &
Creelman, 1967). Very easy discriminations are presented initially with large step sizes that increase the
difficulty until an error is made. When an error is made,
discrimination is made easier in the manner of a staircase procedure. Step size is systematically reduced until
a specified threshold level is reached. A three-interval,
two-alternative forced-choice paradigm (3I2AFC) was
used with the format AXB, where X is always a standard
and the target randomly occurs either in position A or B,
with another standard tone in the remaining position--
that is, "boop, boop, beep" or "beep, boop, boop." Participants must choose between A or B. There were a
maximum number of eight reversals with the threshold
calculated from the last four reversals. Thresholds were
obtained at the 75% correct point on the psychometric
function. The maximum number of trials possible was
80, although this number was never reached. Tones were
separated by 500-ms silent gaps.
For younger children, the examiner initiated each
trial when the child was attentive. Older children capable of attending to the task were allowed to initiate
trials themselves. For each trial, three cartoon characters
(dinosaurs, owls, or kangaroos) appeared on the screen,
each sitting on a colored box. Two lower characters to the
left and right of a higher central character produced the A
and B tones (target tones), and the central character produced the X tone (reference tone). A trial consisted of each
character jumping on its box while producing a tone. The
interval containing the modulated/IRN-containing tone
was randomly allocated across each trial. Younger children pointed to the character that produced the "wobbly

1006

noise" or the "funny noise," and the experimenter entered
the response by selecting the character by mouse click.
Older children were allowed to select the character
themselves. Correct identification of the target tone was
rewarded with a small, colorful picture and a cheerful
noise, whereas incorrect answers elicited a cross and a
sighing noise. Five easy examples were presented initially as training, and the test run proceeded if the child
was able to identify the easy examples.
Two thresholds were obtained for each of the four
auditory hearing tasks, with the average of the two taken
as the threshold estimate. The order of presentation of
the auditory and visual tests was counterbalanced between children.

Visual Form and Motion Processing Tests
The two experimental tests of visual processing in
this study are similar to those used in earlier research by
Braddick and colleagues (Braddick et al., 2003; Gunn et al.,
2002), which were designed to tap form and motion processing. Sensitivity to form and motion was measured
psychophysically in terms of the proportion of coherent
line segments or dots in background noise that is required to detect a shape. The line segments or dots are
either all static (for form) or all in motion (for motion).
The threshold of coherence required for detection of the
hidden shape was taken as an index of sensitivity to
visual cues of either form or motion.
Apparatus. Tasks were generated on a laptop computer (Dell Latitude D505) using Lua scripting language.
The laptop was connected to an external monitor (Iiyama
Visionmaster 450), with a display 36 cm x 27 cm (45 cm
diagonal) and a screen resolution of 1600 ( horizontal) x
1200 (vertical) pixels at 60 frames per second.
Stimuli. Form and motion coherence stimuli were
viewed on the external monitor at a distance of 90 cm
(visual angle 22.91 x 17.19). Both stimuli contained a
circular target area of 14.4 cm (9.17 in diameter) that
appeared with equal probability centrally on the left or
right half of the display. The proportion of coherently
moving dots among randomly moving dots (motion) or
coherently oriented line segments (form) among randomly oriented segments in the target area defined the
coherence value for each trial. Dots or line segments
were arranged to form concentric circles within the circular target area. For the motion stimulus, the direction
of rotation of the coherent rotational motion varied at
random (clockwise or anticlockwise). Figure 1 illustrates
the form and motion displays.
The form stimulus was a static array of randomly
oriented short line segments (white lines on a black background, density 7.62 segments/deg 2). Short line segments
were generated by plotting simultaneously the positions

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Screen shots of the visual form and motion tests.

that individual dots 0.18 cm in diameter (0.114) in
motion would have moved over a lifetime randomly chosen
between 1 and 8 frames (0.02 to 0.13 s) along an arc
trajectory of 3.37 cm /s (2.14/s) resulting in segment
lengths between 0.24 to 0.63 cm (0.15 to 0.40) in length.
The motion stimulus was a random dot kinematogram
(white dots on a black background, density 7.62 dots/deg 2).
Dots that were 0.18 cm in diameter (0.114) had a velocity
of 3.37 cm/s (2.14/s) and had a limited lifetime of eight
frames (0.13 s). To prevent flicker caused by replacing each
dot at the same frame, initial dot lifetimes were chosen at
random between one and eight frames (0.017 and 0.100 s)
at the start of each stimulus presentation. To avoid judgments based on local cues, for both form and motion stimuli, both signal and noise dots had curved paths. Coherent
dots curved around the center of the target area, whereas
noise dots curved around a different randomly chosen
point for each dot.
Procedure. The procedure was similar to that used
by Gunn et al. (2002). Stimuli were presented with room
lights off and curtains drawn. Perceptual thresholds were
obtained using two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) paradigms whereby participants were required to locate the
target regions, which were presented either in the left or
right half of the display. In order to ensure that the children understood the tasks, descriptions such as "Can you
see the ball hidden in the grass?" were used. Children responded by pointing to the location of the "ball." In between presentations, the participants' attention was drawn
to the midline with a set of three colored flashing dots.
In each task, the initial coherence level on each task
was set to 100%, and three to six practice trials were
conducted. Coherence threshold values were established
using the Y method (Kontsevich & Tyler, 1999) for
obtaining the slope and threshold of psychometric functions. This method maximizes efficiency of threshold
estimation by using progressively updated probabilities
to select stimulus intensities at a level that maximizes

information to be gained by completion of that trial. The
motion and form coherence tasks were run successively
for each participant, with the order of presentation of the
two tasks counterbalanced across participants. Thirty
trials were completed for each task. Following Gunn et al.
(2002), one threshold estimate was obtained for each
visual task.
Test-retest reliability. Twenty-one children aged 7-
10 years were retested between 2 weeks and 4 months
after initial testing (M = 8.5 weeks, SD = 4.6 weeks).
Four each of 7-, 8-, and 9-year-olds and nine 10-year-olds
were retested. Selection of the retest sample was not
random, as selection of children for retest depended on
which children were at school and were available for
retesting. No differences between the retest sample and
the rest of the normative sample were apparent upon
examining demographic and test performance data.

Other Measures
SCAN-C. The SCAN-C (Keith, 2000) is a commonly
used standardized test of auditory processing with population-based norms for the United States. It is individually administered either in audiometric conditions or in
a quiet room to children between 5;0 (years;months) and
11;11. Stimuli are recorded on CD and are played over
headphones. The SCAN-C provides an overall score as well
as scores for its four subtests, Filtered Words (FW), Auditory Figure Ground (AFG), Competing Words (CW), and
Competing Sentences (CS). The SCAN-C seems to tap two
auditory skills: a monaural low-redundancy speech factor
( FW and AFG) and a binaural separation /competition
factor (CW and CS; Dawes & Bishop, 2007; Schow &
Chermak, 1999). Note that despite its being widely used,
there are concerns over the reliability of the SCAN-C--
particularly the impact of language level and phonological
skill on SCAN-C performance (Dawes & Bishop, 2007;
Marriage, King, Briggs, & Lutman, 2001). As there is currently no gold standard to compare against (American

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2005), the SCAN-C
has uncertain validity in auditory processing assessment.
Thus, it was of interest to examine whether performance
on the speech-based measures of the SCAN-C would correlate with performance on the nonspeech auditory measures used in this study.
Children's Communication Checklist (2nd ed.; CCC-2).
The CCC-2 (Bishop, 2003) is a parent-completed screening
instrument that is sensitive to communication disorders in
children aged 4-16. It can be used to screen for children
who are likely to have language impairment or to identify
pragmatic impairment in children with communication
problems.

Results
CCC-2
Valid CCC-2s were received for 83 children. The
mean General Communication Index score for the standardization sample was 81.19 (SD = 18.59). This suggests that the sample as a whole is typical in terms of
communication skill; an average score is 82.

SCAN-C
In terms of the norms reported with the SCAN-C,
children in the United Kingdom tended to score lower
than the norms produced by children in the United States.
On the overall composite standard score, U.K. children
scored close to 1 SD lower than the norms of U.S. children,
although the distribution of scores was the same (based on
the single-sided probability that variances are equal,
F test). An error analysis revealed that the poorer performance of U.K. children was largely due to accent effects;
U.K. children misheard SCAN stimuli recorded with a
U.S. accent; therefore, a correction must be applied to
SCAN-C scores for use in identifying auditory processing
problems in U.K. children (Dawes & Bishop, 2007).

Psychophysical Tests
Auditory and visual test data were analyzed in four
parts. First, we examined the impact of procedural
factors such as attention and practice effects on psychophysical test performance. Second, we examined age effects on task performance. Third, we examined retest
reliability of the psychophysical tests. And finally, we
examined correlations among auditory and visual psychophysical tests, CCC-2s, and SCAN-C tests.

Auditory Processing Tests
Procedural factors. Examination of children's responses at easy levels revealed that none were operating
at chance levels (i.e., all were close to 100% correct on the

1008

first five trials). Children understood the task and were
not simply guessing. To examine the effect of practice, an
Age (6) x Run (2) analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
threshold as the dependent variable (DV) was run. We logtransformed 2-Hz, 40-Hz, and 240-Hz threshold data in
order to obtain a normal distribution and to equalize
variances between groups. For 2 Hz and IRN, there was
a significant main effect for run, with better thresholds
on the second run, F(1, 1) = 5.53, p < .05, F(1, 1) = 5.81,
p < .05. There was no Age Group x Run interaction for
any task; where significant, practice effects were no more
important for any one age group than another.
To examine the effect of attention and other procedural factors, we used track width (the standard deviation of the average of the last four reversals used to
compute the threshold in the adaptive procedure). Wider
tracks ( higher values) reflect "guessing" of responses
(Wightman et al., 1989), representing lapses of attention
or memory, or poor motivation. The 3I2AFC method used
for the auditory tasks in this study is thought to have
minimal memory requirements compared with other
methods (Sutcliffe & Bishop, 2005), and the task itself
was motivating; children enjoyed playing the "listening
game." Track width may thus represent largely attentional factors. To compare track width between age groups,
we conducted an ANOVA. Track width data for 2 Hz, 40 Hz,
and 240 Hz were log-transformed to equalize variances.
Track width was significantly different between age
groups for 40 Hz only, F(5, 113) = 2.52, p < .05. Post hoc
comparisons revealed significantly higher track width
for 6-year-olds compared with 8- and 9-year-olds and
adults. Except for the 240-Hz task, there were low significant correlations between track width and threshold
(2 Hz, r = .35, p < .05; 40 Hz, r = .44, p < .05; IRN, r = .23,
p < .05; 240 Hz, r = .18, ns).
Age trends in task performance. Performance in
each subtest by age group is represented graphically
in Figure 2. There was a significant linear regression of
performance on age between 6 and 10 years for all auditory psychophysical tests--2, 40, and 240 Hz, Fs(1, 96) =
21.6, 14.4, 11.43, respectively, ps < .01--except for IRN,
F(1, 96) = 0.28, p > .05. The magnitudes of threshold
estimates for the adults in this sample are similar to
those obtained by Witton and colleagues (Witton et al.,
1998, 2002) and for the NAB (Griffiths, Dean, et al., 2001).
Task performance improves with age, although
how much of this improvement is due to maturation of
nonauditory factors (such as attention and motivation),
and how much is due to maturation of auditory processes?
A multiple regression on threshold was carried out with
track width entered first, followed by age. After track
width, any unique variance accounted for by age should
then relate to age-related development of auditory skills.
Multiple regression was carried out for the age range

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Auditory psychophysical test performance: Boxplots by age group.

Note. The median is indicated by a horizontal white line inside the box. Box edges match the upper and lower quartile. Whiskers
encompass 99% of the distribution. Data points outside this range are marked as outliers.

6-10 years only, as adult ages had a disproportionate
effect on regression. Table 1 shows the amount of variance in threshold accounted for by track width and the
improvement in prediction of threshold by the addition
of age. Age made a significant additional contribution to
prediction of threshold for all tasks except IRN. For IRN,
track width had a small impact, whereas age accounted
for no variance in threshold. For the rest of the tasks, age
tended to make a higher contribution to threshold variance than track width, despite being entered into regression later. Interestingly, although age made a significant
contribution, track width made no significant contribution to prediction of threshold variance for 240 Hz.
Overall patterns of performance on tasks differed.
Auditory task data were log-transformed in order to
equalize variances between groups and were analyzed
by means of a repeated measures ANOVA with task and
age group as factors. There were significant Age x Task
interactions for IRN and all the other tasks; the pattern
of development for IRN differed from that of the other
tasks. There were also significant interactions between
2 Hz and 40 Hz as well as between 2 Hz and 240 Hz but

not between 40 Hz and 240 Hz. Although 40 Hz and
240 Hz had similar developmental trajectories, 2 Hz and
IRN differed from the other tasks.
For 2 Hz FM, there was an improvement in average
performance with age, with most children at adult levels
of performance by age 9 years. Post hoc analysis (Tukey's
honestly significant difference [HSD]) showed a significant
difference between adult performance and 6-, 7-, and
8 year-olds' performance on the 2-Hz task.
For 40 Hz and 240 Hz, most children performed at
adult levels by age 7 years. For these two tasks, there was
a significant difference between adults and 6-year-olds
only. In line with the regression analysis, complex pitch
perception (IRN) was most indifferent to age effects, with
adultlike performance across the age range. There were no
significant differences in performance between any age
group.

Visual Processing Tests
Procedural factors. As for the auditory tests, examination of children's responses at easy levels revealed that they

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1009

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Amount of variance accounted for in threshold by track width in multiple regression and the improvement in
contribution to threshold prediction by the addition of age.
Track width

Age

Variable

R 2 (model: track width only)

by

R 2 (model: track width and age)

by

2 Hz
40 Hz
240 Hz
IRN

.11*
.16*
.02
.05*

.30*
.35*
.13
.22*

.27e
.35e
.13e
.05

-.41*
-.29*
-.33*
-.04

Note.

IRN = iterated rippled noise.

y

Standardized beta values for the regression model containing track width and age. eSignificant addition of age to prediction
of threshold variance, p < .05.
*p < .05.

had understood the task; none were operating at chance levels (i.e., all were close to 100% correct on the first five trials).
For the visual tests, only one threshold estimate was
obtained; therefore, no estimate of within-session practice effects is possible. However, the small nonsignificant
improvements seen in retest data (examined in the Test-
Retest Reliability subsection) suggest no substantial practice effects.
The threshold estimation program for the visual
tests did not report track width. In order to examine the
impact of procedural factors (attention, memory, and motivation) on visual tasks, track width data for the auditory
tasks were standardized across groups and were averaged to provide a general index of procedural factors. There
were no significant correlations between this general index
and visual thresholds (rs = .10, ns).
Age trends in visual thresholds. There was a significant linear improvement with age for motion, F(1, 100) =
19.12, p < .01), but not form, F(1, 100) = 2.17, p > .05 (see
Figure 3). Post hoc analysis ( Tukey 's HSD) revealed

significant differences between adult performance and
all other age groups on the coherent motion test. For visual form, there were significant differences among adults,
6-year-olds, and 10-year-olds.

Test-Retest Reliability
Three of the tests (40 Hz, 240 Hz, and IRN) had moderate retest reliability (rs = .50, .83, and .61, respectively,
p < .05). Detection of 2 Hz FM was the most unreliable
auditory test (r = .25, p > .05), with thresholds quite
variable from one occasion to another. The retest reliability of the two visual tasks was disappointingly low
(r = .07 and .31, p > .05, for form and motion, respectively). Retest reliability may vary with age; however, we
did not have the resources to retest all of the children.
Retest data for the subset of children who we did re-see
were examined, and there was no association with age.
For all tests, there was a small nonsignificant improvement in average performance between test and

Figure 3. Visual psychophysical test performance: Boxplots by age group.

1010

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

retest. It would seem that the low reliability of some of
these tests is not because there are large practice effects.

Correlations Between Tests
Scores on all psychophysical tests were converted to
age-standardized scores by year band. The only exception
was IRN; as performance did not change with age, scores
were standardized with reference to the pooled sample.
Age-standardized scores were then correlated with agestandardized CCC-2 and SCAN-C scores. Table 2 shows
correlations between tests. The four auditory tests have
low significant correlations with each other, as do the two
visual tests.
Better performance on the SCAN-C was associated
with better ( lower) psychophysical threshold, although
correlations are low. Examination of the SCAN-C factor
structure revealed two factors: monaural low redundancy
degradation and binaural separation/competition (Dawes
& Bishop, 2007; Schow & Chermak, 1999). Correlations
with psychophysical thresholds were generally low for
both factors, which were similar in magnitude to those for
total SCAN-C scores, with neither factor more strongly
associated with psychophysical test performance than
the other. The SCAN-C does not seem to be very sensitive
to performance on these psychophysical tasks.
Grammatical impairments are a hallmark of language problems (Leonard, 2000), and auditory processing
problems are commonly associated with language problems. However, there was no correlation between the
syntax subscale score on the CCC-2 and any auditory or
visual psychophysical test. There was a low significant
correlation with syntax and SCAN-C score, perhaps reflecting the contribution of language skill to SCAN-C
test performance. The level of general communicative
competence, as measured by the CCC-2, was unrelated
to performance on the perceptual tasks.

Discussion
For the auditory tasks, 2 Hz, 40 Hz, and 240 Hz ( but
not IRN) showed age-related improvements after attempting to account for the effect of procedure-related skills. Age
accounted for 16%, 19%, and 11% of unique variance in
threshold for 2 Hz, 40 Hz, and 240 Hz, respectively. A
large amount of variance in threshold remained unaccounted for by either auditory or procedure-related skills.
This might be ascribed to individual differences in auditory processing. As detection of FM improved over the
age range studied here, whereas IRN detection did not
improve, it seems that complex pitch perception indexed
by IRN is an early developing skill already fully developed by age 6. In contrast, temporal mechanisms underlying detection of FM, whether reliant on phase locking
and/or spectral mechanisms, seemed to be developing
over the age range studied here. Sensitivity to 2 Hz was
adultlike in most children by age 9, whereas sensitivity to
40 Hz and 240 Hz was adultlike by age 7. This is in line
with Hall and Grose's (1994) finding that children's sensitivity to modulation of a noise carrier improved from age
4 to age 10, with children's performance on backward
masking also improving over the same age range (Buss
et al., 1999; Hartley et al., 2000; Wright & Zecker, 2004).
Increased variability in younger children's performance was also apparent. For 2 Hz, 40 Hz, and 240 Hz,
there was a noticeable skew in distribution toward poorer
performance, which reduced with age such that by age 9,
the spread of scores was symmetrical and of a similar
magnitude to that of adults. For these three tests, but not
for IRN or the visual tests, there is a marked drop in variance between ages 7 and 8. As seen in the regression analysis, variability of performance was due to age-related
development of both auditory and nonauditory factors
for 2 Hz and 40 Hz and mostly auditory factors for 240 Hz.
This is in line with Hall and Grose's (1994) finding that

Table 2. Correlations between tests (in Pearson's r ).
Variable

1

1. 2 Hz FM
2. 40 Hz FM
3. 240 Hz FM
4. IRN
5. Visual Form
6. Visual Motion
7. CCC-2
8. CCC-2 Syntax
9. SCAN-C

.217*
.315**
.261**
.260**
.098
.103
.094
-.371**

Note.

2

3

4

5

6

.217*

.315**
.288**

.261**
.080
.173

.260**
.285**
.114
.097

.098
.172
.225*
.140
.360**

.288**
.080
.285**
.172
-.118
.057
-.325**

.173
.114
.225*
-.121
-.157
-.329**

.097
.140
-.006
.042
-.263**

.360**
-.002
-.047
-.243*

.022
-.052
-.229*

7
.103
-.118
-.121
-.006
-.002
.022
.744**
.201

8

9

.094
.057
-.157
.042
-.047
-.052
.744**

-.371**
-.325**
-.329**
-.263**
-.243*
-.229*
.201
.262*

.262*

FM = frequency modulation; CCC-2 = Children's Communication Checklist (2nd ed.).

*p < .05 (two-tailed). **p < .01 (two-tailed).

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

efficiency of processing the information underlying modulation detection develops over school age.
Track width, thought to be mainly an index of attention, had a significant association with threshold across
age groups. Track width accounted for 11% and 16% of
variance in 2-Hz and 40-Hz tasks, respectively, but very
little variance for 240 Hz and IRN tasks. Except for 40 Hz,
where 6-year-olds had a significantly higher track width,
the size of track width was similar across age groups. It
is interesting that procedure-related effects and auditory
processing development had a different impact on different auditory tasks. Where they were significant, procedural factors had a similar impact across age groups.
Some discrimination tasks (especially 240 Hz but also
2 Hz and 40 Hz) were more age sensitive, whereas some
(2 Hz and 40 Hz) were more susceptible to procedurerelated factors, despite using the same paradigm.
Why should there be a different contribution of
procedure-related factors between tests? One explanation may be that some discriminations may be more
dependent on the child knowing what to focus their attention on and when to listen (Oh, Wightman, & Lutfi,
2001; Sutcliffe & Bishop, 2005). For example, IRN and
240 Hz FM were relatively unaffected by procedurerelated factors, whereas 2 Hz FM was more affected. If a
child only begins attending partway through the signal,
then this could be especially detrimental to detection
of the slower changes associated with 2 Hz FM. However, this explanation does not seem to account for why
40 Hz FM was as susceptible to procedure-related factors as 2 Hz FM was; one might expect 40 cycles per
second to be less susceptible to fluctuations in attention
than 2 cycles per second.
For the visual tasks, although the observed difference between adults and 10-year-olds on the form task is
difficult to explain, it seems that the development of performance on the form task is complete by around age 7,
whereas performance on the motion task is still developing at age 10. This replicates the work of Gunn and
colleagues (2002), who found similar results with similar
visual processing tasks.
One aim of this study was to examine whether the
observed performance deficits on psychophysical tasks
in some people with language and reading problems
might be ascribed to developmental delays. Wright et al.'s
(2004) hypothesis was that a halt of development of
auditory processes seen at age 10 may explain why some
people show persistent and specific auditory deficits.
This hypothesis predicts that performance of adults
with language or reading problems should match that of
typical adults on tasks for which performance reaches
asymptote before puberty but should be more similar
to performance of children at the age of puberty on
measures that continue to develop during adolescence.

1012

Witton et al. (2002) reported group performance data
concerning deficits in adult dyslexic's detection of 2 Hz
and 240 Hz, compared with controls. Witton et al.'s
17 dyslexic adults had a mean threshold of 2.04 (SD =
1.14), whereas 21 controls had a mean of 1.01 (SD = 0.38)
on the 2 Hz FM task. The adults in our study had a mean
threshold of 0.92 (SD = 0.5), not statistically different
from the controls in Witton et al.'s study, although different from the dyslexics, t(21) = -3.73, p < .01. Witton
et al.'s dyslexics scored significantly more poorly than
9- and 10-year-olds in our study but not significantly different from 8-year-olds (M = 1.67, SD = 0.78) on the 2 Hz
task. In contrast, for the 240-Hz task, there was no significant difference in mean threshold between Witton
et al.'s adult controls or dyslexics and the adults in this
study. If auditory development is halted at around age
10, as Wright et al. (2004) suggested, then it seems that
Witton et al.'s dyslexic adults may have been experiencing a delay in 2 Hz development of around 2 years when
their further development was halted at age 10. In the
current study, 240 Hz detection matured earlier (age 7),
whereas 2 Hz matured later ( by age 9). The current results are thus not incompatible with a hypothesis of
developmental delay, although this conclusion is very
speculative. These results are discussed here merely to
stimulate interest in this hypothesis and illustrate how
developmental data might be used to investigate the nature of perceptual deficits seen in a proportion of people
with language and reading problems.

Retest Reliability
The reliability of the auditory tests (except for 2 Hz
FM) is acceptable although not impressive, whereas the
visual tasks are too unreliable for use at the individual
level. For the auditory tests in general, the two tasks
with the highest reliability (240 Hz and IRN) were also
the two tasks that had the least amount of variance
explained by track width (2% and 5% for 240 Hz and
IRN), whereas the two least reliable auditory tests (2 Hz
and 40 Hz) had a higher proportion of variance accounted for by track width (11% and 16%, respectively).
Higher impact of procedure-related factors on threshold
is associated with low retest reliability for the auditory
tests.
Detection of 2 Hz FM was the most unreliable
auditory test, with thresholds quite variable from one
occasion to another. Researchers at the MRC Institute of
Hearing Research working on developing a battery of
pediatric auditory processing tests also report disappointingly low reliability for a 2 Hz FM detection task
(Cowan, 2006). The unreliability of detection of 2-Hz
FM tasks is of interest, given that impaired detection of
2 Hz FM has been reported as evidence of a deficit in
auditory processing in various studies of language and

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

reading impairment (Talcott et al., 2000; Witton et al.,
1998, 2002).
In contrast to the auditory tests, a general estimate
of procedure-related factors did not account for any variation in visual form or motion detection threshold, so the
poor reliability of the visual tests may not be because
of sensitivity to variation in procedure-related factors.
However, the general estimate of procedure-related factors used here may not be a good measure of these factors, as it was derived from average track widths from
the auditory tests.
Given the theoretical interest in being able to measure, behaviorally, the purportedly separate mechanisms of visual form and motion detection as well as the
long-standing research interest in relating deficits in
visual motion sensitivity to various developmental disorders, it would be worthwhile to discover why children's
retest variability on these tasks is so great. Although
reliability of the visual tests is too low for meaningful interpretation of performance at the individual level, group
performance trends for the motion task do support maturation of underlying mechanisms over the target age
range.

Intertest Correlations
The low correlations between auditory and visual
psychophysical tests suggested that they may, in fact, be
measuring different processes rather than being four indices of the same thing. There was little support for there
being a common temporal processing factor indexed by
the dynamic auditory tasks (2 Hz and 40 Hz) and the visual motion detection task; none of the correlations were
especially high. If anything, there seemed to be a tendency for a stronger correlation between (a) the visual
motion task and the 240-Hz task, a supposedly "static"
auditory measure, and ( b) the visual form and the 2-Hz
and 40-Hz tasks, supposedly "temporal" tasks.
Where present, associations between auditory or
visual perceptual measures and the measures of language (CCC-2) and speech-based auditory processing
(SCAN-C) chosen in this study were low. General intelligence may account for much of this association (Watson,
1991). There was no convincing association between perceptual skill and speech perception or language.
In summary, this study demonstrates the importance
of taking age and procedure-related factors into account
when doing auditory testing with children and the need
for collecting large-scale, population-based child performance data over a range of ages for clinical audiometric
procedures. In addition, the specific discrimination is important in determining developmental patterns of performance with different impact of procedure-related and
auditory factors on different discriminations, despite
using the same methodology.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Deafness Research UK
Grant 368:OXF:DB. We also would like to thank the staff and
students at Barley Hill Primary School, East Oxford Primary
School, Sandhills Primary School, and Appleton Primary School
for their help. Thanks also to Tim Griffiths and Sukhbinder
Kumar for their help with the Newcastle Auditory Battery.
Thanks to John Wattam-Bell for the use of the visual form and
motion tasks and to Dee Birtles and Ben Harvey for their help
with the visual tasks.

References
Abdala, C., & Sininger, Y. S. (1996). The development
of cochlear frequency resolution in the human auditory
system. Ear and Hearing, 17, 374-385.
Allen, P., Wightman, F., Kistler, D., & Dolan, T. (1989).
Frequency resolution in children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 32, 317-322.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(2005). (Central) auditory processing disorders [Technical
report]. Available from www.asha.org/policy.
Aylward, G. P., Brager, P., & Harper, D. C. (2002). Relations
between visual and auditory continuous performance tests
in a clinical population: A descriptive study. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 21, 285-303.
Bailey, P. J., & Snowling, M. J. (2002). Auditory processing
and the development of language and literacy. British
Medical Bulletin, 63, 135-146.
Bedi, G., Halperin, J. M., & Sharma, M. (1994). Investigation of modality-specific distractibility in children. International Journal of Neuroscience, 74, 79-85.
Bishop, D. V. M. (2003). Children's Communication Checklist
(2nd ed.). London: Harcourt Assessment.
Bishop, D. V. M., & McArthur, G. M. (2004). Immature
cortical responses to auditory stimuli in specific language
impairment: Evidence from ERPs to rapid tone sequences.
Developmental Science, 7, F11-F18.
Braddick, O., Atkinson, J., & Wattam-Bell, J. (2003).
Normal and anomalous development of visual motion processing: Motion coherence and "dorsal-stream vulnerability."
Neuropsychologia, 41, 1769-1784.
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication.
London: Pergamon.
Buss, E., Hall, J. W. I., Grose, J. H., & Dev, M. B. (1999).
Development of adult-like performance in backward, simultaneous, and forward masking. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 844-849.
Coch, D., Skendzel, W., & Neville, H. J. (2005). Auditory
and visual refractory period effects in children and
adults: An ERP study. Clinical Neurophysiology, 116,
2184-2203.
Cooley, E. L., & Morris, R. D. (1990). Attention in children:
A neuropsychologically based model for assessment. Developmental Neuropsychology, 6, 239-274.
Cowan, J. A. (2006). Auditory processing disorder in children.
Nottingham, United Kingdom: University of Nottingham.

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1013

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Dai, H., Scharf, B., & Buus, S. (1991). Effective attenuation
of signals in noise under focused attention. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 89, 2837-2842.

Keith, R. W. (Ed.). (2000). SCAN-C Test for Auditory Processing
Disorders in Children-Revised. San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation.

Dawes, P., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2007). The SCAN-C in testing
for auditory processing disorder in a sample of British children. International Journal of Audiology, 46, 780-786.

Kontsevich, L. L., & Tyler, C. W. (1999). Bayesian adaptive
estimation of psychometric slope and threshold. Vision
Research, 39, 2729-2737.

Dember, W. N., & Warm, J. S. (1979). Psychology of perception (2nd ed.). New York: Holt, Reinhart, & Winston.

Kupietz, S. S., & Richardson, E. (1978). Children's vigilance
performance and inattentiveness in the classroom. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 19, 145-154.

Eggermont, J. J. (1988). Physiology of the developing auditory system. In S. E. Trehub & B. A. Schneider ( Eds.),
Auditory development in infancy ( pp. 21-45). New York:
Plenum.
Eggermont, J. J., & Ponton, C. W. (2003). Auditory-evoked
potential studies of cortical maturation in normal hearing
and implanted children: Correlations with changes in
structure and speech perception. Acta Oto-Laryngologica,
123, 249-252.
Elliott, L. L. (1979). Performance of children aged 9 to
17 years on a test of speech intelligibility in noise using
sentence material with controlled word predictability.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 66,
651-653.
Enns, J. T., & Akhtar, N. (1989). A developmental study
of filtering in visual attention. Child Development, 60,
1188-1199.
Gibson, L. Y., Hogben, J. H., & Fletcher, J. (2006). Visual
and auditory processing and component reading skills in
developmental dyslexia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 23,
621-642.
Griffiths, T. D., Buchel, C., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Patterson,
R. D. (1998). Analysis of temporal structure in sound by the
human brain. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 422-427.
Griffiths, T. D., Dean, J. L., Woods, W., Rees, A., & Green,
G. G. R. (2001). The Newcastle Auditory Battery ( NAB):
A temporal and spatial test battery for use on adult naive
subjects. Hearing Research, 154, 165-169.
Griffiths, T. D., Uppenkamp, S., Johnsrude, I., Josephs,
O., & Patterson, R. D. (2001). Encoding of the temporal
regularity of sound in the human brainstem. Nature
Neuroscience, 4, 633-637.
Gunn, A., Cory, E., Atkinson, J. C. A., Braddick, O.,
Wattam-Bell, J., Guzzetta, A., et al. (2002). Dorsal and
ventral stream sensitivity in normal development and
hemiplegia. Neuroreport, 13, 843-847.

Leonard, L. B. (2000). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Litovsky, R. Y. (1997). Developmental changes in the precedence effect: Estimates of minimum audible angle. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102, 1739-1745.
Marriage, J., King, J., Briggs, J., & Lutman, M. E. (2001).
The reliability of the SCAN test: Results from a primary
school population in the UK. British Journal of Audiology,
35, 199-208.
McArthur, G. M., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2001). Auditory
perceptual processing in people with reading and oral
language impairments: Current issues and recommendations. Dyslexia, 7, 150-170.
Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. (1995). The visual brain in
action. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Moore, B. J. C. (2004). An introduction to the psychology of
hearing (5th ed.). London: Elsevier.
Moore, B. J. C., & Sek, A. (1996). Detection of frequency
modulation at low modulation rates: Evidence for a mechanism based on phase locking. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 100, 2320-2331.
Oh, E. L., Wightman, F., & Lutfi, R. A. (2001). Children's
detection of pure-tone signals with random multitone
maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
109, 2888-2895.
Palva, A., & Jokinen, K. (1975). Undistorted and filtered
speech audiometry in children with normal hearing. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 80, 383-388.
Parrish, E. E., Giaschi, D. E., Boden, C., & Dougherty, R.
(2005). The maturation of form and motion perception in
school age children. Vision Research, 45, 827-837.
Pasto, L., & Burack, J. A. (1997). A developmental study
of visual attention: Issues of filtering efficiency and focus.
Cognitive Development, 12, 523-535.

Hall, J. W., Buss, E., Grose, J. H., & Dev, M. B. (2004).
Developmental effects in masking-level difference. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 13-20.

Patterson, R. D., Handel, S., Yost, W. A., & Datta, A. J.
(1996). The relative strength of the tone and noise components in iterated rippled noise. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 100, 3286-3294.

Hall, J. W., & Grose, J. H. (1994). Development of temporal
resolution in children as measured by the temporal modulation transfer function. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 96, 150-154.

Patterson, R. D., Uppenkamp, S., Johnsrude, I., & Griffiths,
T. D. (2002). The processing of temporal pitch and melody
information in auditory cortex. Neuron, 36, 767-776.

Hartley, D. E. H., Wright, B. A., Hogan, S. C., & Moore, D. R.
(2000). Age-related improvements in auditory backward
and simultaneous masking in 6- to 10-year-old children.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43,
1402-1415.
Helenius, P., Uutela, K., & Hari, R. (1999). Auditory stream
segregation in dyslexic adults. Brain, 122, 907-913.
Kay, R. H. (1982). Hearing of modulation in sounds. Physiological Reviews, 62, 894-975.

1014

Ponton, C. W., Eggermont, J. J., Kwong, B., & Don, M.
(2000). Maturation of human central auditory system
activity: Evidence from multi-channel evoked potentials.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 111, 220-236.
Ramus, F. (2004). Neurobiology of dyslexia: A reinterpretation of the data. Trends in Neurosciences, 27, 720-726.
Ramus, F., Rosen, S., Dakin, S. C., Day, B. L., Castellote,
J. M., White, S., et al. (2003). Theories of developmental
dyslexia: Insights from a multiple case study of dyslexic
adults. Brain, 126, 841-865.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 1002-1015 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Roach, N. W., Edwards, V. T., & Hogben, J. H. (2004). The
tale is in the tail: An alternative hypothesis for psychophysical performance in dyslexia. Perception, 33, 817-830.

Taylor, M. M., & Creelman, C. D. (1967). PEST: Efficient
estimates on probability functions. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 41, 782-787.

Rosen, S. (1999). Language disorders: A problem with
auditory processing? Current Biology, 9, R698-R700.

Trehub, S. E., Schneider, B. A., & Henderson, J. L. (1995).
Gap detection in infants, children and adults. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 98, 2532-2541.

Rosen, S. (2003). Auditory processing in dyslexia and specific language impairment: Is there a deficit? What is its
nature? Does it explain anything? Journal of Phonetics, 31,
509-527.
Schlauch, R. S., & Hafter, E. R. (1991). Listening bandwidths and frequency uncertainty in pure-tone signal detection. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 90,
1332-1339.

Watson, B. U. (1991). Some relationships between intelligence and auditory discrimination. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 34, 621-627.
Werner, L. A. (1992). Interpreting developmental psychophysics. In L. A. Werner & E. W. Rubel ( Eds.), Developmental psychophysics ( pp. 47-89). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Schneider, B. A., & Trehub, S. E. (1992). Sources of developmental change in auditory sensitivity. In L. A. Werner &
E. W. Rubel ( Eds.), Developmental psychophysics ( pp. 3-46).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Werner, L. A., & Bargones, J. Y. (1991). Sources of auditory masking in infants: Distraction effects. Perception &
Psychophysics, 50, 40-49.

Schneider, B. A., Trehub, S. E., Morrongiello, B. A., &
Thorpe, L. A. (1989). Developmental changes in masked
thresholds. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
86, 1733-1742.

Wightman, F., & Allen, P. (1992). Individual differences
in auditory capability among preschool children. In L. A.
Werner & E. W. Rubel ( Eds.), Developmental psychoacoustics ( pp. 113-133). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Schow, R. L., & Chermak, G. D. (1999). Implications from
factor analysis for central auditory processing disorders.
American Journal of Audiology, 8, 1-6.
Sek, A., & Moore, B. J. C. (2000). Detection of quasitrapezoidal frequency and amplitude modulation. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 1598-1604.
Stein, J. F. (2001). The mangocellular theory of developmental dyslexia. Dyslexia, 7, 12-36.
Stuart, A. (2005). Development of auditory temporal resolution in school-age children revealed by word recognition in
continuous and interrupted noise. Ear and Hearing, 26,
78-88.
Sussman, E., Wong, R., Horvath, J., Winkler, I., & Wang,
W. (2007). The development of perceptual organization of
sound by frequency separation in 5-11 year-old children.
Hearing Research, 225, 117-127.
Sutcliffe, P., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2005). Psychophysical
design influences frequency discrimination performance in
young children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
91, 249-270.
Talcott, J. B., Witton, C., Hebb, G. S., Stoodley, C. J.,
Westwood, E. A., France, S. J., et al. (2002). On the
relationship between dynamic visual and auditory processing and literacy skills: Results from a large primaryschool study. Dyslexia, 8, 204-225.
Talcott, J. B., Witton, C., McLean, M. F., Hansen, P. C.,
Rees, A., Green, G. G. R., et al. (2000). Dynamic sensory
sensitivity and children's word decoding skills. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 97, 2952-2957.
Tallal, P. (2000). Experimental studies of language learning
impairments: From research to remediation. In D. V. M.
Bishop & L. B. Leonard ( Eds.), Speech and language impairments in children ( pp. 131-155). East Sussex, England:
Psychology Press.
Tallal, P. (2004). Improving language and literacy is a matter
of time. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1-8.
Tallal, P., & Piercy, M. (1973). Developmental aphasia:
Impaired rate of non-verbal processing as a function of
sensory modality. Neuropsychologia, 11, 389-398.

Wightman, F., Allen, P., Dolan, T., Kistler, D., & Jamieson,
D. (1989). Temporal resolution in children. Child Development, 60, 611-624.
Witton, C., Stein, J. F., Stoodley, C. J., Rosner, B. S., &
Talcott, J. B. (2002). Separate influences of acoustic AM
and FM sensitivity on the phonological decoding skills
of impaired and normal listeners. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14, 866-874.
Witton, C., Talcott, J. B., Hansen, P. C., Richardson, A. J.,
Griffiths, T. D., Rees, A., et al. (1998). Sensitivity to dynamic auditory and visual stimuli predicts nonword reading
ability in both dyslexic and normal readers. Current Biology,
8, 791-797.
Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranik,
C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1997, May 8).
Deficits in auditory temporal resolution in languageimpaired children. Nature, 387, 176-178.
Wright, B. A., & Zecker, S. G. (2004). Learning problems,
delayed development, and puberty. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 101, 9942-9946.
Wunderlich, J. L., & Cone-Wesson, B. K. (2006). Maturation of CAEP in infants and children: A review. Hearing
Research, 212(1-2), 212-223.
Yost, W. A., Patterson, R. D., & Sheft, S. (1996). A time
domain description for the pitch strength of iterated rippled
noise. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99,
1066-1078.
Received April 24, 2007
Revision received August 27, 2007
Accepted December 9, 2007
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/073)
Contact author: Piers Dawes, who is now with the Wellcome
Language and Reading Project, Department of Psychology,
University of York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.
E-mail: pd524@york.ac.uk.

Dawes & Bishop: Maturation of Visual and Auditory Processes

1015

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

