J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178
DOI 10.1007/s10936-009-9131-5

The Relationship Between the Content and the Form
of Metaphorical Statements
Xu Xu

Published online: 23 October 2009
(c) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2009

Abstract Recent research suggests that the quality of a metaphorical topic-vehicle pairing
should be the determinant to the choice of a proper grammatical form, nominal metaphor
versus simile. Two studies examined the relationship between the quality of the content of a
metaphorical statement and its grammatical form. Study 1 showed that the two grammatical
forms did not differ in aptness when the quality of topic-vehicle pairs and the conventionality
of vehicles, a factor associated with the quality of metaphorical expressions, were controlled.
With an online comprehension measure, Study 2 found that high quality metaphorical pairings were easier to process than low quality metaphorical pairings in both the metaphor form
and the simile form. For high quality metaphorical pairings, information related to both the
topics and the vehicles was highly activated at an early stage of processing. The relations
among factors involved in the interpretive process of metaphorical language are discussed.
Keywords Quality of metaphorical pairing * Similarity * Grammatical form * Online
interpretation * Sentence processing

Introduction
Metaphorical statements can take on two different grammatical forms: nominal metaphor
(e.g., Justice is a net) and simile (e.g., Justice is like a net). Researchers have attempted to
address the differences between the two forms. For example, Ricoeur (1977) argued that
metaphors and similes differed in the psychological processes involved in comprehension.
Metaphors required extra effort to process. Chiappe and Kennedy (2000) conducted a series
of studies on corrective expressions that people might use in conversation, for example, "Sam
is like a rock. No, Sam is not like a rock. He is a rock." Here the metaphor expressed the same
opinion as the simile but with a much greater force. Bowdle and Gentner (2005) proposed

X. Xu (B)
School of Behavioral Sciences and Education, Pennsylvania State University,
Harrisburg, Middletown, PA 17057, USA
e-mail: xuxu@psu.edu

123

166

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

that a simile was a statement of comparison. The comprehension process of a simile was
similar to that of a literal comparison such as A sparrow is like a robin. On the other hand, a
metaphor was a statement of categorization. The comprehension process was similar to that
of a literal categorization such as A sparrow is a bird (also see Glucksberg and Keysar 1990).
There were also a plenty of studies on form preferences. Gibb and Wales (1990) found
that specificity of the topic term of a metaphorical statement (e.g., the topic term is modified by a definite article word or a pronoun) was positively associated with the preference
for the simile form over the metaphor form. Aisenman (1999) showed that different forms
were preferred to describe different types of similarities. People preferred the simile form
for intrinsic similarities such as similar shapes (e.g., A moon is like a pancake). They preferred the metaphor form for extrinsic similarities such as similar functions (e.g., A rooster
is an alarm clock). Bowdle and Gentner's (2005) the career of metaphor hypothesis states
that people prefer the metaphor form when the metaphorical meaning of a vehicle term is
very much conventionalized. For instance, when the vehicle term is goldmine, which has a
conventionalized metaphorical meaning, a rich source of something valuable, people tend to
use the metaphor form, e.g., A library is a goldmine. More recently, Glucksberg and Haught
(2006) proposed a more comprehensive view about form preference. They argued that vehicle conventionality per se should not privilege metaphor over simile. Instead, the quality of
the topic-vehicle pairing was more likely the determinant. The present research followed this
argument, and tested how much grammatical form really matters, especially when the pairing
of two concepts itself possesses the quality to constitute a good metaphorical expression.
Many researchers have studied the goodness of metaphorical expressions. Chiappe et al.
(2003) stated that a good metaphorical statement captured the important features of the topic
concept. Glucksberg and Haught (2006) proposed that a good metaphorical expression should
entail rich, multidimensional interpretations, whereas a poor metaphorical expression would
only carry limited metaphorical meaning. Utsumi (2007) stressed the interpretive diversity
of metaphorical expressions. Interpretive diversity concerned not only the richness of the
potential interpretations, but also the relative salience of these interpretations. To summarize,
there seems to be a certain degree of consensus among researchers on that the level of featural
overlapping between the topic concept and the vehicle concept should warrant the goodness
of a metaphorical expression. It naturally follows that, if there is a high degree of overlapping,
there should be a high level of perceived similarity between the topic concept and the vehicle
concept. Therefore, metaphorical similarity should be a direct index of the quality of the
content of a metaphorical expression. As a matter of fact, some early research had reported
that the level of metaphorical similarity between the topic and the vehicle was positively
related to the goodness of metaphorical expressions (Johnson and Malgady 1979; Marschark
et al. 1983; Tourangeau and Rips 1991; Tourangeau and Sternberg 1981). Some research
also indicated that metaphorical topic-vehicle pairs with high similarity ratings were more
comprehensible than those with low similarity ratings (Wolff and Gentner 2000). Because of
the predictive value of similarity, the present research used it as a simple index of the quality
of metaphorical pairing between a topic and a vehicle.
The purpose of the two studies reported in this paper was to examine the relationship
between the content of a metaphorical statement and its grammatical form. More specifically, the first study used the traditional rating approach adopted by many researchers to
compare the aptness of an expression in the metaphor form versus in the simile form after
controlling the quality of the metaphorical pairing. Sometimes, in the literature, researchers
seem to use aptness to refer to the quality of a metaphorical expression. However, it is necessary to differentiate these two concepts. Aptness refers to the felicity of an expression, i.e.,
whether it is well stated. Thus it should concern both the content and the grammatical form

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

167

of the expression. When researchers in the past used aptness as an index of the quality of a
metaphorical expression, they often either used the aptness ratings for one form, most frequently the metaphor form (e.g., Blasko and Connine 1993; Jones and Estes 2005, 2006), or
averaged the aptness ratings of the two forms (e.g., Bowdle and Gentner 2005; Chiappe et al.
2003). Either way, the differences of aptness ratings between the forms, though sometimes
reported, were largely neglected. The present research therefore reserved the term aptness for
the goodness of an expression in a certain form (metaphor or simile), and the term quality of
topic-vehicle pairing for the degree of featural overlapping, respectively. The second study
examined online interpretation of metaphorical expressions. Despite some speculations, there
seem to be little empirical research utilizing online measures to look directly into how different grammatical forms may evoke different comprehension processes. The study employed
an online comprehension measure in order to closely examine the processing of high quality
metaphorical pairings versus low quality metaphorical pairings in both the metaphor form
and the simile form.

Study 1
To test Glucksberg and Haught (2006) hypothesis regarding the relationship between the
quality of metaphorical pairings and the preference for certain grammatical forms, this study
collected participants' ratings on the quality of 60 topic-vehicle pairs and the aptness of these
pairs expressed in two different grammatical forms, metaphor vs. simile. Another factor that
is often studied in the literature of metaphorical language is vehicle conventionality. On one
hand, some studies have shown that the conventionality of the metaphorical meaning of the
vehicle is an important factor in metaphorical language comprehension (e.g., Bowdle and
Gentner 2005). On the other hand, as Jones and Estes (2006) pointed out, the goodness of
expressions and the conventionality of vehicle terms were overwhelmingly confounded in
past research. This confound seems inevitable due to the natural connection between the two
variables. That is, a good expression is by definition well received and, therefore, repeatedly
used over time. Because of the close relation between the goodness of an expression and the
conventionality of the vehicle, this study also included vehicle conventionality as a variable
to examine the relationship between the content and the form of a metaphorical statement.
In the literature, research has repeatedly shown that people prefer different grammatical
forms for different metaphorical pairings. Some research has also indicated that, given a set
of topic-vehicle pairs, the simile form on average sounds more felicitous than the metaphor
form (Bowdle and Gentner 2005; Chiappe et al. 2003). It seems that the comparison marker
"like" in similes makes the sentences slightly more sensible, regardless of the nature of the
topic-vehicle pairing. This study evaluated the difference in aptness between metaphors and
similes after controlling the quality of the metaphorical pairings and the conventionality of
the vehicles, a factor shown associated with the goodness of the expressions. According to
Glucksberg and Haught (2006), form preference was to a large extent determined by the
quality of the topic-vehicle pairing. More specifically, a good topic-vehicle pair should work
better in the metaphor form, whereas a poor topic-vehicle pair should work better in the
simile form. If this argument holds, after controlling the quality of topic-vehicle pairings and
vehicle conventionality, the form difference in aptness should diminish.

123

168

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

Method
Participants
Ninety-six undergraduate students were recruited from the introductory psychology class.
All considered English as their first language. They received course credit for participation
in this study.
Materials
The materials were collected from the literature of metaphorical language research. Some
of the expressions in the literature contained modifiers (e.g., some) for the topic terms. For
example, Some men are wolves. Compared with expressions without modifiers, e.g., Men are
wolves, they seem to elicit different interpretations and evaluations. To be in line with most
studies on metaphorical language and to control extraneous variables, this study retrieved 60
topic-vehicle pairs without any modifiers (Appendix A).
Procedure
This study consisted of four different rating tasks. All used a pencil-and-paper procedure.
Twenty-four participants were randomly assigned to each of the four tasks and received a
booklet with instructions and materials. Materials for each task were printed in four different
random orders. The first task and the second task were both aptness rating tasks evaluating
the aptness of each of the 60 metaphorical statements. The difference between the two was
the grammatical form of the metaphorical statements. The topic-vehicle pairs were presented
in the simile form (e.g., A pen is like a sword, Community is like soil) in one task and in the
metaphor form (e.g., A pen is a sword, Community is soil) in the other. Participants rated "how
suitable or natural" each sentence sounded on a 6.0 scale, with 1 as "very unsuitable/unnatural" and 6 as "very suitable/natural" (Aisenman 1999; Jones and Estes 2006). The third task
was a similarity rating task. The 60 topic-vehicle pairs were presented as word pairs without
sentential context. Participants evaluated how similar each pair of concepts was on a 5.0
scale, with 1 as "not similar at all" and 5 as "extremely similar". The fourth task was about
the conventionality of the metaphorical meaning of the vehicle terms. Participants were given
three example sentences all with jail as the vehicle: My job is a jail, My marriage is a jail,
My house is a jail. The instruction explained that "people sometimes use one thing, e.g., jail,
to describe other things in a figurative way." The participants were asked to indicate how
familiar they felt about each of the 60 vehicle terms being used to describe other entities in a
figurative way. This task used a 5.0 scale with 1 as "not at all" and 5 as "very familiar". All
participants completed the tasks within 20 min.
Results and Discussion
Interrater agreement within each task was evaluated before further analysis. Cronbach's alpha
was 0.94 for aptness ratings of the simile form, 0.94 for aptness ratings of the metaphor form,
0.97 for similarity ratings, and 0.93 for conventionality ratings. These high agreement levels
suggest that the average ratings across participants could be used for the following analysis
on the relationship between the aptness of metaphors, the aptness of similes, the similarity
(i.e., quality) of the topic-vehicle pairs, and the conventionality of the vehicle terms. The
mean aptness rating for similes was 3.61; the mean aptness rating for metaphors was 3.20

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

169

Table 1 Mean ratings and correlation coefficients for metaphor aptness, simile aptness, similarity, and vehicle
conventionality
Ratings

Metaphor aptness

Correlation coefficients

Mean

SD

Simile aptness

Similarity

Conventionality

3.20

0.76

0.82

0.72

0.38
0.45

Simile aptness

3.61

0.66

-

0.79

Similarity

2.57

0.59

-

-

0.38

Vehicle conventionality

2.56

0.56

-

-

-

 p < 0.01;  p < 0.001

(Table 1). A bivariate correlational analysis showed that the aptness ratings for similes and
metaphors were well correlated, r (60) = 0.818, p < 0.001. If a topic-vehicle pair sounded
suitable in the simile form, it sounded somewhat suitable in the metaphor form, and vice
versa.
The similarity ratings ranged from 1.25 to 4.25 on the 5.0 scale. Similarity was correlated
with aptness ratings for similes, r (60) = 0.793, p < 0.001, and metaphors, r (60) = 0.715,
p < 0.001. That is, be it metaphor or simile, perceived similarity between the topic and the
vehicle was highly correlated with how apt a metaphorical statement sounded. The conventionality ratings of vehicle terms ranged from 1.50 to 4.09 on the 5.0 scale. Conventionality
seemed also positively correlated with the aptness of metaphorical statements in the simile
form, r (60) = 0.454, p < 0.001, and in the metaphor form, r (60) = 0.375, p < 0.005.
However, the strength of these correlations was rather weak.
Because there was also a low correlation between vehicle conventionality and perceived
similarity, r (60) = 0.375, p < 0.005, a partial correlation was conducted to further examine the relationship between aptness and perceived similarity after controlling vehicle conventionality. Partial correlation coefficients, r p (57) = 0.753, p < 0.001 for similes and
r p (57) = 0.669, p < 0.001 for metaphors, indicated that the strength of the partial correlations were rather comparable to the zero-order correlations for both similes and metaphors.
Perceived similarity and aptness correlated with each other, and vehicle conventionality did
not seem to be a substantial mediator.
To test the effect of the quality of metaphorical pairings, a simple ANOVA was first conducted to compare the two sets of aptness ratings. Consistent with past research, on average,
the aptness ratings were significantly higher for simile than for metaphor, F(1, 59) = 53.028,
MSE = 0.095, p < 0.001. Next, topic-vehicle similarity and vehicle conventionality were
entered as covariates in order to control their effects on aptness. The ANCOVA showed that,
after controlling the two variables, the two sets of aptness ratings were no longer reliably different, F(1, 57) = 1.760, MSE = 0.098, p = 0.200. This is positive evidence for Glucksberg
and Haught's (2006) position on the relationship between the quality of a topic-vehicle pair
in a statement and the grammatical form of the statement.
A last note on this study is the higher average aptness rating for similes than metaphors.
Glucksberg and Haught (2006) argued that good topic-vehicle pairs should work better in the
metaphor form, whereas poor topic-vehicle pairs work better in the simile form. One reason
that this study and a few past studies found on average higher felicitous ratings for similes
than for metaphors could be that the metaphorical pairings included in these studies did not
represent the whole range of the quality of topic-vehicle pairings. That is, these topic-vehicle
pairs fell on the lower part of the quality spectrum, and therefore sounded more felicitous

123

170

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

when phrased as similes. An alternative explanation is that, in reality, there are fewer metaphorical pairings that work better as metaphors than as similes, comparing with the amount
of existing metaphorical pairings that work better as similes. For a statement in the metaphor
form to sound better than its simile form, the metaphor form expression probably needs to
be a high frequency expression, and thus very much familiar to most people, e.g., Time is
money and Love is a journey.

Study 2
This study utilized a measure for online comprehension to examine the interpretive processes
of high quality versus low quality metaphorical pairings in both the metaphor form and the
simile form. There have been plenty of discussions and debates in the literature on how
the interpretive processes may differ for metaphors versus similes. Some (e.g., Bowdle and
Gentner 2005) have argued that interpreting a statement in the metaphor form (e.g., My job
is a jail) entails a categorization process. In this process, the vehicle (e.g., jail) exemplifies
an ad hoc category (e.g., things that are confining), and features of this category are activated
and then attributed to the topic concept. In contrast, interpreting a statement in the simile
form entails a comparison process in which similar features of the two domains are activated
and aligned with each other. Glucksberg and Haught (2006) have also stressed the role of
grammatical form in the process of interpreting metaphorical statements, but prresented a
slight different view about the time course of feature activation in the process. According
to their view, the interpretive process for metaphors is initially a process of categorization
in which salient features of the vehicle domain are attributed to the topic. It follows that,
in a post-comprehension process, some additional inferences are made through comparison
and interaction between the two domains. The argument suggests that simile interpretation,
as a comparison process, evoke features of both domains to a comparable level, whereas
metaphor interpretation, as a categorization process, initially evoke mainly features of the
vehicle domain. Not until later are features of the topic domain activated to the same level.
Despite these speculations, only a few studies employed online comprehension measures
to look directly into the interpretive processes of metaphors versus similes. In addition, these
online measures were either reading time or comprehension time. For example, Glucksberg
and Haught (2006) used reading time, and the mean reading times reported were well over
1500 ms. Bowdle and Gentner (2005) asked participants to read a metaphorical sentence and
then strike a key once they felt that they had come up with an interpretation of the sentence.
The mean comprehension times reported ranged from 2000 ms to over 3000 ms. Jones and
Estes (2005) adopted Bowdle and Gentner's approach and reported mean processing times as
high as over 4000 ms. Therefore, it seems necessary to employ different measures to explore
earlier stages of the interpretive process. Furthermore, Jones and Estes (2006) demonstrated
that length of sentence reliably predicted comprehension times. Considering the difference
in sentence length between the metaphor form and the simile form, research about metaphors
and similes needs measures that can bypass the impact of sentence length.
This study adopted a measure used by Blasko and Connine (1993). Participants listened
to metaphorical sentences in the metaphor form and in the simile form. A lexical decision
task followed 750 ms after the offset of the sentence. The response time for the target word
associated with the meaning of the sentence was compared with that for a control word. Activation of the meaning of a sentence should be reflected as the processing advantage for the
target word over the control word. Target words representing the juxtaposition and interaction
between the topic and the vehicle were carefully chosen based on a norming study conducted

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

171

before the main experiment. In addition, there were two types of target words in the experiment: topic-associated targets and vehicle associated targets. As discussed above, there are
speculations on how the interpretive processes for metaphors versus similes are launched
and proceed differently over time. It seems that researchers consider that the activation of
the vehicle domain characterizes the early stage of processing for metaphors, whereas the
alignment of features between the topic and the vehicle domains characterizes the early stage
of processing for similes.
This study used a factorial design with topic-vehicle similarity (high vs. low), grammatical form (metaphor vs. simile), and target type (topic association vs. vehicle association) as
factors. Some predictions of interest are as follows. If high quality topic-vehicle pairs are in
general easier to process than low quality topic-vehicle pairs, there should be a main effect
of similarity. If one form is easier to process than the other, there should be a main effect of
form. If information of one domain gets to be activated earlier than that of the other, there
should be a main effect of target type. In addition, if high quality topic-vehicle pairs and low
quality topic-vehicle pairs differ in terms of which form is more suitable for comprehension,
there should be an interaction between similarity and form. If metaphors and similes differ
in terms of which constituent concept is more salient at the early stage of the interpretive
process, there should be an interaction between form and target type. Finally, a higher order
three-way interaction would suggest that the relationship among quality of topic-vehicle
pairs, grammatical form, and target type is more complicated than it has been speculated.
Method
Participants
One hundred and forty-three undergraduate students were recruited from the introductory
psychology class. Among them, 117 participated in the norming study described next, and 26
in the main experiment. All considered English as their first language. They received course
credit for participation in this study.

The Norming Study
The 60 topic-vehicle pairs were presented in a random order on computer screen. Participants
typed in a box beside each topic-vehicle pair one word that was most closely related to the
meaning of both words of each pair (Blasko and Connine 1993; Jones and Estes 2006). All
participants completed this task within 30 min.
An independent judge who was not aware of the purpose of the study evaluated the
responses generated for each pair of words. The evaluation procedure followed these steps.
First, obviously misspelled words were corrected and non-words were excluded. Second,
response words of the same root were collapsed together for each pair of words, e.g., clean
and cleaning. The root, e.g., clean, was used to represent the collapsed responses. And finally,
for each pair of words, synonyms among the responses were collapsed. For example, quick
and fast were counted as the same response to the word pair time & arrow. Of these two
responses, quick and fast, the word with the higher response frequency was used to represent this response. A frequency table of response words then was generated for each word
pair. Three response words with the highest frequency were considered as the most salient
responses, and retrieved as candidate target words for the main experiment.

123

172

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

Materials of the Main Experiment
Twelve of the 60 topic-vehicle pairs retained based on the following criteria. First, they each
had two response words out of the three candidate target words, one strongly associated with
the topic term but only weakly associated with the vehicle term and one strongly associated with the vehicle term but only weakly associated with the topic term. The association
strength between response words and topics/vehicles were evaluated by the Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA, Landauer et al. 1998). LSA is a practical tool to assess semantic association between word and word, word and passage, or passage and passage. After two texts
are entered into LSA, LSA generates a cosine score (maximum 1.0) indicating the degree
of association between the texts. For the selected 12 topic-vehicle pairs, the average LSA
cosine for the 24 response words and their associative topics/vehicles was 0.35, and the average LSA cosine for the response words and their non-associative topics/vehicles was 0.08,
t (23) = 5.77, p < .001. Second, the topic-vehicle similarity ratings generated in Study 1 for
these 12 topic-vehicle pairs represented a good range (2.25-4.25) on the 5.0 similarity scale.
With this range, a median split would allow the main experiment to examine and compare the
processing differences between the six low quality topic-vehicle pairs and the six high quality
topic-vehicle pairs. Finally, the conventionality ratings of vehicle terms for the six low quality word pairs and the six high quality word pairs were matched t (10) = 0.413, p = 0.70.
According to the results of Study 1, conventionality was to some extent correlated with the
goodness of metaphorical expressions. Matching this variable across high and low similarity
conditions was to control potential processing differences due to the variation in vehicle
conventionality. The 24 response words served as the target words of the main experiment.
Example target words associated with the topics include bright for the word pair star-signpost and change for the word pair reform-therapy. Example target words associated with
the vehicles include direction for the word pair star-signpost and help for the word pair
reform-therapy.
Twenty-four control words were generated from the English Lexicon Project (Balota et al.
2007). These control words matched the 24 target words in response time, word frequency,
and word length. Forty-eight non-words were generated roughly matching the length of the
24 target words and 24 control words.
A female native speaker of American English recorded two versions of metaphorical sentences with each of 12 the topic-vehicle pair, one simile version and one metaphor version.
The two versions were as similar as possible in voice tone. She also recorded an additional
36 sentences, each with a simile version and a metaphor version, for control words and
non-words.
Design of the Main Experiment
The experiment used a 2 x 2 x 2 mixed factorial design, with topic-vehicle similarity (high
vs. low) as a within-subjects variable, type of target words (topic association vs. vehicle
association) as a within-subjects variable, and grammatical form (simile vs. metaphor) as a
between-subjects variable. That is, each participant was presented with all 12 critical topicvehicle pairs, six high similarity and six low similarity. Within each of the two similarity
conditions, half of the sentences were followed by a target word strongly associated with
the topic, whereas the other half of the sentences were followed by a target word strongly
associated with the vehicle. Each participant was presented with sentences of the same grammatical form, either simile or metaphor. In addition, each participant only listened to each
sentence once. That is, each participant only judged on one of the two target words for each

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

173

metaphorical sentence. Crossing the two form conditions and two sets of target words resulted
in four different presentation lists. Each list contained 48 metaphorical sentences followed by
48 letter strings (words and nonwords) and 16 comprehension sentences. These comprehension sentences were built in the experimental program to check participants' attentiveness.

Procedure of the Main Experiment
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four presentation lists. Each participant
sat in front of a computer and listened to the recorded sentences played over a headphone. A
letter string appeared on the computer screen 750 ms after the completion of each sentence.
The selection of this time interval was based on Blasko and Connine's (1993) finding that
it took about 750 ms to process the meaning of most metaphorical sentences. Participants
needed to quickly judge whether the letter string was a real word by pressing a labeled key
on the computer keyboard. In one-third of the trials, after the lexical decision task, a comprehension sentence was presented on the screen. Participants needed to judge whether it
truthfully reflected the meaning of the metaphorical sentence at the beginning of the trial.
All participants completed the experiment within 30 min.
Results
Three participants had low accuracy rate (<80%) on the lexical decision task and low accuracy
rate on the comprehension task ( <75%). One additional participant generated exceptionally
long response time (mean RT = 1,056 ms, z = 3.26) on the lexical decision task. They were
excluded from the following analysis. For the remaining participants, the average accuracy
rate was 97.5% for the lexical decision task, and 90.5% for the comprehension task. The
average response time for the correctly judged trials of the lexical decision task was 663 ms.
These trials were submitted to the following analysis.
To evaluate activation of target words after hearing metaphorical sentences, the response
time for each target word was subtracted from the response time for its corresponding control word. A 2 (high similarity vs. low similarity) x 2 (target associated with topic vs.
target associated with vehicle) x 2 (simile vs. metaphor) ANOVA was conducted on the
difference in response time. Mean activation level under each condition is illustrated in
Fig. 1. There was a main effect of similarity level, F1 (1, 20) = 8.723, MSE = 5,310.565,
p = 0.008, F2 (1, 20) = 8.835, MSE = 11,222.022, p = 0.008. The high similarity metaphorical pairings led to activations of target words, M = 77 ms (SE = 26 ms), which was
not the case for the low similarity metaphorical pairings, M = -23 ms (SE = 21 ms). T tests showed that, following metaphorical sentences with high similarity topic-vehicle pairs,
there was a significant activation of the target words compared with the control words,
t1 (21) = 3.068, p = 0.006, t2 (11) = 2.985, p = 0.012. In contrast, there did not appear to
be significant activation or inhibition of the target words following metaphorical sentences
with low similarity topic-vehicle pairs, t1 (21) < 1, t2 (11) < 1.
The ANOVA did not reveal any other significant effects, all F1 's > 0.20, all F2 's > 0.15.
Different grammatical forms, simile and metaphor, did not lead to different levels of activation of target words. There were not a significant difference in levels of activation between
target words associated with the topics and target words associated with the vehicles. The
lack of interaction between similarity, form, and type of target words suggested that the effect
of similarity level robustly hold across the two form conditions and two types of target words.

123

174

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

Level of Activation (ms)

200
160
120
80
40
0
-40
-80
Simile

Metaphor
Low Similarity

Topic Association

Metaphor

Simile

High Similarity
Vehicle Association

Fig. 1 Activation of different types of target words across two similarity conditions and two grammatical
form conditions

Discussion
This study examined the interpretive processes for high quality metaphorical pairings versus
low quality metaphorical pairings in both the metaphor form and the simile form. It used
the difference in response time between the target word and the control word to measure
the level of meaning activation during sentence interpretation. Two different types of target words allowed the experiment to check which of the two domains, topic vs. vehicle,
is primarily activated at a relatively early stage of the process. The findings showed that,
whether metaphors or similes, high quality topic-vehicle pairs were always processed faster
than low quality pairs. In addition, 750 ms after sentence presentation, information from both
the topic and the vehicle was significantly activated for high quality topic-vehicle pairings,
whereas information from neither domain seemed to be activated at this point for low quality
topic-vehicle pairings.
Combining the findings from Study 1 and Study 2, the role of similarity suggests that
the goodness of a metaphorical statement depends not only on whether there exists a wide
range of common features between the topic and the vehicle, but also on whether the common features are salient for both constituent concepts, and thus easy to access. Recall that
these target words were generated as the result of metaphorical comparison. The target words
selected for Study 2 can be essentially considered representing two different metaphorical
interpretations. For sentences with high similarity topic-vehicle pairs, both interpretations
were highly activated at an early stage of processing. In contrast, for sentences with low similarity topic-vehicle pairs, this was not the case. This is in line with Glucksberg and Haught's
(2006) definition that good metaphorical pairings have rich, multidimensional interpretations, whereas poor metaphorical pairings have limited interpretation. It is also consistent
with Utsumi's (2007) interpretive diversity argument that, for good metaphorical pairings,
the multiple interpretations should be comparable in terms of salience level.
Both of the above two studies (Glucksberg and Haught 2006; Utsumi 2007) indicated that
good metaphorical pairings were associated with preference for the metaphor form, whereas
poor metaphorical pairings were associated with preference for the simile form. However,
in this study, the lack of interaction between similarity (i.e., the quality of the metaphorical
pairings) and form suggests that phrasing a high quality pairing into the metaphor form did
not lead to processing advantage over its simile form. Conversely, phrasing a low quality

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

175

metaphorical pairing into the simile form did not lead to processing advantage over its metaphor form. It appears that a good metaphorical pairing is a good metaphorical pairing,
regardless of its grammatical form. The discrepancy between this study and the previous two
studies is probably due to their different measurement approaches, which might have revealed
different aspects of metaphorical language processing. The online comprehension measure
used in this study detects the characteristics of the ongoing comprehension process, whereas
form preference is usually evaluated at a post-comprehension stage. These two aspects may
not be connected.
Further, the lack of interaction between form and target type suggests that, at this stage
of sentence processing, metaphors and similes do not differ in terms of which domain plays
the primary role. There are two possible explanations. First, inconsistent with speculations
on processing differences, metaphors and similes do not entail different types of processing. However, some studies with different assessment approach have shown that metaphors
and similes indeed lead to different interpretations with the same comparative content (e.g.,
Hasson et al. 2001; Glucksberg and Haught 2006). The second explanation for the lack of
interaction is the limitation of the measure in this study. The study looked at the interpretive
status at 750 ms after sentence presentation, and showed that, at this stage, there was no difference between metaphors and similes. However, the differences between the two may occur
at a much earlier or a much later stage. To test this, research needs to look into the temporal
course of the interpretation process and to compare information activation at various stages.
Finally, in this study, people did not process metaphors faster than similes, or vice versa.
This is consistent with the findings from the studies using reading time and comprehension
time as measures for processing speed (Gentner and Bowdle 2005; Glucksberg and Haught
2006; Jones and Estes 2005, 2006). Glucksberg and Haught (2006) pointed out that, when
encountering a metaphor form or a simile form, people might implicitly switch between the
two forms as a comprehension strategy. If this is the case, presenting a sentence in one form
does not prevent people from rephrasing the sentence in another form. However, 750 ms is
considered a very early stage of sentence processing (Gentner and Wolff 1997). It is unlikely
that people have consciously switched the grammatical form to facilitate comprehension by
this point. To sum up studies comparing the metaphor form and the simile form, whereas
different interpretations and post-comprehension evaluations have been reported for these
two different forms (e.g., Chiappe and Kennedy 2000; Hasson et al. 2001), it seems that
temporal differences between the two forms during the interpretive processes have not been
detected.

Conclusion
Two studies reported in this paper suggest that a good metaphorical statement is one that is
constituted by two concepts that share many salient common features. As a result of these
common features, the two concepts are perceived as very similar to each other. Many studies
have reported the differences in aptness between the metaphor form and the simile form.
The present findings suggest that, with the level of topic-vehicle similarity controlled, the
two grammatical forms no longer reliably differ in aptness. Furthermore, a metaphorical
statement with a highly similar topic-vehicle pair is easy to process in either form.
Acknowledgments The author would like to thank Danielle Reed for constructing the experimental materials, Katie Daniels for evaluating participants' responses for the norming study, and Jennie Mancuso for
assisting with data collection.

123

176

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

Appendix A
See Table 2.

Table 2 Topic-vehicle pairs in
study 1

123

Topic

Vehicle

Addiction

Paste

Anxiety

Hemp

Attitudea

Veil

Austerity

Medicine

Book

Itch

Censorshipa

Filter

Civilization

Crust

Columnist

Sprinter

Community

Soil

Compassion

Well

Conscience

Crown

Conscience

Worm

Criticism

Shield

Cynicism

Undertaker

Data

Fog

Diplomacy

Bridge

Economy

Airplane

Emotion

Water

Eyelashes

Shelves

Facts

Onions

Gaze

Pin

Heart

Refrigerator

Hopea

Light

Indecision

Dead end

Indecision

Whirlpool

Information

Food

Inspiration

Sparkle

Institution

Mill

Justicea

Net

Language

Bridge

Library

Temple

Love

Tea

Marriage

Shoes

Media

Octopus

Museuma

Cemetery

Pen

Sword

Policya

Prescription

Politician

Broom

Politics

Reality show

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178
Table 2 continued

a Topic-vehicle pairs in the main

experiment of Study 2

177

Topic

Vehicle

Public School

Flytrap

Reforma

Therapy

Relation

Book

Revelation

Rain

Revenue

Water

Revolutiona

Volcano

Sarcasm

Arrow

Science

Bird

Selfa

Sculpture

Smog

Shroud

Sorrow

River

Stara

Signpost

Stars

Snow flakes

Success

Line

Superstitiona

Disease

Surgery

Painting

Thought

Net

Time

River

Traitor

Cat

Vexationsa

Knots

Youth

Bird

References
Aisenman, R. A. (1999). Structure mapping and the simile - metaphor preference. Metaphor and
Symbol, 14, 45-51.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Kessler, B., Loftis, B., Neely, J. H., Nelson,
D. L., Simpson, G. B., & Treiman, R. (2007). The English Lexicon Project. Behavior Research
Methods, 39, 445-459.
Blasko, D. G., & Connine, C. M. (1993). Effects of familiarity and aptness on metaphor processing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 295-308.
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor. Psychological Review, 112(1), 193-216.
Chiappe, D. L., & Kennedy, J. M. (2000). Are metaphors elliptical similes? Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 29, 371-398.
Chiappe, D. L., Kennedy, J. M., & Smykowski, T. (2003). Reversibility, aptness, the conventionality of
metaphors and similes. Metaphor and Symbol, 18, 85-105.
Gentner, D., & Bowdle, B. F. (2005). Convention, form, and figurative language processing. Metaphor
and Symbol, 16, 223-247.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the processing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 331-355.
Gibb, H., & Wales, R. (1990). Metaphor or simile: Psychological determinants of the differential use of
each sentence form. Metaphor and Symbol, 5, 199-213.
Glucksberg, S., & Haught, C. (2006). On the relation between metaphor and simile: When comparison
fails. Mind & Language, 21, 360-378.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding metaphorical comparisons: Beyond similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3-18.

123

178

J Psycholinguist Res (2010) 39:165-178

Hasson, U., Estes, Z., & Glucksberg, S. (2001). Metaphors communicate more effectively than do similes.
Abstract of the Psychonomic Society 42nd Annual Meeting, Vol. 6. Austin, TX: Psychonomic Society
Publications, pp. 103.
Johnson, M. G., & Malgady, R. G. (1979). Some cognitive aspects of figurative language: Association
and metaphor. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 8, 249-265.
Jones, L. L., & Estes, Z. (2005). Metaphor comprehension as attributive categorization. Journal of Memory
and Language, 53, 110-124.
Jones, L. L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and alarm clocks: Aptness and conventionality in
metaphor comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 18-32.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An introduction of latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processing, 25, 259-284.
Marschark, M., Katz, A. N., & Paivio, A. (1983). Dimensions of metaphor. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 12, 17-40.
Ricoeur, P. (1977). Rule of metaphor. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Tourangeau, R., & Rips, L. (1991). Interpreting and evaluating metaphors. Journal of Memory and
Language, 30, 452-472.
Tourangeau, R., & Sternberg, R. J. (1981). Aptness in metaphor. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 27-55.
Utsumi, A. (2007). Interpretive diversity explains metaphor-simile distinction. Metaphor and Symbol, 22,
291-312.
Wolff, P., & Gentner, D. (2000). Evidence for role-neutral initial processing of metaphors. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 26, 529-541.

123

