The Relationship Between Brainstem
Temporal Processing and Performance
on Tests of Central Auditory Function
in Children With Reading Disorders
Cassandra R. Billiet
The University of South Dakota,
Vermillion, and Oakdale Ear, Nose,
and Throat Clinic, Maple Grove, MN

Teri James Bellis
Sanford School of Medicine,
The University of South Dakota, Vermillion

Purpose: Studies using speech stimuli to elicit electrophysiologic responses have found
approximately 30% of children with language-based learning problems demonstrate
abnormal brainstem timing. Research is needed regarding how these responses
relate to performance on behavioral tests of central auditory function. The purpose
of the study was to investigate performance of children with dyslexia with and without
abnormal brainstem timing and children with no history of learning or related
disorders on behavioral tests of central auditory function.
Method: Performance of 30 school-age children on behavioral central auditory
tests in common clinical use was examined: Group 1 (n = 10): dyslexia, abnormal
brainstem timing; Group 2 (n = 10): dyslexia, normal brainstem timing; Group 3
(n = 10): typical controls.
Results: Results indicated that all participants in Group 2 met diagnostic criteria
for (central) auditory processing disorder [(C)APD], whereas only 4 participants in
Group 1 met criteria. The Biological Marker of Auditory Processing ( BioMARK)
identified 6 children in Group 1 who did not meet diagnostic criteria for (C)APD
but displayed abnormal brainstem timing.
Conclusions: Results underscore the importance of central auditory assessment
for children with dyslexia. Furthermore, the BioMARK may be useful in identifying
children with central auditory dysfunction who would not have been identified using
behavioral methods of (C)APD assessment.
KEY WORDS: central auditory processing disorder, speech-evoked brainstem
auditory response, dyslexia

P

resent research has investigated sensory and motor deficits as contributing factors to the phonological difficulties displayed by children with reading disorders (Moncrieff & Musiek 2002; Rosen &
Manganari 2001; Sharma et al., 2006; Tallal, Merzenich, Miller, & Jenkins,
1998; Walker, Givens, Cranford, Holbert, & Walker, 2006). In particular,
auditory contributions to reading deficits have been noted. Despite the lack
of consensus with regard to the cause of reading disorders, a significant
amount of research has focused on the auditory theories as a means of explaining, at least in part, the etiology of reading disorders. The scientific
connection between auditory skills and reading has been recognized and
has led to the investigation of auditory neural activity and behavioral
manifestations of reading deficits (Banai, Hornickel, Skoe, Nicol, Zecker,
& Kraus, 2009). A variety of methods and stimuli have been used in order
to investigate which specific areas of auditory processing may be deficient

228 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research *

Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

in children with dyslexia. This information has been explored to better understand whether the relationship between auditory processing and dyslexia is causal or
associated.
Ramus et al. (2003) sought to investigate all possible
causes of dyslexia to determine whether relationships
or patterns exist among the many domains that may be
deficient in children with dyslexia. Results of the study
supported the phonological theory in that a significant
portion of the authors' participants (10 of 16) exhibited
auditory deficits on a variety of phonological and auditory perception tasks. The phonological theory postulates that the origin of the dysfunction at the neurological
level is that of left-hemisphere or interhemispheric brain
regions. Of the remaining six participants who did not
display auditory deficits, four exhibited a motor deficit
and two a visual magnocellular deficit. The performance
of children with dyslexia differed greatly among individuals, supporting the heterogeneous nature of reading disorders.
(Central) auditory processing disorder [(C)APD] can
be operationally defined as a deficit in the "perceptual
processing of auditory information in the central nervous system (CNS) and the neurobiologic activity that
underlies that processing and gives rise to the electrophysiologic auditory potentials" (American SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association [ASHA], 2005, p. 2).
(C)APD may affect auditory skills such as localization /
lateralization, performance with competing or degraded
acoustic stimuli, and temporal processing and patterning
abilities, among others. According to present consensus
statements and guidelines (American Academy of Audiology [AAA], 2010; ASHA, 2005), the diagnosis of (C)APD
should be made via a test battery approach using psychophysical ( behavioral) and /or electrophysiologic measures that have been shown to be sensitive, specific, and
efficient for identification of disorders of the central auditory nervous system (CANS). A diagnosis of (C)APD is
made only when performance is >2 standard deviations
below the mean (regarding age-specific normative data)
on two or more tests of central auditory function, combined with a pattern of deficits based on intra- and intertest comparison measures (e.g., ear differences, response
condition differences, consistency across tests) that has
been shown to be consistent with underlying CANS dysfunction. As with dyslexia, (C)APD is a heterogeneous
disorder, with deficit patterns that vary depending on presumed region of dysfunction within the CANS (see AAA,
2010; ASHA, 2005; Bellis, 2003; Musiek & Chermak,
2007, for comprehensive reviews).
Several researchers have investigated the performance of children with dyslexia on behavioral tests of
central auditory processing. Children with dyslexia have
been shown to exhibit poorer dichotic listening abilities,

particularly for the left ear, as compared with normal
controls (e.g., Bakker, 1973; Moncrieff & Musiek, 2002;
Purdy et al., 2002). Walker et al. (2006) found that children with dyslexia had more difficulty recognizing patterns of differing frequency and temporal duration for
tonal stimuli. It was suggested that poor performance in
children with dyslexia may be due to underdevelopment
of the CANS.
In addition to dichotic speech tests, more comprehensive central auditory test batteries have been administered
to children with reading disorders including temporal patterning tests, tests of monaural low-redundancy speech,
and gap detection. Results have indicated that children
with dyslexia perform poorly on one or more components
of the test battery compared with controls (Sharma
et al., 2006; Welsh, Welsh, & Healy, 1980).
Disruptions in temporal processing may have adverse effects on speech perception and understanding
(Hayes, Tiippana, Nicol, Sams, & Kraus, 2003; King,
Warrier, Hayes, & Kraus, 2002; Phillips, 1995). The ability to discriminate stop consonants often is affected in
individuals with lesions of the primary auditory cortex
(Phillips & Farmer, 1990). Fast speaker rates and presence of background noise are examples of conditions that
affect the accurate perception and recognition of speech.
The importance of temporal processing for hearing, speech,
and language is evident, and it could be expected that
temporal processing deficits would disrupt these skills.
A number of studies that have associated poor auditory processing abilities with reading disorders have
focused on the listener's ability to process rapid verbal
and nonverbal stimuli ( Kraus et al., 1996; McAnally &
Stein, 1996; Tallal, 1980). Tallal (1980) found that children with reading disorders were able to sequence and
discriminate the stimuli as well as their normal peers
when the stimuli were presented at a slower rate; however, when presented more rapidly, the children with
reading disorders performed more poorly. A significant
correlation was established between the children's ability to process the rapid nonverbal information and phonic skills, suggesting a possible fundamental perceptual
deficit underlying the inability to analyze the phonetic
code efficiently. Studies investigating speech-syllable discrimination abilities of these children also have suggested
that children with learning difficulties have difficulty behaviorally discriminating rapid spectro-temporal changes
in speech syllables, which is also reflected in electrophysiologic test measures ( Kraus et al., 1996; Sharma et al.,
2006).
Not all research supports the idea that deficits in auditory processing are present in individuals with reading disorders. Some studies have failed to demonstrate
auditory temporal processing deficits in these children
(Bretherton & Holmes, 2003; Brier, Fletcher, Foorman,

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

229

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Klaas, & Gray, 2003; Mody, Studdert-Kennedy, & Brady,
1997; Schulte-Korne, Deimel, Bartling, & Remschmidt,
1999; B. U. Watson & Miller, 1993; C. A. Watson & Kidd,
2002; Ziegler, Pech-Georgel, George, & Lorenzi, 2009).
Others have concluded that temporal processing deficits
appear to be pansensory in nature, meaning that they
affect processing in multiple sensory modalities (Cacace
& McFarland, 1998; Farmer & Klein, 1995; McFarland
& Cacace, 1995).
Nevertheless, numerous studies suggest that, at
least for some children with dyslexia, there may be a
relationship between reading and auditory processing
abilities. Present findings investigating the relationship
between dyslexia and central auditory processing suggest that some children with dyslexia may exhibit a (C)
APD that is a contributing or co-morbid factor to their
reading deficits. However, not all children with dyslexia
exhibit these deficits, and the heterogeneous nature of
reading disorders makes it difficult to determine the prevalence of auditory processing deficits in this population.
Because the performance of children with dyslexia is
quite variable for auditory tasks, it is difficult to determine conclusively if the relationship between auditory
skills and dyslexia is causal or associated (Rosen, 2003;
Walker et al., 2006). If auditory deficits are present, they
may not be evident on all measures of auditory processing; therefore, the severity of the auditory deficit
does not necessarily predict the severity of the reading
disorder (Rosen, 2003). Despite the fact that central auditory processing has been characterized as a possible
contributing factor to dyslexia, children identified with
dyslexia typically are not assessed for (C)APD. Interestingly, temporal processing deficits also are noted in
children with (C)APD, and many of these children also
exhibit difficulties in reading and spelling (ASHA, 2005;
Bellis, 2002, 2003).
The Biological Marker of Auditory Processing
(BioMARK), a brainstem electrophysiologic response elicited by speech stimuli, may provide additional insight
into the auditory processing abilities of some children
with dyslexia. As described by Johnson, Nicol, and Kraus

(2005), the BioMARK is a neurophysiologic response
recorded to multiple presentations of a 40-ms synthetic
/da / syllable. The response manifests as a series of brief
neural events that are time-locked to the onset, offset, and
periodic information of the stimulus /da /. The response
consists of two components: an onset response composed
of Waves V, A, and C, and a sustained frequency-following
response composed of Waves D, E, F, and O (see Figure 1).
This tool has been used to investigate temporal processing deficits displayed by children with language-based
learning (including reading) disorders. Researchers have
concluded that some children with language-based
learning deficits exhibit abnormal brainstem timing for
speech signals, which has been linked to reduced cortical
processing of acoustic changes compared with normal
children (Banai et al., 2009; Banai, Nicol, Zecker, & Kraus,
2005; King, Warrier, Hayes, & Kraus, 2002; Warrier,
Johnson, Hayes, Nicol, & Kraus, 2004).
Approximately 30% of children with language-based
learning problems, including dyslexia, demonstrate differences in brainstem encoding of speech sounds despite
normal click-evoked auditory brainstem responses (ABRs;
Abrams, Nicol, Zecker, & Kraus, 2006; Banai et al., 2009,
2005; Johnson et al., 2005; Johnson, Nicol, Zecker, &
Kraus, 2007; King et al., 2002; Russo, Nicol, Musacchia,
& Kraus, 2004; Song, Banai, Russo, & Kraus, 2006;
Wible, Nicol, & Kraus, 2005). It should be noted that a
disruption in latency as minimal as fractions of a millisecond may be diagnostically significant. Specifically,
delayed peak latencies for Waves V, A, C, and O and a
shallow slope for the V/A complex have been found in children with language-based learning problems (Banai,
Abrams, & Kraus, 2007; Banai et al., 2009; Johnson et al.,
2005, 2007; Kraus & Nicol, 2005; Song et al., 2006). Interpeak latencies and the magnitude of Waves D, E, and F
typically do not differ between normal children and children with language-based learning problems (Johnson
et al., 2005, 2007).
Abnormal brainstem responses to speech also may
be an indicator of poor responses at the cortical level. Wible,
Nicol, and Kraus (2004) found that broader V/A slopes

Figure 1. Normal BioMARK response recorded to a 40-ms speechlike syllable /da/.

230

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were correlated with an increased vulnerability of the cortical response to the effects of background noise. Banai
et al. (2005) found that children with language-based
learning disorders who exhibited abnormal speech-evoked
brainstem responses also had reduced speech-evoked
mismatch negativity responses compared with normal
children. Banai et al. (2009) suggested that the deficits
observed may be due to a disruption at the brainstem
level in timing and harmonic encoding, leading to abnormal cortical processing of speech sounds and, in turn, phonological processing and reading difficulties. In contrast,
it is also possible that top-down involvement in which
abnormal cortical processes affect the subcortical structures via the corticofugal pathway may be occurring in
these children.
Additional support for the interaction of top-down
and bottom-up factors is provided by studies demonstrating benefit from auditory training for those with abnormal brainstem timing for speech signals (Cunnigham,
Nicol, Zecker, Bradlow, & Kraus, 2001; Hayes, Warrier,
Nicol, Zecker, & Kraus, 2003; King et al., 2002; Russo, Nicol,
Zecker, Hayes, & Kraus, 2005; Warrier et al., 2004). Specifically, children with abnormal brainstem timing involving Waves A and C exhibited improvement in both
physiological and behavioral measures following auditory training.
In summary, scientific evidence supports the relationship between auditory processing and dyslexia in at
least some children. The fact that central auditory processing is not affected in all children with reading deficits and reading deficits are not exhibited by all children
with (C)APD demonstrates the heterogeneous nature of
these disorders (ASHA, 2005; Bellis, 2002, 2003).
The BioMARK may be a promising addition to the
assessment of central auditory function in terms of identification of children with brainstem timing deficits,
recommendations for treatment, and monitoring progress of auditory training programs. Further understanding of how the addition of the BioMARK enhances the
present central auditory assessment battery is needed.
No study to date has investigated how BioMARK results
relate to performance on behavioral tests of central auditory function in present clinical use for the diagnosis of
(C)APD in children with reading disorders.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate
whether children with dyslexia and abnormal brainstem
timing also exhibit abnormal performance patterns on
behavioral tests of central auditory function in common
clinical use. Specifically, we investigated whether the performance of children with dyslexia and abnormal brainstem timing differs from that of children with dyslexia
and normal brainstem timing on behavioral tests of central auditory function. Additionally, we sought to determine whether a predominant pattern of deficit that meets

present diagnostic criteria for (C)APD (AAA, 2010; ASHA,
2005) emerged in these children.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two children ages 8-12 years (20 males and
12 females, mean age = 10.2, SD = .23) participated in
the present study. All participants had normal hearing
sensitivity, a diagnosis of dyslexia via speech-language
and related diagnostic evaluation through a dyslexia specialization clinic or school special education department, and
no higher order confounding conditions unrelated to their
primary diagnosis (e.g., attention-deficit /hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], limited intellectual capacity). Other factors, such as socioeconomic status, were not considered
in the study. The 32 participants were from a larger pool
of 58 children 8-12 years of age (21 females and 37 males,
mean age = 9.8, SD = .88) who qualified to participate in
the study. Of the 58 invited participants, 26 declined to
participate due to significant travel distance from the
available testing sites and /or scheduling conflicts. As is
discussed in the paragraphs that follow, participants were
separated into two groups on the basis of BioMARK testing: Group 1 (abnormal brainstem timing) and Group 2
(normal brainstem timing).

Materials and Procedure
Two phases of testing occurred. The first phase was
a preliminary screening session in order to determine
eligibility for the study. The second phase consisted of a
behavioral central auditory evaluation for those participants who met eligibility criteria. Informed consent and
child assent were obtained from all participants and
their parents or legal guardians prior to the eligibility
phase of the study. Ethical approval to conduct the study
was obtained through the Institutional Review Board of
The University of South Dakota.

Phase 1: Eligibility/Preliminary Screening
and BioMARK Testing
Phase 1 consisted of a hearing screening, clickevoked ABR testing, and BioMARK testing. This phase
lasted approximately 30 min and was conducted at the
testing site nearest to the participant's place of residence.
Pure-tone hearing screening was performed in a quiet room
using a Maico MA40 portable audiometer and TDH-39
supra-aural headphones (Testing Site 1) or in a soundtreated booth using an Interacoustics AC40 clinical audiometer and ER-3A insert earphones (Testing Site 2).
Participants were screened at 20-dB HL for octave frequencies 500-4000 Hz. Tympanometry was performed

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

231

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

using a GSI 27A (Testing Site 1) or a GSI 33 tympanometer
( Testing Site 2). For inclusion in the study, all participants were required to exhibit normal hearing sensitivity and normal Jerger Type A tympanograms (Jerger,
1972) bilaterally, indicative of normal peripheral hearing
and middle-ear function. No participants were excluded
on the basis of peripheral hearing or middle-ear status.
Electrophysiologic testing was conducted in accordance with clinical recommendations for administration
of the BioMARK test, which specify ear of stimulation,
electrode montage, and all other recording parameters
(e.g., Johnson et al., 2005; Russo et al., 2004). Click-evoked
ABR testing was performed to verify normal transmission
of auditory stimuli through the brainstem auditory pathways via measures of latency and waveform morphology;
this is a prerequisite for BioMARK testing. The clickevoked ABR was collected using the Bio-logic Navigator
Pro System (Bio-logic Systems Corporation). A one-channel
neurologic click-evoked ABR was recorded using silver
disc electrodes (impedance < 5 kW) placed at Cz (active),
with the contralateral earlobe (A1) as the reference and
the forehead ( Fz) as ground. Responses were obtained
for the right ear to rarefaction click stimuli presented at
80-dB SPL with an online filter of 100-3000 Hz. Two
thousand stimulus repetitions were collected at a rate of
31.1/s. Two repeatable recordings were obtained in order
to verify response replicability.
Participants were allowed to watch a DVD of their
choice in order to diminish attention to the stimuli and to
reduce artifact from movement. Normal click-evoked
ABR waveforms using the parameters described earlier
are a prerequisite for BioMARK assessment; therefore,
the presence of normal click-evoked ABR waveforms, defined as presence of repeatable Waves I, III, and V with
absolute latencies; interpeak latencies; and amplitudes
within normal limits, was required for eligibility in the
study. No participants were excluded from the study on
the basis of click-evoked ABR results.
Once normal click-evoked ABR and hearing sensitivity were verified, participants underwent BioMARK
testing. BioMARK responses were collected using the
Bio-logic Navigator Pro System ( Bio-logic Systems Corporation). A one-channel recording was obtained using
silver disc electrodes (impedance < 5 kW) placed at Cz
(active), with the ipsilateral earlobe (A2) as the reference
and the forehead (Fz) as ground. In accordance with standard clinical protocol for the BioMARK, responses were
obtained for the right ear at 80-dB SPL with an online
filter of 100-2000 Hz. Responses were elicited to a 40-ms
speechlike /da / stimulus with alternating polarity. Two
thousand stimulus repetitions were collected at a rate of
11.1/s. Three repeatable recordings were obtained in order to verify response replicability and were added together for a grand-averaged BioMARK response for each

232

participant. Again, each participant was allowed to
watch a DVD of his or her choice in order to diminish
attention to the stimuli and to reduce artifact from
movement.
Participants were divided into two groups on the basis
of brainstem physiology as measured by the BioMARK:
Group 1 (abnormal brainstem timing) and Group 2
(normal brainstem timing). Abnormal brainstem timing
was determined via a score automatically assigned to
the response in the BioMARK software on the basis of
normative data for five measures: Wave V latency, Wave
A latency, V/A slope, first-formant frequencies, and high
frequencies. BioMARK scores are generated by the software program and are given in order to determine the
magnitude of deficit, with 0-5 as normal and 6-22 as
abnormal. It is important to note that the BioMARK was
used as a grouping variable only; therefore, additional
analysis of BioMARK responses was not performed. Participants who qualified for inclusion in Group 1 consisted
of 12 children (12 males and 0 females, mean age = 10.4,
SD = .45). Participants who qualified for inclusion in
Group 2 consisted of 20 children (12 females and 8 males,
mean age = 10.05, SD = 1.39).

Phase 2: Central Auditory Testing
Phase 2 consisted of behavioral central auditory testing at the Vermillion, South Dakota site. Order of test administration within the behavioral central auditory test
battery was counterbalanced across participants to control for possible order effects. Breaks were given periodically throughout the testing session or per the participant's
request. The duration of the test session was approximately 1- to 1.5 hr.
Four auditory psychophysical tests in common clinical use for the diagnosis of (C)APD in children and adults
were administered including (a) Dichotic Digits ( DD;
Musiek, 1983), ( b) Frequency Patterns ( FP; Pinheiro &
Ptacek, 1971), (c) Competing Sentences (CS; Willeford &
Burleigh, 1994), and (d) Low-Pass Filtered Speech
( LPFS; Willeford, 1977; Wilson & Mueller, 1984). All
psychophysical tests were completed in a sound-treated
booth in accordance with standard clinical administration
procedures. Test stimuli were routed from a CD player
through an Interacoustics AC40 two-channel clinical audiometer meeting American National Standards Institute
(ANSI; 2004) standards and were delivered via ER-3A
insert earphones at an intensity level of 50-dB SL regarding speech recognition threshold (for speech tasks)
or 1000 Hz pure-tone threshold (for tonal tasks). Practice
items were presented before beginning each test to ensure
understanding of the task. The four tests chosen represent
categories of behavioral diagnostic tests of central auditory
function (i.e., dichotic speech tasks, temporal processing/
patterning tasks, monaural low-redundancy tasks), as

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

delineated in present consensus and guideline documents
for the diagnosis of (C)APD (AAA, 2010; ASHA, 2005). In
addition, normative values, using a two standard deviation cutoff as specified in present recommendations for
diagnosis of (C)APD, exist for each of these tests for those
ranging from age 7 to adulthood (Bellis, 2003). A brief
description of each of the tests follows.
For the DD task, pairs of monosyllabic digits from
1 to 10 (excluding 7) spoken by a male speaker of general
American English were delivered simultaneously to
each of the two ears, with each ear receiving a different
digit pair. Twenty-five stimulus items consisting of four
digits each were presented. This test was chosen because
it has been shown to be sensitive to dysfunction of the
cerebral and interhemispheric central auditory pathways
while being relatively resistant to peripheral hearing loss
and nonauditory factors (Musiek, 1983; Musiek & Baran,
2002). Participants were instructed to repeat all four
numbers (or as many as possible), in no particular order,
and were encouraged to guess if they were not sure, in
accordance with standard clinical recommendations for
administration of this test. Performance was scored as a
function of percentage correct per ear. Subtraction of
left-ear performance from right-ear performance yielded
an intratest comparison measure of right ear advantage
( REA).
For the FP test, triads of tone bursts differing in
frequency ( high, 112 Hz; low, 880 Hz) were presented. As
with the DD test, the FP test has been shown to be sensitive to cerebral central auditory dysfunction while remaining resistant to nonauditory confounds as well as to
peripheral hearing loss, as long as the stimuli are audible. In addition, intratest comparison measures for
two response conditions ( labeling and humming) have
been shown to be sensitive to disruptions of the interhemispheric auditory pathways (e.g., Musiek, 1994; Musiek
& Baran, 2002; Musiek & Pinheiro, 1987). Consistent
with standard clinical recommendations for administration of this test, 30 stimulus items were presented
binaurally for each of the two response conditions, and
responses were scored as a function of percentage correct
per response condition. An intratest comparison measure,
the Humming-Labeling Differential ( HLD), was calculated by subtracting the score obtained in the labeling
response condition from that obtained in the humming
response condition.
The CS test consisted of pairs of sentences delivered
to the ears in a directed-report dichotic paradigm. Consistent with clinical recommendations for administration of this test, the target sentence was presented at an
intensity of 35-dB SL regarding speech reception threshold (SRT) and the competing sentence was presented
at an intensity of 50-dB SL regarding SRT. Listeners
were instructed to report the target sentences only. Ten
stimulus items were presented for each directed-report

condition (right ear, left ear), and responses were scored
as a function of percentage correct per ear using the quadrant scoring method described by Bellis (2003). A subtraction of left-ear scores from right-ear scores yielded
the intratest comparison measure of REA. This test was
chosen because it has been shown to be sensitive particularly to dysfunction of the interhemispheric auditory
pathways, especially when used in conjunction with
other, less linguistically loaded dichotic tests (Porter &
Berlin, 1975; see also Bellis, 2003; Musiek & Baran,
2002, for a review).
Finally, to include a measure of monaural lowredundancy speech, the LPFS test (Wilson & Mueller,
1984) was used. For this test, stimulus items consisted
of monosyllabic Northwestern University Auditory Test
No. 6 ( NU-6) words with a low-pass filter of 1000 Hz (Department of Veterans Affairs, 1992; Wilson & Mueller,
1984). Twenty-five stimulus items were presented per ear
at 50-dB SL regarding SRT, and listeners were instructed
to repeat the words and to guess if they were unsure.
Responses were scored as a function of percentage correct per ear. Although monaural low-redundancy speech
tasks have been shown, as a class, to be somewhat less
sensitive than other measures to CANS dysfunction, the
inclusion of these measures provides an index of auditory closure ability, which assesses the auditory skill of
performance with degraded acoustic stimuli (AAA, 2010;
ASHA, 2005; Musiek & Baran, 2002). Furthermore, although LPFS tests may be affected by cochlear hearing
loss (e.g., Horwitz, Dubno, & Ahlstrom, 2002), all children in the present study exhibited normal peripheral
hearing; therefore, inclusion of this test was appropriate
for this population.
Two children were excluded from Group 1 due to
lack of reliability and cooperation during the behavioral
central auditory testing. These two children were noncompliant with the test procedures despite the use of
reinforcement and reinstruction; therefore, the reliability of their responses was questioned. This resulted in
10 remaining participants in Group 1 (10 males and zero
females, ages 9-12 years, mean age = 10.7, SD = 0.34).
The 10 participants in Group 2 who were most closely
matched in age to those in Group 1 were then selected for
data analyses (five males and five females, ages 9-12 years,
mean age = 10.6, SD = 0.35). Therefore, the final experimental data set included two age-matched groups of
10 participants each. Data from a third group of 10 normal controls ages 8-16 years (six males and four females, mean age = 12.6, SD = 2.17) with no history of
language, learning, communication, or cognitive difficulties also were used to provide a normative base against
which to compare the performance of the two experimental groups on the behavioral central auditory tests, with
the exception of the LPFS, for which data were not available for the participants in Group 3. These participants

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

233

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were part of a larger, previous study investigating a variety of auditory, visual, and electrophysiologic tasks in
normal and disordered auditory processing and attention. In conclusion, results from 30 participants were included in the statistical analysis.

whereas this was the case for only four of the children in
Group 2. Grand-averaged BioMARK response waves for
Group 1 and Group 2 visually display the latency differences that were observed between groups (see Figure 2).

Behavioral Central Auditory Tests

Results
The BioMARK
Abnormal brainstem timing was determined via a
score assigned to the response in the BioMARK software
based on normative data for five measures including
Wave V latency, Wave A latency, V/A slope, first-formant
frequencies, and high frequencies. Scores 0-5 indicated
normal brainstem timing, and scores 6-22 indicated abnormal brainstem timing. All of the children in Group 1
evidenced BioMARK scores of >6, whereas all of the children in Group 2 evidenced BioMARK scores of <5.
As stated previously, the BioMARK results were
used as a grouping variable only, and therefore response
parameters were not used for further analysis as this
was not within the scope or purpose of the present study.
Nonetheless, the following data are offered to illustrate
the ways in which the BioMARK responses differed between Groups 1 and 2. Mean BioMARK latencies and
standard deviations for Group 1 and Group 2 are displayed in Table 1. We used normative values obtained in
quiet from 88 typically developing 8- to 12-year-old children for group peak latency comparisons (Banai et al.,
2007). Averaged responses from Group 1 were within the
normative range for latency for Waves V, E, F, and O and
were in the abnormal range for Waves A, C, and D. From
an individual participant perspective, four of the 10 children in Group 1 had abnormal latency values for Wave A,
five children had abnormal latency values for Wave C,
six children had abnormal latency values for Wave D, and
three children had abnormal latency values for Wave O.
Averaged responses from Group 2 were within the normative range for latency for all measures. Four of the
10 children in Group 2 did exhibit abnormal responses
for Wave C; however, this did not render their overall BioMARK scores to be within the abnormal range.
All of the children in Group 1 had abnormal V/A slopes,

Percentage correct performance by ear ( DD, CS,
LPFS) and response condition ( FP), magnitude of REA
(DD, CST), magnitude of HLD (FP), and associated standard deviations for all behavioral tests are presented in
Table 2. We subjected results to several levels of data
analyses, to be described in the paragraphs that follow.
We conducted all analyses using Statistical Package Social Science (SPSS) Version 14.0 statistical analysis software package.

The DD Test
We subjected results of DD testing to a 3 x 2 analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with group and ear as
between-group, or independent, factors and percentage
correct score as the within-group (dependent) factor. Although participants in Groups 1 and 2 were matched for
age, it was not possible to age-match for participants in
the normal control group. Therefore, and because neuromaturation is a critical factor in central auditory test performance, we entered age as the covariate to control for
possible neuromaturational confounds. Results revealed
a significant main effect of group on overall DD performance, F(1, 27) = 5.645, p < .01. Post hoc Bonferroni
comparisons revealed that Group 1 exhibited significantly poorer overall DD performance as compared
with Group 3 ( p < .01; d = 1.2); similarly, Group 2 performed significantly poorer than Group 3 (p < .01; d = 1.6).
We found no significant difference in overall DD performance between Group 1 and Group 2 (p = .30; d = 0.38).
ANCOVA also revealed a significant main effect of ear,
F(1, 27) = 8.325, p < .01, d = 0.62, as all groups exhibited
better performance for the right ear. No significant
Group x Ear interaction was indicated, F(1, 27) = 1.656,
p = .20.
Because intertest comparison measures have been
suggested to better reflect central auditory dysfunction
as compared with more global task-related or higher

Table 1. Mean BioMARK response latencies (and SDs).
Group

V

A

C

D

E

F

O

Group 1
Group 2

6.62 (0.19)
6.42 (0.21)

7.92 (0.21)a
7.46 (0.21)

18.35 (0.44)a
18.07 (0.83)

23.72 (0.90)a
22.52 (0.32)

31.33 (0.53)
30.76 (0.25)

39.67 (0.54)
39.28 (0.24)

48.23 (0.33)
47.94 (0.22)

Note.
a

234

BioMARK = Biological Marker of Auditory Processing.

Indicates abnormal latencies.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Grand-averaged BioMARK responses for Group 1 (abnormal brainstem timing) and Group 2 (normal
brainstem timing).

order dysfunction, we performed a separate, planned
univariate ANCOVA for REA with group as the independent factor and magnitude of the REA as the dependent factor. Results revealed no significant main effect of
group on magnitude of the REA, F(1, 27) = 2.080, p = .14.
However, effect size analyses (Group 1 vs. Group 2: p = .20;
d = 0.70; Group 1 vs. Group 3: p = .98; d = 0.09; Group 2 vs.
Group 3: p = .13; d = 1.15) suggest that the nonsignificant
finding for the REA comparison may have been the result
of a lack of statistical power due to the small sample size
and high variability, particularly for Groups 1 and 2. Thus,
Type II errors are possible with regard to the comparisons
of the REA obtained from Group 2 to that obtained from
both of the other groups. The larger REA for Group 2 as compared with that of Groups 1 and 3 can be seen in Figure 3.
In summary, participants in Groups 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing) and 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem

timing) exhibited poorer performance overall than those
in Group 3 (normal control) for the DD test; however,
their performance was not significantly different from
one another. For all groups, right-ear performance was
significantly better than left-ear performance on this
task. Effect size analysis suggests that the larger REA
exhibited by Group 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing) as compared with the other two groups may be of
practical or clinical significance, despite a lack of statistical significance likely due to a loss of statistical power.

The CS Test
As with DD testing, we subjected CS test results to a
3 x 2 ANCOVA, with group and ear as between-group
factors, percentage correct score as the within-group factor, and age as the covariate. Results revealed a significant

Table 2. Mean percentage correct (and SDs) by ear/condition and right-ear advantage/humming-labeling difference
for behavioral central auditory tests.
Test

Group 1: Abnormal timing

Group 2: Normal timing

Group 3: Normal control

Dichotic Digits
Right
Left
REA

88.25 (13.23)
83.50 (10.48)
4.75 (14.78)

87.95 (10.10)
73.50 (15.77)
14.45 (12.76)

98.25 (3.34)
94.50 (3.49)
3.75 (2.94)

Competing Sentences
Right
Left
REA

87.25 (19.59)
62.50 (26.79)
24.75 (25.15)

83.75 (12.31)
58.50 (23.21)
25.25 (22.31)

97.75 (3.21)
96.25 (6.26)
1.50 (5.91)

Frequency Patterns
Labeling
Humming
HLD

69.20 (15.78)
89.80 (9.63)
20.60 (18.08)

70.80 (17.28)
88.80 (11.43)
18.00 (11.35)

96.40 (3.50)
98.40 (2.79)
2.00 (2.82)

Low-Pass Filtered Speech
Right
Left

73.20 (8.85)
74.40 (19.15)

68.40 (8.31)
76.40 (6.09)

--
--

Note.

REA = right-ear advantage; HLD = humming-labeling differential. Em dashes indicate data not available.

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

235

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 3. Magnitude of the right-ear advantage (REA) on Dichotic
Digits for Group 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing), Group 2
(dyslexia, normal brainstem timing), and Group 3 (normal controls).
Error bars represent standard deviations.

Figure 4. Magnitude of the REA on Competing Sentences for
Group 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing), Group 2 (dyslexia,
normal brainstem timing), and Group 3 (normal controls). Error bars
represent standard deviations.

main effect of group, F(1, 27) = 5.797, p < .01. Consistent
with findings for DD, post hoc Bonferroni comparisons
indicated significant differences for overall CS test performance between Group 1 and Group 3 ( p < .01; d = 1.1)
and between Group 2 and Group 3 ( p < .01; d = 1.6); however, the difference between Group 1 and Group 2 was
not significant ( p = .79; d = .15). The ANCOVA also revealed a significant main effect of ear, F(1, 27) = 15.121,
p < .01, d = 0.80, with better right-ear performance for all
groups. The Group x Laterality interaction approached
significance, F(1, 27) = 3.150, p = .051.

DD and CS testing, post hoc Bonferroni comparisons
indicated significant differences between Group 1 and
Group 3 ( p < .01; d = 1.5) and between Group 2 and
Group 3 ( p < .01; d = 1.4); however, we found no significant difference between Group 1 and Group 2 ( p = .90;
d = 0.02). Results also indicated a significant main effect
of response condition, F(1, 27) = 20.543, p < .01, d = 0.93,
with better performance in the humming condition, and
a significant Group x Response Condition interaction,
F(1, 27) = 3.793, p < .05.

To explore interaction effects and investigate inte-test
comparison measures, we performed a separate planned
univariate ANCOVA, with group as the between-group
factor and REA as the within-group factor. Results revealed a significant main effect of group, F(1, 27) = 4.740,
p < .05. Post hoc Bonferroni comparisons revealed significant differences in size of the REA between Group 1
and Group 3 ( p < .05; d = 1.2) and Group 2 and Group 3
( p < .05; d = 1.4); however, no significant difference between Group 1 and Group 2 ( p = .99; d = .02) was indicated. Figure 4 illustrates the REA for each group.
When taken together, results of these analyses reveal that Groups 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing) and 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing) performed
more poorly and exhibited a larger REA for the CS test
than did the normal control group; however, their performance did not differ significantly from one another.

A separate planned univariate ANCOVA performed
for HLD revealed a significant main effect of group,
F(1, 27) = 6.540, p < .01, on magnitude of the HLD (see
Figure 5). Consistent with the previous findings, post hoc
Bonferroni comparisons revealed significant differences
in magnitude of the HLD between Groups 1 and 3 (p < .01;
d = 1.4) and between Groups 2 and 3 (p < .05; d = 1.9);
however, we found no significant difference between
Groups 1 and 2 ( p = .89; d = 0.17).

Figure 5. Magnitude of the humming-labeling difference (HLD)
on Frequency Patterns for Group 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem
timing), Group 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing), and Group 3
(normal controls). Error bars represent standard deviations.

The FP Test
We conducted an ANCOVA for FP testing, with group
and response condition ( humming, labeling) as the
between-group factors and percentage correct score as
the within-group factor. Again, we entered age as the covariate to control for possible age effects. The ANCOVA
revealed a significant main effect of group, F(1, 27) =
10.121, p < .01, on overall FP performance. As with both

236

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

In summary, and as with the other behavioral tests
already described, Groups 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing) and 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing)
performed more poorly overall than did Group 3 (normal
control) for the FP test. Groups 1 and 2 also exhibited a
significantly larger HLD than did Group 3; however,
they were not significantly different from one another.

The LPFS Test
Because the normal control group (Group 3) did not
undergo LPFS testing, results from this group were unavailable for comparison. In addition, because participants in Groups 1 and 2 were age-matched, an ANCOVA
was not needed. We subjected results to a 2 x 2 analysis
of variance (ANOVA), with group and ear as betweengroup factors and percentage correct score as the withingroup factor. Results revealed no significant main effects
of group, F(1, 28) = 0.142, p = .70, or ear, F(1, 28) = 1.534,
p = .22, on LPFS testing, and no significant Group x
Laterality interaction, F(1, 28) = 0.838, p = .33.
In summary, performance of Groups 1 and 2 was not
significantly different from one another for the LPFS test.
It is important to note, however, that for both groups,
overall performance for this task was in the abnormal
range as compared with age-specific normative data
(Bellis, 2003), particularly for right-ear responses for
participants in Group 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem
timing).

Relationship Between Brainstem
Timing and Presence of (C)APD
We examined behavioral central auditory test results for each participant in Groups 1 and 2 for presence
of (C)APD according to present clinical recommendations for the diagnosis of the disorder. None of the participants in Group 3 exhibited abnormal results on any
test of central auditory function; therefore, their performance was not examined further. As previously described,
criteria for diagnosis of (C)APD consisted of performance
> 2 standard deviations below the mean for age on two or
more tests of central auditory function, combined with
intra- and intertest patterns of deficit consistent with
underlying neuroscience tenets that would indicate presumed left-, right-, or interhemispheric dysfunction, or
a combination thereof (ASHA, 2005; Bellis, 2003). All
20 participants exhibited abnormal performance on at
least one test of central auditory function; however, the
nature of these abnormalities did not necessarily meet
diagnostic criteria for (C)APD. Results revealed that
four participants in Group 1 and all 10 participants in
Group 2 did meet present clinical diagnostic criteria for
(C)APD as defined earlier.

We used a chi-square test of independence (2 x 2 matrix) to determine whether normal versus abnormal brainstem timing was related to the presence of (C)APD. Results
of the analysis approached significance, c2(1, N = 20) =
3.20, p = .074, suggesting that there may be a relationship between brainstem timing and presence of (C)APD,
with normal brainstem timing being more frequently
associated with (C)APD as diagnosed by behavioral tests
of central auditory function. However, small sample
sizes likely resulted in a loss of statistical power for this
nonparametric test.
Pattern analysis of central auditory test results provided additional information to characterize the deficits
exhibited by participants in Groups 1 and 2. These
patterns link the central auditory test findings to sites of
lesions in the auditory pathways based on findings of
studies of individuals, primarily adults, who exhibited
well-defined lesions of the CANS. Of the four children in
Group 1 who met diagnostic criteria for (C)APD, two exhibited a classic pattern of deficit presumed to be consistent with interhemispheric (corpus callosum) dysfunction
(e.g., Bellis, 2003; Bellis & Ferre, 1999; Musiek, Gollegly,
& Baran, 1984). This pattern consisted of a left-ear deficit
on the dichotic tests, a deficit in the labeling condition
only for the FP test, and normal function for the LPFS
test. The other two children in Group 1 who met diagnostic criteria for (C)APD exhibited a pattern of deficit
consistent with presumed left-hemisphere dysfunction
along with co-morbid interhemispheric dysfunction (Bellis,
2003; Bellis & Ferre, 1999). This pattern consisted of bilateral deficit on the dichotic tasks, a deficit in the labeling condition only for the FP test, and a bilateral
deficit with the right ear worse for the LPFS test.
All 10 of the children in Group 2 met diagnostic
criteria for (C)APD. Six of the 10 children exhibited the
pattern described above of combined presumed site of
dysfunction ( left-hemisphere along with interhemispheric dysfunction). Three of the 10 children exhibited
the classic pattern of presumed interhemispheric dysfunction. Only one of the 10 children exhibited a pattern
of deficit associated with presumed left-hemisphere dysfunction alone, which consisted of a right-ear deficit for
dichotic speech tests, a labeling deficit for the FP test,
and a bilateral deficit for the LPFS test, with poorer performance for the right ear (Bellis, 2003; Bellis & Ferre,
1999).

Discussion
BioMARK Responses
The results of the present study were consistent with
those of Banai et al. (2009, 2005), Cunningham et al.
(2001), Johnson et al. (2007), King et al. (2002), and Wible

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

237

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

et al. (2004) in that the ABRs to speech were found to be
abnormal in a subset of children with dyslexia. Specifically, although results from only 20 children were used
for statistical analysis in the present study, 12 of the
32 children with dyslexia who participated in the study,
or 37.5% of the sample, exhibited abnormal brainstem
timing as measured by the BioMARK. This finding is
consistent with previous studies indicating that approximately 30% of children with language-based learning
disorders, such as dyslexia, have been found to exhibit
abnormal brainstem timing to speech (Banai et al., 2005;
Johnson et al., 2005; King et al., 2002; Russo et al., 2004;
Tallal et al., 1998; Wible et al., 2005).
In the present study, the findings for children in
Group 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing) were consistent with several studies that have indicated abnormal
latencies for Waves V, A, C, and O as well as a shallow
slope for the V/A complex in children with abnormal
brainstem timing (e.g., Banai et al., 2007; Johnson et al.,
2005, 2007; Kraus & Nicol, 2005; King et al., 2002; Song
et al., 2006). Therefore, abnormalities in BioMARK latency measures for Waves A, C, and O suggest that filter
cues that aid in the ability to identify consonants and
vowels may not be coded properly in the brainstems of
these children, which may lead to speech perception difficulties (Banai et al., 2007). Even though the children in
Group 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing) did not exhibit abnormal overall BioMARK scores as determined
by the automatic scoring algorithm in the computer software, some of them did exhibit prolonged latency values
for Wave C as well as abnormal V/A slopes. Further investigation of these findings is needed as these children
actually may have specific timing-related deficits and
associated speech perception difficulties even though
their overall BioMARK scores were judged to be within
the normal range.

Behavioral Central Auditory Processing
Deficits in Children With Dyslexia
It was expected that the children in Group 3 (normal
controls) would exhibit the best performance on behavioral tests of central auditory function followed by those
in Group 2 (dyslexia, normal brainstem timing), with the
children in Group 1 (dyslexia, abnormal brainstem timing) exhibiting the poorest performance on behavioral
tests of central auditory function. However, despite differences in brainstem physiology between Groups 1 and 2,
statistical analyses did not reveal significant differences
between these groups in overall performance on behavioral tests of central auditory function. Therefore, when
overall performance was examined, brainstem timing as
measured by the BioMARK did not appear to be an indicator of how the children would perform on behavioral

238

tests of central auditory function. It is important to note,
however, that performance of the children in Groups 1
and 2 was significantly poorer than that of children in
Group 3, indicating a fundamental difference in the central auditory processing abilities of children with dyslexia as compared with normal children. These findings
are consistent with those of several other studies demonstrating that performance on behavioral tests of central auditory function is poorer in children with reading
disorders as compared with normal controls.
In addition to poorer overall performance on the behavioral tests administered, the children with dyslexia
in the present study also exhibited significantly larger
REAs for the dichotic tasks and a significantly larger
HLD on the FP task as compared with the normal control group. The dichotic listening findings suggest that
children with dyslexia exhibit difficulty with the processes of binaural integration and/or binaural separation
regardless of the status of their brainstem physiology.
Children with these difficulties often have problems hearing in background noise or when more than one person is
talking at the same time. Various studies also have found
poorer performance on dichotic listening tasks and a leftear deficit / REA in children with dyslexia (Moncrieff &
Black 2008; Moncrieff & Musiek 2002; Sharma et al.,
2006). In addition, the findings for the FP testing indicate
that children with dyslexia, regardless of brainstem physiology, exhibit difficulty with linguistic labeling of nonverbal acoustic contours. Similar findings also were
reported by Sharma et al. (2006) and Walker et al. (2006)
for tests of temporal patterning.
The pattern of left-ear deficit on dichotic speech tasks
combined with a deficit on temporal patterning tasks in
the linguistic labeling report only is a classic pattern that
has been shown to be consistent with inefficient interhemispheric transfer of auditory information, likely subserved by the corpus callosum (e.g., Musiek, Gollegly, &
Baran, 1984; Musiek, Kibbe, & Baran, 1984). Although it
is important to note that site-of-dysfunction interpretation in children without concomitant physiologic evidence
of lesions via imaging or other means remains a theoretical concept, the overall group performance patterns
on these tests in the present study indicate that, as a
group, children with dyslexia may exhibit interhemispheric transfer difficulties that affect auditory and related abilities.
Results of LPFS testing indicated that children in
Groups 1 and 2 had difficulty understanding degraded
speech signals when compared with age-appropriate
normative data, particularly for right-ear stimuli. These
findings are consistent with those of Welsh et al. (1980),
who also found that children with dyslexia exhibited difficulty with filtered speech tasks. The pattern of bilateral
and/or right-ear deficit on tests of monaural low-redundancy

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

speech has been linked to dysfunction in the primary
(usually left) auditory cortex, and may be related to inadequate speech-sound representation in that brain
region (Bellis, 2003; Bellis & Ferre, 1999). Therefore, as
a group, children with dyslexia may have poorer cortical
representation of speech sounds than children without
reading disorders, which may be a contributing factor to
their reading deficits.
Although the findings of left-ear deficit on dichotic
speech tasks, deficits in the linguistic labeling of nonverbal
tonal patterns, and deficits on monaural low-redundancy
speech tasks characterize the overall performance of the
children with dyslexia in the present study, it is important to note that not every child in the study exhibited
this precise pattern. Therefore, pattern analysis of individual test results was conducted to elucidate more
fully the nature of the central auditory deficits exhibited
by these children.

Patterns of Performance on Behavioral
Tests of Central Auditory Function
A test battery approach to the assessment of central
auditory processing ensures that a variety of auditory
processes and CANS regions are examined in order to
determine an auditory profile that illuminates possible
site of dysfunction and demonstrates an individual's auditory strengths and weaknesses (Bellis, 2003). Given
the complexity of central auditory processing and the
heterogeneity of (C)APD, combined with the possibility
of nonauditory confounds, simply determining the presence of (C)APD is not sufficient. For the present study,
the performance of each participant was compared against
age-specific normative data (Bellis, 2003) to determine
normal versus abnormal performance on behavioral tests
of central auditory function. These results then were examined to determine whether the participant met current diagnostic criteria for (C)APD, that is, abnormal
performance on two or more tests combined with consistent inter- and intratest performance patterns indicative of central auditory dysfunction (ASHA, 2005).
Analysis of individual performance patterns suggests a high incidence of (C)APD in children with dyslexia. Furthermore, findings are indicative of presumed
interhemispheric and/or left-hemisphere dysfunction, especially for those children with normal brainstem function as well as for some children with abnormal brainstem
function. These results may provide additional support
for the phonological theory of dyslexia, which states that
dysfunction of left-hemisphere and /or interhemispheric
brain areas are presumed to be affected in children with
reading disorders (Ramus et al., 2003).
Finally, it is possible that nonauditory, global confounds, such as language capacity and attention-related

issues, may have existed that resulted in poorer performance on behavioral central auditory tests for the
children with dyslexia in this study. However, all participants were presented with normal cognitive capacity
and no attention-related or similar concerns unrelated
to their primary diagnosis of dyslexia. Furthermore,
although some of the behavioral tests used in the central
auditory test battery are somewhat linguistically loaded
(e.g., LPFS, CS), previous research has indicated that
these tests, when appropriately administered and interpreted, are relatively impervious to these confounds. Specifically, the use of strict diagnostic criteria, combined
with analysis of inter- and intratest patterns that correlate with well-established neuroscience tenets that infer
presumed anatomical site/region of dysfunction, renders such confounds highly unlikely (ASHA, 2005; Bellis,
2003).

The Role of the BioMARK in the
Diagnostic Test Battery for (C)APD
The primary purpose of the present study was to determine whether brainstem temporal processing as
measured by the BioMARK is related to performance
on behavioral tests of central auditory function. Due to
the heterogeneity of reading disorders and inconsistent
findings regarding the relationship between auditory
processing and literacy, auditory training often is not
suggested for children with dyslexia. With access to assessment tools such as the BioMARK, awareness of the
necessity to assess these children for auditory processing deficits is increasing. These measures demonstrate
the relationships among neurophysiologic timing and
speech sounds that cannot be seen with imaging techniques and show training-related improvements in neural synchrony through changes in evoked potentials
(Hayes et al., 2003). Particularly, the BioMARK is able
to detect brainstem timing deficits and can be used to
track physiologic changes that occur following auditory
training. Neural encoding of sound in the auditory brainstem may provide additional insight into which children
are the best candidates for auditory training programs
(Kraus & Banai, 2007). Because it has been shown that
children with abnormal BioMARK findings benefit from
auditory training approaches, it is critical to determine
whether those children identified by the BioMARK testing are the same as those who would be identified--
and presumably treated via auditory training--using
more traditional, behavioral means of central auditory
assessment.
Intra- and intertest analysis of performance on the
behavioral test battery used in this study yielded a diagnosis of (C)APD for 14 of the 20 children with dyslexia; of
these, four also were found to exhibit abnormal brainstem timing. All of these children likely would have been

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

239

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

referred for auditory-based intervention on the basis
of their behavioral central auditory test performance.
Six of the 20 children, however, exhibited abnormal
BioMARK results, but did not meet criteria for (C)APD
on the basis of behavioral test results. As such, it is
unlikely that these children, had they undergone behavioral central auditory assessment alone, would have received a recommendation for auditory-based intervention.
There are at least three possible explanations for
this disagreement between BioMARK and behavioral
central auditory test results. First, it is possible that
neither the BioMARK nor the behavioral central auditory test battery is sufficiently sensitive for the identification of central auditory dysfunction when used alone,
in that the behavioral battery "missed" six children with
central auditory dysfunction as measured by the BioMARK,
and the BioMARK "missed" 10 children who met behavioral diagnostic criteria for (C)APD. Previous studies have indicated that approximately 5%-6% of typically
developing children may exhibit abnormal speech-evoked
brainstem responses using pass-fail criteria identical to
those used in the present study. Therefore, 95%-96% of
typically developing children were correctly identified by
this test (e.g., Banai et al., 2005). Similarly, it is possible
that the behavioral central auditory results did not indicate central auditory dysfunction at all, but rather reflected other nonauditory, global confounds related to
language abilities, attention, or other factors. These explanations are unlikely, however, given the vast body of
literature demonstrating the sensitivity of these tests
when used in combination and when strict diagnostic
criteria and inter- and intratest pattern analysis are
used (see Bellis, 2003; Musiek & Baran, 2002; Musiek &
Chermak, 2007, for review). More likely, it is possible
that, quite simply, these measures reflect different processes, mechanisms, and regions of the CANS. As such,
whereas some children may exhibit abnormal brainstem
transcription of speech stimuli, others may exhibit deficits at the cortical level in processes such as binaural
integration, binaural separation, auditory closure, temporal patterning, and others that are not necessarily reliant on precision of brainstem timing. Still others may
exhibit deficits in both regions/process areas. It is interesting to note that, as discussed previously, the children in Group 2 who met current diagnostic criteria for
(C)APD using behavioral measures did exhibit some
abnormalities in the temporal, rather than spectral, elements of their speech-evoked ABR responses, although
overall BioMARK scores were normal. This may be suggestive of a link among (C)APD, temporal processing,
and reading, as discussed in the introduction. Further
investigation of abnormal BioMARK test results along
with performance on behavioral central auditory processing tests is needed to explore these possibilities.

240

Nonetheless, these findings reinforce the need for a test
battery approach in assessing central auditory disorders.
Results of this study suggest that the BioMARK may
identify a subset of children who would not otherwise meet
(C)APD diagnostic criteria through behavioral means of
central auditory assessment but who would likely benefit
from auditory-based intervention approaches. Therefore,
this study provides support for inclusion of the BioMARK
as part of the central auditory test battery. Finally, the
surprising finding that all 20 children with dyslexia
exhibited some form of central auditory dysfunction via
either behavioral testing, BioMARK testing, or a combination thereof provides strong support for the evaluation
of central auditory function in children with languagebased learning disorders such as dyslexia.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the John W. Carlson Research Grant, which was awarded through the College of Arts
and Sciences at the University of South Dakota, Vermillion,
SD. Additional support was provided by internal research
funding through the Department of Communication Sciences
and Disorders at The University of South Dakota and by a
subproject of National Institutes of Research Resources Grant
P20 RR-015567 awarded to Teri James Bellis that is designated
as a Center of Biomedical Research Excellence (COBRE).

References
Abrams, D. A., Nicol, T., Zecker, S. G., & Kraus, N.
(2006). Auditory brainstem timing predicts cerebral
asymmetry for speech. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26,
11131-11137.
American Academy of Audiology. (2010). Guidelines for
the diagnosis, treatment, and management of children and
adults with central auditory processing disorders. Available
from http://www.audiology.org/resources/documentlibrary/
Documents/CAPDGuidelines 8-2010.pdf.
American National Standards Institute. (2004). Specifications for audiometers (ANSI S3.6-2004). New York, NY:
Author.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(2005). (Central) auditory processing disorders [Technical
report]. Available from http://www.asha.org /docs / html /
TR2005-00043.html.
Bakker, D. J. (1973). Hemispheric specialization and stages
in the learning to read process. Bulletin of the Orton Society,
23, 15-27.
Banai, K., Abrams, D., & Kraus, N. (2007). Sensory-based
learning disability: Insights from brainstem processing
of speech sounds. International Journal of Audiology, 46,
524-532.
Banai, K., Hornickel, J., Skoe, E., Nicol, T., Zecker, S., &
Kraus, N. (2009). Reading and subcortical auditory function.
Cerebral Cortex, 19, 2699-2707. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp024.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Banai, K., Nicol, T., Zecker, S. G., & Kraus, N. (2005).
Brainstem timing: Implications for cortical processing
and literacy. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 9850-9857.
Bellis, T. J. (2002). When the brain can't hear: Unraveling
the mystery of auditory processing disorder. New York, NY:
Pocket Books.
Bellis, T. J. (2003). Assessment and management of central
auditory processing disorders in the educational setting:
From science to practice (2nd ed.). Clifton Park, NY:
Thomson Learning.
Bellis, T. J., & Ferre, J. M. (1999). Multidimensional
approach to the differential diagnosis of central auditory
processing disorders in children. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, 10, 319-328.
Bretherton, L., & Holmes, V. M. (2003). The relationship
between auditory temporal processing, phonemic awareness, and reading disability. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 84, 218-243.
Brier, J. I., Fletcher, J. M., Foorman, B. R., Klaas, P., &
Gray, L. C. (2003). Auditory temporal processing in children
with specific reading disability with and without attention
deficit / hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Speech Language
and Hearing Research, 46, 31-42.
Cacace, A. T., & McFarland, D. J. (1998). Central auditory
processing disorder in school-aged children: A critical review. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
41, 355-373.
Cunningham, J., Nicol, T., Zecker, S. G., Bradlow, A., &
Kraus, N. (2001). Neurobiologic responses to speech in
noise in children with learning problems: Deficits and
strategies for improvement. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112,
758-767.
Department of Veterans Affairs. (1992). Tonal and speech
materials for auditory perceptual assessment [CD]. Long
Beach, CA: Author.
Farmer, M. E., & Klein, R. (1995). The evidence for a temporal processing deficit linked to dyslexia: A review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 460-493.
Hayes, E., Tiippana, K., Nicol, T., Sams, M., & Kraus, N.
(2003). Integration of heard and seen speech: A factor in
learning disabilities in children. Neuroscience Letters, 351,
46-50.
Hayes, E. A., Warrier, C. M., Nicol, T. G., Zecker, S. G., &
Kraus, N. (2003). Neural plasticity following auditory training in children with learning problems. Clinical Neurophysiology, 114, 673-684.
Horwitz, A. R., Dubno, J. R., & Ahlstrom, J. B. (2002).
Recognition of low-pass filtered consonants in noise with
normal and impaired high-frequency hearing. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 111, 409-416.
Jerger, J. (1972). Suggested nomenclature for impedance audiometry. Archives of Otolaryngology, 96, 1-3.
Johnson, K. L., Nicol, T. G., & Kraus, N. (2005). Brainstem
response to speech: A biological marker of auditory processing. Ear and Hearing, 26, 424-434.
Johnson, K. L., Nicol, T. G., Zecker, S. G., & Kraus, N.
(2007). Auditory brainstem correlates of perceptual timing
deficits. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 376-385.
King, C., Warrier, C. M., Hayes, E., & Kraus, N. (2002).
Deficits in auditory brainstem encoding of speech sounds

in children with learning problems. Neuroscience Letters,
319, 111-115.
Kraus, N., & Banai, K. (2007). Auditory-processing malleability: Focus on language and music. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16, 105-110.
Kraus, N., McGee, T. J., Carrell, T. D., Zecker, S. G., Nicol,
T. G., & Koch, D. B. (1996, August 16). Auditory neurophysiologic responses and discrimination deficits in children
with learning problems. Science, 273, 971-973.
Kraus, N., & Nicol, T. (2005). Brainstem origins for cortical
"what" and "where" pathways in the auditory system.
TRENDS in Neuroscience, 28, 176-181.
McAnally, K. I., & Stein, J. F. (1996). Auditory temporal
coding in dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 263, 961-965.
McFarland, D. J., & Cacace, A. T. (1995). Modality specificity as a criterion for diagnosing central auditory
processing disorders. American Journal of Audiology, 4,
36-48.
Mody, M., Studert-Kennedy, M., & Brady, S. (1997).
Speech perception deficits in poor readers: Auditory processing or phonological coding? Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 64, 199-231.
Moncrieff, D. W., & Black, J. R. (2008). Dichotic listening
deficits in children with dyslexia. Dyslexia, 14, 54-78.
Moncrieff, D. W., & Musiek, F. E. (2002). Interaural asymmetries revealed by dichotic listening tests in normal and
dyslexic children. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 13, 428-437.
Musiek, F. E. (1983). Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: The Dichotic Digits Test revisited. Ear and
Hearing, 4, 79-83.
Musiek, F. E. (1994). Frequency (pitch) and duration pattern tests. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 5,
265-268.
Musiek, F. E., & Baran, J. A. (2002). Central auditory
evaluation of patients with neurological involvement. In
J. Katz ( Ed.), Handbook of clinical audiology (5th ed.,
pp. 532-544). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
Musiek, F. E., & Chermak, G. D. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of
(central) auditory processing disorder: Diagnosis ( Volume 1).
San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing.
Musiek, F. E., Gollegly, K. M., & Baran, J. A. (1984).
Myelination of the corpus callosum and auditory processing
problems in children: Theoretical and clinical correlates.
Seminars in Hearing, 5, 231-241.
Musiek, F. E., Kibbe, K., & Baran, J. A. (1984). Neuroaudiological results from split-brain patients. Seminars in
Hearing, 5, 219-229.
Musiek, F. E., & Pinheiro, M. L. (1987). Frequency patterns
in cochlear, brainstem, and cerebral lesions. Audiology, 26,
79-88.
Phillips, D. P. (1995). Central auditory processing: A view
from neuroscience. American Journal of Otology, 16, 338-352.
Phillips, D. P., & Farmer, M. E. (1990). Acquired word deafness and the temporal grain of sound discrimination in the
primary auditory cortex. Behavioral Brain Research, 40,
85-94.

Billiet & Bellis: Brainstem Temporal Processing and CAPD

241

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Pinheiro, M. L., & Ptacek, P. H. (1971). Reversals in the
perception of noise and tone patterns. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 49, 1778-1782.
Porter, R. J., & Berlin, C. I. (1975). On interpreting developmental change in the dichotic right-ear advantage. Brain
and Language, 2, 186-200.
Purdy, S. C., Kelly, A. S., & Davies, M. G. (2002). Auditory brainstem response, middle latency response, and
late cortical evoked potentials in children with learning
disabilities. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology,
13, 367-382.
Ramus, F., Rosen, S., Dakin, S. C., Day, B. L., Castellote,
J. M., White, S., & Frith, U. (2003). Theories of developmental dyslexia: Insights from a multiple case study of
dyslexic adults. Brain, 126, 841-865.
Rosen, S. (2003). Auditory processing in dyslexia and specific language impairment: Is there a deficit? What is its
nature? Does it explain anything? Journal of Phonetics, 31,
509-527.
Rosen, S., & Manganari, E. (2001). Is there a relationship
between speech and nonspeech auditory processing in
children with dyslexia? Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 42, 925-942.
Russo, N., Nicol, T., Musacchia, G., & Kraus, N. (2004).
Brainstem responses to speech syllables. Clinical Neurophysiology, 115, 2021-2030.
Russo, N. M., Nicol, T. G., Zecker, S. G., Hayes, E. A., &
Kraus, N. (2005). Auditory training improves neural timing
in the human brainstem. Behavioural Brain Research, 156,
95-103.
Schulte-Korne, G., Deimel, W., Bartling, J., & Remschmidt,
H. (1999). The role of phonological awareness, speech
perception, and auditory temporal processing for dyslexia.
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 8, 28-34.
Sharma, M., Purdy, S. C., Newall, P., Wheldall, K.,
Beaman, R., & Dillon, H. (2006). Electrophysiological
and behavioral evidence of auditory processing deficits in
children with reading disorder. Clinical Neurophysiology,
117, 1130-1144.
Song, J. H., Banai, K., Russo, N. M., & Kraus, N. (2006).
On the relationship between speech- and nonspeech-evoked
auditory brainstem responses. Audiology Neurotology, 11,
233-241.
Tallal, P. (1980). Auditory temporal perception, phonics, and
reading disabilities in children. Brain and Language, 9,
182-198.
Tallal, P., Merzenich, M. M., Miller, S., & Jenkins, W.
(1998). Language learning impairments: Integrating basic
science, technology, and remediation. Experimental Brain
Research, 123, 210-219.

242

Walker, M. M., Givens, G. D., Cranford, J. L., Holbert, D.,
& Walker, L. (2006). Auditory pattern recognition and brief
tone discrimination of children with reading disorders.
Journal of Communication Disorders, 39, 442-455.
Warrier, C. M., Johnson, K. L., Hayes, E. A., Nicol, T., &
Kraus, N. (2004). Learning impaired children exhibit
timing deficits and training-related improvements in auditory cortical responses to speech in noise. Experimental
Brain Research, 157, 431-441.
Watson, B. U., & Miller, T. K. (1993). Auditory perception,
phonological processing, and reading ability/disability.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 850-863.
Watson, C. A., & Kidd, G. R. (2002). On the lack of association between basic auditory abilities, speech processing,
and other cognitive skills. Seminars in Hearing, 23, 83-93.
Welsh, L. W., Welsh, J. J., & Healy, M. P. (1980). Central
auditory testing and dyslexia. Laryngoscope, 90, 972-984.
Wible, B., Nicol, T., & Kraus, N. (2004). Atypical brainstem
representation of onset and formant structure of speech
sounds in children with language-based learning problems.
Biological Psychology, 67, 299-317.
Wible, B., Nicol, T., & Kraus, N. (2005). Correlation between
brainstem and cortical auditory processes in normal and
language-impaired children. Brain, 128, 417-423.
Willeford, J. (1977). Assessing central auditory behavior in
children: A test battery approach. In R. W. Keith ( Ed.),
Central auditory dysfunction ( pp. 43-72). New York, NY:
Grime & Stratton.
Willeford, J. A., & Burleigh, J. M. (1994). Sentence procedures in central testing. In J. Katz ( Ed.), Handbook of
clinical audiology (4th ed., pp. 256-268). Baltimore, MD:
Williams & Wilkins.
Wilson, L., & Mueller, H. G. (1984). Performance of normal
hearing individuals on auditory filtered speech tests. Asha,
27, 189.
Ziegler, J., Pech-Georgel, C., George, F., & Lorenzi, C.
(2009). Speech perception in noise deficits in dyslexia.
Developmental Science, 12, 732-745.
Received November 4, 2009
Revision received March 28, 2010
Accepted June 7, 2010
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2010/09-0239)
Contact author: Cassandra R. Billiet, Oakdale Ear, Nose, and
Throat Clinic, 9825 Hospital Drive, Suite 203, Maple Grove,
MN 55369. E-mail: cbilliet@oakdaleent.com.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 228-242 * February 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

