729840
research-article2017

LAS0010.1177/0023830917729840Language and SpeechKong and Lee

Article

Attentional Modulation and
Individual Differences in
Explaining the Changing Role of
Fundamental Frequency in Korean
Laryngeal Stop Perception

Language
and Speech
Language and Speech
2018, Vol. 61(3) 384-408
(c) The Author(s) 2017
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830917729840
DOI: 10.1177/0023830917729840
journals.sagepub.com/home/las

Eun Jong Kong

Korea Aerospace University, South Korea

Hyunjung Lee

Incheon National University, South Korea

Abstract
Previous research has shown differential degrees of attention in processing hierarchical linguistic
information where higher order cues require greater attention in speech processing. The
current study investigated the influence of attentional resources on acoustic cue weightings
in speech perception by examining Korean listeners' identifications of the three-way laryngeal
stops (tense vs. lax vs. aspirated). Using a dual-task paradigm, we presented 28 adult Korean
listeners with identification tasks blocked by no-distractor versus distractor conditions where
arithmetic calculations distracted the listeners' speech processing. Auditory stimuli were
prepared by combining voice-onset times (VOTs) and fundamental frequencies (F0s) based on
natural production. Group analyses revealed that VOT was an informative parameter across
the three stop laryngeal categories and the listeners' reliance on VOT was consistently reduced
under the distracting condition. Subsequent individual-level analysis further showed that listeners
with heavier perceptual reliance on VOT were hindered by the distractor more than others in
utilizing VOT. Unlike VOT, the F0 cue did not systematically interact with the distracting listening
condition. The findings indicated that VOT (but not F0) required greater attention in processing
the Korean laryngeal stops, and was presumably a higher order acoustic cue than F0. The current
study contributes to the understanding of attention and cue primacy in general as well as to the
clarification of the relative roles of VOT and F0 for the Korean stop laryngeal contrast.
Keywords
Attention, cue weighting, Korean stop perception, laryngeal contrast, individual difference
Corresponding authors:
Hyunjung Lee, Incheon National University, 12 Gaebeol-ro, Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon (21999), South Korea.
Email: hyunjunglee123@gmail.com
Eun Jong Kong, Korea Aerospace University, 100, Hanggongdae gil, Hwajeon-dong, Deogyang-gu, Goyang, Gyeonggi-do
(10540), South Korea.
Email: ekong@kau.ac.kr

Kong and Lee

385

1 Introduction
Attention is a cognitive process that selects and ignores information (Anderson, 2015, p. 53).
Relevant to the availability of working memory resources, the selective attention and inhibition of
irrelevant distractors (Lavie, Hirst, Fockert, & Viding, 2004) have been found to affect visual processing (Vuilleumier & Driver, 2007) and behavioral performance (Cohen & Maunsell, 2009).
Selective attention also needs to be considered in better understanding speech processing because
listening environments in everyday life require listeners to selectively attend to linguistic signals
often degraded by various factors such as environmental noise, hearing ability, second language
communication, and sound change in progress (Francis & Nusbaum, 2002, 2009; Francis,
Kaganovich, & Driscoll-Huber, 2008; Gordon, Eberhardt, & Rueckl, 1993; Mattys & Wiget, 2011;
Yu, Grove, Martinovic, & Sonderegger, 2011). Previous studies have shown that when listeners
integrate multiple linguistic cues (e.g., context, lexical, and acoustic cues), higher level cues are
processed more reliably than lower level cues in an ideal listening environment, whereas the use of
lower level information increases under non-optimal listening conditions (e.g., non-native and
noisy speech) (e.g., Bradlow & Alexander, 2007; Mattys, White, & Melhorn, 2005). When the
scope is confined to the acoustic level of speech perception, listeners attend to the primary acoustic
cue (higher order information) in optimal listening conditions. But when the primacy cue is unavailable in an adverse listening condition, the role of secondary cues becomes important (Francis
et al., 2008). This suggests that language users trade off linguistic cues depending on the ambient
environmental communication context, and the cue weights are modulated by the availability or
quality of the attentional resources in a way that the cue exploited with a greater degree of attention
is negatively affected.
The cognitive mechanism in which multiple linguistic cues are weighted differently depending
on the information quality has also been tested with low level linguistic information, that is, acoustic cue weightings for a phonological contrast. These kinds of inquiries have explored how selective attention or individual attention controlling ability is related to the perception of speech sounds
(Francis & Nusbaum, 2002, 2008, 2009; Francis et al., 2008; Gordon et al., 1993; Yu, Grove,
Martinovic, & Sonderegger, 2011). For example, Gordon et al. (1993) demonstrated that the perceptual importance of multiple acoustic cues was related to differential degrees of attentional
demands in the perception of the English stop voicing distinction. They showed that voice-onset
time (VOT), the primary cue in the English stops, was associated with greater attentional demand,
whereas fundamental frequency (F0), the secondary cue in the voicing contrast, required less attention. Francis and his colleagues (2002, 2008, 2009) suggested the flexibility of the relationship
between multiple cue weightings and attention where listeners are able to dynamically re-distribute
attention to multiple acoustic cues according to cue availabilities in varying listening conditions.
While the relationship between attention and cue weighting has been discussed in English, further investigation with other languages is important to generalize the role of cognitive resources in
speech processing. The present study aimed to examine the topic by exploring the perception of
three-way laryngeal distinction among Korean voiceless stops, namely, tense, lax, and aspirated
stops. While Korean stops are acoustically cued both by VOT and F0 similar to English, the relative
importance between the two cues is only partially clear compared to the English stops due to the
non-canonical phonological structure and the great degree of phonetic variants induced by sound
change (Kang, 2014; Kim, 1965; Kim & Duanmu, 2004; Silva, 2006). The Korean stops would
make a useful test case of generalizing the role of cognitive mechanism in speech processing since
they offer multi-category comparison sets with a lack of full consensus of how the perceptual importance of the cues are ordered (e.g., Kim, 2004; Kong, Beckman, & Edwards, 2011; Lee & Jongman,
2012; Schertz, Cho, Lotto, & Warner, 2015, 2016). In the course of investigating the cognitive

386

Language and Speech 61(3)

mechanism, we expect to produce insightful experimental evidence indicative of the relative importance of the multiple cues in the Korean stops.

1.1 Attentional resources and cue primacy
Mattys (2004) investigated whether and how multiple acoustic cues of hierarchically different
information levels played an integrative role by examining the mechanism of word segmentation
through a series of cross-modal priming experiments (i.e., auditory priming and visual target).
Aiming to test word stress as a determining tool in segmenting speech (e.g., Cutler & Carter, 1987;
Norris, Mcqueen, Cutler, & Butterfield, 1997), the study focused on two different levels of acoustic
cues, word stress and allophonic coarticulation, representing lower and higher information levels,
respectively, for speech segmentation. The experiments measured lexical-decision latencies
between intact and noisy conditions to explore the relative contribution of the auditorily primed
cues interacting under degraded signal conditions. Mattys concluded that in the ideal listening
condition without background noise, the coarticulated prime of the higher-level cue was a more
meaningful factor in facilitating response time, rather than the stress prime of the lower-level cue.
However, the effect of stress prime increased in the distracting listening condition with noise,
whereas the role of coarticulated primes decreased. Mattys and his colleagues (2005) further examined the cue integration relationship in word segmentation not only between word stress and allophonic coarticulation cues but also between lexical and sub-lexical cues of which linguistic
representations were higher than acoustic-phonetic cues. They found that if high-level cues such
as semantic and lexical information were inefficient or if listening conditions were not ideal in
utilizing the high-level cues, low-level cues compensated for the lack of high-level linguistic information. Mattys et al. (2005) concluded that linguistic cues were weighted hierarchically in segmenting speech, suggesting that multiple cues integrated with signal quality in speech processing.
Less effective use of higher level information under non-ideal listening conditions is also observed
for non-native listeners with incomplete knowledge about the target language. Bradlow & Alexander
(2007) examined how listeners with different linguistic experiences used semantic and acoustic information in combination when processing clear and plain speech styles (to determine sources of reduced
effectiveness in terms of non-native listener speech processing under suboptimal conditions). Results
showed that for the native listeners, the accuracy of speech recognition was greater for high probability sentences than for low probability sentences and for a clear rather than plain speaking style, suggesting that experienced (native) listeners were able to utilize both high and low levels of linguistic
cues either separately or in combination. On the other hand, for the non-native listeners, the accuracy
was meaningfully distinct only between plain and clear speaking types, revealing that less experienced listeners (i.e., non-native listeners) compensated the two levels of semantic cues only for the
clear speech signal. That is, the non-native listeners' use of high level semantic cues became less
effective under unfavorable listening conditions, which led to the failure of semantic compensation.
The findings confirmed that hierarchical levels of linguistic information were processed with differential degrees of attentional weights and higher-level cues were distracted more than lower-level cues
by poor listening conditions and listeners' little language experience.
The knowledge about information hierarchy in the aforementioned studies can be applied to the
use of multiple acoustic cues with relative importance in speech processing. More relevant to the
current study, Gordon et al. (1993) examined the interaction between listening conditions and multiple cue processing only within acoustic signals with different weightings for a sub-lexical phonological contrast. Gordon et al. (1993) conducted an identification task for the voicing distinction of
the English stops where VOT is a strong cue and F0 is a weak cue (e.g., Abramson & Lisker, 1985;
Francis et al., 2006; Whalen, Abramson, Lisker, & Mody, 1993). Specifically, their experiment was

Kong and Lee

387

designed so that the amount of attention allocated to speech perception was deliberately manipulated using a dual-task paradigm aiming to investigate how the use of VOT and F0 would be
affected by the cognitive distractor. They presented listeners a speech identification task with and
without math solving problems embedded, conditioning distractor and no-distractor listening environments. The no-distractor condition (without the math problems) provided an ideal listening
condition, similar to a typical speech perception experiment in a laboratory such that a listener can
pay close attention to speech sounds. On the other hand, in the distractor condition, listeners were
asked to perform the math solving task during the speech identification task, thereby distracting
them from perceiving acoustic cues. They found that when attention to speech sounds was limited
(i.e., the distractor condition), the listeners' reliance on the strong VOT cue was mitigated but reliance on the weak F0 cue was boosted. Gordon et al. (1993) also found a similar relationship
between the attention to and the use of multiple cues to the perception of /i/ and //, of which the
primary and secondary cues are format frequency and duration, respectively; that is, the reliance
on the formant cue decreased when listeners could not fully pay attention to the speech perception
task. Based on the findings, they concluded that while a strong cue (e.g., stop VOT and vowel
formants in English) functioned with greater attentional resources in differentiating the voiced
from the voiceless stops and the tense from the lax vowels, a weak cue (e.g., stop F0 and vowel
duration in English) interplayed with less amount of attention. Gordon et al. (1993) discussed
whether more reliance on the secondary cue under a distracting listening environment might result
from the reduced competition from the primary cue.

1.2 Previous studies investigating the three-way laryngeal contrast in Korean
Built on the findings from the English stops with the two-way voicing distinction, Korean stops
would enable a further exploration of the relationship between attention and cue weightings in that
their phonological and (acoustic-) phonetic characteristics render useful combinations of contrastive stop categories that bear implications on the role of attention. Korean voiceless stops have been
intensively investigated over the last five decades for the typologically unusual three-way laryngeal
contrast among the voiceless region, namely, tense (p', t', k'), lax (p, t, k), and aspirated (ph, th, kh)
stops (e.g., Cho, Jun, & Ladefoged, 2002; Kang, 2014; Kang & Guion, 2006, 2008; Kim, 2004;
Kim, Beddor, & Horrocks, 2002; Kong et al., 2011; Silva, 2006). A number of acoustic and perception studies have demonstrated that while multiple acoustic cues are involved in manifesting the
Korean stop laryngeal contrast such as spectral tilts and closure duration, VOT, and the onset F0
after releasing a stop are important cues to distinguish the stop categories. In the classic acoustic
studies of Korean stops (Han & Weitzman, 1970; Kim, 1965; Lisker & Abramson, 1964), VOT was
shortest for the tense stop, intermediate for the lax stop, and longest for the aspirated stop; the onset
F0 value was lower for the lax stop than for the tense and aspirated stops. Notably, recent studies on
Korean stops have paid attention to a sound change in the lax and aspirated stops in the standard
Seoul dialect, demonstrating the switched role of VOT and F0. The sound change concerns the subphonemic acoustic nature of the categories where the VOT differences between the lax and aspirated
stops become small by both having long lag VOTs, while the tense stops remain unchanged by having short lag VOTs (e.g., Kang, 2014; Silva, 2006). Substantial production studies showed that
while VOT and F0 used to be primary and secondary cues in that order, the role of F0 has been
enhanced while that of VOT has been weakened, especially for the lax versus aspirated stops (Kang,
2014; Kang & Guion, 2008; Kim, 2013; Lee & Jongman, 2012; Silva, 2006).
Regarding the changed acoustic characteristics of the Korean laryngeal categories, there has
been no strong consensus among existing perception studies as to whether it is VOT or F0 that
primarily differentiates the three laryngeal stop categories across the board (Kim, 2004; Kong

388

Language and Speech 61(3)

et al., 2011; Lee, Politzer-Ahles, & Jongman, 2013; Schertz et al., 2015). Kim (2004) and Lee et al.
(2013) examined the trading relation between F0 and VOT cues in the perception of Korean stops.
Both studies used stimuli in which the two acoustic dimensions were systematically manipulated
by having multiple continua. Kim (2004) reported that while the stimuli with short VOTs (shorter
than 26.5 milliseconds) were perceived as the tense stop regardless of the F0 value, stimuli whose
VOT was longer than 26.5ms were mostly perceived as either lax or aspirated stops. She found that
Korean listeners primarily relied on the short VOT in the perception of the tense stop, whereas the
perception of the lax and aspirated stops involved a phonetic trading relation between VOT and F0.
Kim (2004) concluded the equal importance of VOT and F0 in the perception of the lax and aspirated stops. A similar phonetic trading relation was observed in Lee et al. (2013); that is, for Korean
listeners, the reliance on one acoustic cue increases when the other cue is ambiguous, suggesting
that VOT and F0 are both necessary perceptual cues for the stop contrast.
Similarly, Kong et al. (2011) and Schertz et al. (2015) explored the relative importance between
VOT and F0 in perceiving Korean stops by comparing the beta-coefficients of the cues in logistic
regression models. Kong et al. (2011) examined how Korean speaking adult listeners identified natural
stimuli with the stops produced by children, adult males and adult females. Kong et al. (2011) noted
the greater role of VOT than F0 in predicting the tense over non-tense stops. Regarding the identification of the lax and aspirated stops, however, while VOT played a greater role than F0 did when the
stimulus talker was either a child or an adult male, with a female talker, only F0 significantly predicted
the stop categories. They concluded that while VOT alone primarily differentiated the tense from the
non-tense stops, both VOT and F0 were used for the distinction between the lax and aspirated stops.
Similarly, reflecting the socio-phonetic characteristics of sound change in general, Schertz et al. (2015)
identified the primary role of F0 in distinguishing the lax from the aspirated stops when the talker of
the stimuli was a female who was known to lead the sound change. Their analyses exhibited the greatest beta-coefficient for F0 among the tested acoustic variables in identifying the lax from the aspirated
stops. Based on the results, they suggested the primary and secondary influences of F0 and VOT,
respectively, arguing that F0 was more important than VOT for the lax and aspirated stop distinction.
While existing perception studies have confirmed that both VOT and F0 are important acoustic
cues in perceiving the Korean stop laryngeal contrast (as observed in the production studies), they
have also pointed out that the relative importance between cues varied depending on the type of
laryngeal stops in question or the talker group characteristics. Given that either VOT or F0 cannot
be the single primary perceptual cue across the three Korean stop laryngeal categories, questions
arise regarding how this flexibility among Korean listeners regarding cue weightings would interplay with attentional resources available for the stop perception. Furthermore, how would their
cognitive mechanism in speech perception be influenced by distracting listening conditions?
Exploring these questions with the Korean laryngeal stops would broaden our understanding of the
relationship between attention and speech information processing, which has been demonstrated in
the English language with the relatively rigid primacy of VOT over F0. In turn, experimental evidence of the current study would lead us to a better understanding of the cue primacy between VOT
and F0 for the Korean stop laryngeal categories.

1.3 Use of attentional resources as a diagnostic method for cue weighing of
Korean stops
To address the aforementioned linguistic inquiries, we examined whether each of the VOT and F0
cues was modulated by attentional resources by deliberately exposing listeners to distracting listening
conditions. Unlike the existing perception studies investigating relative perceptual cue weightings
with the Korean stops (Choi, Kim, Han, 2013; Francis et al., 2008; Holt & Lotto, 2006; Kang, 2010;

Kong and Lee

389

Kim, 2004; Kingston & Diehl, 1994; Kong et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013; Repp, 1983; Schertz et al.,
2015; Summerfield & Haggard, 1977), we considered listeners' cognitive interaction with acoustic
information in explaining the primacy of multiple phonetic cues and attempted to illuminate the variability in individual listeners' strategies in using multiple cues. Gordon et al. (1993) pointed out that
primary and secondary cues require different degrees of attention to recognize a phonemic category
such that a primary cue demands greater attention than a secondary cue. That is, observing how the
distortion of attentional demands mitigates the use of one cue over the other can be diagnostic of the
nature of the roles of F0 and VOT cues in the perception of the Korean stops.
In an effort to provide a clear picture of the perceptual pattern associated with attention, an
individual cognitive dimension, the present study addresses individual variations as well as group
patterns. In studying speech sounds, the population-typical approach traditionally treats all members of the speech community as if they were relatively similar in processing speech. The analytic
approach has successfully illustrated the group pattern of acoustic and perceptual properties of the
Korean stops. However, given that individual differences observed in cognitive dimensions such as
attention, autistic spectrum quotient, and executive functions are related to systematic variations in
an individual's linguistic ability (Mattys & Wiget, 2011; Yu, 2010, 2016), it is reasonable to speculate about the existence of individual differences in processing the multiple acoustic cues in relation to the attention condition.
The current study is not the first attempt to examine individual differences in the perception of
Korean stops. A few existing studies on Korean stop perception observed the presence of individual differences for the lax-aspirated pair (e.g., Kong & Yoon, 2013; Schertz et al., 2015), where
individual variations were represented as model-residuals deviating from the group-averaged
trend. Based on the foundation of previous empirical findings on individual differences in the use
of Korean stops, we further aimed to describe the change of cue weighting strategy within and
across individuals responding to the varying attention situations.

1.4 Current study
The current study broadly aimed to address the relationship between attentional resources and
acoustic cue weighting in speech perception. We explored the linguistic inquiry by investigating
how attentional manipulation affected Korean listeners' use of multiple acoustic cues (VOT and
F0) in the perception of the typologically unusual three-way laryngeal contrast of the Korean stops.
The current attempt not only provided cross-linguistic evidence regarding the role of attention in
speech perception but also clarified the relative importance of the VOT and F0 cues in perceiving
the Korean stops.
We used the dual-task paradigm, closely following the experimental design of Gordon et al.
(1993) where listeners were asked to perform a primary speech perception task during a secondary
task of arithmetic calculation. Specifically, we examined the perception pattern by pairing two
contrastive stop categories among the three: (1) tense versus aspirated; (2) lax versus aspirated; and
(3) tense versus lax stops. Given the acoustic similarities and differences between the English and
Korean stops, several research questions could be examined with respect to the speech processing
mechanism interacting with attention.
First, examining the pair of the tense versus aspirated categories among the Korean stops would
serve as a useful venue to justify the relationship between attentional resources and linguistic cues
with different weightings, as previously demonstrated in the English language (Bradlow &
Alexander, 2007; Gordon et al., 1993; Mattys, 2004; Mattys et al., 2005, 2011). This would thereby
cross-linguistically verify the effect of attention in speech perception because the contrast is inarguably known to be primarily distinguished along the VOT dimension (e.g., Kim, 2004; Kim et al.,

390

Language and Speech 61(3)

2002; Kong et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013), similar to the English voiced versus voiceless stops.
Based on the similarity between English and Korean stops, we tested whether the use of the primary VOT cue would be mitigated by the presence of the distracting arithmetic calculation task in
identifying the tense from the aspirated stops.
Second, for the pairs involving the lax stop for which the acoustic cue weightings between VOT
and F0 are less clear compared to the cue relation of the tense-aspirated stop pair, we expect to use
attentional resources as a diagnostic method to clarify the relative importance between the VOT
and F0 cues in identifying the lax from the other two stop categories. In other words, exploring
which acoustic cue is mitigated under the distracting listening condition would help elucidate the
enhanced role of F0 and accordingly define the cue primacy between VOT and F0. The current
study employed the experimental paradigm directly tapping on attentional resources and the statistical analysis models considering individual variations in speech perception so that we could clarify the qualitative nature of individual listeners' cue weighting between F0 and VOT for the
contrasts on the basis of each listener's cognitive interaction.

2 Methods
2.1 Participants
Twenty-eight native speakers of Korean (14 males) participated in the study for a nominal fee. The
participants were all in their 20s (mean age of 22, standard deviation (SD) = 1.9), and recruited at
Korea Aerospace University, which is located within the standard Korean dialect region. The present study tested only speakers of Seoul Korean to reduce the possible influence of regional dialectal differences. To minimize the effects of individual traits, we recruited participants from various
academic majors, including: engineering; business; and English linguistics. None of the participants reported any hearing disorders.

2.2 Stimuli
A 30-year-old male speaker of Seoul Korean produced CV syllables, /ta/ and /tha/ based on which we
created a series of acoustic continua. We selected one base token with the lax stop, that is, /ta/ for the
vocalic part of the stimuli, where VOT and F0 were systematically manipulated using Praat. A 7-step
VOT continuum was created by adding the relevant duration of the aspirated portion of /tha/ to the
original burst signal of the base token /ta/, producing seven different log-scale steps--VOT 9ms,
13ms, 19ms, 28ms, 40ms, 58ms, and 100ms. VOT was defined as the interval between the stop burst
release and the onset of the voicing (i.e., the onset of the first full period in the waveform). For each
VOT step, a 5-step F0 continuum was created by lowering and raising the F0 level ranging from 98Hz
to 130Hz in 8Hz steps. Each step of the F0 continuum had a consistent F0 value from the onset to the
offset of the vocalic portion. A total of 35 stimuli were created (7 levels of VOT x 5 levels of F0). It
should be pointed out that the use of the 5-step F0 continuum in the current study differed from the
approach taken by Gordon et al. (1993), where sound stimuli had only two F0 steps--low (100Hz) and
high (180Hz). This change was implemented to meet the purpose of the current study, which is to
investigate relative sensitivities to F0 as well as to VOT in Korean listeners' perception of stops.

2.3 Tasks and procedure
The present study closely followed the experimental design and procedure in Gordon et al. (1993)
where two different attention conditions ("distractor" and "no-distractor" sessions) were defined

Kong and Lee

391

by the presence or absence of a simple arithmetic distractor task. Each participant responded to a
total of 210 trials (35 auditory stimuli x 2 attention conditions x 3 repetition blocks) over E-Prime.
That is, the trials were divided into six separate blocks, three of which were presented in the distractor session and the other three in the no-distractor session. In the distractor session, the participants performed the three-alternative forced-choice task while being distracted by the arithmetic
calculation task. Immediately after the auditory stimulus was played, the listeners were asked to
answer an arithmetic question, which would introduce working memory cognitive loads in which
numeric information would have to be held and mentally processed over time (Diamond, 2013).
Only then could they choose which consonant category they had heard, with no time pressure, by
clicking one of the three response options written in Korean orthography ("," "," and ""
representing /th/, /t/ and /t'/, respectively). To avoid any possible response bias, the response options
on the screen were located to form an equilateral triangle, and the mouse pointer was re-set to the
middle of the triangle for each trial. The arithmetic task had listeners compare three two-digit numbers (e.g., 10, 20, and 30) and click either the "same" button or "different" button depending on
whether the difference between the first two numbers (e.g., 10 - 20 = 10) in absolute values was
equal to the difference between the last two numbers (e.g., 20 - 30 = 10) (Gordon et al., 1993). To
ensure that the inserted arithmetic task sufficiently distracted the listener's ability to process the
stimuli, we instructed the participants to respond as accurately and quickly as possible by clicking
a response option, emphasizing that the arithmetic task was the important part of the experiment.
In addition, we provided the participants' average performance for each calculation (mean accuracy) after each distractor session in order to motivate the participants to provide accurate responses.
In the no-distractor session, the participants were instructed to respond to the sound stimuli
without any arithmetic calculation. The no-distractor session had exactly the same stimulus presentation procedure except that the participants were given three zeros (e.g., "0 0 0") on the slide
instead of the arithmetic task. Replicating the experimental design in Gordon et al. (1993), the
participants were always given the distractor session first so that the duration in which the zeros
were displayed on the screen was set based on each participant's average response time in the
immediately preceding block with the arithmetic task. This was done to fully ascribe the differences observed in the auditory processing to the presence/absence of the distractor.
The average accuracy rate was 98% (SD = 2.6) for the arithmetic calculation of the distractor
session. The present study included all speech identification responses regardless of the accuracy
because the overall accuracy for the calculation was high, and the incorrect calculation did not
necessarily indicate high attention to auditory stimuli. The experiment was conducted in a quiet
room at the university facility. The entire experiment took approximately 40 minutes.

2.4 Analysis
The categorical responses from the identification tasks were analyzed by using the mixed effects
logistic regression models (Baayen, 2008; Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008; Jaeger, 2008;
Morrison, 2007). The regression analyses were implemented in R using the lme4 package (Bates,
Maechler, & Bolker, 2013; R Core Team, 2012). The model employed the listeners' categorical
responses as a dependent variable. To explore the role of acoustic cues in differentiating one category from the other, three different binomial logistic models were made by excluding one out of the
three output categories, yielding the following unique pairs of output variables in each model: (1)
tense and aspirated; (2) lax and aspirated; and (3) tense and lax responses. The fixed effect variables
included the acoustic values of stimulus VOTs and F0s (continuous variables) and the Attention
condition (discrete variable: distractor vs. no-distractor). The interaction terms between acoustic
dimensions and Attention condition were also included in the regression model. To make it

392

Language and Speech 61(3)

possible to compare the VOT and F0 coefficients estimated in the model, the acoustic values of VOT
(in milliseconds) and F0 (in Hertz) were scaled to standardize the units (i.e., means equal to zero and
variances ranging from 0 to 1). Each of the models specified individual listeners as a random factor
where intercepts and slopes of VOT and F0 were allowed to vary (i.e., by-subject random intercepts
and random slopes for VOT and F0). The models also included by-subject adjustments of VOT and
F0 with respect to Attention to capture potential individual variability as to the experimental factor
of Attention condition (i.e., subject-by-Attention random intercepts and random slopes for VOT
and F0). Given the model construction, the significant fixed-effect interaction of Attention with
VOT or F0 would indicate that the listeners' baseline attention to the acoustic parameters was greatly
disturbed as a group. The individual listener's perceptual sensitivities to VOT and F0 were estimated
by adding the random coefficients (by-subject and subject-by-Attention variations) to the fixed
effect coefficient of each acoustic parameter (group-average) in the relevant listening condition.
Similarly, each individual's magnitude of the effect size of the attentional distractor on one acoustic
cue was calculated by subtracting the random slope coefficients of the cue (subject-by-Attention
variations) in the no-distractor condition from those in the distractor condition.

3 Results
3.1 Descriptive pattern
Figure 1 presents the identification rates for the three stops as a function of VOT (top) and F0 (bottom) between the distractor and no-distractor conditions. The data were pooled across F0 (top)
and VOT values (bottom). Overall, the identification pattern averaged across the two Attention
conditions was in line with previous perception studies that reported the importance of VOT in
identifying the tense from the other stops (Figure 1, top left) and that of F0 in identifying the lax
stop (Figure 1, bottom middle). Specifically, Korean listeners heard stimuli with relatively short
VOTs (i.e., 9-13ms) primarily as the tense stop over 75% (top left), whereas they perceived stimuli
with relatively long VOTs (i.e., 59-100ms) as the aspirated stop over 82% (top right). While lax
responses were observed more in the intermediate VOT range from 19 to 40ms compared to the
other VOTs (top middle), the greatest response rate of the lax stop in the VOT range was merely
52% at a VOT of 28ms; the rates of lax responses at 19ms and 40ms were 33% and 32%, respectively. This indicated that the VOT cue alone might not have ensured the lax response for Korean
listeners, and the role of VOT for the lax stop did not appear as robust as it did for the tense and
aspirated stops.
Instead, F0 clearly helped the listeners identify the lax stop from the other stops. Figure 1 (bottom middle) illustrates sharply decreasing lax responses as the F0 values increased. The stimuli
with the lowest F0 (98Hz) were heard as the lax stop by 81%, whereas those with the highest F0
(130Hz) were heard as lax stops by only 5%. In other words, the difference in lax responses
between the lowest (98Hz) and the highest (130Hz) F0 was 76%, indicating that the F0 cue was a
successful predictor for the lax responses. For the tense and aspirated stops that were strongly cued
by VOT, there was a tendency for the two stops to be perceived more easily as F0 increased.
However, the differences in tense and aspirated responses between 98Hz and 130Hz were merely
47% and 27%, respectively, which indicated that the F0 effect was not as strong as it was for the
lax stop. Finally, Figure 1 shows little difference in the group-averaged identification rates between
the distractor (black line) and no-distractor (gray line) conditions across the three stop categories.
Regarding the effect of attention, small numerical differences between the two attentional conditions were observed in the identification of the tense and the lax stops. In both VOT and F0 panels,
the steepness of the response rates was greater under the no-distractor condition (black line) than in

Kong and Lee

393

Figure 1. Identification rates (%) for tense, lax, and aspirated responses between distractor and nodistractor conditions for the group average (gray vs. black solid lines) and selected individual listeners
(dotted and dashed lines) as a function of voice-onset time (VOT) (top) and as a function of fundamental
frequency (F0) (bottom).

the distractor condition (gray line), indicating that one-unit change in VOT (or F0) had a stronger
effect in the ideal listening condition than in the distracting condition with the arithmetic calculation
in listeners' identifying the tense and lax stops. Notably, considerable individual variations were
observed in using the VOT and F0 cues, as illustrated in Figure 1. Referencing the group-averaged
pattern and utilizing visual examination, we selected individuals who relied more on the VOT and
F0 cues (dashed lines), as well as individuals who relied less on these cues (dotted lines). In each
panel, it can be observed that a one-unit change in the VOT or F0 dimension has a different influence on the stop responses for the two subjects. For example, for the lax response as a function of
F0 (bottom middle panel), while Subject ID 012 showed a very sharp decrease in lax responses as
F0 increased, Subject ID 016 exhibited little change in the lax responses across F0 steps. Accordingly,
the individual variation in the descriptive pattern addresses two questions: (1) how differently do
individual listeners use the F0 and VOT cues; and (2) how are the different strategies employed by
individuals to utilize the two cues related to the attentional modulation of each individual? In other
words, if individuals differ from each other in prioritizing F0 and VOT, we might expect that his/her
perception pattern modulated by the distractor would also differ from others.

3.2 Statistical models: mixed-effects regression
3.2.1 Tense vs. aspirated model. Figure 2 illustrates the estimated probability of the choice of the
aspirated over the tense stops, with the left panel showing the group-averaged pattern and the middle and right panels showing the individual listener's patterns. Table 1 summarizes the parameter
estimation for the regression model of the tense-aspirated pair. The model predicting the choice of
the aspirated over tense stops shows that the effect of VOT was significant, as indicated by the
steep regression curves in Figure 2 (left). However, neither the effect of F0 nor that of Attention

394

Language and Speech 61(3)

Figure 2. Left: the group-averaged estimated probability of stop responses for the pair of tense-aspirated
responses with respect to voice-onset time (VOT) and fundamental frequency (F0) between distractor
(dashed lines) and no-distractor conditions (solid lines); and middle and right: selected individual listeners'
estimations (thin lines) deviated from the group-averaged trends (thick lines) assessed in the no-distractor
condition of the regression model.
Table 1. Coefficient estimates for predictors in mixed-effects models (tense-aspirated) for the groupaveraged data in the stop identification task (values in boldface type indicate p < 0.05).
Tense-aspirated

(Intercept)
Voice-onset time (VOT)
Fundamental frequency (F0)
Attention distractor
VOT: Attention distractor
F0: Attention distractor

Estimate

Standard error

z

2.11
8.24
0.14
-0.3
-1.55
-0.12

0.48
0.87
0.17
0.3
0.61
0.17

4.39
9.51
0.82
-0.99
-2.53
-0.71

was significant. In the group-averaged pattern, the likelihood of choosing /th/ responses sharply
increased as VOT became longer ( = 8.24, p < 0.001), but the change in the F0 dimension did not
affect the identification of the aspirated from the tense stops ( = 0.14, p > 0.05). Individual patterns did not deviate greatly from this group trend when the random slopes of the two individuals
with the maximum VOT coefficient (middle panel) and the maximum F0 coefficient were overlaid, as shown in Figure 2 (right panel). Attention did not have a significant effect in the model (
= -0.30, p > 0.05), suggesting that the overall likelihood of identifying the aspirated stops over the
tense stops did not meaningfully decrease in the distracting listening condition.
The interaction between VOT and the Attention condition was significant ( = -1.55, p < 0.01).
Along with the sign of coefficient, this indicated that the listeners utilized the VOT cue less in
identifying the aspirated from the tense stops than they did in the condition without a distractor. In
other words, while listeners were likely to hear a token as an aspirated stop as VOT increased both
in the absence or presence of the distracting task, the magnitude of the VOT effect was significantly smaller in the condition with the arithmetic task. In contrast, Attention did not meaningfully interact with F0 ( = -0.12, p > 0.05). Together with the absence of F0 as a main effect, this
suggests that F0 did not play a crucial role in differentiating the aspirated stops from the tense

Kong and Lee

395

Figure 3. Scatter plots of individual listeners' fundamental frequency (F0) coefficients as a function of
their voice-onset time (VOT) coefficients estimated as random variances in the mixed-effects regression
model of the tense-aspirated stops. The left panel displays the distribution of the coefficients in the nodistractor (filled circles) and in the distractor conditions (empty squares) across all listeners. The right panel
repeats two subsets of data points located at the edges of the VOT coefficient continuum: one group from
the lower VOT coefficient range (below the first quartile,  = 5.62); and the other from the higher VOT
coefficient range (above the third quartile,  = 12.13).

stops. These statistical results for the interaction terms conformed to our prediction that VOT but
not F0 would be influenced by the distractor conditions in identifying the aspirated from the tense
stops given that VOT is an uncontroversially dominant dimension differentiating the aspirated
from the tense stops both in production and perception. The current results indicate that the VOT
cue is a primary cue functioning with great attention in Korean stop perception just as it does in the
perception of the English stop voiced-voiceless contrast, as reported by Gordon et al. (1993).
We plotted all of the individual listener's F0 coefficients as a function of their VOT coefficients
for the tense-aspirated stop model in Figure 3 in order to examine individual variability in terms of
the use of VOT and F0 interacting with attention conditions. In the left panel of Figure 3, data points
represent the model-estimated random slope coefficients for the VOT and F0 parameters with the
different plot-characters indicating the attention conditions. The distributions show that the VOT
coefficient range (1.23 <  < 15.70) was wider than the F0 coefficient range (-0.22 <  < 0.44), suggesting that the individual differences in the tense-aspirated model were largely attributable to the
listeners' variability in utilizing the VOT cue in their perception. The F0 coefficients were positively
correlated with the VOT coefficients in the no-distractor condition, r(26) = 0.94, p < 0.001. Notably,
the individual data points of the VOT coefficients in the distracting listening condition were mostly
located at a lower range of the coefficients consistent with the reduced use of VOT under the suboptimal listening condition. For example, there were no data points above the third quartile ( = 12.13)
along the dimension of the VOT coefficients. For closer visual examinations, subsets of data points,
which were distributed at the two extreme ranges of the VOT coefficients, below the first quartile
(listeners less sensitive to VOT) and above the third quartile (listeners more sensitive to VOT), were
repeated. This is shown in the right panel in Figure 3 where the connected lines indicated how individual data points shifted between the two attention conditions. A straightforward trend appeared in
which the data points located in the top-right corner representing the listeners with VOT coefficients
greater than the third quartile in the no-distractor condition made an overall shift down to the left (i.e.,

396

Language and Speech 61(3)

Figure 4. Scatter plots of individual listeners' voice-onset time (VOT) (left) and fundamental frequency
(F0) (right) coefficient differences between distractor and no-distractor conditions as a function of their
coefficients of VOT and F0 in the no-distractor condition in the mixed-effects regression model of the
tense-aspirated stops.

a lower range of the VOT coefficients) in the distractor condition. The data points at the bottom left
in the no-distractor condition tended to show a subtle upward movement to the right in the twodimensional space, but the range of movement was too narrow compared to that of the data points at
the upper right corner of the coefficient dimensions.
This visual inspection of the distribution of the selected individuals' VOT and F0 coefficients
was followed by correlation tests over all listeners to quantify the relationship between degrees of
individual reliance on each acoustic cue and the size of the distractor effect on that cue. As in the
left panel in Figure 4, each listener's VOT coefficient in the no-distractor condition along the
x-axis (a measure of an individual's reliance on VOT) was plotted with the coefficient differences
of VOT between the distractor and no-distractor conditions (a measure of individual listener's
effect size of attentional distractor on VOT). With respect to the individual listener's use of the
VOT cue, the two variables were marginally correlated, r(26) = -0.349, p = 0.068. The direction of
the correlation was negative, confirming that the individual listeners who depended more on VOT
in the no-distractor condition relied on the VOT cue less in the distracting listening condition. The
same relationship was not retained when the use of the F0 cue was examined at the individual listener level. The listeners' F0 coefficients in the no-distractor condition were not meaningfully
correlated with the coefficient differences of F0 between the two Attention conditions, r(26) =
0.23, p = 0.22. Congruent with the outputs of the group-averaged F0 parameter estimations (Table
1), the utilization of F0 did not systematically interact with the attentional distractor across the
individual listeners in differentiating the aspirated from the tense stops.
Both the visual examinations and correlation tests supported our interpretation of the model
parameter estimations in which the listeners' reliance on the VOT cue was clearly weakened by the
attentional distractor in processing the tense-aspirated stops. In addition, they further suggested
that the varying magnitudes of the attentional distractor effect were systematically correlated with
the individuals' perceptual sensitivity to the acoustic cue. The F0 cue was not useful in the listeners' perception of the tense-aspirated contrast pair, and accordingly the perceptual reliance on F0
did not interact with the attentional distractor effect when examined not only as a group but also

Kong and Lee

397

Figure 5. Left: the group-averaged estimated probability of stop responses for the pairs of lax-aspirated
(top) and tense-lax responses (bottom) with respect to voice-onset time (VOT) and fundamental
frequency (F0) between distractor (dashed lines) and no-distractor conditions (solid lines); and middle and
right: selected individual listeners' estimations (thin lines) deviated from the group-averaged trends (thick
lines) assessed in the no-distractor condition of the regression models.

across individuals. Importantly, the results from the tense-aspirated model verified what the dualtask paradigm involving the distraction (our methodological replication of Gordon et al., 1993)
could tell us in terms of the interplay of attentional source and the exploitation of the cue in action
in speech perception.
3.2.2 Lax-aspirated and tense-lax models: group patterns. Figure 5 presents the estimated probability of
the choice of the aspirated over the lax stops (top panels) and the lax over the tense stops (bottom panels): group-averaged pattern (left panel); and individual listeners' patterns (middle and right panels).
Table 2 summarizes the parameter estimations for the regression models of the two pairs of stops.
Regarding the lax-aspirated choice model, the main effects of VOT and F0 were significant.
Figure 5 (top panels) illustrates that the /th/ responses increased as VOT became longer ( = 3.52,
p < 0.001) and F0 increased ( = 1.71, p < 0.001). In addition, the main effect of Attention was
marginally significant ( = 0.24, p = 0.065), indicating that the listeners were more likely to hear
the aspirated over the lax stops in the distractor condition than in the no-distractor condition. The
model did not yield significant interaction terms of Attention with VOT and F0. The model outputs of the non-significant interaction terms between VOT and Attention ( = -0.47, p = 0.09) and
between F0 and Attention ( = -0.06, p = 0.71) indicated that the two acoustic cues were patterned
similarly between the two Attention conditions.

398

Language and Speech 61(3)

Table 2. Coefficient estimates for predictors in mixed-effects models (lax-aspirated and tense-lax) for
the group-averaged data in the stop identification task (values in boldface type indicate p < 0.05, and italic
indicate p < 0.1).
Lax-aspirated

(Intercept)
Voice-onset time (VOT)
Fundamental frequency (F0)
Attention distractor
VOT: Attention distractor
F0: Attention distractor

Tense-lax

Estimate

Standard
error (SE)

z

Estimate

SE

z

0.28
3.52
1.71
0.25
-0.47
-0.06

0.18
0.31
0.19
0.14
0.28
0.17

1.52
11.24
9.04
1.85
-1.67
-0.37

2.36
5.04
-1.93
-0.78
-0.74
0.07

0.54
0.67
0.15
0.40
0.61
0.15

4.36
7.52
-12.74
-1.93
-1.21
0.44

The model predicting the choice of the lax over the tense stops reported significant main effects
of VOT, F0, and Attention. The positive direction of the regression slopes in Figure 5 (top panels)
indicates that the /t/ responses increased as VOT became longer ( = 5.04, p < 0.01), whereas negative slopes indicate that the lax responses decreased as F0 increased ( = -1.93, p < 0.001). The
VOT coefficient was greater than the F0 coefficients in absolute values, suggesting that the listeners were more sensitive to the change of VOT than to the change of F0 in differentiating the lax
from the tense stops. Regarding the Attention effect, listeners were overall more likely to hear a
stimulus as a lax stop in the no-distractor condition than in the distractor condition ( = -0.78, p <
0.05). Together with the main effect of Attention observed from the lax-aspirated model above, it
appears that the listeners tended not to categorize the stimuli as the lax stop when distracted. Based
on this tendency, it was speculated that the lax category needed to meet stricter phonetic norms to
be identified compared to the tense and aspirated stops.1 Similar to the model of the lax-aspirated
stop, Attention did not interact either with VOT ( = -0.73, p = 0.23) or F0 ( = 0.06, p = 0.65).
According to the group-averaged model outputs, the lack of the significant interaction effects
either with VOT or F0 for the contrast pairs of the lax-aspirated and the tense-lax stops was
puzzling since we had already observed that the listeners' dependency on the primary perceptual cue, namely VOT, was weakened in the distractor condition in the model for the tense-
aspirated stops. One might speculate that these puzzling outputs from the group-averaged
models might be ascribed to the two following possibilities. One is that our participants indeed
did not operate either VOT or F0 with attentional modulation in identifying the lax from the
tense or the aspirated stops, suggesting no definite primacy between the two cues in the Korean
stop perception. The other possibility is that large individual variations might have obscured
the statistical effect of attentional modulation interacting with VOT or F0 at the group level,
failing to converge as one representative group tendency. Previous research has observed that
individual listeners may use different strategies in relying on VOT and F0 for the identification
of the Korean stops (e.g., Kong & Yoon, 2013; Schertz et al., 2015), which might possibly cancel out the interaction effect of Attention with either VOT or F0. Recall that the contrast pairs
with the lax stop were expected to have variant phonetic forms due to the sound change in
progress (e.g., Beddor, 2009; Harrington & Stevens, 2014), which accordingly would yield
variable individual differences in the perception of the lax-aspirated and the tense-lax stop
pairs. The present observation in Figure 1 provides additional support to the assertion that the
individual variations illustrated by the selected individual listeners might have distorted the
representative group-averaged relationship between attentional modulation and the VOT and

Kong and Lee

399

F0 acoustic cues. One way to investigate the non-significant interaction of Attention in the
present data would be to examine individual listener's use of multiple cues estimated in the
regression model varying the two attention conditions.
3.2.3 Lax vs. aspirated and tense vs. lax models: individual patterns. The distributions of the VOT and
F0 coefficients from the two regression models (predicting the lax from the aspirated stops and the
tense from the lax stops) were further inspected to explore individual variability. Figure 5 (middle
and right panels) plotted the individual listener's regression curves on top of the group-averaged
regression curves in the no-distractor condition both for the lax-aspirated and the tense-lax pairs.
The middle and right panels contrast two different individual listeners' utilization of VOT and F0,
whose coefficients were greatest for VOT or F0 among the participants, respectively. Compared to
the group-averaged curves, the individual's VOT slopes in the middle panels were steeper than the
group-averaged VOT slopes, and the individual's F0 slopes in the right panels were steeper than
the group-averaged F0 slopes.
When the VOT and F0 slopes were compared for the listeners, these selected individuals showed
reversed patterns of relative cue weightings between VOT and F0. In the lax-aspirated pair (Figure
5, top), the VOT-dependent listener had a steeper VOT slope than that of F0 (VOT as a more
informative cue), whereas the F0-dependent listener had a steeper F0 slope than that of VOT (F0
as a more informative cue). This reversed relationship of perceptual importance between VOT and
F0 was also observed in the two selected listeners for the tense-lax pair (Figure 5, bottom). To
summarize, the perceptual strategies in weighting one cue over the other varied according to individual listeners in the regression models of the two stop pairs. The strategic differences were not
only in the magnitude of the coefficients (amount of perceptual dependency) but also in the primacy between the two cues (VOT as a primary cue or F0 as a primary cue).
We plotted all of the individual listeners' F0 coefficients as a function of their VOT coefficients
in Figure 6 to provide an extensive picture of individual variability in terms of cue prioritization
between VOT and F0 interacting with the distractor conditions. The data points were model-estimated random slope coefficients added to the fixed effect coefficients for the VOT and F0 parameters. Confirming the observations with selected listeners in Figure 5, the F0 coefficients had a
negative relationship with the VOT coefficients for the lax-aspirated stop pair in the no-distractor
condition (Figure 6, top left), r(26) = -0.80, p < 0.001. For the lax-aspirated pair, the pattern of
negative relationship between F0 and VOT coefficients supported the possibility that the interaction effect of Attention in the regression model (Figure 5, top left and Table 2) might have been
insignificant because the individual variability in giving a perceptual weight for one cue over the
other cancelled the effect out. There was no meaningful positive or negative relationship between
VOT and F0 for the tense-lax pair (Figure 6, bottom left), r(26) = -0.097, p = 0.62.
To examine the data point changes in the two listening conditions more closely, two subsets of
listeners were identified in each pair (Figure 6, right panels) with the data points from the two
distractor conditions connected. The selection of subsets was carried out based on the individual
listeners' random coefficients of VOT and F0 from the regression model. For the lax-aspirated stop
pair, the VOT-dependent group consisted of the 11 listeners who had the top 11 greatest random
VOT coefficients in the mixed effects model. Likewise, the F0-dependent group had another 11
listeners with the top 11 greatest random F0 coefficients in the same model. Note that 11 was the
maximum number of listeners we could identify in the lax-aspirated stop pair to which none of the
listeners belonged to both VOT- and F0-dependent groups. The same method of selection was
applied to the dataset of the tense-lax stop pair, yielding six VOT-dependent listeners and six
F0-dependent listeners. We ensured that the six selected VOT-dependent listeners had relatively
low F0 coefficients (in absolute values) among the listeners with greater VOT coefficients and the

400

Language and Speech 61(3)

Figure 6. Scatter plots of individual listeners' fundamental frequency (F0) coefficients as a function of
their voice-onset time (VOT) coefficients estimated as random variances in the mixed-effects regression
models of the lax-aspirated and tense-lax stops. The left panels display the distributions of the coefficients
in the no-distractor condition (filled circles) and in the distractor condition (empty squares) across all
listeners. The right panels repeat two subset data points for the VOT-dependent listeners and the F0dependent listeners with the connecting points between the two distractor conditions.

six selected F0-dependent listeners had relatively lower VOT coefficients among the listeners with
greater F0 coefficients (in absolute values).
In the right panels in Figure 6, the data-point distributions of these selected sub-group listeners
showed systematic differences between the no-distractor and the distractor conditions. It was
observed that the data-points for the VOT-listeners in the no-distractor condition shifted right
along the dimension of VOT coefficients in the distractor condition. This tendency was consistent
in both contrast pairs, suggesting that the reliance on VOT was weakened for the VOT-listeners in
the presence of attentional distractor. Although the magnitudes of the coefficient differences were
smaller across the F0-listeners compared to the VOT-listeners, the data-points for the F0-listeners
in the no-distractor conditions also tended to move to the lower range of F0 coefficients in absolute
values. Current findings with the sub-group listeners call for a further analysis where these wide
ranges of individual variability are taken into account when we aim to determine the validity of the
null interaction effect of Attention with either VOT or F0.
To generalize the relationship in the right panels of Figure 6, we correlated all 28 listeners' magnitudes of dependency on the acoustic cue (VOT and F0) with the sizes of sensitivity differences to
the cue between the two listening conditions. The top left panel in Figure 7 shows that for the

Kong and Lee

401

Figure 7. Scatter plots of individual listeners' voice-onset time (VOT) (left panels) and fundamental
frequency (F0) (right panels) coefficient differences between distractor and no-distractor conditions as a
function of their coefficients in the no-distractor condition. The data points in the top panels were estimated
from the mixed effects regression models of the tense-lax contrast, and those in the bottom panels from
the lax-aspirated contrast.

tense-lax contrast pair, the individuals' coefficients of VOT in the no-distractor condition were
meaningfully correlated with the coefficient differences of the cue between distractor and no-distractor conditions, r(26) = -0.43, p < 0.05. The negative sign of the correlation coefficients in the VOT
dimension for the tense-lax pair indicated that the more the listeners relied on VOT in differentiating
the lax from the tense in the no-distractor condition, the more their VOT dependency was weakened
in the distractor condition. This association of greater VOT dependency with the greater negative
influence of the distractor on the perception of the tense-lax pair was consistent with the individual
patterns observed in the tense-aspirated model (see Figure 4) where the VOT cue primarily differentiated the two contrastive stops. The top right panel in Figure 7 shows that the use of the F0 parameter
in differentiating the lax from the tense was also associated with a significant negative relationship
between the individuals' coefficients and the coefficient differences of the cue between the listening
conditions, r(26) = -0.43, p < 0.05. Unlike the VOT coefficient distributions, this negative relationship in the F0 coefficient panel would indicate an increased F0 dependency in the distractor condition
relative to the no-distractor condition, given the minus signs of the F0 coefficients across listeners in
the model predicting the lax from the tense. That is, the listeners who were less dependent on F0 in
distinguishing the lax from the tense tended to attend to the cue more in the distractor condition. The
greater enhancement of F0 reliance in the distractor condition for the listeners who depended on it

402

Language and Speech 61(3)

less in the no-distractor condition stood in contrast to the greater reduction of VOT dependency in the
distractor condition for the listeners who relied on it more in the no-distractor condition. In conjunction with the group-averaged model coefficients (Table 2) where F0 was a perceptually contributing
but less weighted cue than VOT, we interpreted this enhanced F0 reliance under the distracted listening condition as a conforming characteristic of a secondary cue interacting with an attentional distractor for the tense-lax pair.
The bottom right panel in Figure 7 shows that in the model of the lax-aspirated stops, the individuals' VOT coefficients were inversely correlated with the coefficient differences of the cues
between the listening conditions, VOT: r(26) = -0.36, p < 0.05. Consistent with the findings in the
two other models of the stop contrast pairs, the listeners who relied on VOT more in the no-distractor condition tended to depend on VOT less in the distractor condition. This systematic variation
across individual listeners faced with the distractor was compatible with the group-averaged tendency of the VOT interaction with attention whose estimated coefficient was marginally significant in the regression model (Table 2, right column). In the lax-aspirated model, the F0 dimension
did not reveal a statistically significant relationship between the individual listeners' cue dependency and the effect size of the attentional distractor on the cue, r(26) = -0.16, p = 0.39. This lack of
significant correlation in the F0 cue was contrastive with the pattern associated with the VOT
dimension in the model and also differed from the output related to F0 in the tense-lax model,
although both of the models indicated that the magnitudes of the F0 coefficients as a fixed effect
variable were smaller than those of the VOT variable. The distracting listening condition neither
systematically weakened nor boosted the amount of F0 dependency in the listeners' ability to differentiate the aspirated from the lax stops.
To summarize, there was a noteworthy finding from the individual level analyses. That is, the
individual variability in the listeners' dependency on the acoustic cue was inter-related with the
way the attentional distractor influenced the listeners. Consistently across the three stop pairs
examined above, the listeners' dependency on VOT relatively weakened faced with the attentional
distractor, while their reliance on F0 increased in the presence of the distractor in the tense-lax stop
pair model. Besides the consistent relationship directions, the individual level analysis further
revealed that the varying magnitudes of the distractor effect on the acoustic cue were explained by
the extent to which the listeners depended on the cue in the perception.
The analyses highlighted that it is necessary to carefully consider individual variability in the
Korean stop perception. For the tense-lax and lax-aspirated stop pairs, the correlation analyses
across individual listeners provided evidence of significant interaction with the attentional distractor, supplementing the group-averaged parameter estimations of the interaction term of Attention
with each acoustic cue. The close examination of individual variations in the uses of VOT and F0
was an important analytic approach confirming the effect of attentional modulation interacting
with cue primacy when the effect of attentional distractor did not clearly emerge as a group trend.

4 Discussion
The current study investigated the effect of attention in utilizing the acoustic parameters (VOT and
F0) when the Korean native speakers perceived a three-way laryngeal contrast of the Korean stops.
Specifically, we aimed to address the relationship between attentional resources and acoustic cue
weighting in speech perception and discuss whether and how much the Korean listeners' utilization
of F0 as well as that of VOT relied on attention resources in differentiating the Korean stops in
order to better understand the relative importance of the F0 cue among the multiple acoustic cues.
We found experimental evidence that supported the existing understanding of attentional modulation in speech perception in which the relative importance among multiple cues in identifying the

Kong and Lee

403

stop laryngeal categories systematically interacted with attentional interruption. This also conforms to the processing of multi-level linguistic information in relation to attention investigated in
the work of Mattys and colleagues (2004, 2005). The distractor hindered listeners from attending
to the acoustic cue operating with greater attention. Reversely, the distractor facilitated the use of
the acoustic cue that functioned with less attention in differentiating stop categories, although it
was limited to the tense-lax contrast. While previous studies (e.g., Gordon et al., 1993) documented evidence of the relationship confined to the group-averaged tendency, the present study
attempted to look into the magnitude differences of the relationship among individual listeners.
When the individual variations as well as the group-averaged tendency were taken into careful
consideration, the degrees of the distractor effect on the cue systematically varied across individual
listeners depending on their perceptual reliance on the cue; the listeners with greater perceptual
dependency on the cue were affected relatively more by the attentional interruption compared to
those with less perceptual dependency on the cue.
Specifically, regarding the perception of the Korean stops, this attentional modulation in the current dual-task paradigm yielded a pattern in which the Korean listeners' use of VOT was reduced
under the distracting attention condition, indicating that VOT was engaged with high attentional
demand in perceiving the Korean stops. The listener's sensitivity to VOT was significantly alleviated
with limited attention not only for a tense versus non-tense (i.e., aspirated and lax stops) contrast but
also for a lax versus aspirated stop contrast, which is known to be manifested with a greater overlap
of VOT values in its production. Notably, the effect sizes of the distractor varied across individual
listeners being consistently correlated with their perceptual reliance on the VOT cue in the absence of
the attentional distractor. This pattern of VOT interaction with attention resources supports that VOT
is a primarily informative acoustic cue to a stop laryngeal contrast among the Korean listeners.
Unlike the VOT cue, the presence of the distractor did not weaken the Korean listeners' use of
F0 in identifying the stops with a three-way laryngeal contrast, suggesting that the F0 cue for the
Korean listeners did not operate with as high level of attention as the VOT cue did. By contrast, the
distractor either increased the listeners' reliance on the F0 cue in differentiating the lax from the
tense stops or failed to influence the use of F0 in perceiving the tense-aspirated and lax-aspirated
contrasts. For the contrast pair of the tense-lax stops, the effect of the distractor systematically
varied across the individual listeners. Specifically, listeners relatively more sensitive to the F0 cue
increased their perceptual dependency on F0 when faced with the distractor. Taken together, the
attentional modulation patterns in the perception of the Korean stops converged to show that the
VOT cue, not the F0 cue, functioned with a relatively higher level of attention, resembling the way
in which the VOT cue interplays with attention in processing the English stops (Francis et al.,
2008; Gordon et al., 1993; Whalen et al., 1993). The current findings did not support the claim
from previous production studies that F0 was a primary dimension that differentiated the Korean
laryngeal stops (e.g., Kang, 2014; Kim, 2013; Lee & Jongman, 2012; Silva, 2006), highlighting the
importance of considering both acoustic and perceptual patterns in describing cue primacy among
multiple acoustic cues.
One important contribution of the present study is our novel attempt to investigate the attentional
modulation in processing the multiple acoustic cues with careful consideration of individual variations. While the group-level assessment with averaging technique involved is useful, in nature, in
representing the central tendency of the sample populations, it was also fundamentally important to
look into the regularity present in the individual variations, particularly since widely varying phonetic
representations associated with the Korean stops are likely to be due to individual user inclinations
toward being conservative or progressive as to the changing cue weighting patterns under sound
change (e.g., Beddor, 2009, 2015; Harrington & Stevens, 2014; Schertz et al., 2015; Stevens &
Harrington, 2014). In the current observations of individual listeners in the listening condition

404

Language and Speech 61(3)

without a distractor (i.e., the neutral identification experiment condition), some listeners relied on F0
more than on VOT for a lax-aspirated contrast consistent with prior production studies where the
speaker-averaged production patterns of Korean stops exhibited clear separation between the two
categories along the F0 dimension. However, there were also other listeners who were more sensitive
to VOT than to F0 for the same pair. This variability cannot be viewed as sub-group characteristics
indexing listeners' age, gender or dialect, since our participants were a relatively homogeneous group
of speakers; they were young speakers from a narrow age range, born and raised in Seoul. Looking
into individual listeners prevented us from drawing conclusions solely based on the group-averaged
data, which might have been distorted by having listeners with a polarized pattern of using F0 and
VOT. Relevant to the current experimental paradigm, the individual-level examinations revealed
varying magnitudes of the distractor effect on the acoustic cue depending on individual listeners'
amounts of attention in processing the multiple acoustic cues. This was useful as secondary evidence
to confirm the interaction effect of attention with VOT and F0 whose model coefficients did not reach
the statistical significance level. If we had not explored the individual variation regarding the magnitude of the distractor effect, only sticking to the group pattern, the lack of the interaction effect associated with attention would have been left unanswered. Congruent with prior studies on the attentional
modulation on the multiple acoustic cues, the examinations exhibited the reduced role of one cue (i.e.,
VOT in Korean) under the distracting listening condition that functioned with greater attention
resources and the enhanced role of the other cue (i.e., F0 in Korean) in the distracting condition that
functioned with less attention. Our attempt to examine the individual variability in utilizing F0 and
VOT bears importance in broadening the analysis paradigm investigating the cognitive mechanism
of attentional modulation in processing multiple acoustic cues.
Given the relationship between the attentional distractor and the acoustic cue primacy demonstrated in the current study, it seems necessary to re-consider the claim that F0 is a primary cue for
the Korean stop laryngeal contrast, for which previous production studies assumed the emergence
of the tonal contrast in the stop distinction (e.g., Kang, 2014; Kim, 2013; Silva, 2006; Wright,
2007; Bang et al., 2015). As the previous perception studies observed the significant role of VOT
as well as F0, our current findings also confirmed that both cues were important in the distinction
of the lax stop from the other stops (e.g., Kang, 2010; Kang, 2014; Kong et al., 2011; Lee et al.,
2013). In addition to this previously reported perceptual tendency, we found from the dual-task
paradigm that VOT required a high level of attention resources, whereas F0 did not. This result
indicates that the role of F0 documented in recent production studies for the lax-aspirated contrast
might have been overestimated; conversely, the role of VOT might have been underestimated. The
present results do not necessarily argue against the status of F0 as an acoustic cue in the innovative
representation of the lax-aspirated stop categories. We simply believe that the seemingly discrepant results between the current perception study and prior production studies might be explained
by the nature of speech perception, which is more flexible than that of speech production, especially in the context of sound changes (e.g., Beddor, 2009, 2015; Francis et al., 2008). The current
evidence of VOT as a primary cue does not dispute the role of F0 that prior production studies have
described in the sound change of the stop laryngeal contrast in Korean. Because the attentional
distractor did not boost the perceptual reliance on F0 for the lax-aspirated stop pair, in particular,
we are not able to define F0 as a secondary cue in perception, as in Gordon et al. (1993). Rather,
the weak evidence of the enhanced role of F0 in the current perception study appears to suggest that
the sound change in the stop laryngeal contrast has not been stabilized in Seoul Korean. Given the
flexible nature of speech perception in processing rich phonetic information, our finding of greater
perceptual reliance on the VOT cue among the young population would reflect how individual
listeners accommodate a co-existence of conservative (VOT as a primary information) and innovative forms (enhanced F0 information) of the phonetic representation of stop categories. For

Kong and Lee

405

example, Korean listeners might attend to VOT even though they are innovative speakers (utilizing
primarily F0 over VOT in producing the lax and aspirated stops) because they are faced with various phonetic forms ranging from conservative to innovative in the course of communication with
others in the speech community experiencing the sound change.
To summarize, we found it useful to examine attentional modulation (cognitive interaction with
speech processing) in defining relative importance among the multiple acoustic cues in the speech
perception. Consideration of the listeners' attention mechanism interacting with the cues can be an
additional criterion in explaining the qualitative nature of the cue and exploring individual variations. In particular, sounds undergoing a change are likely to have a wide range of phonetic variants, which might be neglected with the population-typical approach treating the variant forms as
mere outliers. Careful consideration of individual-level trends would ensure that the quantitative
experimental research depicts the correct picture of the language use when faced with synchronic
and diachronic variations.

5 Conclusion
The present perception study on the three-way laryngeal contrast of Korean stops investigated
how attention interacted with listeners' differential uses of multiple cues in speech perception.
Based on the experimental paradigm manipulating the attentional conditions, both group- and
individual-level observations revealed that the Korean listeners' utilization of VOT was reduced
by the distractor, whereas F0 use was not consistently modulated with the distractor condition in
processing the stop laryngeal categories. This finding agreed with the relationship observed in
English stops, where a primary cue has been associated with reduced perceptual dependency
under degraded listening conditions. This would suggest that Korean listeners primarily rely on
VOT, but not on F0, in the perception of Korean stops. To conclude, this study is important in
that the perceptual mechanism related to attention was borne out in the Korean stops (matching
the previous assertions regarding English stops), by which the primary role of VOT was clarified
in the Korean stops.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors.

Note
1.

This tendency might serve as supporting evidence for recent arguments re-visiting the lax stop as a
default laryngeal category in the Korean stops (e.g., Kim & Duanmu, 2004), although further discussion
on the phonological status of the lax stop is beyond the scope of the current study.

References
Abramson, A. S., & Lisker, L. (1985). Relative power of cues: F0 shift versus voice timing. In V. A. Fromkin
(Ed.), Phonetic linguistics: Essays in honor of Peter Ladefoged (pp. 25-33). New York, NY: Academic
Press.
Bang, H., Sonderegger, M., Kang, Y., Clayards, M., & Yoon, T. (2015). The effect of word frequency on
the timecourse of tonogenesis in Seoul Korean. In Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. Glasgow, UK: University of Glasgow. Retrieved from http://www.yoonjungkang.
com/uploads/1/1/6/2/11625099/icphs2015_bangetal.pdf
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package
version 0.999999-0. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-roject.org/package=lme4

406

Language and Speech 61(3)

Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects
for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390-412.
Beddor, P. S. (2009). A coarticulatory path to sound change. Language, 85(4), 785-821.
Beddor, P. S. (2015). The relation between language users' perception and production repertoires. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Glasgow, UK: University
of Glasgow. Retrieved from https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/icphs-proceedings/
ICPhS2015/Papers/ICPHS1041.pdf
Bradlow, A. R., & Alexander, J. A. (2007). Semantic-contextual and acoustic-phonetic enhancements for
English sentence-in-noise recognition by native and non-native listeners. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 121(4), 2339-2349.
Cho, T., Jun, S.-A., & Ladefoged, P. (2002). Acoustic and aerodynamic correlates of Korean stops and fricatives. Journal of Phonetics, 30(2), 198-228.
Choi, T.-H., Kim, G.-H., & Han, J.-I. (2013). Perception and production of English stops by tonal and nontonal Korean dialect speakers. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 134(6), EL541-EL546.
Cohen, M. R., & Maunsell, J. H. (2009). Attention improves performance primarily by reducing interneuronal
correlations. Nature Neuroscience, 12(12), 1594-1600.
Cutler, A., & Carter, D. M. (1987). The predominance of strong initial syllables in the English vocabulary.
Computer Speech & Language, 2(3-4), 133-142.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual Review of Psychology, 64(1), 135-168.
Francis, A. L., Ciocca, V., Wong, V. K. M., & Chan, J. K. L. (2006). Is fundamental frequency a cue to aspiration in initial stops? Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 120, 2884-2895.
Francis, A., & Nusbaum, H. C. (2002). Selective attention and the acquisition of new phonetic categories.
Journal Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(2), 349-366.
Francis, A., & Nusbaum, H. C. (2009). Effects of intelligibility on working memory demand for speech perception. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 71(6), 1360-1374.
Francis, A. L., Kaganovich, N., & Driscoll-Huber, C. (2008). Cue-specific effects of categorization training
on the relative weighting of acoustic cues to consonant voicing in English. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 124(2), 1234-1251.
Gordon, P. C., Eberhardt, J. L., & Rueckl, J. G. (1993). Attentional modulation of the phonetic significance
of acoustic cues. Cognitive Psychology, 25(1), 1-42.
Han, M. S., & Weitzman, R. S. (1970). Acoustic features of Korean/P, T, K/,/p, t, k/and/ph, th, kh. Phonetica,
22(2), 112-128.
Harrington, J., & Stevens, M. (2014). Editors' introduction: Cognitive processing as a bridge between phonetic and social models of sound change. Laboratory Phonology, 5(1), 1-8.
Holt, L., & Lotto, A. (2006). Cue weighting in auditory categorization: Implications for first and second language acquisition. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119(5), 3059-3071.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards
logit mixed models. Journal of memory and language, 59(4), 434-446.
Kang, K. (2010). Generational differences in the perception of Korean stops. Journal of the Korean Society
of Speech Sciences, 2(1), 3-10.
Kang, K.-H., & Guion, S. (2006). Phonological systems in bilinguals: Age of learning effects on the stop
consonant systems of Korean-English bilinguals. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119(3),
1672-1683.
Kang, K., & Guion, S. (2008). Clear speech production of Korean stops: Changing phonetic targets and
enhancement strategies. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 124(6), 3909-3917.
Kang, Y. (2014). Voice onset time merger and development of tonal contrast in Seoul Korean stop: A corpus
study. Journal of Phonetics, 45(10), 76-90.
Kim, C.-W. (1965). On the autonomy of the tensity feature in stop classification. Word, 21(3), 339-359.
Kim, M. (2004). Correlation between VOT and F0 in the perception of Korean stops and affricates. In Proceedings
of the 8th international conference on spoken language processing, Jeju Island, Korea, pp. 49-52.

Kong and Lee

407

Kim, M-R. (2013). VOT merger and F0 maximization between the lax and aspirated stop in sound change.
The Linguistic Association of Korea Journal, 21(2), 1-20.
Kim, M-R, Beddor, P., & Horrocks, J. (2002). The contribution of consonantal and vocalic information to the
perception of Korean initial stops. Journal of Phonetics, 30(1), 77-100.
Kim, M-R., & Duanmu, S. (2004). "Tense" and "lax" stops in Korean. Journal of East Asian Linguistics,
13(1), 59-104.
Kingston, J., & Diehl, R. L. (1994). Phonetic knowledge. Language, 70(3), 419-494.
Kong, E., Beckman, M. E., & Edwards, J. (2011). Why are Korean tense stops acquired so early: The role of
acoustic properties. Journal of Phonetics, 39(2), 196-211.
Kong, E., & Yoon, I. (2013). L2 proficiency effect on the acoustic cue-weighting pattern by Korean L2 learners of English: production and perception of English stops. Journal of the Korean Society of Speech
Sciences, 5(4), 81-90.
Lavie, N., Hirst, A., De Fockert, J. W., & Viding, E. (2004). Load theory of selective attention and cognitive
control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(3), 339.
Lee, H., & Jongman, A. (2012). Effects of tone on the three-way laryngeal distinction in Korean: An acoustic
and aerodynamic comparison of the Seoul and South Kyungsang dialects. Journal of the International
Phonetic Association, 42(2), 145-169.
Lee, H., Politzer-Ahles, S., & Jongman, A. (2013). Speakers of tonal and non-tonal Korean dialects use different cue weightings in the perception of the three-way laryngeal stop contrast. Journal of Phonetics,
41(2), 117-132.
Lisker, L., & Abramson, A. (1964). A cross-language study of voicing in initial stops: Acoustical measurements. Words, 20(3), 384-442.
Mattys, S.L. (2004). Stress versus coarticulation: Toward an integrated approach to explicit speech segmentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 30(2). 397-408.
Mattys, S. L., White, L., & Melhorn, J. F. (2005). Integration of multiple speech segmentation cues: A hierarchical framework. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134(4), 477-500.
Mattys, S. L., & Wiget, L. (2011). Effect of cognitive load on speech recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 65(2), 145-160.
Morrison, G. (2007). Logistic regression modelling for first and second language perception data. In M. J.
Sole, P. Prieto, & J. Mascaro (Eds.), Segmental and prosodic issues in Romance phonology (pp. 219-
236). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1997). The possible-word constraint in the segmentation of continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 34(3), 191-243.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved from http://www.R-project.org/
Repp, B. H. (1983). Trading relations among acoustic cues in speech perception are largely a result of phonetic categorization. Speech Communication, 2(4), 341-361.
Schertz, J., Cho, T., Lotto, A., & Warner, N. (2015). Individual differences in phonetic cue use in production
and perception of a non-native sound contrast. Journal of Phonetics, 52, 183-204.
Schertz, J., Cho, T., Lotto, A., & Warner, N. (2016). Individual differences in perceptual adaptability of foreign sound categories. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 78(1), 355-367.
Silva, D. (2006). Acoustic evidence for the emergence of tonal contrast in contemporary Korean. Phonology,
23(20), 287-308.
Stevens, M., & Harrington, J. (2014). The individual and the actuation of sound change. Loquens, 1(1), e003.
Summerfield, Q., & Haggard, M. (1977). On the dissociation of spectral and temporal cues to the voicing
distinction in initial stop consonants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 62(2), 435-448.
Vuilleumier, P., & Driver, J. (2007). Modulation of visual processing by attention and emotion: windows on
causal interactions between human brain regions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481), 837-855.
Whalen, D. H., Abramson, A. S., Lisker, L., & Mody, M. (1993). F0 gives voicing information even with
unambiguous voice onset times. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 93(40), 2152-2159.

408

Language and Speech 61(3)

Wright, J. (2007). The phonetic contrast of Korean obstruents. PhD Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Yu, A. C. L. (2010). Perceptual compensation is correlated with individuals' `autistic' traits: Implications for
models of sound change. PLoS One, 5(8), e11950. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011950
Yu, A. C. L. (2016). Vowel-dependent variation in Cantonese /s/ from an individual-difference perspective.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139(4), 1672-1690.
Yu, A. C., Grove, J., Martinovic, M., & Sonderegger, M. (2011). Effects of working memory capacity and
"autistic" traits on phonotactic effects in speech perception. In Proceedings of the International Congress
of the Phonetic Sciences XVII, Hong Kong, pp. 2236-2239.

