749275
research-article2018

LAS0010.1177/0023830917749275Language and SpeechRenwick and Nadeu

Language
and Speech

Article

A Survey of Phonological Mid
Vowel Intuitions in Central Catalan

Language and Speech
2019, Vol. 62(1) 164-204
(c) The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830917749275
DOI: 10.1177/0023830917749275
journals.sagepub.com/home/las

Margaret E L Renwick

University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA

Marianna Nadeu

Independent researcher, Reus, Spain

Abstract
Catalan, like other Romance languages, has two pairs of phonemic mid vowels (/be/ "well" vs.
/b/ "lamb"; /os/ "bear" vs. /s/ "bone"). However, these contrasts do not function like others in
the language: they are partially phonologically conditioned, and evidence shows that words may
be pronounced with different mid vowels by speakers of the same variety or even by the same
speaker. Spanish may influence this instability, as first-language Spanish Catalan-Spanish bilinguals
struggle to perceive and produce the contrast. This paper investigates the mid vowel contrasts
in an Internet survey of vowel height judgments in 220 words by 146 Central Catalan-speaking
individuals who also self-reported their language history. Results confirm that certain phonological
contexts condition mid vowel height, typically favoring low mid judgments; where phonological
conditioning occurs, speakers judge quality with increased consistency and confidence. Many
words lacking phonological conditioning environments, however, are variable across speakers.
Bilingualism levels and age have an effect: among Catalan-dominant participants, choice of mid
vowel is affected by age, while participants with the highest Catalan dominance have greatest
confidence in their intuitions. Variably-judged words are also phonetically variable, indicating a
word-specific association between strength of phonological representation and realization.
Keywords
Phonological contrast, phonological conditioning, Catalan, language dominance, mid vowels

1

Introduction

This paper presents a study examining phonological intuitions of native Central Catalan speakers.
Specifically, we focus on native speaker judgments of vowel height in Catalan mid vowels /e   o/
in a particular set of lexical items. Our study is neither a production task nor a canonical perception

Corresponding author:
Margaret E. L. Renwick, Department of Linguistics, University of Georgia, 240 Gilbert Hall, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Email: mrenwick@uga.edu

Renwick and Nadeu

165

task, but rather it directly queries judgments of vowel height among literate speakers of Catalan.
This technique permits the collection of data from a large number of speakers over a short period
of time, using an Internet-based platform.
Many psycholinguistic studies have focused on Catalan-Spanish bilingual speakers' ability to
perceive the mid vowel contrasts of Catalan (Bosch, Costa, & Sebastian-Galles, 2000; Bosch &
Ramon-Casas, 2011; Navarra, Sebastian-Galles, & Soto-Faraco, 2005; Pallier, Bosch, & SebastianGalles, 1997; Pallier, Colome, & Sebastian-Galles, 2001; Sebastian-Galles, Vera-Constan, Larsson,
Costa, & Deco, 2009), often as a function of their age or order of acquisition (Bosch & SebastianGalles, 2003; Ramon-Casas, Swingley, Sebastian-Galles, & Bosch, 2009; Sebastian-Galles &
Soto-Faraco, 1999), arguing that initial exposure to Spanish reduces sensitivity to them, because
that language does not share the mid vowel contrasts. In spite of this, recent research shows that
monolingual Spanish speakers are sensitive to the phonetic distinction between low and high mid
vowels (due to phonologically conditioned vowel laxing) associated to a singular-plural distinction in some varieties of Spanish (Henriksen, 2017).1
Our line of work, on the other hand, considers the possibility that beyond the effects of bilingualism on vowel acquisition and perception, the lexical specification of mid vowels in many
Catalan words is inherently variable, even among Catalan-dominant speakers. At least as early as
1906, variation in the realization of mid vowels in Catalan has been attested especially in learned
words, though not exclusively (Fabra, 1906). At the same time, in many words, mid vowel quality
is claimed to be predictable based on surrounding phonological characteristics (Wheeler, 2005).
Together, we argue, these two properties may indicate a relatively weaker phonemic distinction
between the high and low mid vowels (also close and open, respectively) in Catalan compared to
other vowels, creating a scenario in which speaker awareness of the contrast may be reduced, or
variable, because it only rarely signals a lexical distinction. Such a scenario is supported by recent
results showing that the mid vowel distinctions are not perceived as categorically as others in
Catalan, though this is affected by language use (Mora, Keidel, & Flege, 2011). Furthermore, the
instability of mid vowel contrasts in other Romance languages, including French (Fagyal, Kibbee,
& Jenkins, 2006; Landick, 1995; Trubetzkoy, 1939) and Italian (Renwick & Ladd, 2016), suggests
that the influence of Spanish may not be the only factor contributing to variability in mid vowel
production in Catalan.
The present paper extends investigations of mid vowel variation in Catalan from the speaker's
perspective, incorporating phonological factors into a survey of vowel height intuitions that also
queries participants' confidence in judgment and their own abilities to produce and perceive the
mid vowel contrasts. Our results confirm that many words receive consistent judgments, as predicted by their morphophonological properties, but in a subset of words, judgments are highly variable. We also find that respondents' confidence, adherence to prescriptive models (based on
etymology and on phonological conditioning), and self-reported use of the contrast is related to
their level of dominance in Catalan versus Spanish.

1.1 Survey-based studies of phonological intuition
In previous work (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016), we have shown that individual Catalan-dominant
speakers may misjudge the mid vowel that they use in specific words, and/or alternate between use
of the close and open mid vowels across repetitions of a word. In this complementary study, we
investigate whether certain words are more variable in mid vowel height across individual speakers. Although speakers in the first study did sometimes misjudge vowel height in their own speech,
they were largely accurate; thus, we suppose that participants' judgments in the present study are
similarly accurate, though they also reported certainty levels for each judgment.

166

Language and Speech 62(1)

Linguists often make judgments about language, based on their own intuition, or by listening to
others' pronunciation, sentence structure, lexical choices, etc. However, quantitative studies relying on participants' explicit judgments of phonological intuition are relatively rare. Below, we situate this project among studies that rely on linguistic judgments, and describe other work that has
collected judgments similarly to the present study.
Anecdotal observations by theoreticians, alongside native speaker intuitions, have long been an
anchor of linguistic argumentation about the nature of sound patterns, syntax (Schutze, 1996), and
other aspects of grammar. However, dependence on the sole intuition of a researcher, or dictionary
writer, may obscure variation across native speakers, an issue that can be mitigated by techniques
in which stimuli are presented to a sufficiently large population that is naive to the purpose of the
study, in a random order, producing results that support tests of statistical significance (Wasow &
Arnold, 2005). Speaker preferences, given explicitly or implicitly, reveal important native-speaker
knowledge, for instance about morphophonological generalizations (Berko, 1958), phonological
well-formedness based on phonotactics (Hay, Pierrehumbert, & Beckman, 2003), wordlikeness
(Frisch, Large, & Pisoni, 2000; Frisch & Zawaydeh, 2001), and syllable structure (Cote &
Kharlamov, 2010; Tilsen & Cohn, 2016). The fact that intuitions reflect actual linguistic performance, particularly in the case of well-attested and robust contrasts, supports the validity of using
judgments, even in the absence of corresponding production data, to observe trends within and
across speakers. On the other hand, when a contrast is weak, due for example to its low functional
load, the presence of phonological conditioning (Renwick & Ladd, 2016), or to a near-merger or
impending merger (Labov, Karen, & Miller, 1991; Labov, Yaeger, & Steiner, 1972), speakers'
intuitions may be unreliable.
Our goal is to test for behavioral trends across a large group of speakers; but, since we hypothesize that speakers will not behave uniformly (see Section 1.2), this work is linked to elicitations
of language usage intended to understand variation across geographic space and time. Within sociolinguistics, where the goal is to uncover variation rather than settle on a single norm, data may be
collected through written surveys, distributed by mail or other means (Chambers, 1994, 1998a,
1998b; Nagy, 2001; Schilling, 2014). Many dialectology surveys of linguistic variation have been
carried out as interviews in which participants respond to questions about their language use, often
by field researchers visiting their home (Kurath & McDavid, 1961; McDavid & O'Cain, 1980;
Pederson, McDaniel, & Adams, 1986), with the notable exception of Martinet's (1945) work on
French, collected from officers in a World War II prison camp. Specifically for Catalan, CarreraSabate (2006) used single-answer questions to examine the variable realization of pretonic vowels
in word-initial position in Western Catalan. She complemented her study with a perception test in
which participants "were asked to discriminate possible phonetic differences" (Carrera-Sabate,
2006, p. 20) and to reflect upon their language use and community norms. The same methods were
applied in a study of the alternation between [] and [a] in compound words (Carrera-Sabate,
2005).
On the other hand, data for the Atlas of North American English (Labov, Ash, & Boberg, 2006),
documenting speech variation in the USA and Canada, were gathered via recorded telephone calls,
while more recent studies, like ours, gather judgments via Internet-based studies (Garcia, 2015;
Walker, Garcia, Cortes, & Campbell-Kibler, 2014). The method used here to collect data was in
fact more explicitly judgment-based than the aforementioned sociolinguistic studies. We rely on
the fact that Catalan speakers are taught the mid vowel distinctions in school, and that they know
terms for referring to the high and low mid vowels.
In this way, our study is most similar to questionnaires used to gather pronunciation data for
dictionaries, including the Dictionary of American Regional English (Cassidy & Hall, 1985). For
the first and second editions of his Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (Wells, 1990, 2000), J. C.

Renwick and Nadeu

167

Wells conducted polls of pronunciation preferences in specific English words, ultimately gathering
judgments from nearly two thousand respondents who provided demographic information on their
sex, age, and regional origin along with their "pronunciation preferences"--for example, whether
zebra is pronounced with a stressed /e/ or /i/, and whether scone rhymes with cone or con (Wells,
1999a, 1999b, 2003).2 Countering the possibility that speakers' actual pronunciation may not be
reflected in their responses, Wells argues that questions of this type involve phonemic distinctions
and thus are well above the threshold of typical linguistic awareness, unlike allophonic aspects of
English such as aspiration of stops or the prevalence of syllabic nasals. In a descriptive statistical
analysis, Wells shows generational differences that he argues illustrate language change in progress. A similar questionnaire focused on American English was prepared and analyzed by Shitara
(1993), highlighting variation within that variety but also with respect to British English.

1.2 Distribution of mid vowels in Catalan
Central Catalan has seven stressed vowels: /i e  a  o u/. In unstressed position, several contrasts
are neutralized: /e  a/ surface as [], while /o  u/ are realized as [u], and /i/ remains [i] (Mascaro,
2002). The phonological nature of the vowels under study (/e / and /o /) is evidenced by the existence of minimal pairs involving these contrasts: venen [be.nn] "they come" versus venen [b.
nn] "they sell"; os [os] "bear" versus os [s] "bone." However, despite the high mid and low mid
vowels being contrastive, Mascaro (1984, 2008, 2010) and Wheeler (2005) noticed that their distribution seems to be partially phonologically conditioned.
Based on alternations like modest [muest] "modest" ~ modestia [mustj] "modesty" and
carbo [kro] "carbon" ~ carbonic [krnik] "carbonic," Mascaro (1984) postulated that prestressing suffixes regularly open the stressed mid vowel in the root, but not other stressed vowels
(sulfur [sulfur] "sulphur" and sulfuric [sulfuik] "sulphuric").3 Given that many of the prestressing suffixes in Mascaro (1984) contained a posttonic high front vocoid, Wheeler (2005) examined
whether it was the high vowel in the posttonic syllable that conditioned the realization of the
stressed vowel. He concluded that there is a "virtually categorical" neutralization of mid vowels
(Wheeler, 2005, p. 44) before posttonic [i, j], such that only low mid vowels can appear before
them (geni [.ni] "genius," gremi [.mi] "guild"; odi [.i] "hate," Jordi [r.i] "George").
He linked this to a much more subtle tendency for low mid vowels to be favored before vowels /u,
o/ in words with penultimate or antepenultimate stress (he presented many counterexamples to that
tendency, though). Mascaro (2008) provided more evidence to support both of Wheeler's (2005, p.
44) observations.
Apart from those conditioning factors (i.e., presence of a prestressing suffix or of a posttonic [i]
or [j]), immediate context also plays a role in the distribution of the front mid vowels. This is due
to a quite complex historical evolution during which the front mid vowels exchanged positions
(Rasico, 1993). To simplify, we can say that Latin ,  > Vulgar Latin /e/ > Central Catalan // (but
Spanish /e/) and Latin  > Vulgar Latin // > Central Catalan /e/ (Spanish /i e /) (Alkire & Rosen,
2010). The change from Vulgar Latin /e/ to Catalan // (involving an intermediate step //, still
preserved in Majorcan Catalan) was quite systematic, whereas the change from // to /e/ was
blocked in some contexts (Rasico, 1981). Based on these historical developments, Wheeler (2005)
noted that, synchronically, /e/ cannot appear before /l/ (Lat. vla: Cat. vela [b.l], Sp. vela [be.
la] "sail"; but also Lat. ml: Cat. mel [ml], Sp. miel [miel] "honey"), /r/ plus vowel (Lat. crru:
Cat. cerro [s.ru], Sp. cerro [e.ro] "(fiber) ball"; but also Lat. trra: Cat. Terra [t.r], Sp. Tierra
[tie.ra] "Earth"), or /r/ followed by a coronal consonant (Lat. vrde: Cat. verd [brt], Sp. verde
[be.e] "green, m."; but also Lat. crtu: Cat. cert [srt], Sp. cierto [ie .to] "true, m."). He added
that /e/ is also avoided before [], //, /f/, and /sk/.

168

Language and Speech 62(1)

Table 1. Conditioning contexts for Catalan mid vowels.
Prestressing suffix

Posttonic [i, j]

Before /r, l/

Before [], /, f, sk/

After []

/, /

/, /

//

//

/e/

Whilst all the contexts mentioned so far condition the presence of a low mid vowel, there is one
other context described by Wheeler (2005, p. 41) that raises the front mid vowel. Specifically, a
palatal lateral tends to raise the immediately following front mid vowel (llebre [e.] "hare,"
from Lat. lpr, cf. Sp. liebre [lie.e]), although Wheeler noted a couple of exceptions. The
contexts that favor either high mid or low mid vowels are summarized in Table 1.
Despite the presence of these patterns, other authors (Badia i Margarit, 1968, 1969a, 1969b,
1970a, 1970b; Fabra, 1906; Recasens, 1993) have emphasized the lack of stability of Catalan mid
vowels. Badia i Margarit (1969a, 1970b) and Recasens (1993) give lists of words that show alternation between high mid and low mid vowels in the same dialect (Central Catalan) across and/or
within speakers. These lists were compiled by the authors through observation of spontaneous oral
speech and texts. Regarding the latter case, Badia i Margarit (1968, 1970a) studied the rhymes of
19th-century and 20th-century poems and concluded that those between non-identical mid vowels
(e.g., /e/ with //) were common. In fact, imperfect rhymes are also attested in medieval poetry
(Coromines, 1974, p. 219) and traditional (Badia i Margarit, 1969b) and contemporary songs.
Recasens (1993) also compiled an extensive list of words and suffixes that contain either low or
high mid vowels depending on the speaker, and claimed that two normative pronunciations have to
be accepted for some words, rather than just one.
While the sources of this inter- and intraspeaker variation have not been systematically studied,
Recasens (1993) ventured that they might include analogy, Spanish influence, or the existence of
stress-induced vowel neutralizations. Extensive and continued contact with Spanish, which has only
one mid vowel height, might be eroding the mid vowel contrasts in Catalan. In addition, he posited
that the fact that some infinitives (e.g., arrencar [rka] "to pluck," galopar [lupa] "to gallop")
do not reveal the identity of the vowel in root-stressed forms may result in unclear intuitions on the
part of the speaker (see also Badia i Margarit, 1970b). According to Badia i Margarit (1970b),
another possible source of confusion is the alternation of low and mid high vowels in words that are
morphologically related (pes [ps] "weight" versus peso [pezu] "(I) weigh"). Finally, the existence
of important differences in the distribution of mid vowels across Catalan dialects has been proposed
as another potential source of variation (Mora & Nadeu, 2012; Wheeler, 2005).

1.3 Research questions
The main goal of this study is to investigate the phonological intuitions of native Central Catalan
speakers regarding the distribution of high mid and low mid vowels. More specifically, we seek
to evaluate generalizations about the almost categorical distribution of mid vowels in certain
contexts as well as observational data that suggest a high degree of variability for certain words.
We do so by testing words with the relevant phonological contexts and words extracted from
Recasens' (1993) and Badia i Margarit's (1969a, 1970b) lists of variable words. We predict that
our participants will exhibit more agreement and more certainty in their choices in words whose
mid vowels are phonologically conditioned than in those described as having variable mid vowel
height.
Previous claims indicate that younger speakers in urban areas tend to use high mid vowels
where older speakers produce low mid vowels (Recasens, 1993); or that, even within the same city,

169

Renwick and Nadeu

Table 2. Distribution of Nonvariable words by conditioning factor, separately by front and back vowels.
Conditioning factor

Front

Back

Immediate context
Posttonic [i, j]
Prestressing suffix
Posttonic [i, j] + Prestressing suffix
Total

20
15
05
5
40

NA4
20
13
6
39

speakers vary in their percentages of use of the mid vowels (Lleo, Benet, & Cortes, 2007); and
many studies demonstrate that Spanish-dominant speakers have difficulties with the Catalan mid
vowel contrasts (e.g., Bosch et al., 2000; Pallier et al., 1997). This study thus also sets out to test
how much interspeaker variation exists (i.e., to what extent speakers disagree on the mid vowel
height of a given word or set of words), and to test the strength of speaker intuitions about mid
vowel height for most words. We predict that interspeaker variation will occur, and that most intuitions will be strong. In addition, we explore the role of dominance in Catalan, as self-assessed
through a bilingual language history questionnaire, on vowel height choice and certainty of judgment. In particular, we test whether age and dominance in Catalan correlate with rate of low mid
vowel choice. We also test whether age and dominance in Catalan correlate with vowel height
certainty. Our results will extend and expand upon previous work examining speaker-specific correspondences between intuitions and acoustics (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016), both through comparison to the intuitions gathered in that work, and by testing whether words that exhibit greater
intraspeaker variation are also more acoustically variable.

2

Methods

2.1 Materials and procedure
Our stimuli were grouped into three categories of words. Two categories were based on the previous literature (see Section 1.2): "Nonvariable" and "Variable" words. In Nonvariable words, the
phonological context is said to condition mid vowel height (in all cases but one, the context, immediate or not, is expected to trigger a low mid vowel). The Variable words we tested were extracted
from published lists of words having variable realizations (allowing both low and high mid vowels) in the same dialectal area or even as produced by the same speaker (Badia i Margarit, 1969a,
1970b; Recasens, 1993). The third category comprised words tested in a previous experiment
(Nadeu & Renwick, 2016) that paired speakers' intuitions with their own productions (we refer to
these words as "Tested" words) in order to start exploring inter- and intraspeaker variability in mid
vowel realization.
We selected a total of 220 words: 40 words x 2 conditions (Variable and Nonvariable) x 2 mid
vowel sets (Front, Back), plus 30 Tested words x 2 sets. All words, including their condition within
the study, are listed in Appendix A. Table 2 shows the distribution of Nonvariable words by subcondition. One word with a stressed back vowel (coreograf "choreographer") from the Nonvariable
condition was excluded from all analyses due to experimenter error in the way it was presented in
the survey. In addition, llengua "language" was accidentally included twice, as Nonvariable (due
to the immediate context, see Section 1.2) and as Variable (as mentioned in several sources). It is
ultimately analyzed as Nonvariable, based on its treatment by participants. The total number of
words analyzed is thus 218. Also note that a Nonvariable word with a front mid vowel (nervi

170

Language and Speech 62(1)

"nerve" with a posttonic /i/) was mentioned as a Variable word in one of the sources discussed in
Section 1.2 (Badia i Margarit, 1970b).
The words belonging to the category Tested constituted a subset of the words included in Nadeu
and Renwick (2016). In that study, stimuli were chosen so that they met certain requirements in
terms of word length, syllable structure, immediate phonological context (for ease of segmentation), and following vowel, but no attention was paid to whether words had been identified as variable previously or whether they exhibited one of the vowel lowering contexts. Among the subset
included in the current study, 13 Tested words (out of 60) also fell in other categories (words with
a front vowel: 5 Nonvariable, 5 Variable words; words with a back vowel: 3 Variable words). In the
analyses, we indicate when these 13 words are included in the Variable or Nonvariable conditions
and when they are considered as part of the Tested condition. The remaining 47 Tested words (see
Appendix A) have no known phonological trigger of vowel height, nor are they reportedly variable
in the literature, so we have no prediction regarding the height of their stressed mid vowels.
For each word, a unique, meaningful sentence was created so that the meaning of the target word
was clear from the context. Note that Catalan orthography does not always provide information on
mid vowel height: /e/ and // are both represented by <e>; /o/ and //, by <o>. When a word requires
a stress mark following the Catalan spelling conventions, a different diacritic is used for the open mid
and the close mid vowels (/e/ = <e> and /o/ = <o>; // = <e> and // = <o>). However, most words do
not carry stress marks. In order to reduce the influence of orthography on participants' judgments, in
words with orthographical stress marks (which indicate prescriptive mid vowel height), stress marks
were removed.6 The stressed vowel in all target words was bolded and underlined.
Two survey lists were created, each containing 120 words (40 per condition). The two lists only
overlapped minimally, with ten words belonging to the Tested category repeated. This allowed us to
survey a wide number of the 210 target items studied previously (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016), while
maintaining a smaller number of 20 total lexical items judged across the widest possible number of
speakers, including those in the previous study. All the other words were only presented in one list or the
other. The surveys were administered online using Qualtrics, which ensured that the number of participants responding to each list was balanced, and presented the sentences to each participant in a randomized order. Beneath each sentence, a scale with the following six responses was presented to collect
speakers' judgments: "Clearly Open"; "Maybe Open"; "Open or Close"; "Maybe Close"; "Clearly
Close"; and "I don't know this word." The possible responses were listed from left to right. In total, four
surveys were created, using each of the two word lists in the two possible orders of responses (from left
to right: from "Clearly Open" to "Clearly Close", and from "Clearly Close" to "Clearly Open"), to
control for a possible response bias derived from the disposition of the different categories on the screen.
Following this section, participants answered a series of questions about the mid vowel contrasts (whether they think they produce a contrast between high mid and low mid vowels, whether
they find it easy to determine what mid vowel height a word has, and whether they are aware that
variation in mid vowel use across speakers exists; see Appendix B). Given that no adult monolinguals of Catalan exist, participants also completed the Bilingual Language Profile questionnaire
(BLP) (Birdsong, Gertken, & Amengual, 2012), which includes questions about participants' (selfassessed) language history, use, proficiency, and attitudes. The output score can range from -218
(monolingualism in Spanish) to +218 (monolingualism in Catalan), where 0 would represent perfectly balanced bilingualism. We report participants' BLP scores in Section 3.1.

2.2 Participants
Participants were recruited through advertisements in social media, emails sent to several Catalan
universities, and word of mouth. A link to the web-based survey was included in the emails and

Renwick and Nadeu

171

advertisements that were distributed. Any person 18 years of age or older was allowed to complete
the survey.
We obtained 242 complete responses, collected over approximately one month. Of these, we
selected for analysis those from speakers of Central Catalan who were born and had lived most of
their lives in Central Catalan-speaking areas (n = 146). We decided to exclude speakers of other
dialects of Catalan because there were not enough responses per dialect to draw any meaningful
comparisons and it is known that the distribution of mid vowels varies importantly across dialects.
It is worth noting, however, that even within the Central Catalan-speaking areas, variation concerning the mid vowels is found, such that one or both contrasts are merged in some places (Recasens,
2014; Recasens & Espinosa, 2009). Some of our participants were from Girona, where the contrast
between /o/ and // is neutralized.
The mean age of the 146 speakers finally included in the analyses is 30.31 (standard deviation
(SD) = 10.5; range = 18-72). The survey took approximately 30 min to complete (mean (M) = 45.8;
SD = 153.7; range = 9.8-1749.7).7

2.3 Data processing and analysis
We first ensured the validity of our data by analyzing the BLP score data in relation to participants'
responses to metalinguistic questions about the mid vowel contrasts, using Pearson's product
moment correlations.
The effect of condition on vowel height judgments was explored by focusing on the distribution
of responses by condition. We conducted tests to determine whether it is the case that Nonvariable
words are more consistently judged to have a certain vowel across speakers. Fleiss' Kappa tests
(Fleiss, 1971) were used to evaluate the level of agreement among survey respondents for each
word. Labels for each judgment were created by collapsing the judgment categories of "Clearly
Open" and "Maybe Open" into a single "Open" category; likewise for "Close" judgments. A category "Other" combined the "Close or Open" and "I don't know the word" options. Labels were
collapsed in this way primarily for two reasons. First, our possible responses combine vowel height
and certainty. By collapsing across "Clearly" and "Maybe" responses we are limiting the analyses
to vowel height independently of degree of certainty. Second, "Maybe" responses were very scarce.
A by-word summary of participants' responses, which uses the categories "Close," "Open," and
"Other," appears in Appendix C.
Responses were coded for each word's condition (Nonvariable, Variable, and No Prediction)
and vowel set (Back vs. Front). The No Prediction condition includes the 47 Tested words that
were not also coded as Variable or Nonvariable. Data from all three conditions were compiled into
a single data set, and the test was run across each list (List 1 vs. List 2) separately, using the flag
"detail = TRUE" in R's kappam.fleiss() command to gain separate scores for each condition
and response type across both front and back vowels.8 In addition, the factors that affected probability of Close versus Open responses were explored through a logistic mixed-effects regression,
which was run, like all the other tests, in R (R Core Team, 2000), using the glmer() function of
the lme4 package (Bates & Maechler, 2009, p. 4).
Degree of judgment certainty (whether speakers selected "Clearly" vs. "Maybe" responses) was
also modeled using logistic mixed-effects regression. In addition, the relationship between speakers' judgments (height distinctions and degree of certainty) and several factors was explored
through correlations.
Finally, the data obtained in the present study were examined in light of the results from Nadeu
and Renwick (2016). As noted in the Introduction, a subset of the stimuli (Tested words) was taken
from that earlier study. We compared the judgments elicited by those stimuli in the present study,

172

Language and Speech 62(1)

Figure 1. Histogram of the Bilingual Language Profile questionnaire scores of the 146 participants
(positive values indicate dominance in Catalan).

against mismatches between participants' intuitions of mid vowel height and their actual phonetic
realizations observed in the previous study. The mismatches were obtained through k-means clustering, which assigns individual data points to one of a specified number of clusters (here, two)
based on their characteristics (in this case, normalized first formant (F1) and second formant (F2)
values). We applied k-means clustering separately to front and back mid vowels. Using the classification yielded by the k-means clustering, we calculated the number of times that the acoustics of
a token did not match the participant's intuition regarding phonological vowel height; see Nadeu
& Renwick (2016) for more information.

3

Results

3.1 Participant characteristics
As noted in Section 2.2, only responses from participants who were born and raised in Central
Catalan-speaking areas were considered (n = 146). The selected speakers still represented a variety
of geographical locations, ages, and degree of Catalan dominance. Language dominance was
assessed by means of the BLP. Our participants obtained a mean BLP score of 69.06 (SD = 47.74;
range: -72.01-148.80). These values represent an extensive range of Catalan-Spanish bilingualism, encompassing both Spanish- and Catalan-dominant individuals as well as balanced bilinguals.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of BLP scores, which reveals that Catalan-dominant speakers (BLP
> 0) outnumber Spanish-dominant ones among the participants.
Between the vowel judgment survey and the BLP, participants answered a few questions about
the mid vowel contrasts. Participants indicated how confident they were that they produced the
/e - / and /o - / distinctions in two separate questions (1 = "I believe I do not distinguish them"
and 10 = "I am sure I distinguish them"), how easy it was for them to determine whether a word
had a low mid versus high mid vowel (1 = "Very difficult" and 10 = "Very easy"), and whether they
had noticed that speakers vary in their mid vowel use (1 = "I have never noticed that" and 10 = "I
have noticed that many times"). The scatterplots in Figure 2 show the distribution of the answers
to these four questions.
Figure 2 displays participants' self-reported degree of confidence that they produced the mid
vowels distinctly ("Back Mid Vowel Distinction": M = 8.75, SD = 1.87; "Front Mid Vowel
Distinction": M = 8.89, SD = 1.71). The scatterplots show a concentration of answers toward the

Renwick and Nadeu

173

Figure 2. Scatterplots of responses (ranging from 1 to 10) to each of the four questions gauging
participants' awareness of mid vowel contrasts. Responses are jittered vertically to avoid overplotting.

upper end of the scale, indicating that, in general, participants are confident that they produce the
mid vowel contrasts. Values below 5, indicating that speakers were not so sure or less confident
that they produced the distinction, are scarce, and the lowest value in the scale (1 = "I believe I do
not distinguish them") was not selected by any participant. In addition, the upper right scatterplot
reveals that most speakers can easily determine which mid vowel a word has, again with most
values concentrating in the higher end of the scale (M = 8.47, SD = 2.08). These responses are an
assurance that participants are capable of providing judgments, which yield the bulk of the data
analyzed in the following subsections. Finally, the lower right scatterplot shows that most participants are aware of variation in the distribution of mid vowels, such that two speakers may disagree
in which mid vowel they assign to the very same word (M = 9.02, SD = 1.82). Very few speakers
reported not being aware of such variation. This shows that the phenomenon under study is salient
enough that linguistically naive speakers are aware of it.
The responses to the four questions concerning mid vowel contrasts are positively, although
weakly, correlated with BLP scores, as shown in Table 3. As BLP scores increase (indicating higher
dominance in Catalan), participants feel more confident that they can distinguish between low mid

174

Language and Speech 62(1)

Table 3. Results of the Pearson's product moment correlation between Bilingual Language Profile
questionnaire (BLP) scores and responses to the four questions aimed at gauging participants' awareness of
mid vowel contrasts.
Comparison

r

p-value

BLP score--back mid vowel distinction
BLP score--front mid vowel distinction
BLP score--ease of height distinction
BLP score--awareness of variation

0.24
0.28
0.20
0.25

< 0.01
< 0.001
< 0.05
< 0.01

and high mid vowels. Participants with higher BLP scores also report finding it easier to decide
which mid vowel a word has and having noticed variation more frequently.
Taken together, the participant characteristics reported here indicate that the judgment data were
obtained from speakers with a reasonable level of Catalan dominance and a reasonable level of
confidence that they were able to complete the main task of the experiment. Nonetheless, we
restrict the remainder of our analysis to judgments provided by the 128 participants who are
Catalan-dominant (BLP > 0) speakers of Central Catalan varieties. We take this step because it is
known that dominance in Catalan versus Spanish affects performance on mid vowel distinctions,
and because our research focus is the stability of the mid vowel contrasts within the Catalanspeaking community, not across Catalan- versus Spanish-dominant populations. In the following
subsections, we analyze mid vowel judgments, relating those responses to the participants' characteristics reported here.

3.2 Open versus close distinction
The total counts of responses from Catalan-dominant participants (n = 15,300) are plotted in Figure
3, separated by condition and front-back distinction. A cursory observation reveals a clear distinction between words in the Nonvariable category and words in the other two conditions. The No
Prediction category includes most of the words that were previously tested in an acoustic study of
the mid vowels (see Section 2.1). As noted there, some of those words had either the phonetic
context to be included in the Nonvariable group or had been listed as Variable. The No Prediction
group excludes those that were recoded as belonging to one of the other two categories.
In the Nonvariable category, we note a preponderance of "Clearly Open" answers, as predicted.
Recall that the Nonvariable condition consists of words where the phonetic context predicts mid
vowel height, such that the low mid vowels are expected. For the back vowels, the second most
frequent answer is "Maybe Open." However, for the front vowel set, "Clearly Close" judgments
outnumber "Maybe Open" answers. This pattern is due to the fact that that one of the contexts
included for the front vowels triggers raising, rather than lowering (see Table 1). More specifically,
the Nonvariable condition includes five words that begin with the palatal lateral //, which, according to Wheeler (2005), has a raising effect on the front mid vowels. Out of the five words included,
two (lleixa "shelf " and lleig "ugly") have that predictor only, and "Clearly Close" or "Maybe
Close" responses make up over 85% of the judgments that they received.
For the remaining three //-initial words, the situation is a bit more complex. In llengua "word,
tongue" and llenya "firewood," the consonants following the stressed vowel ([] and //, respectively) trigger vowel lowering, which conflicts with the effect of the preceding consonant. The
results show that these two words behave differently. Llenya is clearly Nonvariable, and the effect
of // is obvious (95% "Clearly Close" and "Maybe Close" answers). Llengua, however, behaves

Renwick and Nadeu

175

Figure 3. Counts of Catalan-dominant participants' responses by condition, separated by front and back
mid vowel sets.

like a Variable word (Badia i Margarit, 1969a, 1970b; Recasens, 1993), with slightly more close
(66%) than open answers. The fifth word, llei "law," is included in Recasens's (1993) list of variable words. Its behavior, nevertheless, does not show much variability: over 82% "Clearly Close"
and "Maybe Close" judgments. To sum up, the tendency to assign a close /e/ following // is quite
strong, as shown in four of the five words that have this context.
Turning to the No Prediction and Variable conditions, the patterns are comparable across the
front versus back dimension. The most frequent answer is "Clearly Close"; and the second most
frequent, "Clearly Open" (see Figure 3), contrasting with the behavior exhibited by the Nonvariable
words. In addition, there is not such a clear bias toward one of these responses as in the Nonvariable
condition. The similar surface patterns between the No Prediction and Variable conditions mask
important differences in the degree of agreement across speakers between these two conditions,
which are explored in Section 3.5.
Figure 3 shows that in the vast majority of cases participants selected one or the other height.
"Close or Open" responses, indicating that they did not know which mid vowel height to assign or
thought the word could be pronounced either way (despite being familiar with the word), are scarce
(n = 319/15,300; 2.1% of the data). Table 4 shows the counts of words grouped by the percentage
of ambiguous ("Close or Open") responses. In fact, only one word (consell "advice") received
more than 10% ambiguous responses, indicating that participants strongly prefer to select a single,
fixed vowel height rather than a variable height.9
In sum, participants are generally able to make a judgment one way or another, and tend to
refrain from using the "Close or Open" response. Out of 219 words, only 25 (11.4%) elicited more
than 5% of ambiguous responses. Ambiguous responses are included in the Fleiss' Kappa tests
presented below, but are excluded in the remaining analyses.

176

Language and Speech 62(1)

Table 4. Number of words with ambiguous responses by condition.
Condition

Words with no
ambiguous responses

Words with 0-10%
ambiguous responses

Words with over 10%
ambiguous responses

Total words

Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable

36
23
19

48
24
68

0
0
1

84
47
88

To determine the amount of agreement raters obtained in each of the three conditions, two
Fleiss' Kappa tests were run: one on each of the two survey lists. Remember that we collapsed
"Clearly Open" and "Maybe Open" responses into a single "Open" category. The same was done
for the "Close" answers.
The Fleiss' Kappa results (Table 5) show that for Nonvariable words, the highest, almost perfect
kappa scores obtain with the label "Open," both for List 1 (kappa = 0.895) and List 2 (kappa =
0.917). For Nonvariable words, the "Unknown" and "Close" labels have very low (though still
significant) kappa scores, reflecting the very sporadic distribution of those responses in that classification. One exception is for Nonvariable Front "Close," which includes the handful of words
conditioned to have a close vowel (llenya, llei, etc.). Among the No Prediction words, kappa scores
are lower, but still represent substantial (or almost perfect, in one case) agreement. Finally, the
Variable words show the lowest kappa scores, with moderate (or substantial) agreement. Responses
of "Unknown," collapsing "Close or Open" and "I don't know the word" answers, are rare and thus
have low kappa scores throughout.
The factors affecting individual judgments of mid vowel height by Catalan-dominant participants were evaluated in a logistic mixed-effects regression, whose output is shown in Table 6.
The binomial dependent variable in the model, fit by maximum likelihood, was Response, coded
broadly as either "Open" or "Close." The total number of responses considered was 14,950,
while the smaller number of responses (350) given as "I don't know the word" or "Close or
Open" were not considered due to their sparseness, representing 2.3% of responses. Fixed factors were: Vowel Frontness (Front vs. Back); Condition (Nonvariable, Variable, and No
Prediction); BLP score; Age (years); Sex (Male or Female); List (1 or 2, treated as a factor); and
Response Order (left to right: "Close" to "Open" or "Open" to "Close"). Additionally, an interaction between Vowel Frontness and Condition was included. Random intercepts were fit for each
participant, and the continuous variables BLP score and Age were rescaled to z-scores.10 An
early model additionally included an interaction of BLP score with Age, but this was removed
due to its lack of significance.
Based on descriptive observation of the data and reports in the phonological literature, it was
predicted that an increase in "Open" responses would occur for words in the Nonvariable category,
particularly among speakers who had higher ages, and potentially also among speakers with higher
BLP scores even within this Catalan-dominant group. This would result in an increase in log odds
for "Open" responses under those circumstances. In the model presented here, a positive coefficient indicates an increased likelihood of a "Close" response, while a negative coefficient indicates
an increased likelihood of an "Open" response.
The model demonstrates that several phonological factors do significantly affect participants'
choice of mid vowel height, as do some demographic factors. The main effect of Frontness indicates that when participants are judging a back vowel, they are 0.47 times more likely to give an
"Open" response (e-0.755 = 0.47) in the Nonvariable condition. However, when the vowel was
Back, but the Condition was No Prediction or Variable, shown in the interaction terms, participants

177

Renwick and Nadeu

Table 5. Results of the two Fleiss' Kappa tests showing agreement across Catalan-dominant participants.
List 1

Nonvariable

Back

Front

No prediction

Back

Front

Variable

Back

Front

Open
Close
Unknown
Open
Close
Unknown
Open
Close
Unknown
Open
Close
Unknown
Open
Close
Unknown
Open
Close
Unknown

List 2

Kappa

z value

p-value

Kappa

z value

p-value

0.90
0.06
0.02
0.92
0.61
0.01
0.75
0.78
0.03
0.76
0.83
0.01
0.58
0.73
0.06
0.58
0.68
0.04

412.53
26.42
8.72
423.11
278.60
2.14
347.66
360.09
11.97
348.59
384.46
5.62
269.09
336.34
27.61
269.22
313.38
19.93

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.05
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

0.92
0.06
0.04
0.91
0.36
0.02
0.76
0.82
0.02
0.81
0.82
0.01
0.66
0.76
0.03
0.54
0.71
0.03

479.44
29.41
20.08
477.65
188.91
9.41
396.72
430.06
11.06
423.72
430.48
4.44
346.42
397.97
17.13
283.26
371.11
15.34

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

Table 6. Fixed effects from logistic mixed-effects regression evaluating likelihood of "Open" versus
"Close" response among Catalan-dominant speakers. The default levels of the categorical predictors are:
Frontness = Front; Condition = Nonvariable; Sex = Female; List = 1; Order = ["Open" to "Close"].
Variable

Coefficient

Standard error

z value

p (>|z|)

(Intercept)
Frontness = Back
Condition = No prediction
Condition = Variable
Bilingual Language Profile questionnaire score
Age
Sex = Male
List = 2
Order = ["Close" to "Open"]
Frontness = Back x Condition = No prediction
Frontness = Back x Condition = Variable

-2.06
-0.76
2.34
2.51
-0.01
-0.06
0.00
-0.04
-0.01
0.71
0.77

0.07
0.11
0.08
0.07
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.12
0.12

-29.11
-7.11
30.52
35.44
-0.48
-2.56
0.05
-0.71
-0.20
5.73
6.45

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.632
0.011
0.957
0.476
0.845
< 0.001
< 0.001

were more likely to give a "Close" response (log odds increased by 2.04 and 2.15 times, respectively). This is an initial statistical confirmation that participants responded differently to
Nonvariable words. The main effects for Condition provide additional support for this prediction:
a "Close" response was 10.35 times more likely in the No Prediction condition and 12.26 times
more likely in the Variable condition.
Turning to demographic factors, only Age had a significant effect on Response; in this case, an
increase in the independent variable resulted in an increase in "Open" responses. For Age (p <

178

Language and Speech 62(1)

0.05), a one-unit increase (one standard deviation, approximately 10.5 years) gave a likelihood
increase of 0.94 times for "Open" responses. However, BLP score was not significant (p = 0.632),
indicating that among Catalan-dominant speakers, the degree of dominance does not affect the
likelihood of an "Open" response. Sex was not significant (p = 0.957), showing that men and
women responded equivalently. The two survey-specific factors List and Order were also not significant (p = 0.476 and p = 0.845, respectively); this confirms that participants responded equivalently regardless of list and stimulus presentation order.
The results of this logistic regression model confirm the findings of our descriptive analysis
and Fleiss' Kappa tests; that is, participants responded differently to words in the Nonvariable
class than to words in the No Prediction or Variable conditions. The results also indicate an additional source of predictable variation, Age, which suggests that older speakers are more likely to
give "Open" responses than younger speakers. While the effect of BLP score trends in the same
way (its coefficient is negative, indicating an increased likelihood of Open response with an
increase in BLP score), it is not statistically significant. Additionally, the interaction of Age with
BLP score, among Catalan-dominant speakers, is not significant. The specific correlations of BLP
score and Age to the results were tested for front and back vowels separately (with separate correlations for List 1 and List 2, as they contain different words), but all correlations were found to
be non-significant (p > 0.05).

3.3 Certain versus not-certain distinction
While the previous section evaluates responses according to "Open" versus "Close" decisions, this
section considers whether phonological and demographic factors affect participants' certainty of
response. It is predicted that Nonvariable words, seen above to elicit more "Open" responses,
should elicit greater certainty from participants than No Prediction or Variable words. The effects
of BLP score and Age are also tested.
A logistic mixed-effects regression, again a generalized linear mixed model fit by maximum likelihood, was run using responses from Catalan-dominant speakers, similarly to the model in Table 6.
The binomial dependent variable was Certainty, collapsed into "Clearly" and "Maybe" responses;
these were created by combining "Clearly Open" and "Clearly Close" into the first category, and
"Maybe Open" and "Maybe Close" into the second. Again, responses of "I don't know the word" or
"Close or Open" were excluded. Fixed factors were: Condition (Nonvariable, Variable, and No
Prediction); BLP score; Age; Response (broadly, as above, either "Close" or "Open"); and Order of
Presentation. Random intercepts were fit for each participant, and scaled values of BLP score and
Age were used, as above. This was the most complex model that converged.
In this model, shown in Table 7, an increase in likelihood of "Clearly" responses is associated
with a negative coefficient, while an increase in the likelihood of a "Maybe" response is associated
with a positive coefficient.
As shown in Table 7, Condition does have a significant effect on participants' certainty, as do a
range of other factors. The effects for Condition indicate that "Maybe" responses do increase significantly for the No Prediction and Variable words, with respect to default Nonvariable words: the
odds of a "Maybe" response increase 1.31 times for No Prediction words, and 1.56 times for
Variable words. BLP Score has a significant effect (p < 0.01) in the opposite direction: as Catalan
dominance increases by one standard deviation, the likelihood of a "Clearly" response increases
0.53 times. The other demographic factor, Age, is associated with a small increase in "Clearly"
responses, but it is not significant (p = 0.161). Two other factors were tested, but do not reach significance: the category that participants chose ("Close" vs. "Open") has no significant effect (p =
0.225), nor does the order of stimulus presentation from left to right (p = 0.211).

179

Renwick and Nadeu
Table 7. Fixed effects from logistic mixed-effects regression evaluating likelihood of "Clearly" versus
"Maybe" response. The default level of Condition is Nonvariable, while the default level of Response is
"Open," and the default level of Order is ["Open" to "Close"].
Variable

Coefficient

Standard error

z value

p (>|z|)

(Intercept)
Condition = No prediction
Condition = Variable
Bilingual Language Profile questionnaire score
Age
Response = "Close"
Order = ["Close" to "Open"]

-3.95
0.27
0.45
-0.64
-0.32
0.09
-0.55

0.30
0.10
0.09
0.22
0.22
0.08
0.44

-13.31
2.81
5.01
-2.92
-1.40
1.21
-1.25

< 0.001
< 0.01
< 0.001
< 0.01
0.161
0.225
0.211

The results of this logistic regression model indicate, as predicted, that Nonvariable words are
more likely to elicit high judgment certainty from participants, an effect that is increased for individuals with a high BLP score. The significant effect of BLP score on Certainty was tested in further detail. Because the two different word lists, as well as front versus back vowels, may have
elicited different response patterns, four correlations were tested, between BLP and Certainty for
front and back vowels and for each list. A positive correlation was found between Certainty and
BLP score for front vowels in List 1, r = 0.24; t(58) = 1.9269, p < 0.05, but all other correlations
were insignificant (p > 0.05). Thus, there is only meager evidence that higher Catalan dominance
results in greater certainty of vowel height judgments, within a preselected group of Catalandominant individuals.

3.4 Certainty versus intuitions of Close-Open contrasts
It is hypothesized that speakers who have greater certainty about their vowel judgments in specific
words will also be more likely to give high scores to the post-survey questions regarding the mid
vowel contrasts. This was evaluated by calculating a speaker-specific certainty score, which was
matched to each participant's response to post-survey questions. The certainty score is the number
of "Clearly" responses given by each participant, as a percentage of total responses. Scores were
calculated separately for front and back vowels for two reasons: first, because some participants
are from Girona, where the back contrast is neutralized (Recasens & Espinosa, 2009); and second,
because speakers responded separately regarding their intuitions of the front versus back vowel
distinctions. Certainty scores were then correlated with responses to three post-survey questions:
participants' confidence of producing an /e - / distinction, their confidence of producing an /o - /
distinction, and their ease of discriminating the open and close vowels.
The results of these are plotted in Figure 4 and Figure 5. In both figures, it is clear that highconfidence responses of 10 are very common; participants had high certainty overall, as also
shown in Section 3.1. The mean responses regarding a distinction in pronunciation (Figure 4)
were 9.03 for front vowels (SD = 1.65) and 8.90 for back vowels (SD = 1.81). The mean
response regarding participants' ease of making the distinction (Figure 5) was 8.56 (SD = 2.08).
Participants' mean certainty scores were 89.14% for front vowels (SD = 20.39%) and 87.65%
for back vowels (SD = 19.98%). In each case the correlation is strong and positive, as summarized in Table 8. We must note, however, that the correlation may be partially due to our methods: since questions about the mid vowel contrasts were presented after participants had

180

Language and Speech 62(1)

Figure 4. Certainty score based on survey responses versus responses (ranging from 1 to 10) to
questions gauging Catalan-dominant participants' use of mid vowel contrasts. Responses are jittered
vertically to avoid overplotting.

Figure 5. Certainty score based on survey responses versus responses (ranging from 1 to 10) to
questions gauging Catalan-dominant participants' ease of making mid vowel contrasts. Responses are
jittered vertically to avoid overplotting.

completed the survey, it is possible that the responses to the questions were conditioned by
participants' performance in the survey itself. That is, participants may not have been aware of
the difficulty or ease with which they could distinguish between mid vowels before they completed the survey.

3.5 High-agreement and low-agreement words
Figure 3 shows that, particularly among words in the Variable and No Prediction categories,
responses of "Open" and "Close" were much more comparable in frequency (though with more
"Close" responses) than in the Nonvariable class, where "Open" responses dominate. However,

181

Renwick and Nadeu

Table 8. Results of the Pearson's product moment correlation between Certainty score and responses
to questions gauging Catalan-dominant participants' use and awareness of mid vowel contrasts.
Comparison

r

p-value

Front Certainty score--front mid vowel distinction
Back Certainty score--back mid vowel distinction
Front Certainty score--ease of height distinction
Back Certainty score--ease of height distinction

0.66
0.66
0.66
0.67

< 0.0001
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
< 0.0001

what is not revealed by Figure 3 is whether participants responded consistently to individual
words in the Variable and No Prediction classes, or whether there was a mixture of responses
for each word. If words classified as Variable deserve that label, they should show a mixture of
"Open" and "Close" responses, for example. To illustrate word-level patterns, the number of
responses of each of the four types ("Clearly Open," "Maybe Open," "Maybe Close," and
"Clearly Close") was transformed to percentages of the total number of responses and plotted
in Figure 6. For compactness and readability, Figure 6 includes only words with 85% or less
agreement by Catalan-dominant participants: thus 38 front-vowel words and 28 back-vowel
words are included, while the remaining 152 words are not shown. For each word, four percentages are represented: "Clearly Open"; "Maybe Open"; "Maybe Close"; and "Clearly Close."
Because the "Maybe" responses were found to be much more rare than "Clearly" responses,
they are shown as lines rather than points, for visual clarity near the bottoms of the plots. The
x-axis in both plots (Front and Back) is sorted by the "Clearly Close" measure (sorting by
"Clearly Open" would produce similar results). Point shape is determined by phonological
condition (Nonvariable, No Prediction, and Variable).
As Figure 6 shows, for both Front and Back vowels, there is a core of words that have lower, or
mixed, agreement on vowel height. These words, near the transition between high percentage of
"Clearly Close" and high percentage of "Clearly Open," range between 40% and 75% agreement
across participants. In other words, at least one in four participants would have a different judgment from the others. For some words, agreement is split nearly 50-50 among "Clearly Close" and
"Clearly Open" responses. These words therefore elicit variable responses, and indeed, the Variable
stimuli (square points) are heavily represented in this low-agreement zone, being far more common there than Nonvariable or No Prediction words.
This finding additionally illuminates a difference between the Variable and No Prediction
results in Figure 3: the apparently similar results are actually due to different patterns. In the
Variable condition, the same word may have different ratings, whereas in the No Prediction
condition, words tend to be labeled with one height category or the other. This is reflected in
the presence of many Variable words in the "transition zone" where the percentage of "Clearly
Open" and percentage of "Clearly Close" points cross one another, without many words from
other conditions.

3.6 Comparison with earlier acoustic study
The set of Tested words represents a subset of the stimuli from a previous study (Nadeu & Renwick,
2016) that compared speakers' pronunciations of mid vowels to their intuitions of height in the
same words. We now compare the intuitions and pronunciations acquired from those 14 speakers
to the survey data presented here. First, we examine whether participants in the two studies gave

182

Language and Speech 62(1)

Figure 6. Percentage response for four response types, per stimulus. For visualization, words shown
include only those with 85% agreement or less by Catalan-dominant speakers. Data are sorted from
lowest percentage of "Clearly Closed" answers (left side) to highest. "Maybe Open" and "Maybe Closed"
are plotted as lines only.

similar judgments. For each word, we calculated the percentage of "Open" survey responses
("Percent Open") in each study. For the survey data, this involved combining "Clearly Open" and
"Maybe Open" responses, while the previous study only allowed "Open" and "Close" (or "I don't
know") as responses. When percentage of "Open" responses is high, its inverse, percentage of
"Close" responses, is low; however, when participants' survey responses had low agreement, percentage of "Open" responses is intermediate (shown above in Section 3.5). Sixty words were
included in the Tested condition, but they could be mapped onto only 58 words in the previous
study. Our stimuli included the orthographic words pesa "weight / (s/he) weighs (v)" and pesca
"fishing (n) / (s/he) fishes (v)," which can both be either a noun or a verb. In the previous study, we
did not specify which part of speech we intended, but in the present survey, we elicited both noun
and verb explicitly (four separate lexical items). To compare the results, we mapped the words pesa
and pesca from the acoustic study onto the noun judgments in the survey results, because most
words in the previous study were unambiguously nouns, so we assume that speakers might have
treated pesa and pesca similarly.
Figure 7 shows the percentage of "Open" results for each word, across the two studies, plotted
against one another. It is clear that the results of the two studies correlate strongly with one another;

Renwick and Nadeu

183

Figure 7. Percentage of "Open" responses across two studies: survey data from Catalan-dominant
speakers (Survey) versus earlier study (Acoustic). Each data point represents one word, its shape coded by
Condition.

the correlation was very high for front vowels, r = 0.927, t(26) = 12.63, p < 0.001, and back vowels,
r = 0.928, t(28) = 13.18, p < 0.001. Thus, we can conclude that participants across the two studies
share intuitions for most lexical items tested here. There are a few intermediate points: among front
vowels, three words fall in between the two clusters. These are setze "sixteen" (No Prediction;
Survey: 70.00%; Acoustic: 4.88%), cresta "crest" (Variable; Survey: 70.59%; Acoustic: 26.83%),
and enceta "(s/he) starts (v)" (Variable; Survey: 46.88%; Acoustic: 63.41%). Among back vowels,
two words fall in neither cluster: sostre "ceiling" (Variable; Survey: 53.33%; Acoustic: 7.32%) and
flora "flora" (No prediction; Survey: 42.97%; Acoustic: 51.22%). Most of these words are expected
to be variable, though in two cases (setze and sostre) the acoustic study results show a strong preference for "Close" responses. We have no clear explanation for the divergence in judgments on
these two words across the two studies, but note that the acoustic study had a much smaller sample
of speakers (n = 14) and that the participants in the acoustic study were all born and raised in the
same city.
In the acoustic portion of the earlier study, speakers repeated each stimulus three times, and
k-means clustering was used to evaluate whether their productions were consistent and matched
their intuitions. When the cluster assigned by k-means did not match the height category assigned
by the speaker, a mismatch occurred; mismatches were counted across all speakers, for each word.
For comparison to the present study, it was hypothesized that words with an intermediate percentage of "Open" responses (a real mix of "Open" and "Close" responses) would, in the acoustic
study, be more likely to show a higher number of mismatches across speakers.
Indeed, this comparison found that survey words that have the lowest agreements and are maximally variable correspond to those with highest numbers of mismatches. This is shown in Figure 8.
Words that have either low or high percentage of "Open" responses, either below 25% or above 75%
on the vertical axis, strongly tend to have a low number of mismatches in the acoustic results--typically fewer than 15 across all speakers (out of 41 data points per word). However, words with low
survey agreement, between approximately 25% and 75% on the vertical axis, do tend to have a
higher number of mismatches (between 17 and 39 across speakers), affecting both front and back
vowels. These low agreement words, echoing the result in Figure 6, are few in number; but it is clear
that the degree of response mixture is highest in words that also have high mismatches. This indicates that variation does not only occur between speakers, but also within speakers.

184

Language and Speech 62(1)

Figure 8. Percentage of "Open" response score based on survey responses versus mismatch count from
previous acoustic study, per word. Responses are jittered to avoid overplotting.

4

Discussion

4.1 Summary
Participants were asked to identify the height of a stressed mid vowel in a series of words embedded in meaningful sentences. They tended to select "Clearly" responses more often than any other
category and only very rarely selected "Either Open or Close" responses, which suggests that
native speakers have clear intuitions for most words and that they are able to reflect metalinguistically on them. This is not surprising, given the fact that Catalan speakers learn to do this task in
school. Based on the ages of our participants, most of them would have learned to do it. In addition, the fact that they were able to complete the task indicates that they were familiar with the
terms used to distinguish the two mid vowel heights. More support for the reliability of speakers'
intuitions comes from questionnaire items in which the vast majority of participants reported
being very confident that they produced the mid vowel distinctions, as well as ease in distinguishing between close and open mid vowels. In addition, most speakers indicated they were well
aware of the existence of variation in mid vowel use across speakers. In other words, the type of
interspeaker variation that we analyze is obvious to most native speakers. Our analyses showed
that the answers to these survey questions correlate with BLP scores: the more Catalan dominant
a speaker is, the higher their degree of confidence that they produce mid vowel distinctions, the
easier they find it to distinguish close and open mid vowels, and the more aware they are of the
existence of variation.
Turning to the intuitions themselves, our analyses of responses by Catalan-dominant speakers
reveal that words in the Nonvariable condition show more agreement across speakers: the most
common answer, by far, is "Clearly Open." We can thus confirm that the distribution of mid vowels
in Catalan is partially conditioned by the phonological context, as proposed by Wheeler (2005) and
Mascaro (1984, 2008, 2010). More specifically, certain immediate (e.g., a following [l])

Renwick and Nadeu

185

and non-immediate (e.g., the presence of a posttonic [i] or [j]) phonological contexts co-occur
frequently with mid vowel lowering. While Mascaro (1984, p. 124) indicates that the effect of a
prestressing suffix is active, our data do not allow us to offer any insight into this matter. That is, it
is unclear, based on our data, whether the phonological conditioning that we observe is synchronically active or not. We also show that words listed elsewhere as variable and words for which no
predictions were made do not favor one height over the other, and they elicit lower degrees of
agreement across speakers. Therefore, our results also support impressionistic claims by Badia i
Margarit (1969a, 1970b) and Recasens (1993) that some words do not have a fixed vowel height,
as evidenced by inter- and intraspeaker variation within the same dialect. However, within our
Variable condition, some words are more variable than others, which was not predicted based on
this previous literature. Since some of the lists we consulted were based on non-systematic data
collection, it is possible that variability was over- or underreported for some words. Furthermore,
some of those lists were generated approximately fifty years ago. The variability of some of these
words in the Catalan-speaking population as a whole may have increased or decreased since then.
Unfortunately, we are not able to test these possible explanations using the present data.
Age, but not language dominance, was found to affect the likelihood of "Open" versus "Close"
answers. Older speakers are more likely to identify vowels as being open.
Participants' responses to our online survey did not only encode vowel height choice, but also
degree of certainty. We thus analyzed whether degree of certainty is mediated by word condition
and any demographic factors. The statistical analyses reveal that the No Prediction and Variable
conditions are associated with an increase in "Maybe" answers (i.e., less certainty). In addition,
language dominance has an effect: the higher the dominance in Catalan, the higher the degree of
certainty speakers expressed. As expected, certainty also correlated with participants' confidence
that they produced the mid vowel distinctions and with the ease with which they distinguished
open from close mid vowels.
We also plotted the degree of agreement across participants by word. While most words exhibit
high agreement (over 75% of speakers chose the same vowel height), some do not. Among those
that do not, words in the Variable condition are overrepresented. This indicates that words in the
Variable condition tend to be the most variable words in the survey.
Finally, we compared the degree of agreement of words in the Tested category to mismatches
between acoustic realization and speakers' intuitions for the same words collected in a previous
study (Nadeu & Renwick 2016). As expected, results of the current and previous studies correlate
well. Words that had mixed agreement showed larger numbers of mismatches.

4.2 Relevance to studies of bilingualism
The Catalan mid vowels have featured in a large number of studies on bilingualism. A common finding from these papers is that Catalan-dominant Catalan-Spanish bilinguals outperform Spanishdominant bilinguals when perceiving the contrast (Bosch et al., 2000; Pallier et al., 1997, 2001). Our
findings are relevant in light of this previous body of literature. We have shown that self-reported
confidence in one's production of, and distinction between, the mid vowels correlates positively
with dominance in Catalan. We have also demonstrated that these aspects correlate with strength of
intuitions (gauged by certainty in height choice). It seems likely that increased sensitivity to the
phonetic contrast results in greater ease in judging mid vowel height in individual words. Yet, it is
also possible that stronger intuitions and ease of retrieval impact perception of the contrast.
In any case, the results presented here highlight the importance of taking into account individual
speaker intuitions about their mental representations in certain phonetic studies. In fact, recent
studies show that participants' intuitions correlate with their productions (Tilsen & Cohn, 2016).

186

Language and Speech 62(1)

Bosch and Ramon-Casas (2011) examined front mid vowel production by two groups of speakers
who differed in their first language (L1). The initial analysis of formant data indicated that the L1
Spanish group produced a much smaller acoustic difference between the high and low mid vowels
than the L1 Catalan group. Yet, when the same data were analyzed taking into consideration the
actual vowel produced, not the one expected by the experimenters, no difference was found
between the two groups in the phonetic implementation of the contrast. Thus, Bosch and RamonCasas show that, when accounting for differences in mental representations, the actual realization
of the contrast does not vary across groups.
Bosch and Ramon-Casas (2011, p. 521) attribute the initial significant difference to "category
selection errors," probably due to "unstable representations of these vowels in their lexicon." In
discussing these and other findings, Simonet (2014, p. 36) talks about phonolexical representations
being less robust or not accurate in Spanish-dominant speakers. The latter terminology may be
more appropriate, because it is unclear whether we can talk of "errors" in phonological category
selection when there is so much interspeaker variability for some words.
The results we report here and in a previous study (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016) confirm the presence of variation in the lexical distribution of mid vowels across Catalan-dominant speakers of the
same dialectal variety. Different lexical distribution of the mid vowels in some words across speakers might point to the fact that the mid vowel phonological contrasts are somewhat special, being
not as strong as other contrasts. This interpretation is not new. A perception study (Mora et al.,
2011) comparing the identification of low mid versus high mid vowels to that of high mid versus
high vowels revealed that the former are perceived less categorically than the latter. A compressed
S-shaped identification curve for the mid vowels was also found in Pallier et al. (1997), although
that study did not compare the perception of mid vowels to that of other vowel pairs. Based on
these and other findings, Mora, Keidel, and Flege (2015) put forward the perceptual weakening
hypothesis, which claims that the mid vowel contrasts are debilitated due to both internal and
external factors.

4.3 Relevance to the notion of phonological contrast
As summarized in Section 4.1, our study has confirmed accounts describing the mid vowels as
highly conditioned by phonological context: native speaker intuitions favor open mid vowels in
particular in a variety of contexts. What are the implications of this pattern for the mid vowel contrasts themselves? On the one hand, the effects of phonological conditioning help to maintain a
distinction between the close and open vowels. Speakers remain highly aware of the presence of
high mid and low mid qualities, although it is unlikely that they are aware of the contexts in which
they select each one, for example that /, / are preferred in syllables preceding unstressed [i].
However, it is important to note that when a particular sound is phonologically conditioned, its
distribution becomes increasingly predictable, meaning that speakers need not depend on a lexical
specification of, for instance, vowel height to produce or expect the appropriate phonetic form. In
this situation, the presence of phonological conditioning effectively reduces the functional load of
the mid vowel contrasts: because the close and open qualities are already restricted to particular
contexts, there are few minimal pairs, and thus few lexical distinctions would be lost in the case of
merger (Hockett, 1966; Surendran & Niyogi, 2006). Such a case could be formally treated by
Hall's (2009) Probabilistic Phonological Relationship Model, an information-theoretic account of
contrast based on predictability of distribution. As shown by Wedel, Jackson, and Kaplan (2013),
contrasts with lower functional load are more likely to be lost to merger over time. However as
long as speaker awareness of the distinction persists, it is likely that among Catalan-dominant
speakers, a phonetic distinction will also be maintained.

Renwick and Nadeu

187

Another model exists for considering the effects of phonological conditioning on individual
contrasts: the Multidimensional Model of Phonemic Robustness (MMPR) (Renwick, 2014).
Proposed in light of the marginal contrast between Romanian /, /, this model incorporates three
sets of factors that can contribute positively or negatively to "the degree to which a given phone is
independent from other forces at work in the linguistic system" (Renwick, 2014, p. 182). A highly
independent, robust phoneme is used frequently, with few restrictions, across a variety of phonological and morphological contexts, while a less independent phone appears in restricted contexts,
to the extent that native speakers learn and rely on its co-occurrence with other sounds or structures. Phonological conditioning is one of three systemic factors identified by the MMPR, and it is
argued to detract from a phone's independence, while the presence of lexical contrast and high type
frequency would both have the opposite effect. Thus, phonological conditioning and the scarcity of
minimal pairs may detract from the independence of Catalan mid vowels from their typical contexts, while their type frequency across words (though not quantified here)11 is likely high. It is also
possible to evaluate the Catalan mid vowels with respect to the MMPR's phonetic factors: perceptibility and phonetic distinctness. It is clear that among Catalan-dominant speakers, the close and
open mid vowels remain highly perceptually distinct, contributing to their robustness. However, an
acoustic study of the mid vowels' distribution (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016) has shown that for some
speakers, the open and close vowels do not occupy distinct, non-overlapping portions of the vowel
space; rather, they produce a single cloud that spans a wide range of F1 values. While tokens at the
highest and lowest ranges are quite phonetically distinct, it can be unclear where the speaker's
intended dividing line is between open and close variants; thus, the role of phonetic distinctness in
maintaining the mid vowel contrasts is less clear. The MMPR also incorporates usage-based factors including morphologized uses (such as the heavy use of a phone in particular morphemes),
which detract from robustness by increasing context-based predictability, and token frequency,
which adds to a sound's robustness. In Catalan, the mid vowels are used in several frequent, stressbearing morphological suffixes: // is found in the productive suffix -et/eta (diminutive, e.g., caseta
"little house"), while -dor (pescador "fisherman") and -cio (publicacio "publication") have /o/.
Token frequency, like type frequency, has not to our knowledge been evaluated for Catalan, though
we hypothesize that the mid vowels enjoy frequent usage.
The MMPR offers a holistic gauge of the strength of a sound category, and based on how--or
in what way--a particular sound or contrast is robust, it is possible to make predictions.
Specifically, if two sounds are not in a strong relationship of contrast, their phonetic realization
and perception may be affected, particularly in contexts where one sound is highly predictable.
In Romanian, acoustic analysis of continuous speech has shown that the marginally contrastive
/, / distinction is severely diminished, with a phonetic near-merger. The contrast indeed has a
very low functional load, and results from automatic speech recognition experiments imply that
a merger would have little detrimental impact on word recognition (Renwick, Vasilescu, Dutrey,
Lamel, & Vieru, 2016).
In addition to filling out the portrait of how the Catalan mid vowel contrasts operate, our findings build on previous results that combined speaker-specific phonological intuitions with individual vowel production (Nadeu & Renwick, 2016). In that paper, we argued that, across 100
words with stressed mid vowels, there was only moderate interspeaker agreement on vowel height,
and that in a significant number of cases, speakers' intuitions did not match the acoustics of their
productions. The present study confirms, however, that there are words where there is little variability in judgments; these words, which nearly always contain open mid vowels, are very stable. In
the three Nonvariable words that were included in both studies, it is clear that speakers had few
intuition-production mismatches. These were: aterra "(it) lands," which was judged to have // by
12/14 speakers (with 6/41 acoustics-judgment mismatches); perdre "to lose" (12/14 // judgments,

188

Language and Speech 62(1)

with 6/41 acoustics-judgment mismatches); and verda "green, f." (13/14 // judgments, with 3/41
acoustics-judgment mismatches). These results lead us to hypothesize that the participants in the
present survey would also produce these words accurately (according to their intuition), with open
vowels. It also seems to be the case that among words without a specific context conditioning mid
vowel height, some words are more variable than others. We do not have a full explanation of why
these words are so variable, and more research is needed upon this point.
It seems that the contrasts among mid vowels, with respect to other vowels in the Catalan system, are less robust. It is easy to argue that this is a change due to increased contact with Spanish,
but in fact, similar patterns emerge across the Romance languages. As discussed in Nadeu and
Renwick (2016), certain varieties of French, Italian, and Portuguese, for instance, are undergoing
weakening of the mid vowel contrasts, meaning that they are partially neutralized or variable
across speakers (Dufour, Nguyen, & Frauenfelder, 2007; Fagyal, Hassa, & Ngom, 2002; Renwick
& Ladd, 2016; Wetzels, 1992). Similarly, not all Catalan varieties maintain both front and back mid
vowel contrasts (Recasens & Espinosa, 2009).

5

Conclusion

This study has confirmed that there is some phonological conditioning of mid vowels in Catalan,
in line with previous descriptions of vowel quality in the language. Where phonological conditioning occurs, speakers judge quality with increased consistency and confidence. It remains an
open question, which we leave for future research, whether this phonological conditioning is
synchronically active or restricted to a closed class of items for historical reasons. Other words
that lack phonological conditioning environments, however, are more variable in mid vowel
height. A second open research question is why some words are more variable than others.
Potential factors are lexical frequency, the source of the word (e.g., neologisms vs. native
Romance words; Cabre, 2009), or the effects of Spanish cognates on speakers' phonolexical
representations. We have shown that vowel choice is related to speaker age, and certainty of
judgment is related to language dominance. Specifically, older participants select low mid vowels more frequently. On the other hand, participants with higher Catalan dominance have greater
confidence in their judgments, selecting "Clearly Close" or "Clearly Open" more often than
participants with lower BLP scores. In general, though, a high degree of certainty is found
regardless of Catalan dominance level.
Our results suggest that the robustness of phonolexical representations may depend on language
dominance but also on word identity. Despite high levels of agreement on many words, especially
those with phonological conditioning, our survey confirms that variation in mid vowel height is
present in Catalan, to the point that even naive speakers are aware of it. Since this variation has
reached the threshold of speaker awareness, we argue that it affects the vowels' encoding in phonological representations, for instance broadening the phonetic range associated with their exemplar clouds. We also argue that in cases where vowel quality is highly predictable, for instance in
our Nonvariable stimuli, the vowel specification in speakers' representations may be less important
simply because context dictates vowel height. This result in particular builds on previous findings
that some words are variably produced even by the same speaker and that those words elicit greater
variation in judgments.
This research contributes to the larger question of how phonology and phonetics map to one
another. Phonological contrasts are traditionally treated as imposing discrete distinctions on a phonetic continuum, but our results demonstrate that apart from phonetic continuity, the phonological
distinction itself is not robust in all contexts. The continuous nature of vowel acoustics contributes
to the complexity of studying the relationship between their production and speakers' intuitions,

Renwick and Nadeu

189

which is a common theme across the studies mentioned here. When productions are collected, they
must still be classified, which may be done by the researcher either aurally or statistically. However,
because there can be substantial acoustic overlap of vowel distributions, it is possible that statistical methods introduce misclassifications; likewise, a listener's own language experience can
induce perceptual bias to an aural classification method. An alternative, which our research program explores, is to rely on speakers' judgments, which has the benefit of accessing their phonological intuitions. By using multiple techniques to classify vowels (e.g., speaker intuitions and
statistical or aural confirmation), we shed new light on the nature of Catalan mid vowel contrasts
and offer methods for increased precision in mapping abstract representations to acoustic reality.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the input of Miquel Simonet, the Editors, Associate Editor, and one anonymous
reviewer; and for the participation of the Catalan speakers and colleagues who completed and distributed the
survey itself.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This article was supported by funds from the University of Georgia Franklin College of
Arts and Sciences, and from the Department of Spanish, Italian and Portuguese at The Pennsylvania State
University, to which the second author was affiliated.

Notes
1. Catalonia is a bilingual community. Catalan speakers are bilingual in Spanish, although the time at which
each language is learned and the degree of dominance in each language varies across speakers. The 2013
language census report (Institut d'Estadistica de Catalunya, 2015) shows that 94.3% of the population
understands Catalan, while 99.8% understand Spanish. As far as speaking the language is concerned,
99.7% of the population self-reported being able to speak Spanish, whereas only 80.4% claim that they
can speak Catalan.
2. The survey and its results can be accessed at http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/wells/poll98.htm.
3. Prestressing suffixes are unstressed suffixes that move the position of the stress to the last syllable in the
root (simbol [simbul] "symbol," but simbolic [simblik] "symbolic").
4. We use "NA" to indicate that the immediate context is not relevant for back mid vowels.
5. The use of "0" reflects the fact that it is difficult to find front mid vowels that are conditioned only by a
prestressing suffix and not also by posttonic [i, j].
6. Shortly after our study was conducted in winter 2016, the Institut d'Estudis Catalans revised Catalan
spelling conventions to exclude most diacritic stress marks on minimal pairs (Institut d'Estudis Catalans,
2016). Our stimuli included three minimal pairs, some of which formerly required a diacritic mark, but
no longer do.
7. The range of completion times is so broad because participants were allowed to complete the survey in
multiple sessions. That is, they could stop their participation at any time and resume it at their convenience by returning to the Qualtrics website. We observe a few cases of clear outliers (> 500 min). The
median duration was 21.7 min.
8. By contrast, running each condition separately produced uninterpretable results due to the lack of variation in responses to Nonvariable words; for an explanation see Sim and Wright (2005).
9. The results are different if Spanish-dominant participants are included: approximately 30% more words,
across the three conditions, have at least one ambiguous response; in the Nonvariable condition, only 25
words have no ambiguous responses; No Prediction, only 10 words; and Variable, only 11 words have no
ambiguous responses.
10. A z-score transformation results in values centered on a mean of 0, indicating the number of standard
deviations that separate the raw value from the mean. For instance, the mean Bilingual Language Profile

190

Language and Speech 62(1)

questionnaire score 69.06 becomes 0, and a score that is one standard deviation away, that is, 47.74
points lower or higher, has a scaled value of either -1 or +1, respectively.
11. Rafel i Fontanals (1980) presents frequency data on the phonemes of Catalan, based on counts from a
10,000-word literary text. He finds that the mid vowels are less frequent than stressed /i/ and /a/, but more
frequent than stressed /u/, so they are not rare. However, as discussed elsewhere (Nadeu & Renwick,
2016, p. 39), the presence of interspeaker variability in vowel height judgment and production complicates the calculation of accurate frequency measures.

References
Alkire, T., & Rosen, C. (2010). Romance languages: A historical introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Badia i Margarit, A. M. (1968). Algunes normes de prosodia catalana, segons les rimes de Carles Riba. In A.
M. Badia i Margarit, Sons i fonemes de la llengua catalana (pp. 81-96). Barcelona, Spain: Publicacions
de la Universitat de Barcelona.
Badia i Margarit, A. M. (1969a). Algunes mostres de les igualacions E = e i O = o en el catala parlat de
Barcelona. In A. M. Badia i Margarit, Sons i fonemes de la llengua catalana (pp. 97-103). Barcelona,
Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat de Barcelona.
Badia i Margarit, A. M. (1969b). Rimas vocalicas anomalas en el Cancionero Popular Catalan. In A. M. Badia
i Margarit, Sons i fonemes de la llengua catalana (pp. 191-208). Barcelona, Spain: Publicacions de la
Universitat de Barcelona.
Badia i Margarit, A. M. (1970a). Les oppositions phonologiques E/e et O/o du catalan dans les rimes des
poetes modernes. In A. M. Badia i Margarit, Sons i fonemes de la llengua catalana (pp. 105-140).
Barcelona, Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat de Barcelona.
Badia i Margarit, A. M. (1970b). Les vocals toniques e i o en el catala de Barcelona [1970]. Assaig d'analisi
fonologica de la situacio actual. In A. M. Badia i Margarit, Sons i fonemes de la llengua catalana (pp.
141-190). Barcelona, Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat de Barcelona.
Bates, D., & Maechler, M. (2009). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes (Version R package
version 0.999375-32).
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. WORD, 14(2-3), 150-177.
Birdsong, D., Gertken, L. M., & Amengual, M. (2012). Bilingual language profile: An easy-to-use instrument
to assess bilingualism. COERLL, University of Texas at Austin. Retrieved from https://sites.la.utexas.
edu/bilingual/.
Bosch, L., Costa, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2000). First and second language vowel perception in early
bilinguals. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 12(2), 189-221.
Bosch, L., & Ramon-Casas, M. (2011). Variability in vowel production by bilingual speakers: Can input
properties hinder the early stabilization of contrastive categories? Journal of Phonetics, 39(4), 514-
526.
Bosch, L., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2003). Simultaneous bilingualism and the perception of a language-specific vowel contrast in the first year of life. Language and Speech, 46(2-3), 217-243.
Cabre, T. (2009). Vowel reduction and vowel harmony in Eastern Catalan loanword phonology. In M. C.
Vigario, S. Frota, & M. J. Freitas (Eds.), Phonetics and phonology: interactions and interrelations (pp.
267-285). Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Carrera-Sabate, J. (2005). Les vocals atones medials dels compostos en lleidata, entre la variacio i la imperceptibilitat. Estudis de Llengua i Literatura Catalanes, 7, 251-272. Barcelona: Abadia de Montserrat.
Carrera-Sabate, J. (2006). Some connections between linguistic change and the written language: The behavior of speakers aged 3 to 20. Language Variation and Change, 18(01), 15-34.
Cassidy, F., & Hall, J. (1985). The dictionary of American Regional English (Volumes I-IV). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Chambers, J. K. (1994). An introduction to dialect topography. English World-Wide, 15(1), 35-53.
Chambers, J. K. (1998a). Inferring dialect from a postal questionnaire. Journal of English Linguistics, 26(3),
222-246.

Renwick and Nadeu

191

Chambers, J. K. (1998b). Social embedding of changes in progress. Journal of English Linguistics, 26(1),
5-36.
Coromines, J. (1974). Lleures i converses d'un filoleg. Barcelona, Spain: Club Editor.
Cote, M.-H., & Kharlamov, V. (2010). The impact of experimental tasks on syllabification judgments: A case
study of Russian. In C. E. Cairns, & E. Raimy (Eds.), Handbook of the syllable (pp. 271-294). Leiden,
The Netherlands: Brill.
Dufour, S., Nguyen, N., & Frauenfelder, U. H. (2007). The perception of phonemic contrasts in a non-native
dialect. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 121(4), EL131-136.
Fabra, P. (1906). Les e toniques du catalan. Revue Hispanique, 15(47), 9-23.
Fagyal, Z., Hassa, S., & Ngom, F. (2002). L'opposition [e]-[] en syllabes ouvertes de fin de mot en francais
parisien: Etude acoustique preliminaire. In Actes des Journees d'Etudes sur la Parole (pp. 165-168).
Nancy, France.
Fagyal, Z., Kibbee, D., & Jenkins, F. (2006). French: A linguistic introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulletin, 76(5),
378-382.
Frisch, S. A., Large, N. R., & Pisoni, D. B. (2000). Perception of wordlikeness: Effects of segment probability
and length on the processing of non-words. Journal of Memory and Language, 42(4), 481-496.
Frisch, S. A., & Zawaydeh, B. A. (2001). The psychological reality of OCP-Place in Arabic. Language, 77(1),
91-106.
Garcia, C. M. (2015). Gradience and variability of intervocalic /s/ voicing in Highland Ecuadorian Spanish.
Ph.D. Dissertation. The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Hall, K. C. (2009). A probabilistic model of phonological relationships from contrast to allophony. Ph.D.
Dissertation. The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Hay, J., Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Beckman, M. E. (2003). Speech perception, well-formedness and the statistics
of the lexicon. In J. Local, R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.), Papers in laboratory phonology VI: Phonetic
interpretation (pp. 58-74). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Henriksen, N. (2017). Patterns of vowel laxing and harmony in Iberian Spanish: Data from production and
perception. Journal of Phonetics, 63(Supplement C), 106-126.
Hockett, C. F. (1966). The quantification of functional load: A linguistic problem (Memorandum No.
RM-5168-PR). Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Institut d'Estadistica de Catalunya. (2015). Enquesta d'usos linguistics de la poblacio. 2013. Barcelona,
Spain: Generalitat de Catalunya. Retrieved from http://idescat.cat/p/eulp2013.
Institut d'Estudis Catalans. (2016). Gramatica de la llengua catalana. Barcelona, Spain: Institut d'Estudis
Catalans.
Kurath, H., & McDavid, R. I. J. (1961). The pronunciation of English in the Atlantic states: Based upon the
collections of the Linguistic Atlas of the Eastern United States. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
Press.
Labov, W., Ash, S., & Boberg, C. (2006). The atlas of North American English: Phonetics, phonology, and
sound change: A multimedia reference tool. Berlin, Germany; New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
Labov, W., Karen, M., & Miller, C. (1991). Near-mergers and the suspension of phonemic contrast. Language
Variation and Change, 3(1), 33-74.
Labov, W., Yaeger, M., & Steiner, R. (1972). A quantitative study of sound change in progress (Volume 1).
US Regional Survey: University of Pennsylvania.
Landick, M. (1995). The mid-vowels in figures: Hard facts. French Review, 69(1), 88-102.
Lleo, C., Benet, A., & Cortes, S. (2007). Some current phonological features in the Catalan of Barcelona.
Catalan Review, 21(1), 279-300.
Martinet, A. (1945). La prononciation du francais contemporain: Temoignages recueillis en 1941 dans un
camp d'officiers prisonniers. Paris, France: Droz.
Mascaro, J. (1984). Aramon-aramonic: Una regla fonologica catalana no descoberta fins ara. In Estudis de
llengua i literatura catalanes oferts a R. Aramon i Serra (pp. 123-129). Barcelona, Spain: Curial.

192

Language and Speech 62(1)

Mascaro, J. (2002). Reduccio vocalica. In M.-R. L. Sola, J. Mascaro, & M. Perez Saldanya (Eds.), Gramatica
del catala contemporani (pp. 89-123). Barcelona, Spain: Empuries.
Mascaro, J. (2008). La distribucio de les vocals mitjanes toniques en catala central. Caplletra. Revista
Internacional de Filologia, 44, 79-102.
Mascaro, J. (2010). Efectes accentuals i sil*labics sobre la distribucio de les vocals mitjanes en catala central.
In M.-R. Lloret, & C. Pons (Eds.), Noves aproximacions a la fonologia i la morfologia del catala (pp.
405-426). Alacant, Spain: Institut Interuniversitari de Filologia Valenciana.
McDavid, R. I. J., & O'Cain, R. K. (1980). Linguistic atlas of the Middle and South Atlantic states (Volume
1). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mora, J. C., Keidel, J. L., & Flege, J. E. (2011). Why are the Catalan contrasts between /e/-// and /o/-// so difficult for even early Spanish-Catalan bilinguals to perceive? In M. Wrembel, M. Kul, & K. DziubalskaKoaczyk (Eds.), Achievements and perspectives in the acquisition of second language speech: New
Sounds 2010. Volume II (pp. 183-193). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang.
Mora, J. C., Keidel, J. L., & Flege, J. E. (2015). Effects of Spanish use on the production of Catalan vowels by
early Spanish-Catalan bilinguals. In J. Romero, & M. Riera (Eds.), The phonetics-phonology interface:
Sounds, representations, methodologies (pp. 33-53). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Mora, J. C., & Nadeu, M. (2012). L2 effects on the perception and production of a native vowel contrast in
early bilinguals. International Journal of Bilingualism, 16(4), 484-500.
Nadeu, M., & Renwick, M. E. L. (2016). Variation in the lexical distribution and implementation of phonetically similar phonemes in Catalan. Journal of Phonetics, 58(1), 22-47.
Nagy, N. (2001). Live free or die as a linguistic principle. American Speech, 76(1), 30-41.
Navarra, J., Sebastian-Galles, N., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2005). The perception of second language sounds in
early bilinguals: New evidence from an implicit measure. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31(5), 912-918.
Pallier, C., Bosch, L., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (1997). A limit on behavioral plasticity in speech perception.
Cognition, 64(3), B9-B17.
Pallier, C., Colome, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2001). The influence of native-language phonology on lexical access: Exemplar-based versus abstract lexical entries. Psychological Science, 12(6), 445-449.
Pederson, L., McDaniel, S. L., & Adams, C. M. (Eds.). (1986). Linguistic atlas of the Gulf states (Volumes
1-7). Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.
R Core Team. (2000). R language definition. Retrieved from ftp://155.232.191.133/cran/doc/manuals/rdevel/R-lang.pdf.
Rafel i Fontanals, J. (1980). Dades sobre la frequencia de les unitats fonologiques del catala. Estudis
Universitaris Catalans, 24, 473-496.
Ramon-Casas, M., Swingley, D., Sebastian-Galles, N., & Bosch, L. (2009). Vowel categorization during
word recognition in bilingual toddlers. Cognitive Psychology, 59(1), 96-121.
Rasico, P. D. (1981). Preliterary Catalan historical phonology. Ph.D. Dissertation. Indiana University,
Department of Spanish and Portuguese, Bloomington, IN, USA.
Rasico, P. D. (1993). Dues questions de fonologia diacronica catalana. In P. D. Rasico, Estudis i documents
de linguistica historica catalana (pp. 9-19). Barcelona, Spain: Curial.
Recasens, D. (1993). Fonetica i fonologia. Barcelona, Spain: Enciclopedia Catalana.
Recasens, D. (2014). Fonetica i fonologia experimentals del catala. Vocals i consonants. Barcelona, Spain:
Institut d'Estudis Catalans.
Recasens, D., & Espinosa, A. (2009). Dispersion and variability in Catalan five and six peripheral vowel
systems. Speech Communication, 51(3), 240-258.
Renwick, M. E. L. (2014). The phonetics and phonology of contrast: The case of the Romanian vowel system.
Berlin, Germany; Boston, MA: De Gruyter Mouton.
Renwick, M. E. L., & Ladd, D. (2016). Phonetic distinctiveness vs. lexical contrastiveness in non-robust
phonemic contrasts. Laboratory Phonology: Journal of the Association for Laboratory Phonology, 7(1),
1-29.
Renwick, M. E. L., Vasilescu, I., Dutrey, C., Lamel, L., & Vieru, B. (2016). Marginal contrast among
Romanian vowels: Evidence from ASR and functional load. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2016

Renwick and Nadeu

193

(pp. 2433-2437). San Francisco, CA. Retrieved from http://www.isca-speech.org/archive/
Interspeech_2016/pdfs/0762.PDF.
Schilling, N. (2014). Surveys and interviews. In R. J. Podesva, & D. Sharma (Eds.), Research methods in
linguistics (pp. 96-115). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schutze, C. T. (1996). The empirical base of linguistics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Sebastian-Galles, N., & Soto-Faraco, S. (1999). Online processing of native and non-native phonemic contrasts in early bilinguals. Cognition, 72(2), 111-123.
Sebastian-Galles, N., Vera-Constan, F., Larsson, J. P., Costa, A., & Deco, G. (2009). Lexical plasticity in
early bilinguals does not alter phoneme categories: II. Experimental evidence. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 21(12), 2343-2357.
Shitara, Y. (1993). A survey of American pronunciation preferences. In Speech Hearing and Language
(Vol. 7, pp. 201-232). University College London, Department of Phonetics and Linguistics.
Sim, J., & Wright, C. C. (2005). The kappa statistic in reliability studies: Use, interpretation, and sample size
requirements. Physical Therapy, 85(3), 257-268.
Simonet, M. (2014). Phonetic consequences of dynamic cross-linguistic interference in proficient bilinguals.
Journal of Phonetics, 43(1), 26-37.
Surendran, D., & Niyogi, P. (2006). Quantifying the functional load of phonemic oppositions, distinctive features, and suprasegmentals. In O. Nedergaard Thomsen (Ed.), Competing models of linguistic change:
Evolution and beyond (pp. 43-58). Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Tilsen, S., & Cohn, A. C. (2016). Shared representations underlie metaphonological judgments and speech
motor control. Laboratory Phonology: Journal of the Association for Laboratory Phonology, 7(1)(14),
1-33.
Trubetzkoy, N. S. (1939). Principles of phonology. (C. Baltaxe, Trans.). Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Walker, A., Garcia, C., Cortes, Y., & Campbell-Kibler, K. (2014). Comparing social meanings across listener
and speaker groups: The indexical field of Spanish /s/. Language Variation and Change, 26(2), 169-189.
Wasow, T., & Arnold, J. (2005). Intuitions in linguistic argumentation. Lingua, 115(11), 1481-1496.
Wedel, A., Jackson, S., & Kaplan, A. (2013). Functional load and the lexicon: Evidence that syntactic category and frequency relationships in minimal lemma pairs predict the loss of phoneme contrasts in
language change. Language and Speech, 56(3), 395-417.
Wells, J. C. (1990). Longman pronunciation dictionary. 1st edition. Harlow, UK: Longman.
Wells, J. C. (1999a). British English pronunciation preferences: A changing scene. Journal of the International
Phonetic Association, 29(1), 33-50.
Wells, J. C. (1999b). Pronunciation preferences in British English: A new survey. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (pp. 1-4). San Francisco, CA. Retrieved from http://www.
phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/wells/survey-report-icphs.pdf.
Wells, J. C. (2000). Longman pronunciation dictionary. 2nd edition. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Limited.
Wells, J. C. (2003). Pronunciation research by written questionnaire. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS 2003) (pp. 215-218). Barcelona, Spain. Retrieved from http://
www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/wells/03ICPhS_wells.pdf.
Wetzels, W. L. (1992). Mid vowel neutralization in Brazilian Portuguese. Cadernos de Estudos Linguisticos,
23(1), 19-55.
Wheeler, M. (2005). The phonology of Catalan. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

194

Language and Speech 62(1)

Appendix A. Stimuli
List 1 Stimuli
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

accessori
al*lucinogen
broquil
cardioleg
cefalopode
conic
coreograf
dimoni
divorci
egolatra
historia
introductori
lacrimogen
metodic
odi
ossi
propi
robatori
socioleg
territori
compota
espora
fora
fotre
postres
proposa
prosa
rossa
sostre
torca
brossa
crosta
dona
dona
esborra
flora
fossa
lactosa
lectora
polpa
barbacoa
broma
cofoi

accessory
hallucinogenic
broccoli
cardiologist
cephalopod
conical
choreographer
devil
divorce
narcissist
story
introductory
tear-producing
methodical
hatred
osseous
own
theft
sociologist
territory
compote
spore
outside
do, pop.
dessert
proposes
prose
blonde, f.
ceiling
bends
trash
scab/crust
woman
gives
deletes/erases
flora
grave, pit
lactose
reader, f.
pulp
bbq
joke
proud

Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back

Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Variable
Variable
Variable
(Continued)

195

Renwick and Nadeu
List 1 Stimuli. (Continued)
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89

decora
dojo
dropo
estona
flonjo
gol
hora
incomoda
mormola
mot
norma
penjoll
proa
rebolca
rostre
sorra
vota
alfabetic
ciencia
especia
exit
gel
gerro
guerra
higienic
imbecil
lleig
llenya
magisteri
mel
molestia
orenga
perla
renya
tebi
terra
violencia
aterra
cercle
esfera
peca
perdre
pesa (n)
pesa (v)
pesta
setze

decorates
abundantly
lazy person
(a) while
soft
goal
hour
makes uncomfortable
whispers
word
norm
pendant
prow
rolls around
face
sand
votes
alphabetic
science
spice
success
ice
vase
war
hygienic
idiot
ugly
firewood
teaching education
honey
annoyance, discomfort
oregano
pearl
scolds
lukewarm
land/earth
violence
lands
circle
sphere
piece
to lose
weight
weighs
plague
sixteen

Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front

Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Tested (Nonvariable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Nonvariable)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)

196

Language and Speech 62(1)

List 1 Stimuli. (Continued)
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120

vespa
barrera
cera
enceta
festa
neta
neta
pera
Pere
sencera
verda
anem
arregla
comenca
consell
decebre
dialecte
diumenge
entendre
escena
esquerp
feble
hotel
interessa
llengua
membre
penja
primavera
renta
rovell
sistema

wasp
barrier
wax
starts (specific)
party
clean
granddaughter
pear
Peter
entire
green
(we) go
fixes
starts
advice
disappoint
dialect
Sunday
understand
scene
fierce
weak
hotel
interests
language/tongue
member
hangs
Spring
washes
yolk
system

Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front

Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Nonvariable)
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable

197

Renwick and Nadeu
List 2 Stimuli
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166

aerodrom
bigoti
canodrom
carquinyoli
codi
consultori
diagnosi
divisori
dosi
geograf
indomit
ivori
matrimoni
negoci
oli
podoleg
psicoleg
soci
somni
xenofob
cotorra
estora
forta
grossa
orca
pota
rebota
reposa
sorda
torra
brossa
crosta
dona
dona
esborra
flora
fossa
lactosa
lectora
polpa
boa
brotxa
col*loca
destorba
dota
esbossa

airdrome
moustache
dog track
type of cookie
code
doctor's office
diagnose
dividing
dose
geographer
indomitable
ivory
marriage
business
oil
podiatrist
psychologist
member
dream
xenophobic
parrot
carpeta
strong, f.
large, f.
orca
leg (animal)
bounces
rests
deaf, f.
toasts
trash
scab/crust
woman
gives
deletes/erases
flora
grave, pit
lactose
reader, f.
pulp
boa
brush
puts
bothers
provides
sketches

Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back

Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable

198

Language and Speech 62(1)

List 2 Stimuli. (Continued)
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212

estrofa
flor
hola
idioma
molsa
mos
noces
olla
por
provoca
rodola
sobra
udol
zona
cel
encanteri
estel
expert
geni
gresca
herencia
homogeni
juguesca
lleixa
llengua
medi
misteri
obert
paciencia
regim
silenci
tel
vel
nervi
carpeta
cresta
espessa
pantera
pedra
pesca (v)
pesca (n)
pressa
tretze
zeta
barrera
cera

stanza
flower
hello
language
moss
bite (n)
wedding
pot
fear
provokes
falls spinning
is not necessary
howls
zone
sky
spell (n)
star
expert
genius
party
inheritance
homogeneous
bet
shelf
tongue, language
environment
mystery
open
patience
diet
silence
thin layer
veil
nerve
folder
comb (birds)
thick, f.
panther
stone
fishes
fishing
hurry
thirteen
zee
barrier
wax

Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front

Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Nonvariable)
Tested (Nonvariable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
(Continued)

199

Renwick and Nadeu
List 2 Stimuli. (Continued)
Number

Word

Translation

Backness

Condition

213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240

enceta
festa
neta
neta
pera
Pere
sencera
verda
aquest
aspecte
concret
crea
desa
dilema
ell
entre
esquema
exemple
fem
insecte
llei
marea
mes
perfecte
problema
romesco
sense
tren

starts (specific)
party
clean
granddaughter
pear
Peter
entire
green
this
aspect
specific
creates
saves/puts away
dilemma
he
between
scheme/outline
example
(we) do
insect
law
tide
month
perfect
problem
type of sauce
without
train

Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front
Front

Tested (Variable)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (no prediction)
Tested (Nonvariable)
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable

Appendix B. Questions about speakers' intuitions
1.
2.
3.
4.

Creus que pronuncies la diferencia entre e oberta i e tancada? Indica el teu grau de certesa.
"Do you think you pronounce the difference between open e and close e? Indicate your
degree of certainty."
Creus que pronuncies la diferencia entre o oberta i o tancada? Indica el teu grau de certesa.
"Do you think you pronounce the difference between open o and close o? Indicate your
degree of certainty."
Quan penses en paraules que tenen una e o una o, t'es facil saber si la vocal es oberta o tancada?
Indica el grau de facilitat. "When you think about words that include an e or an o, is it easy for
you to judge whether the vowel is open or close? Indicate your degree of certainty."
T'has adonat mai que altres persones poden utilitzar aquestes vocals de manera diferent de
com les utilitzes tu? Per exemple, t'has adonat mai que algu pronuncia una paraula amb e
tancada i tu ho fas amb e oberta? "Have you ever noticed that other people may use these
vowels in a different manner from how you use them? For example, have you ever noticed
that someone pronounces a word with close e while you pronounce it with open e?

200

Language and Speech 62(1)

Appendix C.
Summary of participant judgments
Word

% Close judgments

% Open judgments

% Other judgments

Condition

accessori
aerodrom
al*lucinogen
alfabetic
anem
aquest
arregla
aspecte
aterra
barbacoa
barrera
bigoti
boa
broma
broquil
brossa
brotxa
canodrom
cardioleg
carpeta
carquinyoli
cefalopode
cel
cera
cercle
ciencia
codi
cofoi
col*loca
comenca
compota
concret
conic
consell
consultori
cotorra
crea
cresta
crosta
decebre
decora
desa
destorba
diagnosi
dialecte
dilema

10.00
1.47
5.00
0.00
63.33
39.71
93.33
82.35
6.67
90.00
90.62
7.35
94.12
93.33
5.00
8.59
27.94
5.88
5.00
4.41
5.88
8.33
1.47
7.81
95.00
5.00
4.41
18.33
80.88
38.33
11.67
91.18
5.00
41.67
8.82
89.71
85.29
27.94
17.19
16.67
86.67
57.35
92.65
1.47
6.67
11.76

90.00
95.59
90.00
100.00
28.33
60.29
6.67
16.18
90.00
8.33
7.03
89.71
5.88
5.00
93.33
90.62
67.65
92.65
95.00
92.65
91.18
86.67
97.06
92.19
5.00
95.00
92.65
76.67
14.71
58.33
86.67
5.88
93.33
46.67
89.71
8.82
13.24
70.59
78.91
83.33
10.00
35.29
2.94
97.06
93.33
83.82

0.00
2.94
5.00
0.00
8.33
0.00
0.00
1.47
3.33
1.67
2.34
2.94
0.00
1.67
1.67
0.78
4.41
1.47
0.00
2.94
2.94
5.00
1.47
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.94
5.00
4.41
3.33
1.67
2.94
1.67
11.67
1.47
1.47
1.47
1.47
3.91
0.00
3.33
7.35
4.41
1.47
0.00
4.41

Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
(Continued)

201

Renwick and Nadeu
Appendix. (Continued)
Word

% Close judgments

dimoni
diumenge
divisori
divorci
dojo
dona (n)
dona (v)
dosi
dota
dropo
egolatra
ell
encanteri
enceta
entendre
entre
esborra
esbossa
escena
esfera
especia
espessa
espora
esquema
esquerp
estel
estona
estora
estrofa
exemple
exit
expert
feble
fem
festa
flonjo
flor
flora
fora
forta
fossa
fotre
gel
geni
geograf
gerro

8.33
95.00
13.24
6.67
51.67
7.81
91.41
2.94
86.76
56.67
10.00
88.24
1.47
50.00
75.00
79.41
94.53
88.24
6.67
88.33
6.67
10.29
88.33
83.82
20.00
5.88
90.00
92.65
7.35
94.12
1.67
14.71
93.33
42.65
92.19
45.00
10.29
49.22
15.00
10.29
95.31
88.33
5.00
8.82
2.94
1.67

% Open judgments
88.33
3.33
85.29
86.67
40.00
90.62
8.59
95.59
5.88
38.33
86.67
8.82
97.06
46.88
21.67
19.12
4.69
7.35
93.33
11.67
90.00
89.71
11.67
14.71
76.67
94.12
8.33
4.41
89.71
5.88
98.33
85.29
5.00
50.00
7.03
48.33
82.35
42.97
83.33
88.24
3.12
11.67
95.00
91.18
97.06
96.67

% Other judgments
3.33
1.67
1.47
6.67
8.33
1.56
0.00
1.47
7.35
5.00
3.33
2.94
1.47
3.12
3.33
1.47
0.78
4.41
0.00
0.00
3.33
0.00
0.00
1.47
3.33
0.00
1.67
2.94
2.94
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.67
7.35
0.78
6.67
7.35
7.81
1.67
1.47
1.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.67

Condition
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
No prediction
No prediction
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
No prediction
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
No prediction
Variable
Variable
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable

202

Language and Speech 62(1)

Appendix. (Continued)
Word

% Close judgments

% Open judgments

% Other judgments

Condition

gol
gresca
grossa
guerra
herencia
higienic
historia
hola
homogeni
hora
hotel
idioma
imbecil
incomoda
indomit
insecte
interessa
introductori
ivori
juguesca
lacrimogen
lactosa
lectora
llei
lleig
lleixa
llengua
llenya
magisteri
marea
matrimoni
medi
mel
membre
mes
metodic
misteri
molestia
molsa
mormola
mos
mot
negoci
nervi
neta (n)
neta (adj)

10.00
1.47
5.88
10.00
4.41
1.67
3.33
17.65
4.41
11.67
28.33
79.41
0.00
18.33
1.47
80.88
20.00
10.00
2.94
1.47
10.00
91.41
91.41
82.35
95.00
80.88
66.41
95.00
1.67
83.82
2.94
7.35
8.33
96.67
76.47
1.67
2.94
16.67
91.18
40.00
80.88
90.00
2.94
13.24
5.47
83.59

85.00
97.06
92.65
90.00
91.18
96.67
96.67
75.00
95.59
86.67
70.00
19.12
100.00
78.33
85.29
19.12
71.67
90.00
91.18
98.53
86.67
7.81
7.03
13.24
5.00
11.76
30.47
5.00
98.33
11.76
92.65
92.65
90.00
3.33
20.59
96.67
95.59
81.67
7.35
40.00
14.71
8.33
97.06
85.29
93.75
15.62

5.00
1.47
1.47
0.00
4.41
1.67
0.00
7.35
0.00
1.67
1.67
1.47
0.00
3.33
13.24
0.00
8.33
0.00
5.88
0.00
3.33
0.78
1.56
4.41
0.00
7.35
3.12
0.00
0.00
4.41
4.41
0.00
1.67
0.00
2.94
1.67
1.47
1.67
1.47
20.00
4.41
1.67
0.00
1.47
0.78
0.78

Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
(Continued)

203

Renwick and Nadeu
Appendix. (Continued)
Word

% Close judgments

% Open judgments

noces
norma
obert
odi
oli
olla
orca
orenga
ossi
paciencia
pantera
peca
pedra
penja
penjoll
pera
perdre
Pere
perfecte
perla
pesa (n)
pesa (v)
pesca (n)
pesca (v)
pesta
podoleg
polpa
por
postres
pota
pressa
primavera
proa
problema
propi
proposa
prosa
provoca
psicoleg
rebolca
rebota
regim
renta
renya
reposa
robatori

17.65
88.33
10.29
3.33
0.00
16.18
22.06
3.33
3.33
0.00
86.76
93.33
92.65
93.33
21.67
5.47
6.67
91.41
82.35
3.33
18.33
60.00
5.88
7.35
88.33
0.00
85.16
95.59
13.33
8.82
85.29
68.33
90.00
1.47
8.33
3.33
6.67
92.65
1.47
85.00
89.71
2.94
81.67
15.00
13.24
15.00

80.88
10.00
88.24
96.67
97.06
82.35
76.47
95.00
95.00
97.06
10.29
6.67
4.41
6.67
75.00
93.75
93.33
7.03
16.18
96.67
81.67
38.33
91.18
91.18
10.00
100.00
12.50
2.94
81.67
88.24
14.71
30.00
10.00
97.06
88.33
91.67
88.33
5.88
98.53
10.00
7.35
95.59
18.33
83.33
83.82
83.33

% Other judgments
1.47
1.67
1.47
0.00
2.94
1.47
1.47
1.67
1.67
2.94
2.94
0.00
2.94
0.00
3.33
0.78
0.00
1.56
1.47
0.00
0.00
1.67
2.94
1.47
1.67
0.00
2.34
1.47
5.00
2.94
0.00
1.67
0.00
1.47
3.33
5.00
5.00
1.47
0.00
5.00
2.94
1.47
0.00
1.67
2.94
1.67

Condition
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Variable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
Variable
No prediction
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Variable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Nonvariable

204

Language and Speech 62(1)

Appendix. (Continued)
Word

% Close judgments

rodola
romesco
rossa
rostre
rovell
sencera
sense
setze
silenci
sistema
sobra
soci
socioleg
somni
sorda
sorra
sostre
tebi
tel
terra
territori
torca
torra
tren
tretze
udol
vel
verda
vespa
violencia
vota
xenofob
zeta
zona

25.00
11.76
88.33
46.67
61.67
17.97
69.12
30.00
5.88
65.00
36.76
7.35
1.67
13.24
95.59
93.33
45.00
16.67
1.47
1.67
8.33
11.67
91.18
23.53
95.59
19.12
8.82
4.69
88.33
5.00
95.00
1.47
7.35
86.76

% Open judgments
67.65
86.76
11.67
50.00
38.33
78.91
30.88
70.00
91.18
31.67
58.82
89.71
95.00
83.82
2.94
6.67
53.33
83.33
98.53
98.33
91.67
85.00
8.82
67.65
2.94
75.00
89.71
95.31
10.00
93.33
5.00
95.59
92.65
7.35

% Other judgments
7.35
1.47
0.00
3.33
0.00
3.12
0.00
0.00
2.94
3.33
4.41
2.94
3.33
2.94
1.47
0.00
1.67
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.33
0.00
8.82
1.47
5.88
1.47
0.00
1.67
1.67
0.00
2.94
0.00
5.88

Condition
Variable
Variable
No prediction
Variable
Variable
No prediction
Variable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
No prediction
Variable
No prediction
Variable
Nonvariable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Nonvariable
Variable
Nonvariable
No prediction
Variable

