Language Learning & Technology
ISSN 1094-3501

October 2019, Volume 23, Issue 3
pp. 136-160

ARTICLE

Engagement and Attitude in Telecollaboration:
Topic and cultural background effects
Ana Oskoz, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
Ana Gimeno-Sanz, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

Abstract
This study examines the linguistic resources by which foreign language (L2) learners express their
ideological positions in online discussions taking place in a telecollaborative encounter during one
semester. More specifically, the study attempts to decipher how L2 learners discuss and argue their points
of view regarding their first culture, their second culture, and the topic in general, depending on the issue
under discussion (immigration and nationalism or patriotism) and to the country where the learners were
based (US or Spain). Twenty-four learners, organized into six groups, each with two students from the US
and two from Spain, participated in three online forums. For the analysis, learners' postings were subjected
to quantitative and qualitative content analysis applying two discourse-semantic subsystems of the
Appraisal framework, Engagement--the linguistic resources used to reflect the writer's position and
willingness to recognize alternative positions--and Attitude--the linguistic resources used to indicate
positive or negative assessment of people, places, things, and states of affairs. This study concludes that
there were clear differences in the discursive styles between both sets of learners and topics. Overall, for
instance, the learners employed more monoglossic statements when discussing nationalism or patriotism
rather than immigration and Spain-based learners made more use of judgment markers than their USbased counterparts did.
Keywords: Intercultural Telecollaborative Encounter, Appraisal Framework, Engagement, Attitude
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English and Spanish
APA Citation: Oskoz, A., & Gimeno-Sanz, A. (2019). Engagement and Attitude in Telecollaboration:
Topic and cultural background effects. Language Learning & Technology, 23(3), 136-160.
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/44700

Introduction
The steady increase in studies dealing with telecollaboration confirms a widespread interest in the potential
of intercultural dialogue in second language (L2) education as a process involving "an open and respectful
exchange of views between individuals and groups with different ethnic, cultural, religious, and linguistic
backgrounds and heritage, on the basis of mutual understanding and respect" (Council of Europe, 2008, p.
17). By participating in international partnerships where, together with the instructor's help, learners read,
analyze, and reflect on specific topics, learners are expected to develop intercultural awareness (Bauer, de
Benedette, Furstenberg, Levet, & Waryn, 2006). These studies have demonstrated that, to different extents,
the interactions help L2 learners develop or demonstrate their intercultural competence (Chun, 2011; Elola
& Oskoz, 2008; L. Lee, 2018; Schenker, 2012). Methodologically, most of these studies have frequently
been "characterized primarily in alinguistic terms" (Belz, 2003, p. 69), employing mixed-method
quantitative and qualitative analyses consisting of student opinion questionnaires, interviews, and content
analysis of learner entries (Benson, 2015; Garrett-Rucks, 2013). Yet, given the interactive nature of
telecollaboration and its potential for misunderstandings resulting from different communication styles
(O'Dowd, 2008), it is relevant to examine the linguistic choices students from different cultural
backgrounds make when interacting in a technology-rich telecollaborative environment.
Copyright (c) 2019 Ana Oskoz & Ana Gimeno-Sanz

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

137

Indeed, there is a growing body of literature that explores how L2 learners' discourse practices reflect their
engagement with their audience and their attitudes in these telecollaborative interactions (Belz, 2002, 2003;
Oskoz & Perez-Broncano, 2016; Oskoz, Gimeno-Sanz, & Sevilla-Pavon, 2018; Ryshina-Pankova, 2014,
2018; Vinagre & Corral, 2018). Building upon the Appraisal framework, which examines the linguistic
resources by which interlocutors express, negotiate, and naturalize particular inter-subjective or ideological
positions (Martin & White, 2005; White, 1998, 2015), this study examines the extent to which discursive
practices vary, on the one hand depending, on the topic under discussion (immigration and nationalism or
patriotism) and, on the other, on the country where the learners are based. More specifically, the study
examines how L2 learners discuss and argue their viewpoints regarding their first culture (C1), their second
culture (C2), and the topic (T) under discussion in general, as well as how they employ attitudinal markers
when talking about their C1, C2, and T in their online discussions. To this end, Engagement and Attitude,
two discourse-semantic subsystems of the Appraisal framework (Martin & White, 2005), offer a fitting
framework to illustrate discourse strategies that are recurrent in online forum discussions (McCabe, 2017;
Oskoz & Perez-Broncano, 2016; Oskoz et al., 2018). Ultimately, as described in the conclusion, the findings
have pedagogical implications as they reinforce the need to make learners who participate in an intercultural
exchange project aware of the differences brought about by culturally marked linguistic traditions affecting
written discourse.

Appraisal Framework
Increasingly used to examine L2 learners' discourse, the Appraisal framework is divided into three different
domains: Engagement, Attitude, and Graduation. Engagement refers to "those resources by which a text
references, invokes, and negotiates with the various alternative social positions put at risk by a text's
meanings" (White, 1998, p. 13). It reflects the writer's position as well as his or her willingness to recognize
alternative socio-semiotic positions (White, 2015). Attitude refers to the linguistic resources by which a
speaker "indicates positive or negative assessment of people, places, things, happenings, and states of
affairs" (White, 2015, n. p.). Graduation, which provides a scaling for the values of judgment, has not been
taken into account in this study because the focus lays on how ideas are conveyed rather than the intensity
of the learners' evaluative stances.
Within Engagement, Martin and White (2005) distinguished between monoglossic statements, or bare
assertions in which the writer presents the "current position as one which has no dialogistic alternatives
which need to be recognized" (Martin & White, 2005, p. 99), and heteroglossic statements (see Appendix
A for examples), which reference or recognize alternative positions. In a telecollaborative encounter
between the US and Spain, Oskoz et al. (2018) found that, overall, L2 learners participating in the
interaction presented a higher presence of heteroglossic discourse strategies--those in which learners did
not present propositions as facts hindering dialogistic alternatives--and fewer monoglossic strategies--
which do not allow for negotiation. The higher presence of heteroglossic statements illustrates L2 learners'
openness toward participating in a dialogic space that brings together different opinions and perspectives.
In particular, the lower presence of monoglossic statements when addressing another culture might suggest
that L2 learners do not feel that it is their place to provide strong or controversial statements about another
culture (Oskoz et al., 2018). Additionally, Belz (2003) illustrated how the use of monoglossic or
heteroglossic statements could be a cultural indicator, with her German students using more bald categorical
assertions to discuss either their own cultural behavior or that of their American counterparts.
Within heteroglossic statements, Ryshina-Pankova (2014) suggested that when developing argumentative
essays, there is a need for a balance between contracting strategies (i.e. the extent to which an utterance
"acts to challenge, fend off or restrict the scope of such (dialogic contraction)" (Martin & White, 2005, p.
102)), and expanding strategies, (i.e. "the degree to which an utterance, by dint of one or more of these
locutions, actively makes allowances for dialogically alternative positions and voices" (Martin & White,
2005, p. 102)). Yet, in McCabe's (2017) opinion, the use of expanding versus contracting strategies may
be the result of students' discursive goals. While more expanding strategies might be needed to develop

138

Language Learning & Technology

successful argumentative essays (Ryshina-Pankova, 2014; Swain, 2010), in an online forum, where students
interact with one another to discuss and display content knowledge, learners might be more likely to present
contracting statements (McCabe, 2017). However, in a telecollaborative environment, where learners may
wish to present an open attitude toward the views of the others, Oskoz et al. (2018) and Oskoz and GimenoSanz (in press) illustrated how L2 learners engaged in more expanding strategies and were more inclined
to avoid dialogically contractive strategies that limited the negotiation space (Wu & Allison, 2005).
Furthermore, L2 learners made frequent use of the Entertain marker (i.e. "wordings by which the authorial
voice indicates that its position is but one of a number of possible positions and thereby makes dialogic
space for other possibilities" (Martin & White, 2005, p. 102)) and of the Attribution marker (i.e.
"formulations which disassociate the proposition from the text's internal authorial voice by attributing it to
some external source" (Martin & White, 2005, p. 111)). That is, either by softening their statements with
markers such as I think or by referring to external sources or to their partners' comments, L2 learners create
a dialogic space in the telecollaborative environment that recognizes different socio-semiotic alternative
realities (White, 1998). However, S. H. Lee (2010) argued that a predominant presence of expanding
strategies in written essays might indicate a lack of responsibility for the content provided or a more
superficial knowledge that shows a lack of assimilation of knowledge or ownership of the message. Another
possibility is that a higher use of contractive strategies might indicate L2 learners' failure to negotiate in
the telecollaborative interactions.
Turning our attention to the second component of the Appraisal model, Attitude can be further divided into
Affect, Judgment, and Appreciation (see Appendix B for examples). Affect refers to the evaluation by means
of the interlocutor inviting their "audience to share that emotional response, or at least to see that response
as appropriate and well-motivated, or [...] as understandable" (White, 1998, p. 145-46). Judgment refers
to "the evaluation of human behaviour with respect to social norms" (White, 2015, n.p.) and Appreciation,
to "the evaluation of objects and products (rather than human behaviour) by reference to aesthetic principles
and other systems of social value" (White, 2015, n.p.). All of these categories can bear positive and negative
values and are further subdivided, as illustrated in Appendix B.
Regarding the presence of these markers in L2 learners' discourse in telecollaborative encounters, Vinagre
and Corral (2017) found that their learners used more Affective markers than Judgment and Appreciation
markers. They attributed the high presence of affective markers and a tendency to use positive Affective
markers to the learners' desire "to establish friendly, close, and supportive working relationships that can
facilitate the creation of a relaxed and safe learning environment, which in turn fosters collaboration" (p.
11). Similarly, Liaw and English (2017) also found that their Taiwanese and French learners "tried to project
themselves as possessing the desirable characteristics for effective relationship and connectedness
building" (p. 84), albeit using different communication strategies. Vinagre and Suarez (2018) also suggest
that their German and Spanish learners tended to use positive affective strategies to develop closeness,
friendship and solidarity links with their virtual exchange partners. Overall, L2 learners' tendency to use
positive affective language supports the idea of the need to create a close and friendly atmosphere in virtual
environments for effective collaboration and learning to take place (Morand & Ocker, 2003; Vinagre,
2008).
While above-mentioned studies have determined that L2 learners tend to show positive affective markers
to create a friendly environment (Vinagre & Corral, 2017), research examining Judgment and Appreciation
has found that cultural differences between groups might be manifested in different ways. Vinagre and
Corral (2017), for instance, found that Spanish learners tended to use more Judgment markers than their
American partners. Belz (2003) illustrated how American learners tended to use more positive Appreciation
and positive Evaluation markers than their German counterparts did. Both Belz and Vinagre and Corral
suggest that there might have been cultural differences behind these behaviors. For example, in Spanish
culture, being critical (i.e., making value judgements about specific behaviors, ideas, and opinions) is
considered a positive trait; however, in US culture, as Vinagre and Corral point out, being critical and
opinionated are considered to be negative personality traits. Following House's (2000) continua of
interactional patterns, Belz (2003) found her Germany-based learners to be more direct, explicit and likely

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

139

to provide ad hoc formulations while the US-based students were more indirect and used more linguistic
routines to express their ideas. The different discursive patterns, Belz suggested, might bring conflict and
create an environment that could result in less successful interaction.
In addition to cultural patterns, the topic under discussion can also influence the presence of attitudinal and
engagement markers. This would explain why, contrary to McCabe's (2017) findings based on students'
online interactions, Oskoz and Perez-Broncano (2016) found a higher presence of expanding strategies than
contracting strategies in their students' online forum interactions. While the learners in McCabe (2017)
focused on class topics relating to Spanish language and teaching, learners in Oskoz and Perez-Broncano
(2016) focused on topics such as immigration, which may have required learners to provide less categorical
and fewer contractive assertions. The topic would also explain why, in a telecollaborative environment,
Oskoz and Gimeno-Sanz (in press) found a higher presence of Appreciation and Judgment markers
compared to those indicating Affect, whereas Vinagre and Corral (2017) found affective markers to be most
frequent. Oskoz and Gimeno-Sanz's (in press) topics, immigration and nationalism or patriotism, may well
have encouraged learners to address both the consequences of laws and policies as well as societal
behaviors. Yet, Vinagre and Corral (2017) also suggested that even though their learners presented a
preference for positive markers, controversial topics or situations, such as health systems or immigration,
are more likely to encourage L2 learners to present negative values towards these.
It seems, therefore, that group (determined by nationality) and topic may have an influence on L2 learners'
discussions. Given the increased attention that telecollaborative encounters attract, it is necessary to
understand the extent to which both group and topic can influence L2 learners' discourse strategies. This
study thus examines:
1. How do L2 learners from the US and Spain negotiate their ideological position (Engagement),
when referring to culture one (C1), culture two (C2), and topic (T) in asynchronous
telecollaborative interactions?
2. How do L2 learners from the US and Spain deploy attitudinal markers (Affect, Judgment, and
Appreciation), when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous online interactions?
3. How do L2 learners negotiate their ideological position (Engagement), depending on the topic
(immigration and nationalism or patriotism), when referring to C1, C2, and T in telecollaborative
asynchronous interactions?
4. How do L2 learners deploy attitudinal markers (Affect, Judgment, and Appreciation), depending
on the topic, when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative interactions?

Methodology
This study draws on a larger telecollaborative project (Oskoz et al., 2018; Oskoz & Gimeno-Sanz, in press)
conducted throughout one semester between a technical university in Spain and an East-coast university in
the US.
Participants
There were two groups of students: twelve U.S. students enrolled in a 3rd-year, 3-credit Spanish history
and culture class that was a requirement for their major or minor in Spanish and twelve Spanish students,
who were majoring in aerospace engineering and had enrolled in an optional 3rd-year, 6-credit higher
intermediate English language class. However, only 3 of these credits were devoted to the telecollaborative
project. Between both groups, there were 12 male and 12 female students and they were all between 17 and
24 years of age.
According to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001),
the US-based students' level of Spanish proficiency ranged between B2 and C1, while the Spanish students'
level of English proficiency ranged between B2 and C2. These levels were determined by each of the
instructors upon conducting an in-house proficiency assignment. The US-based class focused on the history

140

Language Learning & Technology

and culture of Spain, whereas the class in Spain focused on developing language fluency and improving
communication skills. Each group of students therefore followed its own curricular program to address their
respective learning objectives. Nonetheless, because both courses also focused on addressing issues of
social justice from a historical, political and economic perspective, the instructors deemed it appropriate to
connect their learners so they could discuss the selected topics from different cultural perspectives.
Procedures
Once preliminary introductions had been made, learners were organized into six groups, each one with two
participants from the US and two from Spain. The six groups of students participated in three discussions,
each of which took place over a period of two weeks, within a purposefully created private Google+
community, an asynchronous tool that allowed participants to discuss the different topics. The first
discussion focused on the video "The Danger of a Single Story" by Chimanda Adichie (2009). This
discussion, focusing on stereotypes, was not considered for the study since students were also learning how
to communicate and interact with one another in the telecollaborative environment. The second and third
discussions (analyzed in this study) focused on (a) immigration and (b) nationalism or patriotism. The
discussions on immigration took place entirely in Spanish and those on nationalism or patriotism took place
entirely in English in order to allow all the students to interact in the target language.
Each of the cultural discussions was initiated in class and was guided by the instructors, who provided links
and articles to encourage the conversation. Both groups used the same links and articles as a starting point.
After the initial in-class warm-up, learners continued the online discussion in their respective groups for a
fortnight. The topics of immigration and nationalism or patriotism were prominent in the news in both
countries due to presidential elections going on in the US, Catalan calls for independence in Spain, and
immigration laws being questioned in Spain due to the so-called "refugee crisis" in Europe. Following
Arnold and Ducate (2006), Oskoz (2009, 2013), and Weasenforth, Biesenbach-Lucas, and Meloni (2002)
each group was assigned a leader for each topic whose mission it was to initiate and ensure an on-going
debate. All of the group members were required to provide personal opinions and share personal
experiences, integrate ideas from their classmates' contributions into their own comments, search for
additional information, and ask questions that would help maintain the conversation. All of the learners
were required to post a minimum of four comments on each topic.
Analysis
Learners' postings were subjected to quantitative and qualitative content analysis using the Appraisal model
(Martin & White, 2005). To examine Attitude, the researchers used the T-unit, that is, a "main clause with
all subordinate clauses attached to it" (Hunt, 1965, p. 20), as the element of analysis. The T-unit was
selected because "these units are the shortest grammatically allowable sentences into which the theme could
be segmented" (Hunt, 1965, p. 21). Within each T-unit, the researchers looked for lexico-grammatical items
(adverbs, adjectives, verbs, and nominalizations), that is, a single word, a part of a word, or a chain of words
that form the basic elements of a language lexicon.
To start with, the researchers categorized a T-unit according to its primary focus; that is, C1, C2, or general
statements referring to the topic under discussion (T) without focusing on either C1 or C2. In those instances
in which a single utterance simultaneously referred to C1, C2, or T, it was counted twice or three times, as
required. C1, it must be noted, referred to the U.S. culture for the American students whilst C2 referred to
Spanish culture and this was reversed for the Spanish students. There were two participants, though, one
from the US and one from Spain, who made references to belonging to two different cultures. In those
cases, references to both their cultures counted as C1.
Second, the researchers examined whether the T-units were monoglossic or heteroglossic, distinguishing
in the latter case whether the statements could be imbued with the voices of others, either through an
expansion strategy or through a contraction strategy. Vinagre and Corral (2017) counted lexical items such
as I believe, I think, and in my opinion, as part of Attitude (Judgment + > Veracity +). Yet, in this study,
these markers were considered to indicate the learners' engagement and ideological position towards their

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

141

own statements. Accordingly, these markers were considered Expanding strategies, specifically falling in
the subcategory of Entertain, thus voicing dialogic alternatives. It must be noted that, as illustrated in the
following example, an utterance could present more than one Engagement marker.
I think (T > Expand > Entertain) it [not demonstrating their sense of patriotic spirit] (Expand >
Attribute > Acknowledge classmate) is very much the opposite from here in the United States (Alicia,
US, Online forum).
Third, the T-units were coded as either expressing positive or negative emotions or values. In cases where
there was no inherently positive or negative lexical item, decisions were made based on the context of the
conversation. Fourth, the researchers decided whether each T-unit represented Affect, Judgment or
Appreciation. Note that, as Iedema, Feez, and White (1994) pointed out, the sub-categories of Judgment
and Appreciation can be inscribed in texts when the evaluation is explicitly stated by means of a lexical
item carrying a Judgment value (such as the word worse in the text "Nationalism is a radical version, you
think that other countries are worse than yours"), or they may be tokens when Judgment is evoked by
superficially neutral ideational meanings (such as "I mean, we have our current flag and it is in every
government building, but we don't do anything like the pledging allegiance to the flag"), which evoke
Judgment responses from the reader. Tokens, therefore, "assume shared social norms" (White, 1998, p. 35),
which a reader will interpret according to their own cultural and ideological positioning. Here again, each
T-unit can represent more than one Attitude marker. Take, for example, these two units:
You don't know how ashamed I feel (misery) knowing that such a cruel act (quality -) as bull fighting
is what crosses everyone's mind (normality +) when they think about my country.... (Pedro, Spain,
Online forum 1)
Bednarek (2009), Ngo and Unsworth (2015), and Su and Hunston (forthcoming) have all pointed out some
of the difficulties of applying the system of Attitude as defined by Martin and White (2005). In line with
Bednarek's (2009) study, when analyzing the data, the coders took into account both the lexis and the
context in which a thing or situation is appreciated or a person or behavior judged. Ngo and Unsworth
(2015) proposed a redefinition of some of the subcategories within Affect (e.g., surprise, fear) and
Appreciation (e.g., valuation). Although this study analyzed the data following Martin and White's (2005)
categories, Ngo and Unsworth's (2015) redefined categories helped the coders in cases where an instance
did not clearly fall into one of Martin and White's (2015) suggested categories.
In the initial stages of data analysis, inter-rater reliability was sought first by discussing the framework and
then coding 20% of the data (from the Spanish and the English versions), comparing results, and discussing
inconsistencies. Cohen's  was run to determine the level of agreement between the two independent raters
on whether the speech units were reliably or unreliably analyzed. After discussion, there was very strong
agreement between the two raters,  = 1.000, p < .0005. Subsequently, once the categories had been agreed
upon, one of the researchers coded both the Spanish and the English versions. Independent t-tests were
utilized to analyze the data. This study only reports on the significant results. Cohen d sizes for the
significant differences regarding means between the two groups of learners or between the two topics were
small, except when noted in the Results section.

Results
The first research question examined how L2 learners negotiate their ideological position (Engagement),
depending on the group, when referring to C1, C2, and T in telecollaborative asynchronous interactions.
There is evidence to conclude that Spain-based students used significantly more monoglossic statements
(t(298) = 3.37, p < 0.05 and t(83) = 1.04, p < 0.05) when discussing their C1 or that of their telecollaborative
partners compared to their US-based counterparts.
Within heteroglossic statements (see Table 1, Appendix C), both when referring to their C1 or that of their
telecollaborative counterparts, Spain-based students used more contractive statements (t(298) = 2.38, p < 0.05

142

Language Learning & Technology

and t(83) = 4.19, p < 0.05 respectively) than the US-based students while the US-based students produced
significantly more expanding statements when addressing their C1 and that of their telecollaborative
counterparts (t(298) = .50, p = 0.05 and t(83) = -4.65, p < 0.05, respectively). Looking into the subcategories
within expanding and contracting statements, when discussing their C1, that of their counterparts or the
topic in general, US-based students employed more Entertain (t(298) = -3.32, p < 0.05, t(83) = -2.44, p = 0.04
and t(99) = -1.72, p < 0.05) and Attribute (t(298) = -2.59, p < 0.05, t(83) = -1.76, p = 0.02 and t(99) = -1.61, p =
0.03) strategies than the Spain-based students. This group used significantly more Proclaim statements
when discussing their own and the U.S. culture (t(298) = 1.17, p = 0.02 and t(83) = 5.58, p < 0.05 respectively)
and Disclaim statements (t(298) = 1.83, p < 0.05) when addressing their own C1.
The qualitative analysis provided us with further insights. Not only did US-based students employ more
expanding strategies than their Spain-based counterparts, they also used them differently. As seen in
Excerpt 1, U.S. students often included references to external sources, in particular from articles, either
from journals or the web, to provide a definition or data to support their ideas. That is, although these
students also referred to their classmates' comments, US-based students tended to rely on established
sources to support their opinions or provide alternative views. (See English translations in Appendix D).
Excerpt 1
En nuestra ultima conversacion comenzamos hablar de la unica historia de la inmigracion (T >
Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge classmate) y como afecta nuestros vistos de los paises de Espana
y EE.UU. (C1 and C2 > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge classmate). Segun el Diccionario de
Webster (T > Expand > Attribute > External sources), un diccionario ingles muy confiable por los
hablantes de ingles, inmigracion es el acto de llegar a un pais que no es un nativo para obtener la
residencia permanente. Con esta definicion de inmigracion, tenemos que pensar de los siguientes: los
estereotipos de los inmigrantes y como afectan las relaciones entre los inmigrantes y los nativos en el
pais? (T > Expand > Attribute > Entertain) (David, US, Online forum).
Spain-based students also made references to external sources "Por lo que se puede apreciar en las noticias,
en Estados Unidos la situacion es similar por los comentarios que realiza Trump." [According to what can
be seen on the news, the situation in the US is similar because of Trump's statements]. Yet, as seen in
Excerpt 2, they were more likely to revisit content from their classmates' contributions or to acknowledge
what other people said, without searching for alternative views from external sources such as articles. These
students, despite providing their opinions using instances such as I think or I believe, were also more likely
to provide their own opinion using contracting strategies, in particular Proclaim, without employing these
mitigating markers.
Excerpt 2
Respondiendo a lo que ha comentado David, aqui en Espana el tema de la inmigracion esta muy
presente (C1 > Contract > Proclaim), puesto que recibimos a gente de diferentes paises. Estas personas
buscan inmigrar a Espana (C1 > Contract > Proclaim) porque consideran que tendran una vida mejor
que la que tienen en su pais (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge external sources). La reaccion de
los espanoles frente a que cada vez hallan mas inmigrantes es negativa (C1 > Contract > Proclaim).
Esta ideologia la justifican (C1 > Contract > Proclaim) alegando que estas personas procedentes de
otros paises nos quitan los trabajos (C1 > Expand > Attribute > Distance external sources), y que por
ello el pais no sale de la crisis economica en la que se encuentra (C1 > Expand > Attribute > Distance
external sources) (Paco, Spain, Online forum).
With regard to the second question, the study explored whether L2 learners deploy attitudinal markers
differently according to the group, when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous online interactions.
When addressing their C1 (see Table 2, Appendix C), the US-based learners used significantly more Affect
(t(790) = -1.114, p = 0.03) and Appreciation (t(790) = -1.000, p = 0.04) markers while Spanish students used
significantly more Judgment markers (t(790) = 2.849, p < 0.0.5). US-based students, for example, presented

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

143

affective markers such as "Me gusta mucho ver la diversidad en mi propia comunidad." [I really like to see
diversity in my own community] or "I enjoy riding a bike and spending the day out in DC", and
Appreciation markers such as "hay una connotacion negativa con la palabra `inmigracion'" [There is a
negative connotation to the word `immigration'] or "...as you bash the other side with hurtful stereotypes"
(emphasis added). In terms of Judgment, Spain-based students made comments such as "Lo que no
comprenden es que la inmigracion nos aporta variedad cultural." [What they don't understand is that
immigration gives us cultural variety] or "The ones from Cataluna declare themselves as citizens from a
different country" (emphasis added). When referring to C2, however, US-based students produced
significantly more Appreciation markers (t(192) = -1.219, p = 0.016) while the Spain-based students produced
more Affect (t(192) = 2.03, p < 0.05) and Judgment markers (t(192) = 1.577, p = 0.02). Regarding Appreciation,
US-based students made comments such as "del mismo modo que los inmigrantes vienen a Espana en
condiciones inhumanas" [in the same way that immigrants come to Spain in inhumane conditions] or "in
Spain people are not used to demonstrating their sense of patriotic spirit" (emphasis added). Regarding
Affect, students from Spain made comments such as "una de las cosas que mas me gusta de las veces que
he viajado a Estados Unidos es que encuentras personas de muchas culturas diferentes conviviendo." [One
of the things I like the most about the times I've traveled to the United States is that you find people from
many different cultures living together] or "here there isn't that love that you have for your flag, what I
really admire." (emphasis added) In terms of Judgment, Spain-based students presented statements such as
"No entiendo como alguien que piensa asi puede haber llegado hasta las elecciones y tenga opciones de
ganarlas." [I do not understand how someone who thinks this way has arrived to the elections and have
options to win them] or "It's incredible that so many people had voted for Trump." (emphasis added). In
terms of T, the US-based students used significantly more Affect (t(291) = -1.949, p < 0.05) and Appreciation
(t(291) = -4.062, p < 0.0.5) linguistic markers while their Spain-based counterparts used more Judgment (t(291)
= -1.173, p = 0.21) markers.
In terms of the categories within Judgment (see Table 3, Appendix C), when referring to C1, Spain-based
students predominantly used more Normality (t(790) = 2.1, p < 0.005) and Propriety (t(790) = 1.4, p = 0.04)
features than their US-based counterparts. When referring to their C1, students from Spain made comments
such as "Para los espanoles, un espanol que inmigre a otro pais (como puede ser Alemania) esta bien visto."
[For Spaniards, a Spaniard who immigrates to another country (such as Germany) is acceptable] or "Espana
es un pais que no aprecia lo que tiene como deberia (Normality), no lo valora hasta que triunfa fuera."
[Spain is a country that does not appreciate what it has as it should not value it until it triumphs outside]
(emphasis added) In terms of Propriety, these students commented that "We just can't go on without
condemning what happened here just 50 years ago, which is absolutely nothing on an historical perspective"
or "Los espanoles tampoco aceptan a las personas extranjeras porque muchos de ellos todavia son racistas"
[Spaniards do not accept foreigners because many of them are still racist] (emphasis added). Similarly,
when examining T, Spain-based students used significantly more instances of Normality (t(291) = 2.9, p <
0.05) and Propriety (t(291) = 4.0, p < 0.05) than their U.S. counterparts. Students, for instance, pointed out
that "Es un hecho que la inmigracion aumenta la oferta laboral, pero en una manera que perjudica al puesto
de trabajo." [It is a fact that immigration increases the labor supply, but in a way that harms the native job]
or "Todos somos personas y tenemos derecho a elegir donde residir." [We are all people and we have the
right to choose where to live] (emphasis added).
With regard to Appreciation (see Table 4, Appendix C), when discussing their C1, US-based students used
significantly more linguistic markers to express Impact (t(790) = -2.45, p < 0.05). These students, for
example, addressed the effect of several laws: ("[Las leyes] tienen consecuencias muy negativas." [[The
laws] have very negative consequences.], "las leyes de inmigracion extremadamente duras en varios
estados en los EE.UU" [the extremely harsh immigration laws in several states in the US], and "[US]
politics have a major effect on nationalism and patriotism." (emphasis added). Similarly, when looking at
how students addressed their C2, US-based students significantly used more Impact (t(192) = -1.12, p = 0.03)
linguistic markers than their Spanish counterparts. U.S. students, for example, when discussing nationalism
and patriotism pointed out that "I think more of art, the history of the country, and soccer than bullfighting

144

Language Learning & Technology

and fascism even though they have made a mark on Spain today," and acknowledged that they were not
aware of "the differences to be so apparent and extreme between the Catalan community and the rest of
Spain" or "how big the differences are in accents in Spain especially to the point where it becomes hard to
understand." (emphasis added).
The third research question examined how L2 learners negotiate their ideological position (Engagement),
depending on the topic, when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative interactions.
When addressing both their own and the other culture, learners produced more monoglossic statements
(t(298) = -3.37, p < 0.05 and t(83) = -1.17, p = 0.03) when discussing Nationalism or patriotism and more
heteroglossic statements (t(298) = 3.37, p < 0.05 and t(83) = 1.17, p = 0.03) when discussing Immigration.
Within heteroglossic statements (see Table 5, Appendix C), both when discussing their C1 and the C2,
students used significantly more expanding statements (t(298) = 5.03, p = 0.05 and t(83) = 4.65, p < 0.05) when
discussing immigration while they used significantly more contracting statements (t(298) = -339, p < 0.05
and t(83) = -4.19, p < 0.05) when addressing the topic of Nationalism or patriotism. Cohen's d regarding the
Expand category was 0.58 for C1 and 0.58 for C2, which corresponds to a medium effect size.
For subcategories of expanding and contracting statements, when referring to C1, C2 and T, there is
evidence that students used more Entertain (t(298) = 3.32, p < 0.05, t(83)= 2.24, p = 0.04, and t(99) = 1.7, p <
0.05) and Attribute (t(298)= 2.47, p < 0.05, t(83) = 1.7, p = 0.02, and t(99) = 1.6, p = 0.03) markers when
discussing the topic of Immigration than when discussing that of Nationalism or patriotism. When
discussing the latter, students used more Proclaim strategies (t(298) = -1.17, p = 0.02 and t(83) = -5.6, p < 0.05)
when talking about C1 and C2, but relied on Disclaim (t(298) = -1.83, p < 0.05) only to talk about C1.
The following interaction when discussing immigration is an example that shows that, regardless of the
country, learners relied on external resources (Attribute) to inform themselves about the topic. They also
provided their mitigated opinions with expressions such as "creo que" [I think that] and "pienso que" [I
believe that] and asked each other questions to guide the conversation (Entertain).
Excerpt 3
Recientemente, lei un articulo Internet (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge external sources) de la
Economia que discutio los beneficios economicos y las desventajas economicas de la inmigracion.
Aunque el articulo Internet (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge external sources) menciono
aumentar la competencia en el mercado laboral por inmigracion, pero los subsiguientes cambios son lo
que nos preocupamos (T > Contract > Proclaim > Pronounce). Por ejemplo, hay la posibilidad del
reducir los salarios de trabajadores nativos, menos beneficios, y una mas grande poblacion anciana (T
> Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge external sources) ... (David, US, Online forum).
Excerpt 4
Sobre lo que ha comentado David (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge classmate), es totalmente
cierto que (T > Contract > Proclaim) en lo que concierne a la seguridad nacional, la inmigracion en
muchas ocasiones es una desventaja por los ataques terroristas como pueden ser el del 11-S. Buscando
un poco por Internet (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge external sources) he podido encontrar
esta definicion: "La "Seguridad Nacional" es un componente importante del esfuerzo de un Estado por
equilibrar la facilitacion y el control de la migracion (Paco, Spain, Online forum).
Exerpt 5
Creo que (C1 > Expand > Entertain) la economia es no se va afectada por inmigracion (C1 > Expand >
Attribute > acknowledge classmates). Tambien, yo creo que (C1 > Expand > Entertain) en ciertas partes
de los EE.UU, personas se sienten con derecho a trabajos incluso si los inmigrantes estan mejor en la
posicion. En los EE.UU, "la fuga de cerebros" (T > Expand > Attribute > Acknowledge classmate) es
cuando el gente inteligente inmigran a un pais del oeste y utilizan sus habilidades. Creo que (C1 >

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

145

Expand > Entertain) esto hace que la economia mas fuerte (Anastasia, US, Online forum).
As seen in Excerpt 3, David starts his post referring to the content of an article regarding the positive and
negative economic consequences of immigration. In particular, he acknowledges the positive effect of
"aumentar la competencia laboral" [increasing competitiveness of the labor market], but decides to focus
on those elements, as indicated in the article, that can be worrisome for the immigrant-receiving country.
In Excerpt 4, Paco makes a reference to David's entry and focuses on the topic of national security. To add
to the conversation, Paco searches for additional information on the Internet and includes the definition
provided. In a subsequent entry (Excerpt 5), Anastasia follows David's and Paco's comments by
entertaining that she does not think that immigration affects the economy (a previous comment) and that
some people from the US believe they are entitled to have a job even if immigrants are better qualified for
it (a new idea). Anastasia also brings a topic already presented in the discussion, "la fuga de cerebros"
[brain drain], which according to her, as seen by the Entertain marker, has a positive effect on the economy.
When discussing the topic of nationalism, however, albeit relying on external sources, students tended to
provide their personal opinions and experiences, as illustrated in Excerpts 6 and 7.
Excerpt 6
I did a quick Google search (T > Expand > Attribute > external sources) and found a nice short
definition: "patriotic feeling, principles, or efforts" (T > Expand > Attribute > external sources). I will
say, under that definition it listed one of the synonyms as "flag-waving" (T > Expand > Attribute >
external sources), which is something I really associate (C1> Contract > Proclaim > Pronounce) with
American nationalism/my own sense of nationalism [...] I fly our flag everyday at my home, I celebrate
the Fourth of July, Labor Day, and Memorial Day by having a cookout with my family and friends (and
in that time remembering all the great people who have fought for, died for, and advanced our country),
and taking pride in the fact that my homeland is one of freedom, liberty, and equality (C1 > Contract >
Proclaim > Pronounce) (Alicia, US, Online forum).
Exerpt 7
Hello guys, in Spain in general this topic makes a bit of controversy (C1 > Contract > Proclaim >
Pronounce). In Spain we have some regions in which people don't feel "Spanish" (T > Expand >
Attribute > external sources), like Catalonia and the Basque Country. They believe (T > Expand >
Attribute > external sources) that they should be an independent country. As I am from Murcia, of
course I feel I belong to Spain (C1 > Contract > Proclaim > Pronounce) and I'm proud of being Spanish
(C1 > Contract > Proclaim > Pronounce) (Lourdes, Spain, Online forum).
As seen in Excerpt 6, Alicia started by providing a definition found on the web. She went on to mention
one of the synonyms included in the definition, "flag-waving", which she rapidly connected with her own
experience about nationalism. That is, although she relied briefly on an external source to help her frame
the topic, in the rest of her entry, Alicia went on to explain what people did in her state to demonstrate their
nationalistic feelings. She made no other references to external sources, from either articles or journals, or
what other people had said. Alicia's interaction was followed by Lourdes (Excerpt 7), who immediately
noted the controversy that the concept of nationalism raises in Spain. She starts with a pronouncement "this
topic makes a bit of controversy", which she continues referencing to two regions, Catalonia and the Basque
Country, who have expressed their differences with the rest of Spain (Expand > Attribute > External
sources). After this brief explanation, Lourdes moves to express her own feelings with two statements in
which she does not give place to negotiation (Contract > Proclaim > Pronounce).
The fourth research question examined how L2 learners deploy attitudinal markers (Affect, Judgment and
Appreciation), depending on the topic, when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative
interactions. The results (see Table 6, Appendix C) indicated that learners produced significantly more
instances of Appreciation when discussing Immigration (t(298) = 1.107, p = .023) than Nationalism or

146

Language Learning & Technology

patriotism in terms of C1. As seen in Excerpt 10, when talking about Immigration, students presented
information about different laws, such as the "Arizona Senate Bill 1070" or the Alabama law, "HB 56" or
"la ley de extranjeria", the immigration law approved in Spain in 1985. As seen in Excerpt 8, Carolina
describes the impact that the Alabama, "HB 56" law had on immigrants and employed terms such as "ilegal"
(illegal), "inmigrantes sin papeles" (undocumented immigrants) to describe persons or actions.
Excerpt 8
Esta ley de Alabama, "HB 56", atacada por completo (Appreciation > Impact -) todos los aspectos de
la vida de los inmigrantes, por lo que es ilegal (Appreciation > Quality -) que los propietarios alquilan
a inmigrantes sin papeles (Appreciation > Quality -) (Carolina, US, Online forum).
Although there were no differences in terms of Affect in general (see Table 6, Appendix C) between the
two topics, when addressing their C1, students used significantly more instances of Affect - (t(790) = 1.68, p
< 0.05) for the topic of Immigration while there were more instances of Affect + when discussing
Nationalism (t(790) = -1.69, p = 0.02). When talking about how immigration was perceived or acted upon in
their own countries, students often presented instances of how they disliked what was happening. Their
ideological underpinning always had a positive attitude toward immigration. Consider the following
examples: "...y es muy triste que esto se vea como algo negativo" [...and it very sad for this to be seen as
something negative]; "Es lamentable que juzgen a todos por igual cuando no es asi." [It's regrettable that
everybody is judged the same when they are not the same.], and "...y lo mas triste es que estas personas
vienen huyendo de la pobreza y violencia de sus paises" [...and the saddest thing is that these people are
running away from poverty and violence in their countries] (emphasis added). Contrary to this, when
discussing the topic of nationalism and presenting their own opinions about their own countries, despite
still presenting negative emotions such as "I will never feel proud of my country until this changes," overall
students provided comments such as "I love Spain, its social customs, language and weather," "I like being
Spanish," "every day I am proud to be an American," "I'm proud of being Spanish," or "we feel very proud
to be able to celebrate those holidays" (emphasis added).
Within Judgment (see Table 7, Appendix C), the results indicated that when discussing nationalism, learners
employed significantly more instances of Judgment - to talk about C2 (t(192) = -1.556, p = .001) than when
talking about C1 and T. US-based students, for example, commented on behaviors that were out of their
understanding of how people should behave, such as how in Spain "people is not used to demonstrating
their sense of patriotic spirit" (Normality -), how, unlike in the US, people do not have "Spanish flags
hanging outside their houses if it's not the time of the World/European cup" (Normality -), or that "so many
different places want their community to become independent" (Normality -). Spain-based students, on the
other hand, were more inclined to provide moral comment, such as when they commented on the 2016 U.S.
presidential elections and how people "share his ideas (male chauvinist or xenophobe ideas)" (Propriety -),
or "that he has validated being a racist, misogynist, homophobic [person]..." Propriety -). When referring
to the Topic in general, students produced significantly more instances of Normality (t(99) = 1.161, p = .009),
Capacity (t(291) = 1.161, p = .009) and Propriety (t(291) = 1.8, p = 0.01) when discussing nationalism or
patriotism. For instance, students pointed to the fine line between patriotism and nationalism and "while
patriotism is the love for your country, its people, its landscapes, the feeling of `being at home` that it gives
you, nationalism is a radical version (Propriety -), you think that others countries are worse than yours
(Propriety -), you want your country to be more powerful at any cost (Propriety -)." (emphasis added). By
addressing the topic in general without referring to a particular country, students also provided a positive
outlook on how "countries should be looked at how they are trying to right the wrongs" (Propriety +;
emphasis added).
In terms of Appreciation (see Table 8, Appendix C), learners produced significantly more instances of
Appreciation - in their C1 (t(298) = 1.237, p = 0.11) when talking about nationalism. As such, students made
comments such as "Spain [...] will never get rid of their dark past," "even knowing that patriotism and
nationalism was only a part of fascist propaganda," "States lack that cultural aspect of belonging in most

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

147

case," "how divided the country is from back in January," or "a man who is openly misogynistic, racist,
homophobic" (emphasis added; those comments reflect a negative perception of the students' C1s).

Discussion
Upon examining research question one, the extent to which Spain-based and US-based L2 learners negotiate
their ideological position when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative interactions,
the results indicated different patterns of interaction. Contrary to McCabe's (2017) findings, but similarly
to Oskoz et al's. (2018) and Oskoz & Gimeno-Sanz's (in press) findings on telecollaborative encounters,
learners in this study presented more instances of expanding vs. contracting strategies. Yet, similar to Belz's
(2003) German students, the Spain-based students made more bald categorical assertions and employed
more monoglossic and contractive statements to address both their own and U.S. culture. This seems to
support the idea of Spaniards being culturally more opinionated (Vinagre & Corral, 2017) and feeling
confident about presenting their own opinions and perspectives in relation to their C1 and that of their
telecollaborative partners. As suggested by S. H. Lee (2010), the higher use by the Spain-based group of
dialogically contractive strategies, such as Pronounce (Proclaim), limited the negotiation space. Yet, while
this group used Proclaim strategies with a high presence of Pronounce statements to address their own and
U.S. culture, these learners only used more Disclaim features to talk about their C1. It seems that the
Spaniards, despite being more opinionated, were also wary of adopting a critical stance in relation to their
C2, which they probably knew less about. US-based learners presenting more Entertain markers within
heteroglossic statements might also be the result of cultural patterns, with US-based students being more
careful and indirect, implicit, and attentive to the addressee (House, 2000) when providing an opinion that
could be considered rude. Furthermore, the fact that within heteroglossic statements, US-based learners
employed more Attribute statements speaks to them looking for evidence or external sources to support
their opinions. This allowed the US-based learners to add new dimensions to their work and to that of their
classmates (Wu & Allison, 2005), either answering their questions or building upon the joint discovery of
immigration laws or different perspectives regarding nationalism or patriotism. As argued by S. H. Lee
(2010), however, it could also be interpreted as the US-based learners not committing to their own message.
When querying the extent to which the use of discursive practices for Affect, Judgment and Appreciation
varied when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative interactions depending on the
group (research question two), the results of the study suggest that there were indeed differences in how the
learners from the two countries approached the discussions. The US-based students presented more
instances of Affect and Appreciation while Spain-based students tended to use Judgment markers. In
particular, US-based students presented more instances of Affect to talk about their C1 and the topics under
discussion in general. It was only when Spain-based students referred to C2 that they produced more Affect
markers--and used more positive than negative markers--than their US-based counterparts. This translates
into a desire on behalf of the Spain-based learners to create a positive atmosphere in telecollaborative
environments (Liaw & English, 2017; Vinagre, 2008). Using positive Affect markers to talk about C2 might
have also been a way for the Spain-based learners to soften their discourse, given that, similar to Vinagre
and Corral's (2017) study, Spain-based learners made more use of Judgment markers than their US-based
partners did. Additionally, the overall higher presence of Judgment markers provides further support to the
idea that being critical is considered a positive trait in Spain while in U.S. culture being critical and
opinionated are considered to be negative personality traits. In fact, the higher presence of the Propriety
category in the Spain-based learners illustrates that these students did not hesitate to show their mostly
negative opinions about the ethical values presented by their C1 and, to a lesser extent, by the behaviors
observed in the other culture. Finally, the fact that when discussing C1 or C2, US-based learners used more
instances of Impact markers reflects how, rather than focusing on human behavior, they were more inclined
to discuss the consequences of the different immigration policies and practices and the effects of
nationalism in both countries.
The third question sought to determine how L2 learners negotiate their ideological position depending on

148

Language Learning & Technology

the topic when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous telecollaborative interactions. The results of the
study illustrate that learners produced more monoglossic statements when discussing nationalism than when
discussing immigration. Even when using heteroglossic statements, learners produced more contracting
(Proclaim and Disclaim) strategies than expanding strategies on the topic of nationalism. When discussing
this topic, after brief references to definitions or to other comments, learners were likely to provide their
own personal viewpoints. Moreover, as mentioned above, both Spain and the US were going through very
politically charged moments at the time of the study. L2 learners in this study used more bare assertions
both to present their own opinions about what was happening in their country, as well as to create solidarity
with their telecollaborative partners. On the other hand, L2 learners employed more expanding strategies
to talk about immigration, indicating that learners were open to different alternatives and to building
knowledge based on questions posted and threads discussed in the online forums. Like in Wu and Allison's
(2005) study, L2 learners frequently made use of attributions (expanding strategy) and referred to both
external sources that provided support to their thoughts and additional information that added new
dimensions to their work and to that of their classmates, either answering their questions or building upon
the joint discovery of immigration laws or different perspectives of nationalism. When comparing the two
topics, therefore, it seems that nationalism provided more leeway for an emotional discussion in which
learners expressed their inner emotions and deeper feelings, which to some extent limited the negotiation
space (Wu & Allison, 2005), while the less-frequent presence of both monoglossic and contracting
strategies when talking about immigration can imply the conduciveness of this topic to a more open and
informed dialogue.
Our fourth and final question examined whether there were differences in L2 learners' use of linguistic
markers for Attitude, depending on the topic, when referring to C1, C2, and T in asynchronous
telecollaborative interactions. The results suggest that while learners presented similar attitudinal markers
when referring to immigration and nationalism or patriotism regarding C2 and T, the differences in Attitude
between the two topics chiefly rested on how learners approached their C1. As such, when addressing the
topic of immigration, students often rejected the negative implications and consequences of their country's
practices and policies regarding this issue. The fact that these results were accompanied by negative
affective values illustrates the negative emotions that this topic brought forth. Finally, the fact that students
produced significantly more instances of Normality and Capacity when discussing the Topic of immigration
in general terms displays the prevalence of using T as a neutral space to express Judgement, avoiding
reference to either C1 or C2. When discussing nationalism, however, learners presented higher instances of
positive Affect markers. In particular, they used expressions of Cheer and Affection to express their
emotions, particularly pride, about their own country. This corroborates the idea that learners provide a
positive view to create a friendly environment, which is effective for successful interaction (Vinagre, 2008;
Morand & Ocker, 2003). It was initially surprising to discover the presence of negative Judgment markers
to talk about C2. However, this could be explained if we take into account that this conversation took place
at the time when nationalism was a very heated topic in both countries. Students from the US, for example,
found it difficult to understand that some Spanish autonomous regions sought independence. Likewise,
Spanish students commented on several of the racist and misogynistic comments heard during the 2016
U.S. elections. Similarly, to the debate on immigration, L2 learners used their interactions about the topic
in general to talk about Propriety, supporting the idea that learners felt safer judging ethical behaviors or
evaluating attitudes when talking about the topic, without addressing any particular culture.

Conclusion
The results of this study confirmed the differences in discursive style between learners from two different
countries. This, in itself, is not a negative implication, but it might suggest the need to make L2 learners
aware of different styles both in terms of how they and their collaborative partners present Attitude and
how they engage with the content. This by no means implies that we need to change our learner's
communicative styles, but to make them open to different discursive practices that they will find in this
increasingly globalized world. Our results also highlight that despite the unique and distinctive discourse

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

149

patterns of the different groups, students also performed differently when addressing the L2 culture, being
perchance more respectful and tentative than when addressing their own. This indicates an interest and
desire, on the learners' behalf, to develop an environment conducive to successful interaction that, in turn,
will facilitate intercultural communication. The results of the study also illustrate the impact that the topic
has on our learners' discourse practices. Topics that require the learners to delve beyond their personal and
emotional opinions and push them to provide an informed opinion based on evidence may encourage them
to add newly discovered dimensions to their work.
There are a number of limitations to this study. First, the small sample size prevents us from being able to
extrapolate the results to a larger population. Second, given the different discursive practices between the
two groups of students, it would have been of interest to provide students with a questionnaire to understand
more about the extent to which the different styles of communication influenced the online discussion.
Third, although the topics of the tasks did indeed lead to different reactions from the L2 learners, they were
still considered heated and controversial topics. It would be of interest to investigate how learners present
attitude and engage with the topics, moving from more neutral to more controversial. Fourth, it would also
be of interest to learn how L2 learners use attitude markers and engagement statements when addressing
C1, C2 and T in their first language and L2. Without a doubt, continuing this line of research will provide
us with valuable information regarding learners' true engagement in telecollaborative environments.
Finally, the work of Bednarek (2009), Ngo and Unsworth (2015), and Su and Hunston (forthcoming) is
directing research based on the Appraisal framework to a more finetuned analysis of the data that takes into
account the lexis, the context and the association between language patterns and attitudinal meanings.
From a pedagogical point of view, the results from this study have a number of implications. First, it is
advisable to discuss with L2 learners the various discursive patterns that may arise depending on the country
their counterparts are based in. It is not a matter of asking students to change their discourse styles in terms
of engagement or attitude, but for them to be aware of each other's style (Byrnes, 1986) and, thus, help to
avoid misunderstandings. Second, L2 learners should also be made aware that these different discursive
patterns belong to the sphere of cultural awareness, which to a large extent is the core of such classroom
practices. Third, the online forum entries can be used as models that L2 learners can analyze to understand
different styles and patterns, which they could potentially learn to emulate when communicating in the
target language (Belz & Vyatkina, 2005, 2008). Learning more about their discursive practices will allow
us to create a space that provides and nurtures the true dialogue needed for successful telecollaboration.

References
Adichie, C. (2009). Adichie Chimanda: The danger of a single story [Video file]. Retrieved from
https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story?language=en
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future language teachers' social and cognitive collaboration in an online
environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42-63. Retrieved from
https://www.lltjournal.org/item/2533
Bauer, B., de Benedette, L., Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., & Waryn, S. (2006). The Cultura Project. In J. A.
Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 31-62).
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Bednarek, M. (2009). Language patterns and ATTITUDE. Functions of Language, 16(2), 165-192.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved from https://www.lltjournal.org/item/2373
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68-99. Retrieved from
https://www.lltjournal.org/item/2431

150

Language Learning & Technology

Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2005). Learner corpus analysis and the development of L2 pragmatic
competence in networked intercultural language study: The case of German modal particles.
Canadian Modern Language Review, 62(1), 17-48.
Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2008). The pedagogical mediation of a developmental learner corpus for
classroom-based language instruction. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 33-52.
doi:https://dx.doi.org/10125/44154, Retrieved from https://www.lltjournal.org/item/2640
Benson, P. (2015). Commenting to learn: Evidence of language and intercultural learning in comments on
YouTube videos. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 88-105.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10125/44435. Retrieved from https://www.lltjournal.org/item/2921
Byrnes, H. (1986). Interactional style in German and American conversations. Text, 2(1), 189-206.
Chun, D. (2011). Developing Intercultural Communicative Competence through Online Exchanges.
CALICO Journal, 28(2), 392-419.
Council of Europe (2001). The common European framework of reference for languages: Learning,
teaching, assessment. Retrieved from http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/CADRE_EN.asp
Council of Europe (2008). White paper on intercultural dialogue. Living together as equals in dignity.
Retrieved from http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/intercultural/source/white%20paper_final_revised_en.pdf
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering intercultural competence development in foreign
language and study abroad contexts. Foreign Language Annals, 41(3), 421-444.
Garrett-Rucks, P. (2013). A discussion-based online approach to fostering deep cultural inquiry in an
introductory language course. Foreign Language Annals, 46, 191-212. doi:10.1111/flan.12026
House, J. (2000). Understanding misunderstanding: A pragmatic-discourse approach to analysing
mismanaged rapport in talk across cultures. In H. Spencer-Oatey (Ed.), Culturally speaking.
Managing relations across cultures (pp. 145-165). London: Continuum.
Hunt, K. W. (1965). Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. Champaign, IL: National
Council of Teachers of English.
Iedema, R., Feez, S., & White, P. R. (1994). Media literacy (Write it right literacy in industry research
project - Stage 2). Sydney: Metropolitan East Disadvantaged Schools Program.
Lee, L. (2018). Using Telecollaboration 2.0 to Build Intercultural Communicative Competence: A
Spanish-American Exchange. In D. Tafazoli, M. E. Gomez Parra, & C. A. Huertas-Abril (Eds.),
Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Technology-Enhanced Language Learning (pp. 303-321). Hershey,
PA: IGI Global.
Lee, S. H. (2010). Attribution in high- and low-graded persuasive essays by tertiary students. Functions of
Language, 17, 181-206. doi:10.1075/fol.17.2.02lee
Liaw, M.-L., & English, K. (2017). Identity and addresivity in the Beyond these Walls program. System,
64, 74-86.
Martin, J. R., & White, P. R. (2005). The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English. New York, NY:
Palgrave.
McCabe, A. (2017). Knowledge and interaction in on-line discussions in Spanish by advanced language
learners. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(5), 409-431.
Morand, D. A., & Ocker, R. J. (2003). Politeness theory and computer-mediated communication: A
sociolinguistic approach to analyzing relational messages. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii.

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

151

Ngo, T., & Unsworth, L. (2015) Reworking the appraisal framework in ESL research: refining attitude
resources. Functional Linguistics, 2(1), 1-24.
Oskoz, A. (2009). Using Online Forums to Integrate the Standards into the Foreign Language
Curriculum. In V. Scott (Ed.), Principles and Practices of the Standards in College Foreign
Language Education. (pp. 106-125). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Oskoz, A. (2013). Let's Enhance Learners' Cultural Discussions: Developing a Community of Inquiry in
a Blended Course. In Z. Akyol & R. Garrison (Eds.), Educational Communities of Inquiry:
Theoretical Framework, Research and Practice. (pp. 267-294). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Oskoz, A., & Gimeno-Sanz, A. (in press). Exploring L2 learners' engagement and attitude in an
intercultural encounter. Language Learning & Technology, 24(1).
Oskoz, A., Gimeno-Sanz, A., & Sevilla-Pavon, A. (2018). Exploring learner written discourse in a
university telecollaboration project. In Mousten, B., Vandepitte, S., Arno, E., & Maylath, B. (Eds.),
Multilingual Writing and Pedagogical Cooperation in Virtual Learning Environments (pp. 200-220).
Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Oskoz, A., & Perez-Broncano, O. (2016). What did you say? How did you say it? Linguistic choices in
online discussions. Foreign Language Annals, 49(4), 772-788.
Ryshina-Pankova, M. (2014). Exploring academic argumentation in course-related blogs through
ENGAGEMENT. In G. Thompson & L. Alba (Eds.), Evaluation in context (pp. 281-302).
Philadelphia: PA: John Benjamins.
Ryshina-Pankova, M. (2018). Discourse moves and intercultural communicative competence in
telecollaborative chats. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 218-239. Retreived from
https://www.lltjournal.org/item/3036
Schenker, T. (2012). Intercultural Competence and Cultural Learning through Telecollaboration. CALICO
Journal, 29(3), 449-470.
Su, H. & Hunston, S. (forthcoming) Language patterns and ATTITUDE revisited: Adjective patterns,
Attitude and Appraisal. Functions of Language.
Swain, E. (2010). Getting engaged: Dialogistic positioning in novice academic discussion writing. In E.
Swain (Ed.), Thresholds and potentialities of systemic functional linguistics: Multilingual,
multimodal and other specialised discourses (pp. 291-317). Trieste: EUT Edizioni Universita di
Trieste.
Vinagre, M. (2008). Politeness strategies in collaborative e-mail exchanges. Computers & Education,
50(3), 1022-1036.
Vinagre, M., & Corral, A. (2017). Evaluative language for rapport building in virtual collaboration: An
analysis of Appraisal in computer-mediated interaction. Journal of Language and Intercultural
Communication, 1-19.
Vinagre, M., & Suarez, M. (2018). El uso de la cortesia linguistica en la peticion en espanol y aleman:
Estudio de un caso en un entorno virtual. Resla, 31(2), 686-709.
Weasenforth, D., Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Meloni, C. (2002). Realizing constructivist objectives through
collaborative technologies: Threaded discussions. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 58-86.
White, P. (1998). Telling media tales: The news story as rhetoric. (PhD), The University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia.
White, P. (2015). Introductory tour through appraisal theory. Retrieved from
http://www.grammatics.com/appraisal/AppraisalGuide/Framed/Frame.htm.

152

Language Learning & Technology

Wu. S. M., & Allison, D. (2005). Evaluative expressions in analytical arguments: Aspects of appraisal in
assigned English language essays. Journal of Applied Linguistics, 2(1), 105-127.

Appendix A. Examples of Expanding and Contracting Engagement Statements
Expanding Statements

Examples

Entertain Entertain

I do think that these symbols are used politically to form good
opinions of the country or advance specific ideologies.
Luis, it was very interesting to hear that in Spain people is not used to
demonstrating their sense of patriotic spirit (Acknowledge >
classmate)
According to the Oxford Dictionary, nationalism is defined as patriotic
feeling, principles, or efforts surrounding one's country
(Acknowledge > external sources)
Here is a website about southern secession, and it's honestly disturbing
to me (Distance > external sources)
I believe she left out a key part of that definition (Distance >
classmate)

Attribute Acknowledge

Distance

Contracting Statements

Examples

Proclaim Concur

I agree that to move on and make the country better you need to
remember the past

Pronounce
Endorse

Disclaim Deny

I take a lot of pride ... in representing my country with respect
wherever I am.
The quote "Nationalism is the poisonous idea that one's country is
superior to somebody else's [...]" does a good job showing how
negative nationalism can be for both individual countries and the
world in general. (Endorse > readings).
Like Alicia i agree with what she said about how during Labor Day,
Memorial Day and fourth of July our sense of nationalism is much
prominent than any other time during the year (Endorse > classmates).
I do not see these symbols being sold

Counter-expectation however, we do not show a particular pride in our country (Counter >
external sources).
but to keep the country on the same level of other countries does not
make sense to me. (Counter > classmates).

Appendix B. Examples of Attitude
Discourse
Marker
Affect

Sub-category
Happiness/
Unhappiness

Examples
I'm proud of being Spanish (Spain > C1 > Happiness > Affection) [...]
I will never feel proud of my country until this changes... (Spain > C1
Unhappiness > Misery)

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

Security/
Insecurity

153

As for accents, I think it's safe to say that you can definitely distinguish
where someone is from within the US based on their accent. (US > C1 >
Security > Confidence)
every day I'm surprised about the amount of people who still support
him (US > C1 > Insecurity > Surprise)

Satisfaction/
I like being Spanish (Spain > C1> Satisfaction > Pleasure/Admiration)
Dissatisfaction it really disappointing me because I have always thought that we are one
of the most prideful countries in the world, (US > C1> Dissatisfaction >
Displeasure)
Inclination/
There still are some people who have extreme southern pride that would
Disinclination want (US > Inclination > Desire) to become independent.
I'm really worried about how things are going to change (US > C1 >
Disinclination > Fear)
Judgment

Normality

Capacity

Tenacity

Veracity
Propriety

Appreciation Impact

Quality

Balance

Complexity

When I think of Spain, the bull comes to mine as well as the royal seal in
the flag and used on the Spanish soccer jersey (US > C2 > Normality +)
we do say the pledge of allegiance to our Flag every day in school (US >
C1 > Normality +)
and create (US > C1 > Capacity +) new opportunities
I think Spain, unlike other European countries like Germany or Italy,
will never get rid of (Spain > C1 > Capacity -) their dark past...
the Cataluna nationalist people has been trying (Spain > C1 > Tenacity
+) so hard to separate from Spain
The fact that many people in this country still think that way and have
been waiting (US > C1 > Tenacity -) for someone to represent them
i believe the two are very close together. (Spain > T > Veracity +)
or at least that was what I wanted to. (US > C1 > Veracity +)
whereas the Native Americans have been pushed away from mainstream
society and forced to assimilate. (US > C1> Propriety -)
here in Spain it will always represent for me the part of my country that
looks away from the crimes that our past hide (Spain > C1 > Propriety -)
I think the nationalism affects the politics (Spain > T > Impact +)
this is a great example of how someone's nationalism or patriotism can
be affected or changed (US > C1 > Impact -)
I don't think that you need to be so disappointed in your country because
that was one of the darkest periods (US > C2 > Quality -) in all of
history
it kind of sounds like there is a very strong lack of unity (Quality -)
among the country
I think I fall in a minority (US > T > Balance -) of those in the US
I believe she left out a key part (US > T > Balance -) of that definition
given by the Oxford dictionary
It's hard to make a clear distinction between these two terms (US > T >
Complexity +)
so depending on where are you from inside Spain, you I know it's hard
to compare (US > C2 > Complexity -)

154

Language Learning & Technology

Valuation

which is absolutely nothing (Spain > C1 > Valuation -) on an historical
perspective.
[these groups are] seen as a crucial part to the success of the nation
nothing (US > C1 > Valuation +)

Appendix C. Quantitative Analysis
Table 1. Engagement by Group
US-Based Learners

Spain-based learners

C1

C2

T

C1

C2

T

162

8 44%

98

5.10%

51

2.66%

439 22.86% 175

9.11% 187

9.74%

Entertain

75

3.91%

58

3.02%

34

1.77%

236 12.29% 102

5.31% 129

6.72%

Attribute

87

4.53%

40

2.08%

17

0.89%

203 10.57%

73

3.80%

58

3.02%

38

1.98%

21

1.09%

9

0.47%

135

7.03%

25

1.30%

37

1.93%

10

0.52%

15

0.78%

7

0.36%

38

1.98%

45

2.34%

17

0.89%

39

2.03%

4

0.21%

1

0.05%

28

1.46%

3

0.16%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

2

0.10%

0

0.00%

4

0.21%

Contract

189

9.84%

46

2.40% 109

5.68%

358 18.65%

22

1.15%

84

4.38%

Proclaim

124

6.46%

35

1.82%

93

4.84%

278 14.48%

10

0.52%

57

2.97%

Concur

7

0.36%

2

0.10%

4

0.21%

1.46%

2

0.10%

10

0.52%

103

5.36%

27

1.41%

86

4.48%

223 11.61%

8

0.42%

39

2.03%

Endorse
readings

3

0.16%

4

0.21%

2

0.10%

10

0.52%

0

0.00%

4

0. 21%

Endorse
classmate

11

0.57%

2

0.10%

1

0.05%

17

0.89%

0

0.00%

4

0. 21%

65

3.39%

11

0.57%

16

0.83%

80

4.17%

12

0.63%

27

1.41%

Deny

25

1.30%

8

0.42%

6

0.31%

20

1.04%

4

0. 21%

6

0.31%

Counter
readings

40

2.08%

3

0.16%

9

0.47%

55

2.86%

6

0.31%

17

0.89%

Counter
classmate

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

1

0.05%

5

0.26%

2

0.10%

4

0. 21%

7.50% 160

8.33%

Expand

Acknowledge
readings
Acknowledge
classmates
Distance
readings
Distance
classmate

Pronounce

Disclaim

Total

351 18.28% 144

28

797 41.51% 197 10.26% 271 14.11%

Table 2. Total tokens of Affect by group
Spain-based Learners
C1
Affect +

19

1.02

C2
13

0.78%

US-based Learners
T

8

0.42%

C1
50

C2
3.00% 17 1.02% 27

T
1.62%

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

155

1.80% 22

1.32%

3

0.18%

51

3.06%

6 0.36%

4

0.24%

3

0.18%

0

0.12%

0

0.06%

15 0.90%

1 0.06%

3

0.18%

Cheer

1

0.12%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

9 0.54%

1 0.06%

1

0.06%

Affection

2

0.06%

0

0.12%

0

0.06%

6 0.36%

0 0.00%

2

0.12%

Unhappiness

6

0.90%

7

0.42%

1

0.06%

24 1.44%

2 0.12%

1

0.06%

Misery

6

0.84%

7

0.42%

1

0.06%

23 1.38%

2 0.12%

1

0.06%

Antipathy

0

0.06%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

2

0.06%

4

0.12%

0

0.00%

17 1.02%

1 0.06%

7

0.42%

Confidence

2

0.06%

3

0.06%

0

0.00%

11 0.66%

1 0.06%

6

0.36%

Trust

0

0.00%

1

0.06%

0

0.00%

6 0.36%

0 0.00%

1

0.06%

Insecurity

4

0.24% 11

0.66%

1

0.06%

14 0.84%

3 0.18%

3

0.18%

Disquiet

1

0.06%

5

0.30%

0

0.00%

5 0.30%

0 0.00%

1

0.06%

Surprise

3

0.18%

6

0.36%

1

0.06%

9 0.54%

3 0.18%

2

0.12%

Satisfaction

7

0.36%

5

0.30%

7

0.37%

10 0.60%

4 0.24%

8

0.48%

Interest

3

0.18%

2

0.12%

2

0.06%

2 0.12%

3 0.18%

6

0.36%

Pleasure/Admiration

4

0.18%

3

0.18%

5

0.24%

8 0.48%

1 0.06%

2

0.12%

4

0.18%

0

0.00%

1

0.06%

7 0.42%

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

Ennui

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

Displeasure

4

0.18%

0

0.00%

1

0.06%

6 0.36%

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

7

0.36%

4

0.24%

1

0.06%

8 0.48% 11 0.66%

9

0.54%

7

0.36%

4

0.24%

1

0.06%

8 0.48% 11 0.66%

9

0.54%

0

0.00%

4

0.24%

0

0.00%

6 0.66%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

Fear

0

0.00%

4

0.24%

0

0.00%

6 0.66%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

Total

33

2.10% 11

0.66%

101 6.06% 23 1.38% 31

1.86%

Affect Happiness

Security

Dissatisfaction

Inclination
Desire
Disinclination

14

2.82% 35

Table 3. Total tokens of Judgment appraisal by group
Spain-based Learners
C1

C2

US-based learners
T

C1

C2

T

Judgment +

85 5.10% 18 1.08% 43 2.58%

152

9.12% 25 1.50% 54 3.24%

Judgment -

76 4.56% 17 1.02% 29 1.74%

110

6.60% 15 0.90% 14 0.84%

Positive Normality

59 3.54% 13 0.78% 25 1.50%

92

5.52% 19 1.14% 23 1.38%

Negative Normality

20 1.20%

8 0.48% 6 0.36%

25

1.50% 13 0.78%

Positive Capacity

7 0.42%

2 0.12% 8 0.48%

35

2.10%

3 0.18% 13 0.78%

Negative Capacity

18 1.08%

3 0.18% 3 0.18%

22

1.32%

1 0.06%

3 0.18%

Positive Tenacity

3 0.18%

0 0.00% 0 0.00%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

2 0.12%

Negative Tenacity

1 0.06%

1 0.06% 0 0.00%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

0 0.00%

Positive Veracity

13 0.78%

3 0.78% 5 0.30%

15

0.90%

3 0.18% 11 0.66%

4 0.24%

156

Language Learning & Technology

Negative Veracity

2 0.12%

0 0.00% 1 0.06%

6

0.36%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

Positive Propriety

3 0.18%

0 0.00% 5 0.30%

9

0.54%

0 0.00%

5 0.30%

Negative Propriety

35 2.10%

5 0.30% 19 1.14%

56

3.36%

1 0.06%

6 0.36%

Total

161 9.66% 35 2.10% 72 4.32%

262 15.73% 40 2.40% 68 4.08%

Table 4. Total tokens of Appreciation Appraisal by group
Spain-based Learners
C1

C2

US-based learners
T

C1

C2

T

Appreciation +

63 3.78% 13

0.78% 27

1.62%

139

8.34% 43 2.58%

83

4.98%

Appreciation -

74 4.44% 37

2.22% 33

1.98%

202 12.12% 38 2.28%

42

2.52%

0.12%

3

0.18%

30

1.80%

8 0.48%

26

1.56%

Reaction
Positive Impact

9 0.54%

2

Negative Impact

18 1.08% 11

0.66% 12

0.72%

67

4.02% 15 0.90%

15

0.90%

Positive Quality

44 2.64% 11

0.66% 20

1.20%

88

5.28% 31 1.86%

36

2.16%

Negative Quality

44 2.64% 20

1.20% 19

1.14%

105

6.30% 19 1.14%

18

1.08%

Composition
Positive Balance

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

1

0.06%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

Negative Balance

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

5

0.30%

1 0.06%

1

0.06%

Positive Complexity

8 0.48%

0

0.00%

3

0.18%

16

0.96%

4 0.24%

19

1.14%

Negative Complexity

4 0.24%

0

0.00%

2

0.12%

10

0.60%

2 0.12%

2

0.12%

Positive Valuation

2 0.12%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

4

0.24%

0 0.00%

3

0.18%

Negative Valuation

7 0.42%

6

0.36%

0

0.00%

15

0.90%

1 0.06%

5

0.30%

3.00% 60

3.60%

341 20.47% 81 4.86%

125

7.50%

Valuation

Total

137 8.22% 50

Table 5. Engagement by topic
Immigration (Spanish)
C1

C2

Nationalism or Patriotism (English)
T

C1

C2

T

Expand

267

13.91% 99 5.16%

154

8.02%

334 17.40%

174

9.06%

84

4.38%

Entertain

116

6.04% 52 2.71%

111

5.78%

195 10.16%

108

5.63%

52

2.71%

Attribute

151

7.86% 47 2.45%

43

2.24%

139

7.24%

66

3.44%

32

1.67%

Acknowledge Reading

86

4.48% 27 1.41%

25

1.30%

87

4.53%

19

0.99%

21

1.09%

Acknowledge
Classmate

24

1.25% 17 0.89%

17

0.89%

24

1.25%

43

2.24%

7

0.36%

Distance Readings

41

2.14%

3 0.1%

1

0.05%

26

1.35%

4

0.21%

0

0.00%

Distance Classmate

0

0%

0 0%

0

0%

2

0.10%

0

0.00%

4

0.21%

326 16.98%

57

2.97%

47

2.45%

Contract

221

11.51% 11 0.57%

146

7.60%

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

Proclaim

157

39

2.03%

35

1.88%

1.51%

3

0.16%

4

0.21%

200 10.42%

31

1.61%

25

1.30%

0.10%

4

0.21%

5

0.26%

20

1.04%

1

0.05%

1

0.05%

1.61%

75

3.91%

18

0.94%

12

0.63%

9

0.47%

26

1.35%

9

0.47%

3

0.16%

2 0.10%

17

0.89%

45

2.34%

7

0.36%

9

0.47%

0 0.00%

5

0.26%

4

0.21%

2

0.10%

0

0.00%

151

7.86%

6 0.31%

115

5.99%

6

0.31%

1 0.05%

10

0.52%

126

6.56%

4 0.21%

100

5.21%

11

0.57%

0 0.00%

1

0.05%

2

8

0.42%

1 0.05%

4

0.21%

Disclaim

70

3.65%

5 0.26%

31

Deny

19

0.99%

3 0.16%

Counter Reading

50

2.60%

1

0.05%

Concur
Pronounce
Endorse Reading
Endorse Classmate

Counter Classmate
Total

488

25.42% 110 5.73%

251 13.07%
29

300 15.63%

660 34.38%

231 12.03% 131 6.82%

Table 6. Total tokens of Affect Appraisal by topic
Forum

Immigration (Spanish)
C1

C2

Nationalism or Patriotism (English)
T

C1

C2

T

Affect +

17 1.02% 12

0.72% 23 1.38%

52

3.12% 18 1.08% 12 0.72%

Affect -

30 1.80%

9

0.54%

6 0.36%

35

2.10% 19 1.14%

1 0.06%

3 0.18%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

15

0.90%

1 0.06%

2 0.12%

Cheer

2 0.12%

0

0.00%

0 0.00%

8

0.48%

1 0.06%

1 0.06%

Affection

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

7

0.42%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

Unhappiness

15 0.90%

3

0.18%

2 0.12%

15

0.90%

6 0.36%

0 0.00%

14 0.84%

3

0.18%

2 0.12%

15

0.90%

6 0.36%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

0 0.06%

0 0.00%

3 0.18%

1

0.06%

3 0.18%

16

0.96%

4 0.24%

4 0.24%

Confidence

3 0.18%

1

0.06%

3 0.18%

10

0.60%

3 0.18%

3 0.18%

Trust

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

1 0.00%

6

0.36%

1 0.06%

1 0.06%

Insecurity

8 0.48%

5

0.30%

3 0.18%

10

0.60%

9 0.54%

1 0.06%

Disquiet

1 0.06%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

5

0.30%

4 0.24%

1 0.06%

Surprise

7 0.42%

4

0.24%

3 0.18%

5

0.30%

5 0.30%

0 0.00%

Satisfaction

8 0.48%

6

0.36% 12 0.72%

9

0.54%

3 0.18%

3 0.18%

Interest

4 0.24%

4

0.24%

8 0.48%

1

0.06%

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

Pleasure/Admiration

4 0.24%

2

0.12%

4 0.24%

8

0.48%

2 0.12%

3 0.18%

5 0.30%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

6

0.36%

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

Ennui

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

0 0.00%

0

0.00%

0 0.00%

0 0.00%

Displeasure

4 0.24%

0

0.00%

1 0.06%

6

0.30%

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

3 0.18%

5

0.30%

7 0.42%

12

0.72% 10 0.60%

3 0.18%

3 0.18%

5

0.30%

7 0.42%

12

0.72% 10 0.60%

3 0.18%

2 0.12%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

4

0.24%

0 0.00%

Happiness

Misery
Antipathy
Security

Dissatisfaction

Inclination
Desire
Disinclination

3 0.18%

158

Fear
Total

Language Learning & Technology

2 0.12%

1

47 2.82% 21

0.06%

0 0.00%

4

1.26% 29 1.74%

87

0.24%

0 0.00%

3 0.18%

5.22% 39 2.22% 13 0.78%

Table 7. Total tokens of Judgment Appraisal by topic
Immigration (Spanish)
C1

C2

Nationalism or Patriotism (English)
T

C1

C2

T

26 1.56% 29 1.74%

Judgment +

96 5.76%

17 1.02% 67

4.67%

142 8.52%

Judgment -

107 6.42%

17 1.02% 36

2.04%

78 4.68%

15 0.90%

Positive Normality

64 3.84%

11 0.66% 35

2.52%

87 5.22%

21 1.26% 13 0.78%

Negative Normality

22 1.32%

10 0.60% 10

0.60%

23 1.38%

11 0.66%

0 0.00%

Positive Capacity

17 1.02%

2 0.12% 19

1.20%

25 1.50%

3 0.18%

2 0.12%

Negative Capacity

22 1.32%

2 0.12%

4

0.18%

18 1.08%

2 0.12%

2 0.12%

Positive Tenacity

1 0.06%

0 0.00%

1

0.06%

3 0.18%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

Negative Tenacity

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

0

0.00%

2 0.12%

0 0.00%

0 0.00%

Positive Veracity

10 0.60%

4 0.24%

7

0.48%

18 1.08%

2 0.12%

9 0.54%

Negative Veracity

6 0.36%

0 0.00%

1

0.00%

2 0.12%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

Positive Propriety

4 0.24%

0 0.00%

5

1.68%

8 0.48%

0 0.00%

5 0.30%

Negative Propriety

57 3.42%

4 0.24% 21

1.26%

34 2.04%

2 0.12%

4 0.24%

Total

203 12.18% 34 2.04% 103 6.18%

8 0.48%

220 13.21% 41 2.46% 37 2.22%

Table 8. Total tokens of Appreciation Appraisal by topic
Immigration (Spanish)
C1

C2

Nationalism or Patriotism (English)
T

C1

C2

T

Appreciation +

76

4.56% 14 0.84% 62 3.72%

129

7.74%

42 2.46% 48

2.88%

Appreciation -

122

7.32% 19 1.14% 63 3.78%

151

9.06%

56 3.18% 12

0.66%

Positive Impact

11

0.66%

2 0.12% 20 1.20%

28

1.68%

8 0.42%

9

0.48%

Negative Impact

29

1.74%

4 0.24% 10 1.14%

56

3.36%

22 0.20%

8

0.36%

Positive Quality

54

3.24% 12 0.72% 37 2.22%

78

4.68%

30 1.80% 19

1.08%

Negative Quality

70

4.20% 11 0.66% 36 2.16%

79

4.74%

28 1.62%

1

0.06%

Positive Balance

0

0.00%

0 0.00%

0 0.00%

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

1

0.06%

Negative Balance

2

0.12%

0 0.00%

0 0.00%

4

0.24%

1 0.06%

1

0.06%

Positive Complexity

9

0.54%

0 0.00%

5 0.30%

15

0.90%

4 0.24% 17

1.02%

Negative Complexity

6

0.36%

0 0.00%

3 0.18%

8

0.48%

2 0.12%

1

0.12%

Positive Valuation

1

0.06%

0 0.00%

1 0.06%

5

0.36%

0 0.00%

2

0.24%

Negative Valuation

16

0.96%

4 0.24%

4 0.24%

6

0.36%

3 0.18%

1

0.06%

98 5.64% 60

3.54%

Total

198 11.88% 33 1.98% 125 7.50%

280 16.80%

Ana Oskoz and Ana Gimeno-Sanz

159

Appendix D. Translations from Spanish into English
Excerpt 1

In our last conversation, we started talking about the unique history of immigration and how it affects
our views of countries such as Spain and the US. According to Webster's Dictionary, an English
dictionary that English speakers highly trust, immigration is the act of arriving in a country that is not
a native to obtain permanent residency. With this definition of immigration, we have to think of the
following: the stereotypes of immigrants, and how do relations between immigrants and natives affect
the country (David, US, Online forum).
Excerpt 2

In reply to David's comments, the issue of immigration is very present here in Spain because we
receive people from different countries. These people seek to immigrate to Spain because they think
they will be able to lead a better life than they would in their own country. Spaniards react increasingly
negatively to the increasing number of immigrants. They justify this ideology saying that these people
who come from other countries take jobs away from us, therefore preventing the country from
overcoming the financial crisis it is going through (Paco, Spain, Online forum).
Excerpt 3

I recently read an article on the Internet on Economy that argued the financial benefits and
disadvantages of immigration. Although the Internet article mentioned the increasing competitiveness
of the labor market due to immigration, however it is the subsequent changes that worry us. For
example, there is the possibility of reducing the salaries of the native workers, less benefits, and a
larger elderly population... (David, US, Online forum).
Excerpt 4

Regarding what David said, it is absolutely true that regarding national security, immigration,
immigration can on many occasions be a disadvantage because of the terrorist attacks like the 9/11
one. Browsing through the Internet, I found this definition: "National Security is an important
component of the effort made by a country to balance facilitation and control of immigration." (Paco,
Spain, Online forum).
Excerpt 5

I think the economy is not affected by immigration. Also, I believe that in certain parts of the US,
people feel entitled to jobs even if the immigrants are better in the position. In the US, `the brain drain'
is when smart people immigrate to a western country and use their skills. I think this makes the
economy stronger (Anastasia, US, Online forum).
Excerpt 8

This Alabama law, "HB 56", completely attacked every aspect of immigrants' lives, making it illegal
for property owners to rent out to undocumented immigrants (Carolina, US, Online forum).

About the Authors
Ana Oskoz is Full Professor at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) where she teaches
courses in Spanish and second language acquisition. In her research, Ana Oskoz focuses on digital writing
literacies and intercultural competence development. She is also Co-Editor of the CALICO Journal.

160

Language Learning & Technology

E-mail: aoskoz@umbc.edu
Ana Gimeno is Full Professor of English Language in the Department of Applied Linguistics at the
Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain. She is Head of the CAMILLE Research Group and is President
of WorldCALL. She is also editor-in-chief of EuroCALL's online scientific journal, The EuroCALL Review
and Associate Editor of ReCALL (CUP).
E-mail: agimeno@upvnet.upv.es

