Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

On verbal memory span in Chinese speakers: Evidence for employment of
an articulation-resistant phonological component
Alan D. Baddeley a, *, Zhan Xu b, Sai Tung Ho a, Graham J. Hitch a
a
b

Department of Psychology, University of York, UK
Faculty of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Short-term memory
Chinese language
Phonological similarity
Subvocal articulation

A striking feature of speakers of Chinese is the fact that their immediate verbal memory span tends to be sub
stantially greater than is found for other languages. This is not limited to digits, nor is it is it adequately
accounted for in terms of spoken duration. We explore two sources of this potential linguistic advantage, one is in
terms of supplementary visual coding. We use the visual similarity effect to assess this hypothesis finding little
support for its importance. The second approach assesses the role of subvocal articulation, using articulatory
suppression which has been shown to remove the impact of phonological similarity on the recall of visually
presented verbal sequences. We find that the phonological similarity effect remains in both Mandarin and
Cantonese speakers, suggesting that Chinese language speakers may be able to maintain a phonological repre
sentation of the material despite concurrent articulation of an irrelevant utterance. We discuss a possible
mechanism and its theoretical implications. Finally, we speculate that this enhanced capacity may reflect an
adaptation to the demands of learning to map the Chinese writing system onto a complex tonal language.

As pointed out in the influential paper by Henrich, Heine and Nor
enzayan (2010), the empirical background to current psychological
science is dominated by research on participants from societies that are
Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich and Democratic (WEIRD).
Henrich et al. describe a number of areas where this population bias can
potentially be actively misleading and emphasise the importance of
distinguishing the more general and broadly replicable aspects of psy
chology from those that are culturally or environmentally dependent.
They illustrate their case using a number of areas most of which have a
clear potential for cultural influence and list only two within the broad
area of cognitive psychology, namely visual illusions and reasoning.
However, this does not of course mean that other cognitive areas are
immune from such factors.
There has for example been extensive recent work on the interface
between environment, language and perception across an impressively
wide range of cultures. One approach uses the number of words in the
language related to each of the major senses as an indicator of their
relative importance within that culture, finding an overall tendency for
vision to dominate and for taste and smell to be least prominent (Winter,
Perlman & Majid, 2018). However as shown in a study involving 20
languages and three sign languages, considerable variability was found

(Majid, Roberts, Cilissen, Emmorey et al., 2018). A notable exception for
example came from the language of hunter gatherers where smell pro
vided a much more prominent proportion of vocabulary. Moreover,
when two groups operating in the same environment were compared,
the hunter gatherers had more smell-related words than agriculturalists
and were better at odor naming while no difference was found for
naming colors (Majid & Kruspe, 2018).
While the aim of these studies was principally theoretical, there are
also important practical reasons for extending the existing literature
across a wider range of languages and cultures. A good example of this
came from the need to assess the effects on cognition of the parasitic
infections commonly found in children in developing nations. Interna
tional concern has been expressed about the adverse effects of such in
fections on children's school achievement (Halloran, Bundy & Pollitt,
1989). However, the evidence was principally correlational, children
with a heavier parasitic load tend to perform less well than those who
are less infected. Unfortunately, such children also tend to be disad
vantaged on a range of other potentially important factors including
greater poverty and poorer nutrition. Resolving this problem requires an
experimental approach involving matched groups in which one group is
treated and another not (at least until after completion of the study).

* Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK.
E-mail address: a.baddeley@york.ac.uk (A.D. Baddeley).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2022.104389
Received 8 August 2021; Received in revised form 12 August 2022; Accepted 13 November 2022
Available online 5 December 2022
0749-596X/(c) 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

with English consistently the most rapidly spoken and the greatest span,
with one notable exception: Chinese. Fig. 1 illustrates the results of six
studies showing superior digit spans in Chinese than English (Chan &
Elliott, 2011; Chen, Cowell, Varley & Wang, 2009; Chincotta & Under
wood, 1997; Elliott, 1992; Mattys & Baddeley, 2019; Stigler, Lee &
Stevenson, 1986). The difference is a large effect (d >.8 for five of the six
comparisons shown) and is commonly attributed to more rapid articu
lation of Chinese digits allowing faster refreshing via subvocal rehearsal.
The word length effect itself was initially attributed by Baddeley et al.
(1975) to the capacity of rapid rehearsal to refresh a fading memory
trace. However, while time-based trace decay provides a simple account
of these findings and is proposed by some theorists (e.g. Baddeley &
Hitch, 2019; Barrouillet & Camos, 2015, Mueller, Seymour, Kieras &
Meyer, 2003), others propose a range of alternative explanations (e.g.
Caplan, Rochon & Waters, 1992; Jalbert, Neath & Surprenant, 2011;
Neath & Nairne, 1995; Service, 2000). That said, the precise nature of
forgetting as addressed by these studies is not central to our investiga
tion and indeed, even supporters of the time-based decay approach
agree that something more than speed of articulation must be assumed
in order to explain the superior span of Chinese speakers (Zhang &
Simon, 1985; Mattys & Baddeley, 2019). The present series of experi
ments attempts to throw light on this missing factor.
One possible explanation is that the logographic nature of Chinese
writing allows a supplementary visual contribution to span. Potential
support for this hypothesis came from a series of experiments by Saito,
Logie, Morita & Law (2008) comparing the roles of visual and phono
logical similarity in Japanese speakers' immediate serial recall of logo
graphic Kanji characters. A major determinant of immediate serial recall
in alphabetic languages such as English is within-sequence phonological
similarity which markedly impairs performance (Conrad & Hull, 1964;
Baddeley, 1966). However, while it is possible to show equivalent visual
similarity effects in English, these are weaker and much more difficult to
demonstrate (Logie, Della Sala, Wynn, & Baddeley, 2000; see also
Chubala, Guitard, Neath, Saint-Aubin & Surprenant, 2020). In contrast,
using visually presented pictographic Japanese Kanji characters Saito
et al. (2008) showed reliable visual similarity effects across three
studies, raising the possibility that the enhanced span shown by Chinese
speakers could be the result of a capacity of logographic characters to
provide a supplement to the standard phonologically-based recall per
formance. We describe a series of experiments beginning with the sup
plementary visual coding hypothesis before moving on to explore other
potential interpretations.

Because of the distribution of infection, such studies involve testing
groups of children in poor areas of developing nations where literacy can
not be assumed. One such study involved adapting existing tests origi
nally developed within the cognitive laboratory to assess children in a
remote community where parasitic load was greatest and literacy could
not be assumed. Tests of long-term and working memory, visual search
and semantic processing were successfully developed and applied within
a remote Tanzanian fishing village (Baddeley, Gardner & GranthamMcGregor, 1995). A particular issue arose on the educational tests
which were based on the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT). This,
like most tests of early reading in English capitalised on the capacity to
pronounce words with irregular letter to sound spelling. The local lan
guage was Kiswahili which has a very regular letter to sound corre
spondence. Consequently, simply translating the original test did not
work since once the basic rule had been mastered, performance was at
ceiling. However, this did not imply that the constituent words had been
understood as reflected in the capacity to discriminate words from nonwords. This led to the development of a three-stage lexical decision test
in which the child had first to detect real letters among letter-like shapes,
then decide between words and nonwords and finally to read simple
sentences and decide which were true and which false (Alcock et al.,
2000). The test correlated well with teachers' ratings while the method
was later validated using an English version against more standard tests
(Gathercole & Baddeley, 1996). The method is readily adaptable to any
language, including those with regular spelling to sound orthographies.
A Portuguese version has been developed in Brazil (Pinheiro et al.,
2015).
A third way in which crosslinguistic studies can be fruitful is when a
laboratory-based finding can be shown to be directly applicable to a
practical problem. A good example of this stems from the demonstration
of the effect on verbal STM of the length of the words being retained
with longer words associated with shorter spans (Baddeley, Thomson &
Buchanan, 1975). Naveh-Benjamin and Ayres (1986) observed that the
spoken length of digits varied markedly across languages. They went on
to show a clear and reliable association between recall and span ranging
from English, their most rapidly spoken sample, through Spanish, He
brew and Arabic, the slowest with over two syllables per digit. Since
digit span forms a prominent component of clinical and educational tests
worldwide, it illustrates the potential danger of simply mapping scores
from one language to another.
The Naveh Benjamin and Ayres (1986) study led to the study of the
length and span relationship across a wide range of further languages

Fig. 1. Digit span in English and Chinese speakers. (Key to studies: a = Stigler et al. (1986); b = Elliot (1992); c = Chincotta and Underwood (1997); d = Chen et al.
(2009); e = Mattys and Baddeley (2019); f = Chan and Elliot (2011)). Error bars indicate 95 % Confidence Intervals.
2

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

From Conrad and Hull's (1964) study onwards, the most commonly
used method of investigating the type of coding underpinning verbal
STM performance is by manipulating within-list similarity, whereby
greater similarity impairs performance. The effect has been shown to
reflect within-list rather than between-list similarity (Baddeley, Hitch, &
Quinlan, 2018) and to operate principally by disrupting recall of serial
order (Wickelgren, 1965). In its simplest form, a limited set of items is
used repeatedly since increasing the set size increases the contribution of
item memory. This in turn is likely to increase the potential contribution
from long-term memory, particularly with an open set procedure in
which different items are used on every trial (Baddeley, Hitch & Allen,
2009). Our aim is to investigate the main system underlying immediate
serial recall, the phonological loop component within the multicompo
nent model of working memory (Baddeley & Hitch, 2019), and to ach
ieve this we opt for the limited set size procedure.
One danger of such an approach is the risk that the particular set of
items selected may be atypical (Clark, 1973), a particular problem when
constraints are tight, as in the comparison of similar- and dissimilarsounding letters from the available pool of 26 in English, or in the
case of words, trying to construct sets that are matched on all but the
crucial variable being studied. One answer to this problem is to replicate
using several different sets of items before concluding that an effect is
reliable. This is the approach we take in our Mandarin studies where we
use two different sets of three items for each condition. Finally, it is
important to ensure that the set chosen does not offer differential
encoding strategies between conditions. For example, a set of rhyming
words can be encoded and remembered as a sequence of initial letters to
which the common rhyme can be added at retrieval, hence avoiding the
similarity effect. This method is not available to the dissimilar control
set, where both onset and rhyme differ across items, potentially making
retention of the similar set easier (Gupta, Lipinski & Aktunc, 2005). This
strategy can be avoided if similarity is based for example on a common
vowel, with both initial and terminal consonants occurring more than
once (e.g. "mat, can, man, cat, map"), the approach we take here.
The need to balance conditions across a range of potentially impor
tant variables such as visual similarity, phonological similarity and
frequency makes it difficult to create the sets of six to eight items
necessary for a pure list design. One way around this is to have two sets
of three items of the same type, for example both sets being visually but
not phonologically similar. This approach was shown to be viable by
Saito et al. (2008) and is adopted in our first three studies.
In their initial study, Saito et al. (2008) systematically compared the
influence of within-list phonological and visual similarity over three
experiments using visually presented Kanji characters. Historically,
these originally derived from Chinese but are now much changed and
may be combined in written Japanese by a later syllabic script known as
Kana. Their first experiment showed clear evidence of both phonological
and visual similarity effects.
Two further experiments took advantage of the fact that earlier ev
idence has shown that the influence of phonological similarity can be
removed when items are presented visually and subvocalization pre
vented by articulatory suppression, continuously repeating an irrelevant
sound such as the word "the" (Baddeley, Lewis & Vallar, 1984; Murray
1968; Larsen & Baddeley, 2003). This is assumed to occur because
vocalisation is necessary to convert the written items to a phonological
form suitable for retention within the loop. Saito et al. (2008) showed
that concurrent articulatory suppression abolished the phonological
similarity effect for Kanji characters while the effect of visual similarity
remained, as expected given the existing literature. A subsequent study
by Logie, Saito, Morita, Varma and Norris (2016) extended these find
ings and then applied the Page and Norris (1998) model of serial recall
initially developed to explain the role of phonological similarity. They
found that the error pattern due to visual similarity was broadly
equivalent to that previously shown for its phonological equivalent
implying comparable underlying processes. These studies are therefore
consistent with a role for visual coding in logographic reading systems

that could potentially provide a supplement to the phonological coding
that typifies recall in alphabetic scripts.
Our own studies begin by attempting to extend the Saito et al. (2008)
findings to the immediate serial recall and serial recognition of six item
sequences by Chinese speakers, again varying both visual and phono
logical similarity. Our hypothesis was that a clear visual similarity effect
would be found that could potentially provide an explanation of the
enhanced verbal memory span in Mandarin speakers.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 attempted to explore the influence of visual and
phonological similarity across a sample of native speakers of Mandarin
Chinese. In order to ensure generality, half the participants were tested
by written serial recall and half by a serial order reconstruction task
whereby the set of items was displayed simultaneously and selected in
their order of presentation. Visual similarity was varied over two levels
whereas phonological similarity was varied over three levels according
to the phonological and tonal content of the characters.
The data for this experiment and all other experiments within this
series are freely available from the Open Science Framework:
https://osf.io/7ejb8/?view_only=a2117dc89013401387b0b44b104
6e0d6
Method
Participants
Two groups of 24 undergraduates who were all native speakers of
Chinese Mandarin participated. Half were female and their ages ranged
from 18 to 25, with a mean of 20.4 years. One group was tested using
recall and one using serial order reconstruction. They were paid a small
sum for their participation. This and Experiments 2 and 3 were approved
by the Psychology Ethics Committee of Southwest University and Ex
periments 4 and 5 by the Psychology Ethics Committee of the University
of York and involved the informed consent of the participants. Sample
sizes of independent groups in Experiments 1, 2 and 3 were in the same
range as those reported by Saito et al. (2008).
Design and materials
The experiment involved a three Phonological Similarity (high vs
moderate vs low) by two Visual Similarity (high vs low) factorial
repeated measures design. Half of the participants were tested using
serial recall and half using serial reconstruction in separate miniexperiments. Order of testing the six conditions was counterbalanced
over participants using a Latin square.
Each condition involved a set of six Chinese characters with mono
syllabic CV pronunciation. Because it was impractical to create sets in
which all six characters were phonologically or visually similar, we
followed Saito et al., (2008) by forming two equivalent subsets of three
characters and combining them to make up each condition. High
phonological similarity subsets shared the same vowels, consonants and
almost the same tones, moderate phonological similarity subsets shared
the same vowels or consonants (half-half) but were each different in
tone, and low phonological similarity sets differed in consonants, vowels
and tones. Visual similarity was defined in terms of whether or not the
characters in a subset were judged by an independent panel to be
visually similar (see below). The full sets are shown in Table 1.
A separate group of thirty Chinese students rated the stimuli for fa
miliarity and visual and phonological similarity. Characters were pre
sented individually for ratings of familiarity and in subsets of three for
ratings of similarity. Order of presentation was pseudorandom in both
cases. Familiarity was rated on a 5-point scale from "very strange" to
"very familiar". Similarity was rated on two 5-point scales from "very
dissimilar" to "very similar". Descriptive statistics for ratings of the six
3

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Table 1
The Chinese characters used in Experiment 1.

sets of characters, together with their frequency and number of strokes
are shown in Table 2. All the characters were familiar which meant
participants could pronounce, read and write them. ANOVAs showed no
significant differences between the six sets in number of strokes, dic
tionary frequency or rated familiarity. Rated phonological similarity
was balanced for the high and low visual similarity sets but differed
significantly for the high, moderate and low phonological similarity sets
(F(2,29) = 1614.8, MSE = 112.3, p <.001, 2p =.98). Conversely, rated
visual similarity was balanced for the high, moderate and low phono
logical similarity sets but differed significantly between the high and
low visual similarity sets (F (1,29) = 5126.6, MSE = 185.0, p <.001, 2p
=.99).

Procedure
Participants in this and all subsequent experiments were tested
individually. The experimental session consisted of an initial production
task followed by the memory task.
Production task. This was required in order to ensure each partici
pant could correctly pronounce and write each character. Using a
Macromedia Flash program, the characters were presented on a com
puter display-one at a time for 1 s followed by a 3 s blank interval.
Participants were instructed to read aloud the presented word and write
it down. All did so correctly for all 36 characters.
Memory tasks. On each trial, participants were shown a sequence of
six characters presented in the center of a computer display (see Fig. 2).
Sequences were random orderings of the two subsets of three characters
for each condition. The procedure was controlled by a Microsoft C++
program. When the participant understood the instruction, they pressed
any key to receive 4 practice trials followed by 72 test trials (12 per
condition). Each trial began with a fixation point at the center of the
screen. When the participant clicked a BEGIN button, six characters
were presented at a 1 s rate with a 50 ms blank inter-item interval.
Participants read each character silently and attempted to remember the
order of the sequence. For the serial recall task, a question mark shown
50 ms after the offset of the last item cued participants to write their
responses from left to right on an answer sheet in which each line con
tained six blank boxes. For the serial reconstruction task, the six char
acters were shown simultaneously in a randomized array 50 msec after
the offset of the last item. Participants used a computer mouse to select
them in the order in which they had been presented. Neither task
allowed retracing and changing a response. Up to a minute was allowed
before continuing to a new trial. The experiment lasted a little over an
hour during which time two breaks of 1 min were allowed.

Table 2
Descriptive statistics for the characters used in Experiment 1.
Subset

High
Phon
Sim
High Vis
Sim
Low Vis
Sim
Moderate
Phon
Sim
Low Vis
Sim
Low Vis
Sim
Low Phon
Sim
Low Vis
Sim
Low Vis
Sim

Rated
Familiarity

Rated
Phonological
Similarity

Rated
Visual
Similarity

Number
of
Strokes

Dictionary
Frequency

4.36(0.76)

4.87(0.34)

4.37(0.80)

4.80(0.40)

4.77
(0.43)
1.07
(0.25)

11.33
(1.51)
9.00
(1.90)

0.0045
(0.0027)
0.0034
(0.0027)

4.46(0.75)

3.30(0.46)

4.39(0.80)

3.33(0.48)

4.48
(0.50)
1.07
(0.25)

9.67
(2.80)
10.17
(0.41)

0.0035
(0.0032)
0.0050
(0.0027)

4.30(0.89)

1.00(0.00)

4.51(0.73)

1.00(0.00)

4.45
(0.50)
1.03
(0.18)

10.17
(0.41)
9.67
(1.97)

0.0033
(0.0020)
0.0042
(0.0009)

Results
Recall
Items were scored as correct only when written in the right serial
position. Fig. 3 (top panel) shows mean proportion of items correctly
recalled, averaged across serial position, for the six conditions. A three
Phonological Similarity (high vs moderate vs low) by two Visual

Notes. Frequency counts are based on the modern Chinese frequency dictionary
(Wang, 1986).
Data represent M(SD) for each variable.
Phon Sim = Phonological Similarity, Vis Sim = Visual Similarity.
4

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Fig. 2. Within-trial sequence of events in Experiment 1.

Similarity (high vs low) repeated measures ANOVA on proportion cor
rect responses showed significant main effects of phonological similar
ity, F (2,46) = 133.07, MSE = 7.20, p <.001, 2p =.85, visual similarity, F
(1, 23) = 12.71, MSE =.68, p <.001, 2p =.36, and no interaction, F
(2,46) =.53, MSE =.02, p =.59, 2p =.02.
Post hoc tests showed that recall was significantly poorer for high
phonological similarity items (M = 0.62, SE =.02) than for moderate
phonological similarity items (M = 0.84, SE =.02), t (23) = 10.27, p
<.001, d = 2.10, which in turn were significantly less well recalled than
low phonological similarity items (M = 0.93, SE =.02), t (23) = 5.33, p
<.001, d = 1.09. The difference between high and low phonological
similarity items was also significant, t (23) = 15.23, p <.001, d = 3.11.
Note that serial position data are not reported here or in other ana
lyses where it would be possible as to do so would add bulk to the paper
without affecting any of the main points. The interested reader can find
full serial position data in the OSF files.

similarity effects operating through their impact on order information,
as is typical when a limited and closed set of items is employed. As in
Japanese, the effect of visual similarity was not as strong as that ob
tained with phonological similarity.
The moderate phonological similarity condition in which the three
members of each set differ in tonality led to a reduced similarity effect
indicating the potential importance of tonality in disambiguating
otherwise phonologically identical items. We return to the issue of to
nality at a later point. Our next experiment opted to maximize the effect
of phonological similarity by focusing only on the condition where all
the phonologically similar items have the same tone.
Experiment 2
A standard feature of the phonological similarity effect for alphabetic
languages is that when presentation is visual, the effect is removed by
articulatory suppression whereby participants continuously utter an
irrelevant sound (Murray, 1968; Baddeley et al., 1984; Jones, Macken &
Nicholls, 2004; Levy, 1971; Larsen & Baddeley, 2003). This disruptive
effect was also shown to occur in Japanese by Saito (1997) and as
already noted, Saito et al. (2008) reported that while articulatory sup
pression removed the Japanese phonological similarity effect, it had no
impact on that of visual similarity. Our second experiment therefore
attempts to replicate these suppression effects using Chinese characters.
The design was equivalent to that of Experiment 1 with the exception
that we omitted the intermediate phonological similarity condition and
participants were required to perform articulatory suppression.

Reconstruction
Individual responses were scored as correct when an item was
selected in its serial position at presentation. Fig. 3 (bottom panel) shows
proportion correct for the six conditions averaged across serial position.
The broad pattern was the same and ANOVA indicated significant main
effects of phonological similarity, F (2,46) = 162.57, MSE = 7.99, p
<.001 2p =.88, visual similarity F (1,23) = 21.15, MSE =.41, p <.01, 2p
=.48, and no interaction, F (2,46) = 1.64, MSE =.06, p =.21, 2p =.07.
Post hoc tests showed that reconstruction was significantly less ac
curate for high phonological similarity items (M = 0.63, SE =.02) than
moderate phonological similarity items (M = 0.87, SE =.02), t (23) =
11.62, p <.001, d = 2.37, and less accurate for the latter than low
phonological similarity items (M = 0.95, SE =.02), t (23) = 4.92, p
<.001, d = 1.00. The difference between high and low phonological
similarity items was also significant, t (23) = 17.32, p <.001, d = 3.53.

Method

Discussion

Participants
Two groups of 32 undergraduate students who were all native
speakers of Mandarin participated, their ages ranged from 17 to 28 with
the mean of 20.0 years. As in Experiment 1, half were tested using serial
recall and half by reconstruction.

Our overall results for both recall and reconstruction were consistent
with those of Saito et al. (2008) for Japanese Kanji characters in showing
significant effects of both phonological and visual similarity. The pattern
was the same for the two modes of responding, consistent with the

Design and materials
The experiment used a two Phonological Similarity (high vs low) by
two Visual Similarity (high vs low) factorial design. Both factors were
manipulated within-subjects using materials taken from the
5

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Fig. 3. Memory performance as a function of items' phonological and visual similarity in Experiment 1. Error bars in this and subsequent plots of experimental data
indicate Cousineau-Morey 95% Confidence Intervals (Baguley, 2012).

corresponding conditions of Experiment 1. There was one exception.
The character "" (tao, frequency = 0.00553, strokes = 10) was
replaced by ""(gun, frequency = 0.00503, strokes = 10) because some
participants reported a potential association to another character in
Experiment 1. This had no impact on the phonological or visual simi
larity manipulation. As before, half the participants were tested by serial
recall and half by serial reconstruction. Order of performing the four
conditions was counterbalanced using a Latin square.

Results
Recall
A 2 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA on the recall data (Fig. 4, top
panel) showed a significant effect of phonological similarity, F(1,31) =
36.77, MSE =.48, p <.001, 2p =.54, while the effect of visual similarity
failed to reach significance, F(1,31) = 3.18, MSE =.02, p =.08, 2p =.09.
Mean proportion correct was 0.55 for the low phonological similarity
items and 0.42 for the high phonological similarity items. The interac
tion between phonological and visual similarity fell short of significance,
F(1,31) = 3.55, MSE =.02, p =.07, 2p =.10.

Procedure
The procedure was equivalent to Experiment 1 except that in all
conditions, presentation and recall were accompanied by articulatory
suppression. Participants were required to utter the counting sequence
yi, er, san, si (equivalent to one, two, three, four) repeatedly at a rate of
one sequence per second, starting from the appearance of the fixation
point and ending when serial recall or reconstruction was complete.
Participants were monitored and if necessary reminded to perform the
suppression task at the appropriate pace.

Reconstruction
Corresponding analysis of the data for the reconstruction task (Fig. 4,
bottom panel) indicated a significant effect of phonological similarity, F
(1,31) = 17.12, MSE =.22, p <.001, 2p =.36, no effect of visual similarity
F(1,31) =.14, MSE =.001, p =.72, 2p =.00, and no interaction, F(1,31)
=.17, MSE =.001, p =.69, 2p =.01. Mean proportion correct was 0.58 for
the low phonological similarity items and 0.50 for the high phonological
similarity items.

6

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Fig. 4. Memory performance in Experiment 2 as a function of items' phonological and visual similarity in the presence of articulatory suppression.

Discussion

be at variance with Chincotta and Underwood (1997) who report that
suppression removes the Chinese advantage in digit span. However,
their study lacked power, using a separate groups design comparing
samples of only 16 participants for each of its six languages, and did
show a small numerical Chinese advantage under suppression. It does
however indicate the need to replicate our unexpected result and, if
confirmed, to investigate its theoretical implications.
The survival of the phonological similarity effect would seem to
suggest that our Chinese participants were capable of combining overt
vocal articulation of the suppressive material with maintenance of the
memory sequence in some speech-based form, unlike English speakers.
The absence of a clear visual similarity effect in the presence of

The pattern of results was quite unexpected. Not only did we fail to
demonstrate the survival of the visual similarity effect under suppres
sion shown by Saito et al. (2008) for Japanese Kanji characters, but
unlike their results and many in English, our participants showed a very
clear effect of phonological similarity despite suppressing articulation. A
study of Chinese speakers that used a probed recall task did report a
visual similarity effect that survived suppression, and of particular in
terest here, a reduced but significant effect of phonological similarity
under suppression (Lin, Chen, Lai & Wu, 2015). The survival of the
phonological similarity effect under suppression here may also seem to
7

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

suppression is perhaps easier to explain given that its magnitude was not
substantial in Experiment 1, as is typically the case for other reported
effects of visual similarity in the literature (Logie et al., 2000; Saito et al.,
2008). It could perhaps be argued that articulatory suppression adds
sufficient "noise" to the memory system to mask a relatively weak effect
of visual similarity. Moreover, the weakness of the visual similarity ef
fect makes it an unlikely source of the substantial Chinese language
advantage, leaving the unexpected finding of a form of phonological
coding that survives articulatory suppression as a more promising way
ahead.
It is important to note here that articulatory suppression has
repeatedly been found to abolish the phonological similarity effect for
readers of alphabetic scripts. As shown in Fig. 5 the six broadly com
parable studies we have identified all show a virtually complete aboli
tion of the phonological similarity effect under articulatory suppression,
making its survival in Chinese speakers a potentially more important
finding than the absence of the much weaker visual similarity effect. We
decided therefore to focus on this apparent anomaly with its surprising
implication that Mandarin speakers are apparently able to simulta
neously articulate irrelevant material while retaining and retrieving a
completely different phonological sequence. Is it indeed possible that
Chinese speakers can articulate and retain a phonological representation
at the same time and if so, how is this achieved?
One limitation of our method up to this point is our use of separate
experiments for baseline and suppression conditions. It would also be
advisable to replicate using a new set of items to reduce the chances of
the language-as-a fixed effect fallacy whereby the specific set of material

used proves to be atypical of a language in general (Clark, 1973). This is
a particular danger when the material selected is highly constrained, as
was the case in Experiments 1 and 2 by the need to find items that
balance both visual and phonological similarity while avoiding differ
ences in rated familiarity and number of constituent strokes. The next
experiment therefore excludes conditions involving visual similarity,
uses a new set of materials and combines phonological similarity and
articulatory suppression in the same within-participant design. We also
followed testing with a brief questionnaire regarding the strategies
employed. Although retrospective reporting of strategies across several
conditions is unlikely to yield conclusive evidence, we hoped it might
throw light on the hypothesis that some form of verbal rehearsal may
still be possible despite suppression.
Experiment 3
Method
Participants
Twenty four students (mean age 21, range 18-25, 9 males) from
Southwest University participated in the immediate recall task. Thirty
other students (mean age 23, range 20-28, 9 males) were recruited to
obtain subjective ratings for the materials. All participants were native
speakers of Mandarin.
Design
The experiment had a two Phonological Similarity (high vs low) by

Fig. 5. Effect of phonological similarity in immediate serial recall in English and Japanese speakers and its elimination by articulatory suppression. (Key to studies: a
= Peterson and Johnson (1971); b = Jones et al. (2004); c = Larsen and Baddeley (2003, Expt.1); d = Larsen and Baddeley (2003, Expt.2); e = Larsen and Baddeley
(2003, Expt.3); f = Saito et al (2008). Studies a - e used English speakers, study f used Japanese speakers.
8

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

one question on how often it was used in the control condition and
another on how often it was used when articulatory suppression was
required. Answers were made on a Likert scale from 1 (never) to 5 (most
of the time). In order of questioning the strategies were verbal rehearsal,
visualization, using the meaning of individual characters, linking char
acters in a sentence, and recombining strokes (radicals).

two Concurrent Task (baseline vs articulatory suppression) factorial
repeated measures design. The four conditions were tested in a coun
terbalanced order in blocks of 12 trials, with the constraint that blocks
involving the same suppression instruction were kept adjacent to
minimize the need to switch instructions.
Materials
Two sets of six Chinese characters were assembled such that items in
one set were phonologically similar and items in the other were
phonologically dissimilar (see Table 3). None of the items had poly
phonic pronunciations and each had a different radical. The high
phonological similarity set comprised two subsets of three characters in
which each item had exactly the same pronunciation in terms of vowel,
consonant and tone. There was no overlap in these features between
subsets. The low phonological similarity set comprised six characters
with different pronunciations in terms of vowel and consonant but some
used the same tone. No vowel or consonant appeared in both the high
and low phonological similarity sets though some tones did. The two sets
of characters were balanced on objective measures of both frequency of
occurrence and visual complexity. Independent t-tests confirmed there
was no significant difference between the low and high phonological
similarity sets in either frequency (M =.047, SE =.02 vs M =.048, SE
=.02), t(10) < 1, or number of strokes (M = 8.00, SE = 1.21 vs M = 8.00,
SE = 1.03, t(10) < 1. A total of 48 lists was constructed for use in in
dividual trials of the memory task by combining the six characters in
each set in 24 different random orders.
As a further check on the materials a second group of participants (N
= 30) rated them on familiarity, phonological similarity and visual
similarity using a Likert scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high). Characters were
presented individually for ratings of familiarity and in subsets of 3 or
sets of 6 for ratings of phonological or visual similarity. For each type of
rating order of presentation was pseudorandom. All items were rated as
highly familiar. A paired samples t-test indicated no significant differ
ence between the mean rated familiarity of the low and high phono
logical similarity sets (M = 4.32, SE =.12 vs M = 4.24, SE =.12), t(29) =
1.53, p =.14. Phonological similarity was rated as very high for each
subset of highly similar items (M = 4.80 for both) and very low for the
low similarity set (M = 1.27). Phonological similarity was rated as low
when the two high phonological similarity subsets were combined into
the full set (M = 1.30). Visual similarity was consistently rated as very
low for each set and for the two high phonological similarity subsets
(range M = 1.27 to M = 1.40).
A short questionnaire on strategies was prepared for administration
after the memory task (See Appendix). For each strategy listed there was

Procedure
Pre-test. In order to ensure participants could correctly pronounce
and write all 12 characters, they were asked to read each one aloud and
write it down. Each character was presented for 1 s at the center of a
VDU screen and 3 s was allowed for the response. Any occasional
mistake was corrected and all participants proceeded to the main task.
Memory task. Each trial consisted of two phases. In the presentation
phase, a fixation point was followed by presentation of each character
for 1 s in the center of the screen. Participants were instructed to
remember the words in the correct order. In the recall phase, which
followed immediately, participants wrote the words in order from left to
right on an answer sheet. They were not allowed to retrace to change an
answer. The next trial began when the participant pressed a key to
indicate being ready. In trial blocks involving articulatory suppression,
participants were required to count aloud ``1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4..." in
Chinese during both presentation and recall at a rate of one sequence /s.
In baseline blocks, participants were required to keep silent.
Results
Data were analyzed by entering the mean proportion of items
recalled in the correct serial position into a two Phonological Similarity
(high vs low) by two (Concurrent Task (baseline vs articulatory sup
pression) repeated measures ANOVA. This was followed by a t-test to
compare memory for sequences of high vs low phonological similarity
items in the suppression condition separately.
Fig. 6 shows the proportion of items correctly recalled in the four
conditions. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of phono
logical similarity, F(1, 23) = 203.22, MSE = 7.74, p <.001, 2p =.90, with
poorer recall of high vs low phonological similarity items (M =.50, SE
=.03 vs M =.73, SE =.03), and a significant main effect of concurrent
task, F(1, 23) = 137.27, MSE = 12.82, p <.001, 2p =.86, with poorer
recall under articulatory suppression than in the baseline condition (M
=.47, SE =.03 vs M =.77, SE =.03). The interaction between phono
logical similarity and concurrent task was also significant, F(1, 23) =
33.44, MSE = 2.77, p <.001, 2p =.59, reflecting a reduced effect of
phonological similarity with articulatory suppression. Importantly, the
phonological similarity effect remained highly significant in the

Table 3
Chinese characters used in Experiment 3.

9

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

articulatory suppression. They achieve this by attempting to replicate
across a range of methodological variations. These include spoken lan
guage (Cantonese rather than Mandarin), degree of phonological simi
larity (all six similar items being tonally equivalent, rather than two sets
of three), and measure of retention. Instead of assessing the accuracy of
written recall or recognition-based reconstruction of fixed-length se
quences we use the traditional measure of memory span (Jacobs, 1887).
Finally, we compare suppression during input only with suppression
during input and recall, the latter ensuring that participants can not use
rapid rehearsal between presentation and response. Of these variations,
that of spoken language is probably the most significant. The same
ideograph can be pronounced in Cantonese or Mandarin, hence pure
Mandarin and pure Cantonese speakers would be able to read the same
passage equally well, but would not understand a version spoken in the
others' language. There are also subtle differences in tonality with
somewhat more tones used in Mandarin.
Experiment 4
Experiment 4 attempted to separate out the effects of tonal and
phonemic similarity and their sensitivity to articulatory suppression in
Cantonese speakers by varying them orthogonally. We expected to
confirm Experiments 1 to 3 by showing a reliable albeit reduced effect of
phonological similarity under articulatory suppression that would hold
for both phonemic and tonal similarity when considered separately. The
span procedure used differs from the fixed list-length approach used in
Experiments 1-3 in that it is likely to be less sensitive to small differ
ences across conditions. It does however have the advantage of allowing
for individual differences that can create ceiling and/or floor effects
with the fixed length approach. We would however not expect sub
stantially different results with span.

Fig. 6. Serial recall performance in Experiment 3 as a function of phonological
similarity with and without articulatory suppression.

presence of suppression (M =.52, SE =.19 vs M =.42, SE =.14), t(23) =
3.04, p <.001.
Fig. 7 summarizes responses to the post-experiment questionnaire.
Participants reported using each strategy some of the time in both
baseline and suppression conditions. Of special note, articulatory sup
pression reduced the rated frequency of verbal rehearsal, t(23) = 4.42, p
<.001, and linking items to form a sentence, t(23) = 2.19, p <.05, while
not having much if any effect on the other strategies.
Discussion
Experiment 3 replicates the pattern of data found in Experiments 1
and 2 in a single study using a new set of stimulus items. It again shows a
clear overall effect of phonological similarity that is reduced but by no
means abolished by articulatory suppression. As for the questionnaire
data, we should point out that we regard retrospective reports of
memory strategy as inherently unreliable, suspecting that some partic
ipants are unaware of using a strategy, others may change over time and
all may have difficulty remembering which strategy was used in which
condition. Subject to these important caveats they can nevertheless
provide potentially interesting information, in this case in suggesting the
possibility that suppressing articulation reduced but did not abolish the
use of verbal rehearsal.
Our final experiments are concerned with the robustness of our basic
finding of a phonological similarity effect that is still present under

Method
Participants
Thirty four native Cantonese speakers (Mean age 21.5 years, SD =
1.03 years) volunteered to take part. Two (1 male, 1 female) dropped out
due to failure to conform to the instructions. They were undergraduate
students from either the University of York, the University of Leicester or
the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Sample sizes in Experiments 4
and 5 were broadly similar to independent group sizes in Experiments 1,
2 and 3.
Design
The experiment used a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial repeated measures design
manipulating Phonological Similarity (high vs low); Tonal Similarity
(high vs low) and Concurrent Task (baseline vs articulatory suppres
sion). The dependent variable was memory span. Order of testing the
eight conditions was counterbalanced using a Latin Square.
Materials
Four sets each of six traditional Chinese characters were selected
from a Chinese-Cantonese syllabary (Kwan et al., 2013). In the set with
high phonological and tonal similarity all the items shared the same
phonemes and the same tone, being pronounced `ji, 4th tone'. In the set
with high phonological and low tonal similarity the items shared the
same phoneme but had different tones, being pronounced `ji' with each
of the six possible tones. In the set with low phonological and high tonal
similarity, the characters had different phonemes but were each pro
nounced with the 4th tone and in the set with low phonological and low
tonal similarity all the characters had different phonemes and different
tones. The sets were matched as closely as possible for visual complexity
(number of strokes, which ranged from 4 to 15) and frequency rank,
which ranged from 60 to 2772 (Kwan et al., 2013). All the characters
were considered to be in common use given the estimate that literate
Chinese speakers are familiar with about 5,000 characters
(Zhang & Simon, 1985). Details of individual characters and their

Fig. 7. Ratings of strategy use in Experiment 3 with and without articulatory
suppression.
10

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

properties are provided in Table 4.
In order to assess memory span, blocks of sequences of progressively
increasing length were generated, one for each set of characters. Within
each block there were three sequences at each length from two up to ten
items and each character appeared the same number of times. The order
of characters within sequences was pseudorandom such that no char
acter was repeated in sequences of up to six items, some characters
appeared twice in longer sequences but never in immediate succession,
and there were no sequences in which adjacent characters were judged
to form a meaningful unit.

assessment of span involved continuing testing until the participant
failed all three trials at a given sequence length. Span was taken as the
previous list length plus either 0.33 or 0.67 according to whether one or
two of the three trials at that length were correct.
In the articulatory suppression condition, participants began artic
ulating the phrase `' (pronounced `ding, 1st tone') at a rate of three to
four syllables per second before initiating the trial. They were instructed
to stop articulation on the signal to recall. Participants who failed to
comply with the instructions at any point were reminded appropriately.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room. They were
informed about the experiment and gave written consent. In the span
task characters were presented in Microsoft Standard Kai 96 Font at a
rate of 1 item per s via Microsoft Powerpoint on a 13 MacBook Pro.
Each character was shown for 750 msec and was preceded and followed
by a 250 msec fixation cross. Each sequence was followed immediately
by a slide signaling recall. Participants initiated each trial by making a
key press and wrote their serial recall on an answer sheet.
The experiment began with an explanation of the recall procedure
and four practice trials using different characters. Each block of trials
began with a display of the six characters that appeared within it. At this
point the experimenter ensured participants were familiar with each
character and knew its pronunciation, and made them aware the same
character could appear more than once in some sequences. Each

Results
Performance in the various experimental conditions is illustrated in
Fig. 8, which shows large effects of phonological similarity and articu
latory suppression and a smaller effect of tonal similarity. The data were
entered into a 2 (phonological similarity) x 2 (tonal similarity) x 2
(concurrent task) repeated measures ANOVA. This was followed by
examination of simple main effects in the baseline and articulatory
suppression conditions.
The main effect of phonological similarity was significant, F(1, 31) =
290.7, MSE = 1.24, p <.001, 2p =.90, with spans more than two items
lower for characters with the same phonemes (M = 3.42, SE =.14 vs M =
5.80, SE =.14). The main effect of tonal similarity was also significant, F
(1, 31) = 17.49, MSE = 0.68, p <.001, 2p =.36, with spans lower by
about half an item for characters with the same tone (M = 4.40, SE =.13
vs M = 4.83, SE =.13). The main effect of articulatory suppression was

Table 4
Stimulus materials used in Experiment 4.

11

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Fig. 8. Memory span as a function of items' phonological and tonal similarity in baseline and articulatory suppression conditions of Experiment 4.

also significant, F(1,31) = 82.48, MSE = 1.36, p <.001, 2p =.73,
reducing spans by about one item (M = 3.95, SE =.14 vs M = 5.27, SE
=.14). There was one significant interaction, that between articulatory
suppression and phonological similarity, F(1,31) = 28.17, MSE = 0.76,
p <.001, 2p =.48, reflecting a much smaller effect of phonemic similarity
with articulatory suppression. However, analysis of simple main effects
indicated that spans remained significantly lower for high phonological
similarity characters under suppression, F(1,31) = 279.0, p <.001, (M =
3.05 vs M = 4.85). The interaction between articulatory suppression and
tonal similarity approached significance, F(1,31) = 3.84, MSE = 0.59, p
=.06, 2p =.11, reflecting a tendency for suppression to reduce the effect
of tonality. However, analysis of simple effects showed that the effect of
tonal similarity remained significant under suppression, F(1,31) = 1.91,
p <.03 (M = 3.83 vs M = 4.07). Neither of the remaining interactions
approached significance: F(1,31) = 1.53, MSE = 0.46, p =.23, 2p =.05,
for that between phonological and tonal similarity, and F < 1.0 for the
triple interaction.

Experiment 5
Method
Participants
Thirty-six native Cantonese Chinese speakers (mean age 23.5 years,
range 17-33 years, 14 males) volunteered to take part. They were a mix
of students and staff from the Buddhist Mau Fung Memorial College and
undergraduate students from the University of York.
Design
The experiment used a 2 x 3 repeated measures factorial design
manipulating Phonological and Tonal Similarity (high vs low) and
Concurrent Task (baseline vs articulatory suppression during input vs
articulatory suppression throughout) with memory span as the depen
dent variable. The characters in the high similarity condition all had the
same pronunciation (i.e., same phonemes and tone) while those in the
low similarity condition had different pronunciations (i.e., different
phonemes and tones). Concurrent articulation was performed during
presentation only, during presentation and recall or not at all (baseline
condition). The order of administering the six experimental conditions
was partially counterbalanced with participants receiving the baseline
condition first followed by the two suppression conditions, in counter
balanced order. The order of span assessments for the two sets of char
acters varying in similarity was nested within this arrangement and
counterbalanced.

Discussion
Despite the procedural changes, the broad pattern of results for
Experiment 4 replicates those obtained previously, with a substantial
effect of phonological similarity that is reduced but not removed in the
presence of articulatory suppression. As in Experiment 1, an effect of
tonal similarity is found under baseline conditions. It appears to be less
clear than found previously which may reflect the lower potential
sensitivity of the span-based approach. Importantly, the tonality effect
survives under articulatory suppression, like that of phonological simi
larity. Despite its small effect tonal similarity is clearly an important
feature that merits further investigation. However, we decided to
exclude it from our final study and focus instead on the substantially
bigger effect of phonological similarity.
Experiment 5 was principally a replication of the previous Cantonese
experiment with two added features. One concerns a potential strategic
means of limiting the effects of articulatory suppression by rapidly
transferring items into an articulatory code before responding. This was
shown by Baddeley and Lewis (1984) to offer a way of reducing the
effect of suppression but one which they show can be avoided by
requiring suppression during both presentation and recall. We therefore
compare two suppression conditions, one involving suppression only
during presentation, potentially allowing such a strategy, and the other
preventing it by requiring suppression during both input and retrieval.
The second modification was to include a post-experiment strategy
questionnaire. As in Experiment 3, we hoped it would provide some
indication as to whether participants were able to verbally rehearse
items while suppressing articulation.

Materials
The two sets of characters were taken from the corresponding con
ditions of Experiment 4 and were used to generate blocks of sequences
for assessing memory span as before. A brief post-experiment ques
tionnaire similar to that used in Experiment 3 asked participants to rate
how often various strategies were used in each of the three concurrent
articulation conditions. The strategies were verbal rehearsal, using vi
sual appearance, using the meanings of individual words, linking words
to make a sentence and recombining strokes. Responses were made on a
Likert scale from 0 (never) to 4 (most of the time).
Procedure
The procedure was identical to that in Experiment 4 save for the
inclusion of the extra suppression condition. Thus, when suppression
was required during presentation only, participants were instructed to
stop articulation on the signal to recall, as before. When suppression was
required during both presentation and recall, participants were
instructed to stop articulation only when they had finished their written
recall. Participants who failed to comply with the instructions at any
12

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

point were reminded appropriately. At the end of the experiment, par
ticipants were debriefed and asked to complete the strategy
questionnaire.

Discussion
The span data are clear in showing once again the persistence of a
reduced but reliable effect of phonological similarity in Chinese speakers
in the presence of articulatory suppression. They show further that the
effect of suppression is the same whether it is performed only during
encoding or throughout encoding and recall. This indicates that the
suppression effect operates principally through the disruption of
phonological encoding, with no further disruption thereafter. Any sim
ilarity effect remaining would therefore seem to be maintained in some
non-articulatory form. We return to the question of what form this might
take in the next section. The strategy data are interesting in this respect
since participants reported continuing to make some use of verbal
rehearsal under suppression. However, given the caveats described
earlier, we use these reports merely to suggest potential directions for
interpretation.

Results
Participants' spans were entered into a two Similarity (high vs low)
by three Concurrent Task (baseline vs articulatory suppression during
input vs articulatory suppression throughout) factorial repeated mea
sures ANOVA. This was followed up by tests of the simple main effect of
similarity in each of the three concurrent task conditions and a two
Similarity (high vs low) by two Concurrent Task (articulatory suppres
sion during input vs articulatory suppression throughout) ANOVA.
Fig. 9 shows performance in the six conditions. The main effect of
phonological and tonal similarity was significant, F(1, 35) = 171.2, MSE
= 1.39, p <.001, 2p =.83, with spans approximately-two items lower for
characters with the same pronunciation (M = 3.19, SE =.14 vs M = 5.29,
SE =.14). The main effect of articulatory suppression was also signifi
cant, F(2, 70) = 41.51, MSE = 0.63, p <.001, 2p =.54. Spans were
highest in the baseline condition (M = 4.94, SE =.13), and about one
item lower with suppression during presentation only (M = 3.97, SE
=.13) and suppression during both presentation and recall (M = 3.83,
SE =.13). There was also a significant interaction between similarity and
suppression, F(2, 70) = 71.12, MSE = 0.43, p <.001, 2p =.67 reflecting a
marked reduction in the effect of phonological and tonal similarity in the
two suppression conditions. However, further analysis showed that the
simple main effect of similarity was significant in all three conditions:
baseline, F(1,35) = 533.4, p <.001, M = 3.14 vs M = 6.73, suppression
during input, F(1,35) = 91.83, p <.001, M = 3.22 vs M = 4.71, and
suppression throughout, F(1,35) = 60.8, p <.001, M = 3.22 vs M = 4.43.
The two Similarity (high vs low) by two Concurrent Task (articula
tory suppression during input vs articulatory suppression throughout)
ANOVA indicated that spans in the two suppression conditions did not
differ significantly, F(1,35) = 1.12, MSE = 0.62, p = 0.30, 2p =.03, and
were equally affected by phonological and tonal similarity, as indicated
by the absence of a significant interaction, F(1,35) = 2.10, MSE = 0.33,
p = 0.16, 2p =.06.
Fig. 10 summarizes responses to the strategy questionnaire which are
broadly similar to those for Experiment 3. The most frequently reported
strategy under baseline conditions was verbal rehearsal and the most
evident effect of articulatory suppression throughout was to reduce this,
although it was still reported as being used. Suppression throughout also
reduced the reported frequency of linking words to form a sentence. The
pattern was broadly similar with suppression during presentation only.

General discussion
We begin by summarising our findings before going on to offer a
broadly-based theoretical interpretation that we think is compatible
with most theoretical approaches to verbal short-term memory. We then
provide a somewhat more detailed account within the multiple
component working memory model (Baddeley & Hitch, 2019) befor
e addressing the question of how our findings might bear on the superior
verbal memory span found in Chinese language speakers. We conclude
with speculations about how this might be related to the nature of the
written and spoken language systems used in China.
Experiments 1 and 2 examine the effects of visual and phonological
similarity on verbal short-term memory in Mandarin speakers, finding a
small visual similarity effect that is present in Experiment 1 in the
absence of articulatory suppression for both serial recall and recon
struction. However, Experiment 2 finds a non-significant visual simi
larity effect in both tasks in the presence of articulatory suppression.
This contrasts with Saito et al.'s (2008) results on Japanese speakers for
whom suppression does not eliminate the effect of visual similarity. The
visual similarity effect is clearly of interest but as it is relatively small it
does not seem a particularly promising clue to the superior spans of
Chinese speakers. We therefore decided to focus instead on what seems a
more important contrast between Chinese and Japanese speakers,
namely the unexpected survival of an effect of phonological similarity in
the presence of articulatory suppression, albeit much reduced in size.
We have already emphasized the danger of generalizing from results
obtained with specific sets of materials, a limitation that results from the
need to use fixed sets that balance potential confounding variables. Our
first concern, therefore, was to ensure that our main finding of a
continued effect of phonological similarity under articulatory suppres
sion in Mandarin speakers was indeed replicable. Experiment 3
addressed this directly by using different sets of characters and
combining similarity and suppression within the same study, again
finding that although suppression reduces the phonological similarity
effect, it clearly does not remove it. Experiment 4 addressed the issue of
generalization further by demonstrating that the interaction between
phonological similarity and articulatory suppression replicated in
Cantonese speakers when all items rather than subsets of three were
phonologically similar and retention was assessed in terms of memory
span. Experiment 4 also replicated Experiment 1 in showing an effect of
tonal similarity while at the same time suggesting this effect is not large
enough to explain our overall findings. Experiment 5 provided a further
replication of the continued presence of a phonological similarity effect
under articulatory suppression in Cantonese speakers and ruled out a
possible explanation in terms of strategies by finding no difference be
tween suppression during item presentation only and suppression
throughout presentation and recall. Finally, questionnaires in Experi
ments 3 and 5 raised the possibility that participants may have
continued to rely on verbal rehearsal albeit to a reduced extent while

Fig. 9. Memory span for high and low phonological similarity characters in
Experiment 5 as a function of articulatory suppression: none (Baseline), sup
pression during encoding, and suppression throughout encoding and recall.
13

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

Fig. 10. Ratings of strategy use in Experiment 5 without suppression (Baseline), with suppression during encoding, and with suppression throughout encoding
and recall.

production.
A broadly similar distinction is made in a neural network model of
the phonological loop in which separate but interconnected sets of units
represent input and output phonemes and are temporarily activated by
item presentation and rehearsal (Burgess & Hitch, 1999; 2006). The
model is capable of simulating human performance in a range of shortterm memory tasks and captures the patient data by artificially lesioning
input phoneme units while leaving output units intact.
How might such a dual system for the temporary representation of
phonological information be used differently by Chinese language
speakers from those of other languages? The simplest explanation is that
something akin to the "inner ear" provides a supplement to exist
ing sources of stored acoustic information in Chinese speakers. Most
views of STM assume that more than one such source is used. In the
multicomponent model the episodic buffer is assumed to integrate in
formation from visual and verbal subsystems, combining these with
input from LTM. A similar role is assumed for the focus of attention in
Cowan's embedded processes model (Cowan, 1999), while Neath and
Nairne's (1995) model is based on the combination of features from a
range of potential sources. Explaining how such sources of information
are combined does of course differ between models, but is not crucial to
our proposed explanation. However, we are still left with the puzzle of
why Chinese speakers are able to make greater use of information of
recent phonological input than speakers of other currently studied
languages.
At this point we can only speculate but we suggest the reason may be
related to the Chinese reading system which, unlike alphabetic systems
requires the mastery of a very large number of visual characters, each
involving mapping onto a spoken sound. We note also that there are
many cases where the meaning depends on one of a range of several
possible tones, a distinction that seems likely to depend principally on
input rather than articulatory coding. One possibility, therefore, is that
reading a logographic character activates the phonologically-based
"inner ear" more strongly than reading alphabetic script, and this re
sults in a more long-lasting, non-articulatory speech-based representa
tion that benefits Chinese speakers. Our results suggest that this
representation carries tonal as well as phonological information.
Another possibility is that by virtue of their language experience Chinese
speakers are simply more practised in attentionally refreshing the con
tents of their inner ear than speakers of alphabetic languages. Yet
another might be a combination of these two possibilities. We should
emphasise however that we are not suggesting Chinese speakers have
access to an extra source of information that speakers of other languages
do not have. Our proposal is rather that Chinese speakers' experience
with language results in them being able to make greater use of a form of
information that is potentially available to speakers of all languages.

performing articulatory suppression. This leads to the question of how
Chinese speakers are able to maintain one verbal sequence while artic
ulating another?
To begin with our broad interpretation, there is agreement across
theoretical models that verbal material such as words or digits may be
maintained by overt or covert articulation (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974;
2019; Barrouillet & Camos, 2015; Cowan, 1992) and that disrupting this
by requiring articulatory suppression will markedly impair performance
(Baddeley, Lewis & Vallar, 1984; Murray, 1968). Concurrent articula
tory activity however causes even more disruption when it is part of an
executively demanding task such as counting backwards in steps of three
or more, suggesting a further form of maintenance based on attention.
This more demanding form of rehearsal is sometimes referred to as
"refreshing" and can be used for other dimensions such as vision. Such a
distinction is made particularly clearly in the Barrouillet and Camos
(2015) model of working memory. The detailed nature of the forgetting
process that demands such rehearsal, for example via decay or inter
ference, remains controversial. This issue is not however crucial for our
overall account, nor is the nature of the representations that support
such short-term retention, whether comprising constructed episodes or
bundles of features (Neath & Nairne, 1995), entries in a temporary
memory system such the episodic buffer (Baddeley, Hitch and Allen,
2010) or markers linking to representations in LTM (Cowan, 1999;
2019). Thus, we do not regard our assumption of the presence and
function of two different forms of rehearsal as controversial.
The crucial question for developing an interpretation of our results
concerns evidence as to when the retention of speech-like features can
withstand articulatory suppression. Such evidence is sparse but never
theless clear cut, emerging first in studies of reading alphabetic script
showing that suppressing articulation does not prevent participants
from being able to judge whether a pair of visually different words is
homophonous (e.g. write-right) or whether a nonword (e.g. pallis)
sounds like a real word (Baddeley, Eldridge & Lewis, 1981; Besner,
Davies & Daniels, 1981). More recently this ability has also been
demonstrated for items presented visually in a short-term memory task
(Norris, Butterfield, Hall & Page, 2018). We have previously suggested
that the form of representation supporting such judgements corresponds
to a speech-based "inner ear" that is to be distinguished from the "inner
voice" of subocal rehearsal (Baddeley & Lewis, 1981). Closely related to
this, data on the selective neuropsychological impairment of auditoryverbal short-term memory led Vallar and Papagno (2002) to propose
an elaborated model of the phonological loop that differentiates input
and output buffers, with left parietal damage in patients impairing the
input buffer (see also Shallice & Papagno, 2019). The phonological
output buffer is associated with Broca's area and is assumed to be intact
in such STM patients given their lack of problems with speech
14

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

This raises the question of why Japanese speakers do not appear to
use the inner ear to limit disruption from articulatory suppression,
despite having a logographic writing system. This too must be regarded
as a matter for speculation but we suspect it may relate to differences in
the nature of the two writing systems and their relationships with
spoken language. While Japanese writing was influenced by the sys
tem developed in China, it comprises a mix of two approaches, of which
one, Kanji reflects this logographic Chinese influence while the other,
Kana, is syllabic. Furthermore, Kanji has far fewer forms than its Chi
nese equivalent, and in each case, pronunciation may be quite different
depending on context, making a simple visual to phonological mapping
harder. Another potentially significant difference is that tonality appears
to play a less important role in Japanese than Chinese. It therefore seems
likely that the problems to be mastered in learning to read may be
different between the two languages, particularly with regard to the
demands made on direct mapping from visual input to internal speech
sound.
Finally, what are the implications of our results for theories of
working memory, can they be linked to the superior verbal memory span
shown repeatedly by Chinese speakers? We suggest they can by
assuming that Chinese speakers make more effective use of tempora
ry speech-based storage than do speakers of other languages so far
studied and that this has been developed by the demands of the Chinese
writing system. However, we do not wish to discount a potential role of
the more rapid articulation rates typical of Chinese speakers. There is a
clear association between rate of articulating digits and digit span across
a range of different alphabetic languages (Naveh Benjamin & Ayres,
1986), a phenomenon related to the word length effect (Baddeley
et al.,1975). The effect of word length is not itself controversial being
substantial and replicable as reflected in memory span, where span for
sequences of five monosyllables drops from 90 % to 55 % for words of
five syllables. What remains controversial however, is attempts to
link the effect to trace decay via comparison of words matched in
number of syllables but differing in spoken duration, leaving the nature
of the underlying forgetting mechanism undecided (Brown & Hulme,
1995; Jalbert, Neath, Biretta & Suprenant, 2011; Lewandowsky,

Oberauer & Brown, 2009). In short, we regard the capacity of Chinese
speakers to maintain a speech-based representation while suppressing
articulation as a likely contributor to their enhanced digit span, but not a
full explanation.
One final question this raises is whether non-Chinese speakers could
learn to boost their short-term memory performance in the same way?
This does seem likely to be the case as simultaneous interpreters are
apparently able to articulate and hold incoming speech at the same time
(Chincotta & Underwood, 1998) although this capacity follows a long
period of training. We suggest it is worth exploring our contention that
the information is present in all speakers and might potentially enhance
performance, given more encouragement to make use of it. In conclu
sion, our studies illustrate the value of studying memory and cognition
beyond the usual context of WEIRD societies. We have observed a
modest but surprising difference in the verbal memory capacities of
Chinese speakers which we suggest may be related to the demands of
learning to read and pronounce Chinese script. Further studies of other
languages and writing systems may be productive in throwing further
light on the cause of this advantage.
Author note
Zhan Xu ran Experiments 1 & 2 at the University of York and
Experiment 3 at Southwest University. Sai Tung Ho ran Experiments 4
and 5 at the University of York. Experiment 4 was as an undergraduate
project run jointly with Gabriel Tam and Mulong Lang. We thank Satoru
Saito for discussions on the similarities and differences between Japa
nese and Chinese language and writing systems.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
None.

Appendix

15

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

16

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389

References

Chincotta, D., & Underwood, G. (1997). Digit span & articulatory suppression: A crosslinguistic comparison. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9, 89-96.
Chincotta, D., & Underwood, G. (1998). Simultaneous interpreters and the effect of
concurrent articulation on immediate memory. Interpreting, 3, 1-20. https://doi.org/
10.1075/intp.3.1.01chi
Chubala, C. M., Guitard, D., Neath, I., Saint-Aubin, J., & Surprenant, A. M. (2020). Visual
similarity effects in immediate serial recall and (sometimes) in immediate serial
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 48, 411-425. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421019-00979-5
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-a-fixed-effect-fallacy: A critique of language
statistics in psychological research. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 12,
335-359.
Conrad, R., & Hull, A. J. (1964). Information, acoustic confusion and memory span.
British Journal of Psychology, 55, 429-432.
Cowan, N. (1992). Verbal memory span and the timing of spoken recall. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31(5), 668-684.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory. In A. M. P. Shah
(Ed.), Models of working memory (pp. 62-101). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Cowan. (2019). Short-term memory based on activated long-term memory: A review in
response to Norris (2017). Psychological Bulletin, 145, 822-847.
Elliott, J. M. (1992). Forward digit span and articulation speed for Malay, English, and
two Chinese dialects. Perception and Motor Skills, 74, 291-295. https://doi.org/
10.2466/pms.1992.74.1.291
Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1996). The children's test of non-word repetition.
London: Psychological Corporation.
Gupta, P., Lipinski, J., & Aktunc, E. (2005). Reexamining the phonological similarity
effect in immediate serial recall: The roles of type of similarity, category cuing, and
item recall. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1001-1016. https://doi.org/10.3758/
bf03193208
Halloran, M. E., Bundy, D. A. P., & Pollitt, E. (1989). Infectious disease and the UNESCO
basic education initiative. Parasitology Today, 5, 359-362.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 61-83. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X0999152X
Jacobs, J. (1887). Experiments in "prehension". Mind, 12, 75-79.
Jalbert, A., Neath, I., Bireta, T. J., & Surprenant, A. M. (2011). When does length cause
the word length effect? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 338-353.
Jalbert, A., Neath, I., & Surprenant, A. M. (2011). Does length or neighborhood size cause
the word length effect? Memory & Cognition, 39, 1198-1210. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13421-011-0094-z
Jones, D. M., Macken, W. J., & Nicholls, A. P. (2004). The phonological store of working
memory: Is it phonological and is it a store? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 30(3), 656-674.
Kwan, T., Tang, W.S., Chiu, T.M., Wong, L.L.Y., Wong, D. & Zhong, L. (2013). A Chinese
character database: With word-formations phonologically disambiguated according to the
Cantonese Dialect. https://humanum.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/lexi-can/.
Larsen, J., & Baddeley, A. D. (2003). Disruption of verbal STM by irrelevant speech,
articulatory suppression and manual tapping: Do they have a common source?
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A, 56(8), 1249-1268.
Levy, B. A. (1971). The role of articulation in auditory and visual short-term memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 10, 123-132.
Lewandowsky, S., Oberauer, K., & Brown, G. D. A. (2009). No temporal decay in verbal
short-term memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 120-126.

Alcock, K. J., Nokes, K., Ngowi, F., Musabi, C., Mbise, A., Mandali, R., ... Baddeley, A. D.
(2000). The development of reading tests in irregularly spelled language. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 21, 525-555. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716400004069
Baddeley, A. D. (1966). Short-term memory for word sequences as a function of acoustic,
semantic and formal similarity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18,
362-365.
Baddeley, A. D., Eldridge, M., & Lewis, V. J. (1981). The role of subvocalization in
reading. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 439-454.
Baddeley, A. D., Gardner, J. M., & Grantham-McGregor, S. (1995). Cross-cultural
cognition: Developing tests for developing countries. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9,
173-195.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In G. A. Bower (Ed.), Recent
advances in learning and motivation (Vol. 8, pp. 47-89). New York: Academic Press.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (2019). The phonological loop as a buffer store: An
update. Cortex, 12, 91-106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.05.015
Baddeley, A. D., Hitch, G. J., & Allen, R. J. (2009). Working memory and binding in
sentence recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 438-456.
Baddeley, A. D., Allen, R. J., & Hitch, G. J. (2010). (Investigating the episodic buffer.
Psychologica Belgica, 50, 223-243.
Baddeley, A. D., Hitch, G. J., & Quinlan, P. T. (2018). Is the phonological similarity effect
in working memory due to proactive interference? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 44, 1312-1316. https://doi.org/
10.1037/xlm0000509
Baddeley, A. D., & Lewis, V. J. (1981). Inner active processes in reading: The inner voice,
the inner ear and the inner eye. In A. M. Lesgold, & C. A. Perfetti (Eds.), Interactive
processes in reading (pp. 107-129). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Baddeley, A. D., & Lewis, V. J. (1984). When does rapid presentation enhance digit span?
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 22, 403-405.
Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V. J., & Vallar, G. (1984). Exploring the articulatory loop.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36, 233-252.
Baddeley, A. D., Thomson, N., & Buchanan, M. (1975). Word length and the structure of
short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 575-589.
Baguley, T. (2012). Calculating and graphing within-subject confidence intervals for
ANOVA. Behavior Research Methods, 44, 158-175.
Barrouillet, P., & Camos, V. (2015). Working memory: Loss and reconstruction. Hove:
Psychology Press.
Besner, D., Davies, J., & Daniels, S. (1981). Phonological processes in reading: The effects
of concurrent articulation. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 415-438.
Brown, G. D. A., & Hulme, C. (1995). Modelling item length effects in memory span: No
rehearsal needed? Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 594-621.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order: A network model of the
phonological loop and its timing. Psychological Review, 106, 551-581.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (2006). A revised model of short-term memory and long-term
learning of verbal sequences. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 627-652.
Caplan, D., Rochon, E., & Waters, G. S. (1992). Articulatory and phonological
determinants of word-length effects in span tasks. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 45A, 177-192.
Chan, M. E., & Elliott, J. M. (2011). Cross-linguistic differences in digit memory span.
Australian Psychologist, 46, 25-30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17429544.2010.00007.x
Chen, Z.-Y., Cowell, P. E., Varley, R., & Wang, Y.-C. (2009). A cross- language study of
verbal and visuospatial working memory span. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 31, 385-391. https://doi.org/10.1080/13803390802195195

17

A.D. Baddeley et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 129 (2023) 104389
Page, M. P. A., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: A new model of immediate serial
recall. Psychological Review, 105, 761-781.
Peterson, L. R., & Johnson, S. T. (1971). Some effects of minimizing ariculation on shortterm retention. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 10, 346-354.
Pinheiro, E., Barbosa, T., Miranda, M. C., Baddeley, A., Navas, A. L. G. P., &
Bueno, O. F. A. (2015). Adaptation of the word subtest of the Reading Decision Test
(RDT) for Brazilian Portuguese. Psicologia: Reflexao e Critica, 28, 31-40.
Saito, S. (1997). When articulatory suppression does not supress the activity of the
phonological loop. British Journal of Psychology, 88, 565-578.
Saito, S., Logie, R. H., Morita, A., & Law, A. (2008). Visual and phonological similarity
effects in verbal immediate serial recall: A test with Kanji materials. Journal of
Memory and Language, 59, 1-17.
Service, E. (2000). Phonological complexity and word duration in immediate recall:
Different paradigms answer different questions. A comment on Cowan, Nugent,
Elliott & Geer. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A(3), 661-665.
Shallice, T., & Papagno, C. (2019). Impairments of auditory-verbal short-term memory:
Do selective deficits of the input phonological buffer exist. Cortex, 112, 107-121.
Stigler, J. W., Lee, S. Y., & Stevenson, H. W. (1986). Digit memory in Chinese and
English: Evidence for a temporally limited store. Cognition, 23, 1-20.
Vallar, G., & Papagno, C. (2002). Neuropsychological impairments of verbal short-term
memory. In A. D. Baddeley, M. D. Kopelman, & B. A. Wilson (Eds.), Handbook of
memory disorders (2nd. ed., pp. 249-270). Chichester: Wiley.
Wang, H. (1986). Modern Chinese frequency dictionary. Beijing: Beijing Language Institute
Press.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1965). Short-term memory for phonemically similar lists. American
Journal of Psychology, 78, 567-574.
Winter, B., Perlman, M., & Majid, A. (2018). Vision dominates in perceptual language:
English sensory vocabulary is optimized for usage. Cognition, 179, 213-220. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.05.008
Zhang, G., & Simon, H. A. (1985). STM capacity for Chinese words and idioms: Chunking
and acoustical loop hypotheses. Memory & Cognition, 13, 193-201.

Lin, Y. C., Chen, H. Y., Lai, Y.C., & Wu, D.H. (2015). Phonological similarity and
orthographic similarity affect probed serial recall of Chinese characters. Memory &
Cognition, 43, 538-554 (2015). doi:10.3758/s13421-014-0495-x.
Logie, R. H., Della Sala, S., Wynn, V., & Baddeley, A. D. (2000). Visual similarity effects
in immediate serial recall. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A,
626-646.
Logie, R. H., Saito, S., Morita, A., Varma, S., & Norris, D. (2016). Recalling visual serial
order for verbal sequences. Memory & Cognition, 44, 590-607. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13421-015-0580-9
Majid, A., & Kruspe, N. (2018). Hunter-gatherer olfaction is special. Current Biology, 28,
409-413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.12.014
Majid, A., Roberts, S.G., Cilissen, L., Emmorey, K., Nicodemus, B., O'Grady, L., . . .
Levinson, S.C. (2018). Differential coding of perception in the world's languages.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 115, 11369-11376. https://do
i.org/10.1073/pnas.1720419115.
Mattys, S., & Baddeley, A. D. (2019). Working memory and second language accent
acquisition. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 33, 1113-1123. https://doi.org/10.1002/
acp.3554
Mueller, S. T., Seymour, T. L., Kieras, D. E., & Meyer, D. E. (2003). Theoretical
implications of articulatory duration, phonological similarity, and phonological
complexity in verbal working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 1353-1380.
Murray, D. J. (1968). Articulation and acoustic confusability in short-term memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 78, 679-684.
Neath, I., & Nairne, J. S. (1995). Word-length effects in immediate memory: Overwriting
trace-decay theory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 429-441.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Ayres, T. J. (1986). Digit span, reading rate, and linguistic
relativity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38, 739-751.
Norris, D., Butterfield, S., Hall, J., & Page, M. P. A. (2018). Phonological recoding under
articulatory suppression. Memory & Cognition, 46, 173-180.

18

