LANGUAGE
J. Verhoeven,
AND SPEECH,
G. 2004,
de Pauw,
47 and
(3), 297
H. Kloots
- 308

297

Speech Rate in a Pluricentric Language:
A Comparison Between Dutch in
Belgium and the Netherlands
Jo Verhoeven, Guy De Pauw,
and Hanne Kloots
University of Antwerp

Key words

Abstract

This paper investigates speech rate in two standard national varieties of Dutch
on the basis of 160 15 mins conversations with native speakers who belong
to four different regions in the Netherlands and four in the Dutch-speaking
pluricentric
part of Belgium (Flanders). Speech rate was quantified as articulation rate
languages
and speaking rate, both expressed as the number of syllables per second
(syll/s). The results show a significant effect of speakers' country of origin:
prosody
subjects in the Netherlands speak 16% faster than subjects in Belgium
(articulation: 5.05 vs. 4.23 syll/s, speaking: 4.23 vs. 4.00 syll/s). In addispeaking rate
tion, the independent variable sex was also found to be significant: on
average, men speak 6% faster than women (articulation: 4.79 vs. 4.50 syll/s,
speech rate
speaking: 4.23 vs. 4.01 syll/s). The independent variable age was significant too: younger subjects speak 5% faster than older ones (articulation: 4.78 vs. 4.52 syll/s,
speaking: 4.23 vs. 4.01 syll/s). The findings of this study confirm the traditional view that speech
rate is determined by extralinguistic variables, but also suggest that there may be intrinsic tempo
differences between language varieties.

articulation rate

1 Introduction
The temporal organization of speech is characterized by variations in continuity
(silent pauses) and variations in speed (rate of speech). Speech rate has been investigated in a wide variety of languages with very different results. At present, however,
it is not clear whether there are inherent differences in the tempo of languages. This
study was specifically undertaken to investigate whether language varieties may differ
intrinsically in speech rate in order to contribute to the more general question whether
speech tempo is part of the linguistic structure of languages.

Acknowledgments: Hanne Kloots holds a research assistantship from the Fund for
Scientific Research -- Flanders. We would like to thank Anne Cutler, Mirjam Ernestus
and Nigel Hewlett for their useful comments on an earlier version of this paper. Any
shortcomings, however, remain our own.
Address for correspondence. University of Antwerp, Campus Drie Eiken, Department of
Linguistics, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Wilrijk, Belgium; e-mail:< jo.verhoeven@ua.ac.be>.
`Language and Speech' is (c) Kingston Press Ltd. 1958 - 2004

Language and Speech

298

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

Research over the past decades has centered around two main issues. On the
one hand it has been investigated to what extent speech rate is determined by nonlinguistic factors. Studies have shown that men speak faster than women (Whiteside,
1996) and that the elderly speak more slowly than youngsters (Duchin & Mysak,
1987; Malecot, Johnston, & Kizziar, 1972; Ramig, 1983). Other nonlinguistic factors
determining speech rate are as diverse as the speaker's profession (Malecot et al., 1972)
and emotional state (Hausner, 1987): People in higher-ranking professions speak
more slowly than those in lower-ranking professions and increasing stress levels are
related to faster speech.
On the other hand, it has been shown that there are quite substantial differences in speech rate between languages. Average articulation rates in British English
for instance vary between 3.16 and 5.33 syll/s (Tauroza & Allison, 1990). Mean
articulation rate in French ranges between 4.31 syll/s (Grosjean & Deschamps, 1973)
and 5.73 syll/s (Malecot, Johnston, Kizziar, 1972). In Northern Standard Dutch,
average articulation rate is 5.2 syll/s (Blaauw, 1995), while that of Norwegian ranges
between 3.5 and 4.5 syll/s (Almberg, 2000). Articulation rates for Brazilian Portuguese
and Spanish are higher with 6.57 syll/s and 7.81 syll/s respectively (Rebollo Couto,
1997). These differences seem to suggest that speech rate is a factor of the linguistic
background of speakers. This relationship between speech rate and the native
language of speakers has been investigated by comparing speech rate in different
languages: Osser & Peng (1964) for instance studied tempo in American English
and Japanese and did not find any significant differences between the two. The
comparison of structurally different languages, however, is problematic. Some
languages for instance have typically longer words or syllables than others. When
speech rate is expressed as the number of "words per minute" or "syllables per
second," the measures will reflect these structural differences, and a language with
long words or syllables will necessarily have a lower speech rate measure than a
language with short words or syllables.
The problematic interaction between speech rate and structural differences
between languages is largely eliminated by comparing regional varieties of the same
language. Such comparisons have been made for different regions in the United States
(Byrd, 1992; Ray & Zahn, 1990), Norway (Almberg, 2000) and Scotland (Hewlett &
Rendall, 1998). The results of these studies generally did not reveal a significant influence of regional accent on speech rate. Although this suggests that that speech rate
does not vary a great deal within the same standard language, these results do not enable
firm conclusions to be drawn about the relationship between speech rate and the
linguistic background of speakers since the linguistic background of the speakers in
the above-mentioned studies may simply have been too similar.
In this investigation, a new dimension to the study of speech rate will be added
by comparing speech rate in different varieties of a pluricentric language. Pluricentric
languages are "languages with several interacting centers, each providing a national
variety with at least some of its own (codified) norms. Pluricentric languages are both
unifiers and dividers of people" (Clyne, 1992, p. 1). This approach overcomes some
of the problems associated with the other methods discussed earlier. On the one hand,
it eliminates structural differences between languages in the comparison of speech rate.
Language and Speech

J. Verhoeven, G. de Pauw, and H. Kloots

299

On the other hand, it ascertains that the speakers of the different national varieties
identify with different norms and linguistic variables.
The language chosen for this study was Dutch, which has been described explicitly as an example of a pluricentric language (Deprez, 1997; Geerts, 1992). This
language has two national varieties, one of which is spoken in the Netherlands while
the other is spoken in the northern part of Belgium (Flanders). The phonetic characteristics of both national varieties have been well documented in Collins & Mees
(1982), Mees & Collins (1983) and Gussenhoven (1999) for Dutch in the Netherlands
and Verhoeven (2002) and Verhoeven (forthcoming) for Belgian Dutch. Since there
are no substantial structural differences between both varieties, it is possible to compute
speech rate values that can be reliably compared. In addition, the differences in norms
and values between the two national varieties are widely regarded as substantial
enough to provide an interesting starting point for investigating the relationship
between speech rate and the linguistic background of speakers.1
As to the outcome of the speech rate comparison in Belgium and the Netherlands,
our own perceptual impressions lead us to expect that the variety of Dutch spoken
in the Netherlands has a substantially higher speech rate than the variety spoken in
Belgium. In line with previous studies on the influence of geographical region it can
be hypothesized that there are no significant differences between the regions within
each country. However, a significant influence is expected of the extralinguistic variables sex and age, in that men speak faster than women and younger people have a
higher speech rate than older people.

2 Data collection
In this study, speech rates were calculated for spontaneous speech samples of 160
native speakers of Dutch who had participated in a substantial data collection exercise in the context of an interuniversity research project between the universities of
Antwerp (Belgium) and Nijmegen (the Netherlands). The main aim of this project was
to describe pronunciation variation in Standard Dutch (Van Hout et al. 1999). The
data that were collected in this project have now also been integrated in the Corpus
of Spoken Dutch.2

1

Speech rate has been studied before in a pluricentric language situation by Moreau &
Brichard (1999) who have compared verbal fluency strategies in two national varieties of
French, that is, in France and in Belgium. They found systematic differences between the
two varieties in terms of the duration of silent and filled pauses, the use of hesitation
markers, repetitions, and so forth. This study also investigated speech rate but the reported
values are very confusing in that there is no indication at all of how speech rate had been
calculated. The absence of statistical testing makes the results impossible to interpret.

2

The Corpus of Spoken Dutch is a database of contemporary Standard Dutch as spoken
by adults in the Netherlands and Flanders. In total the corpus contains approximately 10
million words or the equivalent of 1000 hours of speech. More information about this
corpus is found on <http://lands.let.kun.nl / cgn>.
Language and Speech

300

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

2.1
Informant characteristics

All subjects were professional teachers of Dutch who were born and bred in the
regions for which they acted as representatives. The total number of informants
was 160, that is, 5 informants x 2 sexes (male vs. female) x 2 ages ( < 40 versus > 45 years
of age) x 2 countries (the Netherlands vs. Belgium) x 4 regions (Center, Transition,
Periphery 1 and Periphery 2). The central region covered the areas of Randstad in the
Netherlands and Brabant in Belgium. The transition zone consisted of the regions
Utrecht / Gelderland in the Netherlands and the province of East Flanders in Belgium.
The region of Groningen / Drenthe in the Netherlands and the province of West
Flanders in Belgium constituted the first peripheral area, while the second peripheral
area was made up of the Limburg provinces in the Netherlands and Belgium. The informants were teachers of Dutch in secondary schools of major towns in the different
geographical areas. The regions and cities in the study are illustrated in Figure 1:

Figure 1
Map of the Dutch-speaking language
area in the Netherlands and the
northern part of Belgium (Flanders).
In each country, four regions were
selected

Language and Speech

J. Verhoeven, G. de Pauw, and H. Kloots

301

In contrast to the previous studies on the influence of region on speech rate, the
regions in this study were not defined purely geographically but in terms of their
linguistic, socioeconomic, demographic and cultural characteristics. The central
regions are the densely-populated economic and cultural centers of the Netherlands
and Flanders which are also linguistically dominant. In the peripheral areas, there is
a comparatively large linguistic and geographical distance from the central regions and
dialects still occupy a relatively strong position. The transition zones occupy an intermediary position between the center and the peripheral areas both demographically
and linguistically.
2.2
Speech sample

The speech rate values in this study are based on the spontaneous speech of the 160
informants. These data were collected in 1999. In each recording session informants
were required to speak freely about general topics such as current affairs, education,
hobbies and holidays. The "interviews" were conducted by two project assistants who
spoke Standard Dutch: they were explicitly instructed to interfere as little as possible
with informants' spontaneous speech by, for instance, only introducing a new topic
of conversation when informants ran out of something to say. Thus, they only fulfilled
a prompting function rather than acting as a real interviewer. Each interview lasted
at least 15 mins.
2.3
Procedure

The interviews were conducted in quiet rooms without disturbing background noise.
During interviews, only the informant and the interviewer were present. The interviews
were recorded on a portable DAT-recorder (Tascam DA-P1) with an AKG-C420
headset condenser microphone. Afterwards, the interviews were digitized and downsampled to 16 kHz (16 bits).

3 Analysis
3.1
Calculation of speech rate

The interviews were transcribed orthographically. The transcripts conformed to a
large extent to the spelling conventions of Standard Dutch (Goedertier & Goddijn,
2000). In order to establish speech rate in the corpus, two measures were calculated:
speaking rate and articulation rate. In accordance to Laver (1994) speaking rate was
defined as the number of syllables per second including filled and silent pauses.
Speaking rate was also expressed as the number of syllables per second, but this value
excluded silent pauses while filled pauses were included. It was considered appropriate to choose the syllable as a unit to express speech rate since this investigation
compares two national varieties of the same language and there are no differences in
syllable structure between the two varieties.
As a first step in the calculation of speaking rate and articulation rate the total
number of syllables was established for the participants in each interview. This was
Language and Speech

302

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

achieved by means of an implicit syllabification script which counted the number of
vowels per word on the assumption that each syllable must contain a vowel. In addition to the total number of syllables, the script also determined total elapsed time as
well as the duration of silent intervals which was necessary to properly compute articulation rate, since this metric expresses the number of syllables per second excluding
silent pauses.
Speaking rate and articulation rate were calculated for 10 equal time intervals
in each interview. Subsequently, it was investigated whether these measures of articulation rate and speaking rate were different over time by means of an analysis of
variance with the time interval as the independent variable and articulation rate as
the dependent variable. The analysis was not significant, F (9, 1590) = 0.8850, p =
.5379. A similar analysis with speaking rate as an independent variable was not significant either, F (9, 1590) = 1.89199, p = .0603. Due to the lack of significance of the
two measures of speech rate across the different time intervals, it was decided to calculate one value for articulation rate and one value for speaking rate for each interview
as a whole. These values were analyzed in more detail.

4 Results
The total amount of speech collected (silent and filled pauses inclusive) during the
interviews was 44.60 hours or about 500,000 words. The Belgian regions were somewhat better represented than the Netherlands regions (24.96 hours vs. 19.64 hours),
there was almost as much speech from women as from men (22.70 hours vs. 21.89 hours)
and there was marginally more speech from older speakers (22.88 hours vs. 21.72
hours). The silent pauses took up 4.48 hours.
4.1
Articulation and speaking rate

The independent variables in the experiment were country, informants' regional affiliation, sex and age. The significance of these variables was analyzed by means of a
four-way analysis of variance. In the first analysis, the dependent variable was articulation rate in syllables per second. This value included filled pauses, but excluded
silent pauses. The analysis of variance shows a significant main effect of the independent
variables country, F (1, 1) = 155.51, p < .0001; region, F (1, 3) = 3.1428, p = .0276;
sex, F (1, 1) = 19.6557, p < .0001; and age, F (1, 1) = 15.3988, p < .0001. In addition,
a significant two-way interaction was found between country and region, F (1, 3)
= 6.3951, p = .0005. None of the other interactions was significant. Average articulation rates in the different regions of the two countries are given in Table 1. Mean
articulation rate in the Netherlands is 5.05 syll/s while it amounts to 4.23 syll/s in
Belgium. In addition, men speak significantly faster than women (4.79 vs. 4.50 syll/s).
Mean articulation rate for young speakers is 4.78 syll/s while that for older speakers
is 4.52 syll/s.
A pairwise comparison of articulation rates between the regions in each of the
two countries by means of a contrast analysis reveals no significant differences between
the Belgian regions. In the Netherlands it is only the Randstad region which differs
significantly from all the other regions. The significant interaction between country
Language and Speech

J. Verhoeven, G. de Pauw, and H. Kloots

303

and region is explained by the fact that the central region in the Netherlands has the
highest speech rate, while the Belgian central region has a very slow speech rate.
TABLE 1
Mean articulation rate (syll/s, excluding silent pauses) and speaking rate (syll/s, including
silent pauses) in the different geographical regions in the Netherlands and Belgium.
Speech rates are ranked from fastest (top) to slowest (bottom)
Rank order

Articulation rate

Rank order

Speaking rate

NL-Randstad

5.42

NL-Randstad

4.35

NL-Gro. /Drenthe

4.96

NL-Gro. /Drenthe

4.28

NL-Utrecht / Gelderl.

4.92

NL-Limburg

4.19

NL-Limburg

4.89

NL-Utrecht / Gelderl.

4.10

BE-East Flanders

4.43

BE-East Flanders

4.10

BE-West Flanders

4.25

BE-Brabant

3.98

BE-Brabant

4.15

BE-West Flanders

3.93

BE-Limburg

4.14

BE-Limburg

3.91

In the second analysis the dependent variable was speaking rate expressed as the
number of syllables per second. This value included both silent and filled pauses. The
statistical analysis of speaking rate shows a significant effect of country, F (1, 1)
= 11.0486, p = .0012; sex, F (1, 1) = 10.6766, p = .0014; and age, F (1, 1) = 10.6585,
p = .0014. There was no significant effect of region, nor were any of the higher order
interactions significant. Speaking rates in the different regions are summarized in
Table 1. Mean speaking rate in the Netherlands is 4.23 syll/s, while that in Belgium
amounts to 4.00 syll/s. Women speak significantly more slowly than men (4.01 syll/s
vs. 4.23 syll/s) and young speakers speak faster than older speakers (4.23 syll/s vs.
4.01 syll/s).

5 Discussion
The main objective of this paper was to investigate the relationship between speech
rate and the linguistic background of speakers. In addition, the effects of the extralinguistic variables sex and age were also examined. Speech rate was defined both as
articulation rate (speech delivery excluding silent pauses) and speaking rate (speech
delivery including silent pauses).
Average articulation rate for the whole corpus was 4.63 syllables per second,
that is, 5.05 syll/s for the Netherlands regions and 4.23 syll/s for Belgian regions. The
value for the Netherlands compares extremely well with that of 5.2 syll/s reported in
Blaauw (1995) who also investigated speech rate in the Netherlands as part of a bigger
study on the prosody of speech. Statistical analysis showed that the difference in
speech rate between Belgium and the Netherlands is significant: all regions in the
Netherlands have a faster speech rate than the Belgian regions. While the factor region
Language and Speech

304

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

also came out significant, a contrast analysis indicated that within Belgium the differences in speech rate between the four regions are in fact not significant. In the
Netherlands, it is only the central region (Randstad) where speech rate is significantly
faster than in the other regions.
Average speaking rate in the corpus is generally somewhat lower than articulation rate since this metric includes silent pauses. For the whole corpus mean speaking
rate was 4.10 syll/s, that is, 4.23 syll/s in the Netherlands and 3.98 syll/s in Belgium.
Although silent pauses were included in the measure of speaking rate, it mirrors to a
large extent the results for articulation rate in that the difference between the two
countries is significant. However, there is no significant effect of the regions within
each country.
The results of this investigation confirm our perceptual impressions that speech
rate in the Netherlands is significantly faster than in Belgium. It should be noted that
besides the statistical significance of this result, the faster speech rate in the Netherlands
is highly consistent in that it applies to all regions, both age groups and both sexes.
The initial hypothesis that there are no significant differences between the regions
within each country is to a large extent confirmed: It is only the central region in the
Netherlands which differs significantly from all the other regions within this country.
Taken together, both observations suggest that the observed differences in speech rate
may have something to do with the linguistic background of the speakers:3 both
national varieties of Dutch seem to have their own inherent tempo.
The difference in speech rate between Belgium and the Netherlands can be
accounted for by an interaction of several factors which are essentially related to the
distance between everyday language use and the standard language in both countries.
Historically, the difference between everyday language use and the standard language
has always been bigger in Belgium than in the Netherlands (Geeraerts, 2001). In
everyday social encounters Belgians tend to use dialect or a language variety that is
quite different from the standard language. This even applies to teachers of Dutch:
a survey in Kloots (2003) has found that 76% of the Dutch language teachers in the
Netherlands speak standard Dutch at home. In Belgium, this only applies to 24% of
the Dutch language teachers.
This bigger distance between everyday language use and the standard language
in Belgium may have influenced speech rate in a variety of ways. As a result of the
less frequent use of the standard language by the Belgians, this language variety may
feel less natural to them. They may feel less comfortable and fluent in the standard
language than their counterparts in the Netherlands, which may result in a slower
speech rate in Belgium, much the same way as non-native speakers of a language
generally have a slower speech rate than native speakers.
The infrequent use of the standard language and the stronger presence of dialects
in everyday social encounters in Belgium allows for a stronger influence of these
dialects when Belgians do use the standard language. It is possible that dialects in the
northern part of Belgium have an intrinsically lower speech rate than the dialects of
the Netherlands and it is this slow speech rate which is carried over into the standard
language as a sort of "foreign accent." At present, however, there is no information
available about speech rate in the dialects of Belgium and the Netherlands.
Language and Speech

J. Verhoeven, G. de Pauw, and H. Kloots

305

A third factor that has to be considered is that Belgians may have experienced
the interviews as more formal than the informants in the Netherlands. Formality was
one of the variables investigated in Malecot et al. (1972) in their study of French.
Although they established a trend that formal speech was slower than informal speech
(5.7 syll/s vs. 5.9 syll/s) the difference was not significant.
It has to be emphasized that the interaction of above-mentioned factors associated with the distance between everyday language use in Belgium and the standard
language is a historic one which has existed for several generations. It is therefore not
inconceivable that the slower speech rate in Belgian Dutch has set an example in the
language acquisition process across generations, which may have been imitated as an
essential characteristic of the standard language. As such the slower speech rate may
have become codified as an independent norm in the Belgian national variety of
Dutch with the result that Belgian Dutch is now spoken inherently more slowly.

3

A possible counter-argument to this interpretation is that the speech rate differences are
an artifact of the experimental methods used, particularly since the measures of speech
rate in this study are based on a vowel count in orthographic transcriptions. A potential
disadvantage of this is a discrepancy with phonetic reality: phonetic processes like schwainsertion in consonant clusters and syllable deletion are not reflected in the orthographic
transcription. The former creates extra syllables in that for example, a monosyllable
[ mlk ] `milk' is realized with two syllables as [ mlk ]. The latter decreases the number
of syllables in that for example, [ momnt ] `moment' is realized as a monosyllable
[ mnt ]. These processes may potentially neutralize the differences in speech rate based
on an orthographic transcription in different ways.
The first possibility that has to be considered is that there is more schwa insertion in Belgium
than in the Netherlands, which would increase the number of syllables and consequently
raise speech rate, potentially neutralizing the effect of speech rate in this study. Although
it was not possible to comprehensively test schwa insertion in these particular speech
samples, independent research by Swerts, Kloots, Gillis, and De Schutter (2001) and
Kloots, De Schutter, Gillis, and Swerts (2002) has found that there is more schwa insertion in the Netherlands.
The second factor to be considered is syllable deletion. If speakers in the Netherlands
drop syllables more often than in Belgium, the number of syllables decreases and this lowers
the estimated speech rate, potentially neutralizing the effect of speech rate reported in
this study. Syllable deletion was investigated in speech samples of 18 informants who
took part in this study (9 Belgium and 9 the Netherlands) and the speech of whom had
previously been transcribed phonetically by an independent transcriber for a purpose unrelated to this study. Results show that there is a certain amount of syllable deletion, that
is, 1.51% in Belgium and 0.95% in the Netherlands. However, the degree of deletion in
both national varieties is very similar.
From the two additional analyses presented above it is unlikely that the differences in speech
rate based on orthographic transcriptions are neutralized by a calculation of speech rate
based on phonetic transcriptions. On the contrary, the higher frequency of schwa insertion in the Netherlands and the slightly higher incidence of syllable deletion in Belgium
suggest that estimates of speech rate based on phonetic transcriptions could in fact even
reveal a bigger difference between Belgium and the Netherlands.
Language and Speech

306

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

In terms of speech perception, the differences in speech rate found in this study
are consistent with perception results in Van Heuven (2003). He compared the
perception of speech rate in the cities of Amsterdam (Central region) and Nijmegen
(Transition): He found that informants' speech rate in Amsterdam is perceived somewhat faster than that of Nijmegen-Dutch (4.5 vs. 4.2) on a seven-point scale between
slow and fast.
It should also be mentioned that the average difference in articulation rate
between Belgium and the Netherlands is 16%. This value is bigger than the just noticeable difference of speech tempo established by Quene (2004): On the basis of an
analysis of tempo variations in spontaneous speech he estimated the JND to be
around 10%. This indicates that the differences in speech rate in this study could play
a perceptual role and suggests a potential for further perceptual research.
Besides a main effect of country on speech rate, the analysis also showed a significant effect of sex and age: men speak faster than women and young people speak faster
than older people. The faster articulation rates for men are consistent with research
in Whiteside (1996) who also reports significantly faster articulation rates for men (men:
4.10 syll/s vs. women: 3.38 syll/s). Although the difference between men and women
is significant in our data, it is not as outspoken as in Whiteside. It is not clear how to
account for this consistent difference in speech rate between the sexes.
The faster speech rates in the young people of this study are entirely in agreement with the general trend that was established in Malecot et al. (1972), Ramig
(1983) and Duchin and Mysak (1987). These measurements are also consistent with
perception research into the perception of speech tempo in Van Heuven (2003) who
found that speech of young speakers was rated faster than that of older speakers.
The fact that the elderly speak more slowly than youngsters is consistent with the
neurological effects of ageing in that neurological control over speech production
becomes somewhat more difficult and may require more time to be executed.
The fact that this study shows a significant effect of country on speech rate as
well as of age and sex suggests that an explicit reference to speech rate is necessary
in the description of regionally determined differences between accents and the description of sex- and age-related speech characteristics. A substantial number of studies,
such as that of Whiteside (1996), have shown that speech rate has an influence on the
concrete phonetic realization of speech sounds so that speech rate can cause phonetically different realizations of speech sounds across regions. In order to capture these
differences, a full account of speech rate is necessary.

6 Conclusion
This paper investigated the relationship between speech rate, linguistic background
of speakers and two extralinguistic variables, that is, age and sex. It was shown that
all three factors are significantly related to speech rate. As far as regional variation
is concerned, a major opposition was found between regions in the Netherlands and
regions in Flanders. Average speaking rate in the Netherlands is 4.23, while in Flanders
it amounts to 3.98 syll/s. This opposition between the North and the South coincides
with a difference in standard language between Belgian Dutch and Dutch in the
Language and Speech

J. Verhoeven, G. de Pauw, and H. Kloots

307

Netherlands. This difference in speech rate was accounted for in terms of the bigger
distance in Belgium between the standard language and language use in everyday
situations. The use of the standard language may thus feel less natural than in the
Netherlands resulting in a slower speech rate in Belgium. It cannot be excluded that
there also is substantial transfer from dialects in Belgium. In view of the historic
aspect of this situation, it cannot be excluded that this difference may have been codified in the Belgian variety of Dutch. Besides a regional influence, the age and sex of
informants were also found to be significantly related to speech rate: younger speakers
talk faster than older speakers, while women speak more slowly than men. These
observations suggest that speech rate is a factor that has to be taken into account in
the description of accent differences as well as in descriptions of sex- and age-related
differences in speech.
Received: March 30, 2004; first revision received: September 22, 2004;
accepted: September 23, 2004

References
ALMBERG, J. (2000). Kor fort snakkar vi egentlig? Norlyd: Tromso University Working Papers
on Language and Linguistics, 28, 60 - 73.
BLAAUW, E. (1995). On the perceptual classification of spontaneous and read speech. Utrecht:
LED.
BYRD, D. (1992). Sex, dialects and reduction. University of California Working Papers in
Phonetics, 81, 26 - 33.
CLYNE, M. (1992). Pluricentric Languages: Introduction. In M. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric
languages. Differing norms in different nations (pp. 1 - 9). Berlin / New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
COLLINS, B., & MEES, I. (1982). A phonetic description of the consonant system of Standard
Dutch. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 12, 2 - 12.
DEPREZ, K. (1997). Diets, Nederlands, Nederduits, Hollands, Vlaams, Belgisch-Nederlands.
In M. Clyne (Ed.), Undoing and redoing corpus planning (pp. 249 - 312). Berlin / New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
DUCHIN, S., & MYSAK, E. (1987). Disfluency and rate characteristics of young adult, middleaged, and older males. Journal of Communication Disorders, 20, 245 - 257.
GEERAERTS, D. (2001). Een zondagspak? Het Nederlands in Vlaanderen: Gedrag, beleid,
attitudes. Ons Erfdeel, 44, 337 - 343.
GEERTS, G. (1992). Is Dutch a pluricentric language? In M. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages.
Differing norms in different nations (pp. 71 - 91). Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
GOEDERTIER, W., & GODDIJN, S. (2000). <http: / / lands.let.kun.nl / cgn>.
GROSJEAN, F., & DESCHAMPS, A. (1973). Analyze des variables temporelles du francais
spontane. II. Comparaison du francais oral dans la description avec l'anglais (description) et avec le francais (interview radiophonique). Phonetica, 28, 191 - 226.
GUSSENHOVEN, C. (1999). Illustrations of the IPA: Dutch. Handbook of the International
Phonetic Association. A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge:
University Press. 74 - 77.
HAUSNER, M. (1987). Sprechgeschwindigkeit als eine Funktion von Stress: Eine Fallstudie.
Language and Style, 20, 285 - 311.
HEWLETT, N., & RENDALL, M. (1998). Rural versus urban accent as an influence on the
rate of speech. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 28, 63 - 71.
Language and Speech

308

Dutch speech rate and regional accent

KLOOTS, H. (2003). Uitspraakonderwijs in het vak Nederlands in Vlaanderen en Nederland
op het einde van de twintigste eeuw. Antwerp Papers in Linguistics, 104, 1 - 128.
KLOOTS, H., DE SCHUTTER, G., GILLIS, S., & SWERTS, M. (2002). Sjwa-insertie in eindclusters: Variatiepatronen in het Standaardnederlands. Nederlandse Taalkunde, 7, 97 - 126.
LAVER, J. (1994). Principles of phonetics. Cambridge: University Press.
MALECOT, A., JOHNSTON, R., & KIZZIAR, P. A. (1972). Syllabic rate and utterance length
in French. Phonetica, 26, 235 - 251.
MEES, I., & COLLINS, B. (1983). A phonetic description of the vowel system of Standard
Dutch. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 13, 74 - 77.
MOREAU, M., & BRICHARD, H. (1999). Francais et Belges: Des fluidites verbales differentes?
Des donnees objectives aux representations subjectives. In M. Moreau, H. Brichard, &
C. Dupal (Eds.), Les Belges et la norme. Analyze d'un complexe linguistique (pp. 12 - 18).
Brussels: Editions Duculot.
OSSER, H., & PENG, F. (1964). A cross cultural study of speech rate. Language and Speech,
7, 120 - 125.
QUENE, H. (2004). What is the Just Noticeable Difference for tempo in speech? To appear in:
H. Quene & V. J. van Heuven (Eds.) On speech and language: Studies for Sieb G. Nooteboom.
Utrecht: Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics.
RAMIG, L. (1983). Effects of physiological aging on speaking and reading rates. Journal of
Communication Disorders, 16, 217 - 226.
RAY, G. B., & ZAHN, C. J. (1990). Regional speech rates in the United States: A preliminary
analysis. Communication Research Report, 7, 34 - 37.
REBOLLO COUTO, L. (1997). Le rythme en espagnol et en portugais. Traveaux de l'institut
de phonetique de Strasbourg, 27, 63 - 90.
SWERTS, M., KLOOTS, H., GILLIS, S., & DE SCHUTTER, G. (2001). Factors affecting
schwa-insertion in final consonant clusters in standard Dutch. Proceedings
Eurospeech 2001 (pp. 75 - 78).
TAUROZA, S., & ALLISON, D. (1990). Speech rates in British English. Applied Linguistics,
11, 90 - 105.
VAN HEUVEN, V. (2003). Vervlakt het Nederlands? In J. Stroop (Ed.), Waar gaat het Nederlands
naartoe? Panorama van een taal (pp. 215 - 223). Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
VAN HOUT, R., DE SCHUTTER, G., DE CROM, E., HUINCK, W., KLOOTS, H., & VAN
DE VELDE, H. (1999). De uitspraak van het Standaard-Nederlands: Variatie en varianten in Vlaanderen en Nederland. E. Huls, B. Weltens (Eds.), Artikelen van de Derde
Sociolinguistische Converentie (pp. 183 - 196). Delft: Eburon.
VERHOEVEN, J. (2002). The sound system of Dutch in a general phonetic perspective. Antwerp
Papers in Linguistics, 100, 165 - 176.
VERHOEVEN, J. (forthcoming). Illustrations of the IPA: Dutch (Belgium). Journal of the
International Phonetic Association.
WHITESIDE, S. (1996). Temporal-based acoustic-phonetic patterns in read speech: Some evidence for speaker sex differences. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 26.

Language and Speech

