Variational learning in L2
The transfer of L1 syntax and parsing strategies in
the interpretation of wh-questions by L1 German
learners of L2 English
Tom Rankin

Vienna University of Economics and Business

This study examines the interpretation of constituent wh-questions in L2 English
by learners whose L1 is Austrian German. Austrian German and English share
identical surface word order patterns for a range of question forms, but with
distinct semantic interpretations. Non-target patterns of interpretation show that
the learners ay high levels of proficiency continue to optionally parse English
questions with the L1 syntax. The continued presence of thematic verb movement and head-final VP syntax in L1 German-L2 English interlanguagechallenges previous findings that headedness is reset very early and that V2 is realised
by auxiliary verbs. This is analysed as an instance of Variational Learning (Yang,
2002), whereby the L1 grammar is accessed to parse L2 input where possible.
The L1 syntactic representation thus continues to be available at high proficiency
levels to parse input strings that are linearly compatible, giving rise in the case of
L1 German-L2 English to non-target parses and interpretation of wh-questions.
Keywords: parsing, L1 transfer, parameters, headedness, verb second, variational
learning

1.

Introduction

Full Transfer/Full Access (FT/FA; Schwartz & Sprouse, 1994, 1996) assumes that the
L1 grammar constitutes the initial state of second language acquisition. L1 parameters are reset in response to parses of input. When input strings cannot be parsed
by the current grammatical representation, this motivates restructuring. Access
to Universal Grammar means that new parameter settings are in principle available to the L2 learner. However, it has been recognised for some time that learners'

Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 4:4 (2014), 432-461. doi 10.1075/lab.4.4.02ran
issn 1879-9264 / e-issn 1879-9272 (c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

Variational learning in L2 433

performance at any point in time is not consistent with uniform underlying parameter settings (e.g. White's, 1990/91, 1991, 1992, findings on verb movement).
For first language acquisition, Yang (2002: 20) points out that transformational parameter setting, i.e. that parameters are uniformly and instantaneously
`switched on', leads to the predictions in (1) (the same predictions would hold for
L2 learning assuming transformational learning).
(1) a.

The learner's linguistic production ought to be consistent with respect to
the grammar that is currently assumed.
 b. As the learner moves from grammar to grammar, abrupt changes in
linguistic expressions should be observed.

He outlines how Variational Learning (VL) assumes that a population of competing grammars underlies an individual's linguistic performance in L1 acquisition
and variability during the course of diachronic change (Yang, 2002). Slabakova
(2008) in turn suggests that this can be extended to L2A assuming FT/FA. This
paper seeks to explore whether distinct grammatical representations may underlie
learners' parses of L2 input at high levels of proficiency. The study takes inspiration from findings on the interpretation of ambiguous wh-questions in L2 German
by L1 English and Afrikaans speakers (Gruter, 2006; Gruter & Conradie, 2006).
Certain English and German wh-questions share identical linear orders, which
are, however, derived from different underlying syntactic representations. Thus,
English simple tense subject and periphrastic tense object questions (see (2) and
(3) respectively) can be parsed with a German verb second (V2), OV grammar.
However, the semantic interpretation assigned by the L1 German representation
will be ambiguous, allowing both object and subject readings. If the L1 grammatical representation is still available at high levels of proficiency and competes with
other possible representations to parse input, learners will show evidence of nontarget patterns of interpretation of these questions. If sentence (2), for example,
is parsed using the L1 German grammar, the question could mean either "What
bites the cat?" (the target interpretation, in which "what" is the subject) or "What
does the cat bite?" (a non-target interpretation, in which "what" is the object).
(2) What bites the cat?
(3) What has the cat bitten?

The experiment outlined below reproduces Gruter's methodology to test and extend her prediction (Gruter, 2006: 311) that the animacy of wh-phrases will influence how ambiguous wh-questions are parsed in native German. This is extended
to SLA by testing whether upper-intermediate L1 German-L2 English learners
have target interpretations of questions, and thus whether the L1 grammar influences L2 parsing at higher proficiency levels. Finally, the role of animacy in

434 Tom Rankin

ambiguity resolution is examined in L1 German-L2 English to investigate whether
processing strategies as well as grammatical representation are transferred to the
L2 and influence the choice of grammar for parsing.
The paper is organised as follows: First, the structure of main clause questions
in English and German is outlined. Next, Gruter's (2006) results for the initial
state in L1 English-L2 German are presented. Previous studies of the acquisition
of L2 English by speakers of V2/OV languages are outlined before a discussion of
the possible application of Variational Learning in SLA theory. The remainder of
the paper outlines the picture interpretation experiment and presents its results.
Finally, the frequency of wh-structures in the input in classroom interaction are
outlined as a first step towards more detailed testing of VL's prediction of a relationship between the frequency of syntactic structures and parameter setting in
the course of acquisition.
2. Main clause subject and object questions in English and German
The analysis of wh-questions has spawned an extensive literature in theoretical
syntax. To avoid unnecessary complications, I concentrate on the most relevant
and uncontroversial aspects of the syntactic analysis. The V2 and SOV properties
of German lead to main clause interrogatives having no word order distinctions
between subject and object questions (4) and (5).
(4) Wen
hat
der
Lowe gesehen?
 who.acc have.3ps the.masc.nom lion see
 `Who(m) did the lion see?'
(5) Wer
hat
den
Lowen gesehen?
 who.nom have.3ps the.masc.acc lion see
 `Who saw the lion?'

Interpretation is conditioned by verbal agreement morphology, case marking on
DPs and inflectional forms of pronouns and the wh-word wer. However, there is
no overt morphological distinction between nominative and accusative for singular feminine and neuter DPs, nor for the inanimate wh-word was. This coincides
with the word order facts to produce a range of question forms which are ambiguous between a subject and an object reading (see (6) and (7)).
(6)




Was
jagt
die
Katze?
what.nom/acc chase.3ps the.fem.nom/acc cat
a. `What is chasing the cat?'
b. `What is the cat chasing?'

Variational learning in L2 435

(7)




Was
hat
die
Katze gejagt?
what.nom/acc has.3ps the.fem.nom/acc cat chased
a. `What has chased the cat?'
b. `What has the cat chased?'

Lacking overt morphological markers, the surface order is consistent either with
an interpretation where the wh-word has raised from Spec,VP, with the full DP as
the complement of V0 (8), or with the wh-word having raised from complement of
V0 and the full DP as the subject in Spec,IP (9).
(8) [ CP Wask jagti [ IP tk ti [VP tk die Katze ti ]]] (subject question)
(9) [ CP Wask jagti [ IP die Katzej ti [VP tj tk ti ]]] (object question)

English simple tense object questions require do-support while subject questions
do not (6a/6b). Do-support has traditionally been analysed as a mechanism to
carry tense and agreement features from the I(nflection) node. Because English
does not permit thematic verb movement, pleonastic do is inserted under I0 to
carry tense and agreement morphology. This can then move further to C0 to check
interrogative features, which otherwise would not be possible with the thematic
verb stranded in V0. Subject questions pose more difficult analytical problems.
There is considerable debate over whether subject wh-questions involve vacuous
movement of the subject wh-phrase to Spec,CP. For ease of exposition, I assume
vacuous movement. With respect to the issues related to L1 German-L2 English,
it is not clear that there would be different predictions for an analysis that has the
wh-phrase in Spec,IP. Assuming that L1 German speakers initially approach the
task of acquiring English with their L1 syntactic representation, they will parse
English wh-questions with wh-phrases in Spec,CP and they would not find any
relevant evidence in the input to motivate modifying this analysis (in much the
same way that the lack of evidence from the English surface linearization has deprived theoretical syntacticians of strong empirical support for either the vacuous
movement or non-movement analyses).
As the English translations in (4-5) indicate, despite the lack of case marking
on DPs, argument structure in English is rendered transparent by word order. The
lack of verb movement and the VO properties of English mean that a DP which
occurs after the thematic verb is invariably the object. In object questions, the
subject is in Spec,IP and it is the object that is fronted to Spec,CP, leaving a trace
as the complement of V0. English main clause interrogatives are thus never ambiguous and the underlying argument structure is always clear from the surface
linearization.
In sum, German main clause questions show only two distinct word order patterns, one in simple tenses and one in periphrastic tenses. These surface

436 Tom Rankin

linearizations overlap with two of the four possible word order patterns in English
main clause wh-questions. However, the interpretation of questions in German is
different than English because the latter has a one to one mapping between question form and interpretation, while German questions (where overt morphological marking is lacking) are ambiguous between object and subject readings. One
complication to be addressed is the possibility of do-support (tun-support) in certain German dialects. This is the case in the native Austro-Bavarian dialect of the
learners in the present study (see Eroms, 1998). It is thus possible to assume formal overlap in three quarters of main clause wh-question forms (Table 1).
Table 1. Formal correspondence between (Austrian)German and English wh-questions
German

English

Was jagt die Katze? (ambiguous)

What chases the cat? (subject)

Was tut die Katze jagen? (ambiguous)

What does the cat chase? (object)

Was hat die Katze gejagt? (ambiguous)

What has the cat chased? (object)

-

What has chased the cat? (subject)

3. Parsing and grammatical representation at the initial state
Gruter (2006) exploits this overlap and the potential ambiguity of German main
clause wh-questions to test the Full Transfer model of the initial state against the
predictions of Minimal Trees (Vainikka & Young-Scholten, 1996). Her subjects
are L1 English learners of L2 German. Careful pretesting established that they
were at the initial state. While Minimal Trees argues that learners have only lexical projections at the initial state, Full Transfer/Full Access (FT/FA) proposes that
the entire L1 grammar is used to parse L2 input. Assuming that learners assign
only a VP structure to the input, German simple tense questions will be parsed as
subject questions, with the wh-phrase in Spec,VP and the object DP as complement of V0. However, periphrastic tense questions cannot be accommodated by
a VP-only representation. In the absence of a full syntactic parse, learners should
show no clear preference and a tendency towards guessing. Alternatively, a default linear-order parsing strategy which assigns the subject thematic role to the
first DP in the clause may result in a preference for subject interpretation (Gruter,
2006: 300-301).
Under the assumptions of FT/FA, L1 English-L2 German learners will parse
incoming strings with an English V-in situ, SVO representation. They will then
parse German simple present tense questions in the same way as English simple tense subject questions, giving rise to a preference for subject interpretation

Variational learning in L2 437

CP
C'

DP
wasi

C

IP
I'

ti
I

VP
ti

V'
V

DP

jagt die Katze

Figure 1. L1 English speakers' subject representation of ambiguous German simple tense
questions
CP
C'

DP
wasi

C
hatj

IP
DP
die Katze

I'
I
tj

VP
V'

ti
V

DP

gejagt

tk

Figure 2. L1 English speakers' object representation of ambiguous German periphrastic
tense questions

(Figure 1). Similarly, with an SVO representation, German periphrastic perfect
tense questions can be assigned a full syntactic parse, but only as an object question with a trace as complement of V0 (Figure 2).
Gruter (2006) tests these predictions using a picture interpretation methodology, whereby learners are presented with cartoon scenes involving animals chasing each other, biting each other, etc., and are then asked questions relating to the
pictures. This methodology, which is adapted in the present study, is described in
more detail below.
Gruter's results are in line with the FT/FA predictions. The learners preferred
a subject interpretation for present tense questions at a rate of 71.2% vs. 28.8%

438 Tom Rankin

(Gruter, 2006: 309). In the perfect tense condition, which is where the predictions
of FT/FA and MT diverge, there was a strong preference for object interpretation
at a rate of 97.6% vs. 2.4% (Gruter, 2006: 309). None of the learners demonstrated
that they had detected the ambiguity in the sentences by choosing both possible
answers. Thus, it seemed that they were parsing the German input with their full
L1 grammar, in line with Full Transfer.
The native German control group showed similar patterns of performance
in both the present and perfect tense questions, which was significantly different
from the learner group. Interestingly, however, the native speakers only provided
both possible answers to 40%-45% of the ambiguous questions, and object interpretation was clearly preferred in instances where only one answer was provided. Gruter (2006: 311) interprets this result as an animacy bias in ambiguity
resolution. Recall that in order to construct possibly ambiguous questions, the
uninflected question word was was used in the experimental sentences, yielding
questions such as (10).
(10) Was jagt die Katze?

The distinction between the [-animate] wh-word and the [+animate] DP may
privilege an object interpretation. If animacy is a cue for ambiguity resolution, the
[+animate] DP is more likely to be associated with the agent theta role and syntactic subject. Gruter (2006: 311) observes that such an explanation would predict
that structurally similar questions in which both DPs are [+animate], as in (11),
would not exhibit an object bias. This prediction is taken up and tested in the study
presented below.
(11) Welches Tier jagt
das
Kamel?
 which animal chase-3sg the-neut camel
 `Which animal is (the camel) chasing (the camel)?'

4. OV to VO and V2 to V3: Previous SLA research
In order to acquire English syntax, and the interpretation of English wh-questions, L1 German speakers need to restructure their grammar from an OV to a
VO grammar and establish that English does not instantiate thematic verb movement. Consistent trends have emerged from studies of these aspects of L2 syntactic
development. To set the scene for research questions, I concentrate on two studies
in the following discussion (Kaltenbacher, 2001; Westergaard, 2003) but point out
where similar findings have emerged from other studies.
Kaltenbacher (2001) studied parameter resetting in L1 German-L2 English
interlanguage with reference to pro-drop, the adjacency condition on case

Variational learning in L2 439

assignment, and headedness of VP. His test subjects were instructed learners at
lower-intermediate, upper-intermediate, and advanced proficiency levels. They
completed grammaticality judgement, translation, and sentence formation/manipulation tasks. The most relevant finding for present purposes was that VP
headedness was reset early and consistently (Kaltenbacher, 2001: 224).
It was only in the judgement task that Kaltenbacher (2001: 216) found any significant evidence of the residual influence of German OV. In this case, there was a
tendency in all the proficiency groups to accept English sentences with non-target
OV structures. However, learners who accepted OV were not a majority, even at
the lowest proficiency levels, and the tendency declined significantly; non-target
OV patterns were accepted at a rate of only 14.3% by the 6th year of instruction. In
the production tasks, there were only occasional occurrences of OV patterns as in
(12); otherwise, the learners' performance mirrored that of native controls, even
at the lowest proficiency levels. The highest rate of non-target OV production was
2.4%.
(12) He can't tell me, how he the car repaired. (Kaltenbacher, 2001: 225, Ex. 68)

Kaltenbacher (2001: 224) questions why his learners acquire English VO so easily
when the other parameters he studied pose more significant learnability problems.
He concludes that, on the assumption there is access to UG allowing new parameter settings, "[t]he input is just full of the necessary data to induce parameter
fixation" (Kaltenbacher, 2001: 225). So, the obvious VO patterns in English serve
to promote swift restructuring.
This assumption that headedness can be restructured easily is well represented
in the literature and has received further empirical support. Vainikka & YoungScholten (1996) point out that L1 Italian and Spanish learners of L2 German reset quickly from VO to OV. Studies on the acquisition of L2 English by Chinese,
Japanese, and Spanish speakers have similarly found that headedness is reset
(Flynn, 1989; Flynn & Espinal, 1985; cf. Epstein et al., 1996 for review). Overall,
the results suggest that the strict VO order of English, which cannot be parsed
with an OV representation, and the abundance of VO cues in the input motivate
quick restructuring.
Research on the development of verb placement in L2 English by speakers of a
V2-L1 has shown that restructuring from V2 to V3 presents a more serious learnability problem. However, one feature that appears to be reset straightforwardly is
the lack of thematic verb movement. In a study of word order in L1 Norwegian-L2
English, for example, Westergaard (2003) found an asymmetry between auxiliary
and thematic verbs in transfer patterns. She tested the performance of children in
grades 1 to 7 in grammaticality judgement, translation, and sentence preference
tasks. While there was overall "massive transfer of V2 word order" (Westergaard,

440 Tom Rankin

2003: 85), auxiliary verbs were more likely to occur in non-target V2 patterns (13).
Thematic verb placement was more target-like.
(13) The spaghetti is Susan eating, not the bread. (Westergaard, 2003: 94)

In the translation task, learners' performance on declarative topicalisation structures with auxiliary verbs consistently lagged behind performance on thematic
verbs. Word order in topicalisation structures with thematic verbs was the target
V3 at rates of 15% in 5th grade, 43% in 6th, and 65% in 7th. With auxiliary verbs,
the rate of production of V3 remained at 10% in 5th grade, 23% in 6th, and 42% in
7th. This sort of asymmetry seems to become more pronounced as proficiency increases; for example, Robertson & Sorace's (1999) study of L1 German-L2 English
acquisition by instructed learners in high school and university found that there
was a residual V2 constraint. This is exhibited in English declaratives and realised
exclusively by movement of non-thematic verbs, with no evidence of thematic verb
movement.
Thus, there seems to be a consistent developmental trend in the acquisition
of English declaratives by speakers of V2-L1s. This is characterised by a retreat
from an initial V2 grammar to a more target-like V3 grammar, which, however,
continues to instantiate residual V2 with non-thematic verbs. Westergaard (2003)
identifies a similar trend in questions. Again, learners initially relied on the L1
grammar; in simple tense questions, which would require do-support, the fifth
graders produced thematic verb movement in 72% of instances (14), with target
do-support in only 10%. However, between 6th and 7th grade, there was a "major
leap" in acquisition (Westergaard, 2003: 96). At this stage, more than half of the
pupils provided the correct structure.
(14) Where sits the cat?

As with OV/VO, the development from V2 to V3 can be accommodated by FT/
FA. It seems that V2 with thematic verbs is transferred at the L2 initial state. Given
this starting point, the L2 English input with respect to V2 is more ambiguous
than the VO cues. Westergaard (2003: 92) observes that frequently occurring sequences such as SVO in English are misleading because they can be parsed by a
V2 grammar. In addition, the surface structure of English questions with modal or
aspectual auxiliaries is the same as a V2 language. Westergaard (2003: 91) points
out that the necessary cues for restructuring are rare in the input her learners were
exposed to. Topicalisation would indicate that English is V3, but this (OSV) order
is rare. Do-support in questions indicates that thematic verbs do not move, but
this sort of structure is rare in the controlled pedagogical input available to young
learners at elementary school level. So, while parameter resetting is possible, there
is no consistent transformational resetting of V2 due to the nature of the English

Variational learning in L2 441

input. V2, realised by non-target subject-auxiliary inversion, remains an option in
the L2 English of V2-L1 speakers. This leads to questions with regard to parameters and transfer: in what sense can L1 parameter settings be said to continue to
exist, alongside target L2 settings, in the learner's interlanguage grammar, to be
used for parsing and production? Do learners fall back on the L1 syntax in certain
contexts? Does the L2 grammatical representation instantiate mutually exclusive
parameter settings?
5. Theoretical considerations
The role of parameters has been much discussed in both first and second language
acquisition research (see Ayoun, 2003). It has long been clear that parameter resetting does not proceed in an all-or-nothing fashion in the course of L2 acquisition.
White's (1990/91, 1991, 1992) seminal studies of verb movement in L1 French-L2
English showed that different surface properties connected to a single underlying
parameter are not acquired at the same time, contra to what would be expected if a
parameter were instantaneously reset. Learners seem to permit mutually exclusive
parametric options by accepting both non-target verb movement and target verb
in situ in L2 English.
This is a difficulty if we want to assume that there is transformational learning in L2A (refer to Yang's predictions in (1) above). However, a VL approach to
parameter resetting can readily accommodate such variability. Taking inspiration
from thinking in evolutionary biology, it is claimed that non-uniformity in a data
sample should not be interpreted as imperfect forms of a single archetype, but
rather as a collection of distinct individuals (Yang, 2002: 25). Thus, Variational
Learning sees variability in the course of first language acquisition as a series of
changes in the underlying distribution of a population of grammars in an individual learner, rather than as imperfect discrete stages on the way to a target system.
The population of competing grammars is constrained by the innate hypothesis space for parametric variation given by UG. Within this space, parameters
are probabilistically selected for parsing input. The success of a parameter setting
when parsing input then affects the probability with which it will be selected in
the future. Learners arrive at a stable equilibrium of different grammars, which
underlies variability in native adult competence, by means of the process in (15)
(Yang, 2002: 26-27):
(15) Upon the presentation of an input datum s, the child
 a. selects a grammar Gi with probability Pi,
 b. analyzes s with Gi

442 Tom Rankin

 c.


if successful, reward Gi by increasing Pi
otherwise, punish Gi by decreasing Pi

Slabakova (2008: 116) observes that Variational Learning is "logically extendable"
to SLA as there is more variability in the production of L2 learners than children
learning their L1. There is also more variability in learner-directed speech depending on naturalistic or instructed L2 settings. Any application of VL in SLA must
also take additional variables into account. Important among these is the status
of the L1 parameter value, and whether it is "just one among many" or whether
it enjoys "some privileged status" (Slabakova, 2008: 116). Under Full Transfer's
assumptions, it would be logical to assume that the L1 parameter values indeed
have a privileged status, a fact which Slabakova (2008: 120, note 13) acknowledges:
"Assuming L1 transfer, the native value would be the logical starting point of the
learner, accessing the others only if the native one fails."
Indeed, in addition to transfer, learnability considerations of FT/FA are also
compatible with a Variational Learning model. Schwartz and Sprouse (1996) propose that L2 development post-initial state is failure-driven. Learners initially
function with the L1 grammar, which parses the L2 input. A parsing failure will
motivate grammar restructuring. Restructuring from one stage of grammatical
development to the next is constrained by UG. Despite access to UG, restructuring
need not necessarily arrive at a target L2 grammar. Where there are robust cues
in the input, restructuring may proceed swiftly; however, "it may be that the L2
acquirer will never be able to arrive at the TL grammar: either the data needed to
force restructuring simply do not exist [...] or the positive data needed are highly
obscure, being very complex and/or very rare" (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1996: 42).
Similarly, Sprouse (2011: 98) asserts that due to the nature of the initial state, it is
possible that "the Interlanguage grammar licenses certain target-deviant linguistic
objects from which there is no available input to trigger retreat."
This highlights the conceptual compatibility of Variational Learning and FT/
FA. We can still assume `full access' to UG and grammatical development based on
parsing failure. The key difference is that where the L1 representation can parse L2
input, it is probable that it will. Thus, rather than causing a direct change in a given
grammatical representation, a parsing failure will impinge upon the probability
with which different grammatical representations are accessed. If the L1 parameter value can parse input, it may never be definitively deleted from among the
population of grammars, but it could rather persist as an option accessed to parse
any L2 input which is formally compatible with the representation. Slabakova
(2008: 117) points out "that the rise of the target value from probability 0 to 1, and
even conceivably fossilizing at 0.8, is going to be correlated with the percentage of
sentences in the input that unambiguously reward the target parameter value and

Variational learning in L2 443

punish all others." Thus, Sprouse's "target-deviant linguistic objects" would be the
probabilistic occurrence of L1 parameter settings which are otherwise consistent
with parsing a certain percentage of the L2 input. In L1 German-L2 English, there
is evidence from production which seems to show evidence of the continued influence of L1 syntax after basic word order has seemingly been acquired (16-18).
(16) What means suppress? (Vienna CLIL Corpus)
(17) An example for this combination offers the German band Die Arzte.
(Writing task, 2nd semester English Studies, University of Vienna)
(18) Another perspective on transfer provides Schachter. (Term paper, 4th
semester English Studies, University of Vienna)

Notice here that the linear orders DP-V-DP are identical in both English and
German, the difference lies in the thematic relations. Where German permits
O-V-S, English does not. It may be that simple DP-V-DP sentences in the input
are parsed by a V2 grammar. In canonical SVO sentences, which are identical on
the surface in English and German, this would give successful parses, but it may
also prompt the V2 grammar to produce non-target sentences. This issue, in relation to main-clause wh-questions, is addressed in the research questions below.
6. Research questions and predictions
Given an initial state in which L1 German speakers parse L2 English with a V2/
OV grammar, simple tense subject wh-questions, periphrastic tense object whquestions, and simple tense object questions with do-support can all be parsed
with the L1 grammar. Following Slabakova and FT/FA, I assume the L1 grammatical representation has a privileged status and continues to parse L2 input where
possible. The grammatical representations underlying these parses will thus be
rewarded (in the sense of Yang) and will continue to exist among the population
of grammars available to the learner. Where these grammars are accessed probabilistically for parsing at higher proficiency levels, this will give rise to non-target
patterns of interpretation of English wh-questions.
One issue that should be addressed at this point is the role of (mis)comprehension. In reference to Variational Learning's computation of the success of a
particular grammar in parsing input, Slabakova (2008: 117) points out that where
"the language learner uses her native parameter value as a possible analysis for
the incoming message, it is comprehension or miscomprehension of the message
that measures success or failure." One might then suggest that miscomprehension
of English questions, indicated by miscommunication or misunderstandings in

444 Tom Rankin

interactions, would also punish German parses of English wh-questions. Recall,
however, that a German parse will give an ambiguous interpretation. Pragmatic or
contextual cues that an answer to a question is `wrong' does not necessarily imply
that learners would be lead to adopt a different parse, but rather that they had simply chosen the contextually `wrong' of two permissible options.
Against this background, three related research questions are explored in two
experimental studies. Experiment 1 addresses Gruter's prediction on the role of
animacy in ambiguity resolution in German. It is predicted that [-animate] whphrases will be preferentially parsed as objects, while [+animate] wh-phrases will
neutralise this bias. It is assumed that was (`what') is [-animate] and welches Tier
(`which animal') is [+animate], giving the predictions outlined in Table 2.
RQ 1: Does the animacy of non-overtly case-marked wh-phrases affect interpretation in native German?
Table 2. Predicted interpretation of German ambiguous questions by native German
speakers
Interpretation
-animate
Was beisst die Katze?

Ambiguous -- Object Bias

+animate
Welches Tier beisst die Katze?

Ambiguous -- No Bias

Experiment 2 addresses the role of L1 German grammar in parsing English whquestions. Given that English requires residual V2 with auxiliaries in questions,
simple tense subject questions are the only structures which would indicate the
continued presence of thematic verb movement. Non-target patterns of interpretation of these questions indicate that learners continue to access the L1 grammar
in parsing. Ambiguous interpretations of object questions indicate the continued
use of OV. The influence of L1 German syntax therefore predicts the patterns of
interpretation outlined in Table 3.
RQ 2: Do upper-intermediate proficiency L1 German-L2 English learners
parse L2 wh-questions with a V2/OV grammar?

Variational learning in L2 445

Table 3. Predicted interpretation of English questions by L1 German-L2 English speakers
Parsed with L1 German
Grammar

Parsed with Target English
Grammar

Simple Tense Subject
What chased the cat?

non-target
(ambiguous)

target
(subject)

Simple Tense Object
What does the cat chase?

non-target
(ambiguous)

target
(object)

Periphrastic Tense Subject
What is chasing the cat?

-

target
(subject)

Periphrastic Tense Object
What is the cat chasing?

non-target
(ambiguous)

target
(object)

If RQs 1 and 2 are answered `yes', the third research question explores whether L1
processing preferences for ambiguity resolution are also transferred to L2 English.
The Competition Model approach to L1 sentence processing suggests that cues
which are used in processing L1 may also be used in processing L2 sentences (Bates
& MacWhinney, 1989). In experiments which manipulated word order, number
agreement and animacy, Kilborn (1989) has shown that L1 German speakers rely
more on animacy cues in parsing English than do native English speakers. In the
experiments below, what and which animal are predicted to be preferentially parsed
in the same way as their German cognates. Thus, processing preferences may affect
the probability with which the L1 grammatical properties are accessed to parse the
input. The predictions are summarised in Table 4. The logic of the predictions is
that in subject questions, the [-animate] wh-phrase what will bias an object interpretation. Manipulating the animacy of the wh-phrase, with [+animate] which
animal, will neutralise this bias and reduce the rate of non-target responses. By
contrast, [+animate] wh-phrases in object questions will increase the rate of nontarget answers, indicating a higher probability of accessing an OV grammar.
RQ 3: Does the animacy of wh-phrases influence L1 Germans' interpretation
of English wh-questions?
Table 4. Parsing preferences according to wh-phrase animacy in L1 German-L2 English
Question forms

Interpretation patterns

Simple Tense Subject
[-animate] What bites the cat?
vs.
[+animate] Which animal bites the cat?

[+animate] fewer non-target answers

Simple Tense Object
[-animate] What does the cat bite?
vs.
[+animate] Which animal does the cat bite?

[+animate] more non-target answers

446 Tom Rankin

7.

Experiment 1

7.1 Participants
The native German group was made up of thirteen native speakers of AustrianGerman recruited from among personal contacts in Vienna, Austria (9 male / 4
female). They were aged between 25 and 41 years (M = 31.7, SD = 5.14). They were
asked to participate as a control group for a second language acquisition experiment
and were unaware of the aims of the study to test interpretation in native German.
7.2 Materials and procedure
The picture interpretation task in essence reproduced the methodology used in
Gruter (2006). The experimental materials were made up of five separate picture
stimuli. Each picture depicted an A4 size cartoon scene of animals performing a
particular action (see Figure 3). The scenes involved the actions `chasing', `biting',
`carrying', `pushing,' and `catching'.

Figure 3. Example of picture stimulus -- the `chase' picture

In Experiment 1, each scene was accompanied by five questions. Two questions
tested the experimental variable by varying wh-phrase animacy (19 and 20), three
questions served as distractors of varying forms (see 21). Because Gruter (2006)
demonstrated that German speakers exhibited no difference in interpretation depending on tense form, this aspect of her study was not reproduced. Tense was
held constant.
(19) Was jagt die Katze?
(20) Welches Tier jagt die Maus?
(21) Was ist hinter/vor dem Pferd? (What is behind/in front of the horse?)

The experiment was carried out individually with each participant by a native
German-speaking experimenter. Each scene in turn was placed on a desk in
front of the participant along with a multiple choice answer sheet (see Figure 4).

Variational learning in L2 447

Participants were told to record their responses by circling appropriate answers.
They were informed that they should circle as many options as they felt appropriate and that if they felt there was no appropriate answer, they should circle the
question mark. Questions were posed orally by the experimenter. The order of
presentation of the five scenes as well as the order of questions for each scene were
randomised so that each participant had a unique order of questions.
1.

Pferd

Maus

Katze

?

2.

Hund

Fliege

Elefant

?

3.

Katze

Elefant

Pferd

?

Figure 4. Excerpt from Experiment 1 answer sheet

7.3 Results for Native German Group
The answers provided by the native German speakers were coded as `ambiguous'
where participants circled both possible answers to an ambiguous question. Where
participants chose just one option, this was coded as either `subject' or `object'. No
question was answered with the `don't know' option.
The results for the German group reproduced Gruter's results in that there was
a tendency to assign either an object or a subject interpretation to ambiguous questions rather than consistently stating that both options are possible. As in Gruter's
findings, there was a clear tendency for [-animate] was to be interpreted as an
object (see Table 5). This then serves as confirmation for the first aspect of Gruter's
prediction that animacy is a cue for ambiguity resolution and that the [-animate]
wh-phrase will bias an object interpretation of ambiguous questions. The second
element of the prediction, that [+animate] welches Tier questions will neutralise
the object bias, was also supported. Here, there was a stronger tendency towards
a subject interpretation. It seems that [+animate] wh-phrases make an ambiguous
interpretation much more likely (see Table 5).
Table 5. Native German interpretation of ambiguous [-animate] vs. [+animate] questions
Subject

Object

Ambiguous

[-animate]
was question

18.6%
(13 of 70)

54.2%
(38 of 70)

27.2%
(19 of 70)

[+animate]
welches Tier questions

31.4%
(22 of 70)

17.1%
(12 of 70)

51.5%
(36 of 70)

448 Tom Rankin

A 2 (animacy) x 3 (interpretation: subject, object ambiguous) ANOVA showed
a significant effect of animacy on interpretation F(1.79, 14.29) = 8.4, p. < .05. These
patterns of interpretation may be a result of online processing preferences for
ambiguity resolution. In the was questions, there was a clear animacy distinction
between the wh-phrase and the DP, which was not the case in the welches Tier
questions, where both the wh-phrase and the DP were [+animate]. So, during the
course of processing, the initial was perhaps privileges an object interpretation,
which is held in working memory while the rest of the sentence is processed. Upon
encountering the animate DP in the question, and in the absence of cues from case,
the parser then assigns it the subject theta role. By contrast, while welches Tier may
slightly privilege a [+animate] subject theta role, it is pragmatically equally likely
that the animal mentioned in the wh-phrase is either chasing or being chased. On
encountering the full DP, the parser lacks disambiguating cues both from case and
animacy, giving rise to an ambiguous interpretation. Results for Experiment 2 are
summarised in Figure 5.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%

Ambiguous Interpretation
Object Interpretation
Subject Interpretation

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

[-animate] wh

[+animate] wh

Figure 5. L1 German interpretation of animate vs. inanimate wh-questions

8. Experiment 2
8.1 Participants
Experiment 2 was completed by a native English control group and a group of
instructed L1 German-L2 English learners. For the L2 group, nineteen learners
(4 male/15 female) were recruited as volunteers from among students of English
Studies at the University of Salzburg, Austria.1 All learners reported German as
their only first language.

Variational learning in L2 449

Table 6. L2 Group background information
L2 Learners

Age
(years)

Age of first
exposure
(years)

Time learning
English
(years)

Semesters of
English Studies

Mean

21.1

11.2

9.9

3.1

Range

19-24

7-14

8-13

1-5

SD

1.33

1.77

1.72

1.63

For the purposes of the predictions, it was important that learners were well beyond the initial state. The learners had a minimum of 8 years instruction in English.
All were within the first five semesters of a degree programme in English Studies.
All had recently either completed or were taking courses designed to foster proficiency in the core skills at a C1 level on the Common European Framework of
Reference. In order to begin the degree program, all students take a pre-session
language proficiency exam which requires a score at the B2+ level.
The English group consisted of 12 native English speakers living in Austria (5
male / 7 female). They were aged between 29 and 48 years (M = 35.2, SD = 6.44).
All had at least a basic knowledge of German, and four reported German as their
dominant daily language. Information on German usage was collected to control
for the possibility of back transfer from L2 German to L1 English.2 However, as
outlined below, the English group performed entirely as expected and showed no
evidence of any variability in their responses.
8.2 Materials and procedure
Experiment 2 employed the same materials and procedures as Experiment 1, with
the obvious exception that it was conducted in English. Given that tense form,
subject/object question structures and animacy were varied in the English version,
each scene was accompanied by ten questions. Six questions tested experimental
variables and four were of different distractor forms (see Table 7). Randomisation
of the order of presentation of the scenes and the order of questions accompanying
each scene meant that each participant was faced with a unique order.
As in Experiment 1, participants were instructed to circle ALL possible answers to each question and told explicitly that it was permissible to circle more
than one answer if they found this appropriate (Figure 6 shows an excerpt from
the English answer sheet). It was made clear that participants could request verbatim repetition of questions, but not reformulation.4 The entire procedure took 15
to 20 minutes per participant and the experimenter timed the questions according
to the speed of participants' responses, only moving on after they had marked the
answer sheet.

450 Tom Rankin

Table 7. Examples of range of question forms in Experiment 23
Simple Tense Subject what

What chases the dog?

Simple Tense Object what

What does the dog chase?

Periphrastic Tense Subject what

What is chasing the dog?

Periphrastic Tense Object what

What is the dog chasing?

Simple Tense Subject which-NP

Which animal chases the dog?

Simple Tense object which-NP

Which animal does the dog chase?

Distractor Question Forms

What is between the elephant and the cat?
How many animals are behind/in front of the dog?

1.

Crocodile

Rabbit

Horse

?

2.

Dog

Horse

Rabbit

?

3.

Rabbit

Crocodile

Dog

?

Figure 6. Excerpt from answer sheet

8.3 Native English and L2 English results
The results for the native English group are not discussed in detail because they
performed entirely as predicted. Interpretation was completely consistent. These
results, then, serve to show that there were no issues in the experimental task
which might have influenced interpretation patterns.
For statistical analysis, learners' responses were coded as either target or nontarget. Non-target responses were those where an object or ambiguous interpretation was assigned to a subject question, and vice-versa. Interestingly, no participant
assigned an ambiguous interpretation to any single question. There is, however,
evidence of ambiguous interpretation, both in individual learners' responses to
different questions and at the group level. 10 of 19 participants provided nontarget interpretations in the simple tense condition. Thus, a slight majority of individuals lacked consistent interpretations for English questions. I leave the lack of
ambiguous interpretation of individual questions as an issue for future research.
I start with the presentation of the results for the different question forms with
[-animate] wh-phrases. These results lend only qualified support to the specific
predictions in Table 1. As outlined in Figure 7, the prediction that simple tense
subject questions would have an ambiguous interpretation was confirmed. 21.1%
(20 of 95) of the simple tense subject questions were assigned an object interpretation. This indicates that there was a tendency for upper-intermediate proficiency

Variational learning in L2 451
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
Non-target
Target

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

[-Animate] Simple [-Animate] Simple [+Animate] Simple [+Animate] Simple
Tense Subject Q
Tense Object Q
Tense Subject Q
Tense Object Q

Figure 7. Interpretation of simple vs. periphrastic tense [-animate] questions by the L2
Group

L1 German-L2 English learners to parse English questions with their L1 syntactic
representations.
However, the same did not apply to object questions, which were also predicted
to show evidence of non-target interpretation. In this case, the learners provided
consistent target interpretation. Interestingly, there was a very slight tendency for
periphrastic tense subject questions to be assigned a non-target interpretation. A 2
(L1) x 4 (question form) ANOVA showed a main effect of native language on the
rate of target responses F(1, 29) = 8.99. p < .05 and a significant interaction between
native language and question form F(3, 87) = 8.66, p. < .05. Looking at the different
forms in more detail, t-tests showed that there was a significantly different rate
of target response between native speakers (M = 5, SE = 0) and learners (M = 3.8,
SE = 0.30) for simple tense subject questions, t(18) = 3.88, p < .05. The difference
between native speakers' (M = 5, SE = 0) and learners' (M = 4.79, SE = 0.42) performance on periphrastic tense subject questions was not significant, t(18) = 2.19,
p > .05. Thus, it would seem that despite the tendency for learners to parse English
wh-questions with a thematic V2 grammar, OV has been reset and learners parse
questions with a head-initial VP. However, this is questionable in light of the results for questions which manipulate wh-phrase animacy.
Given the finding that wh-phrase animacy impinges on interpretation in native German, the final research question addressed whether a similar parsing strategy transfers to L2 English. It appears that manipulating wh-phrase animacy does
have an interesting effect on interpretation in L1 German-L2 English (Table 8).

452 Tom Rankin

Table 8. L2 Group interpretation of animate vs. inanimate wh-phrases in English
[-Animate]
Subject Q

[+Animate]
Subject Q

[-Animate]
Object Q

[+Animate]
Object Q

Target Interpretation

78.9%
(75 of 95)

85.3%
(81 of 95)

100%
(95 of 95)

91.6%
(87 of 95)

Non-Target Interpretation

21.1%
(20 of 95)

14.7%
(14 of 95)

0

8.4%
(8 of 95)

Another 2 (L1) x 4 (question) ANOVA again revealed a main effect of L1 on the rate
of target interpretation of these question forms F(1, 29) = 15.84, p. < .05. Where the
syntactic form of the question remained the same, manipulating animacy was predicted to have an effect on interpretation (as in L1 German). A repeated measures
ANOVA on the learners' responses to animate vs. inanimate subject questions
showed that animacy did not have a significant effect on the rate of non-target
responses F(1, 18) = 1.00, p > .05. However, animacy did have a significant effect
on the learners' responses to object questions F(1, 29) = 4.38, p < .05. This finding
is in line with the prediction that [+animate] wh-phrases increase the number of
non-target responses to object questions. Thus, processing preferences do seem to
increase the probability of accessing the L1 OV grammar to parse input.
It should be noted that in the case of object questions, the learners are parsing
English questions with do-support in the same way as they would parse dialectal
German tun-support questions, with a head-final VP, thus giving rise to non-target patterns of interpretation (see 22-23).
(22) Which animal does the cat chase?
(23) Welches Tier tut die Katze jagen?

8.4 Individual learner results
As Gruter (2006: 309) notes, grammars are properties of individuals rather than
groups; one therefore needs to investigate whether the pattern of individuals' responses matches the predictions at the group level. Each participant responded to
five test items for each condition. These numbers are used to calculate the percentage of non-target responses to the question forms and presented in Table 9.
Six learners patterned like native English speakers and had consistent target
interpretations. However, this is perhaps a surprisingly low number. Recall that
the participants were all students in English Studies degree programs. They therefore form a self-selecting group of people who, it can be assumed, have an above
average motivation and aptitude for English. After an average of 10 years of formal instruction (and with a minimum of 8 years), a majority of the participants

Variational learning in L2 453

continue to show non-target patterns of interpretation. There is no obvious explanation in terms of their language acquisition history to explain the performance of
the six learners with native-like interpretation patterns.
The findings for the effect of animacy at the group level are only mirrored to a
limited extent at the individual level. The results are unequivocal for object questions: inanimate simple tense object questions show a completely consistent pattern, but six learners optionally revert to an L1 parse for animate object questions.
The results for subject questions are not so clear-cut. Twelve learners provided
non-target answers to subject questions; of these, only half performed as predicted
by showing fewer non-target answers in the [+animate] versus [-animate] condition. For five learners, the rate of non-target responses to [-animate] subject questions actually increased (P4 had the same number of non-target answers for both).
Table 9. Rate of individuals' non-target responses to different question forms (%)
Inanimate
Simple
Tense Subj

Inanimate
Simple
Tense Obj

Inanimate Inanimate Animate
Periphrastic Periphrastic Simple
Tense Subj Tense Obj
Tense Subj

Animate
Simple Tense
Object

P1

80

0

20

0

20

0

P2

0

0

0

0

0

0

P3

20

0

0

0

40

0

P4

20

0

20

0

20

20

P5

0

0

0

0

20

0

P6

60

0

0

0

20

0

P7

0

0

0

0

20

20

P8

20

0

0

0

40

20

P8

20

0

20

0

60

0

P10

0

0

0

0

0

0

P11

0

0

0

0

0

0

P12

0

0

0

0

0

0

P13

60

0

20

0

0

40

P14

0

0

0

0

0

0

P15

40

0

0

0

20

0

P16

0

0

0

0

0

20

P17

0

0

0

0

0

0

P18

40

0

0

0

20

40

P19

40

0

0

0

0

0

454 Tom Rankin

9. English Wh-questions in the in instruction input
VL assumes that there will be a quantitative correlation between the frequency
of syntactic forms in the input and the acquisition of parametric properties of
the target language. In order to complete the application of the VL model to the
acquisition of wh-questions in L1 Austrian-German-L2 English, the frequencies
of interrogative structures in instruction were computed. The data came from the
Austrian Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) Classroom Corpus
(DELT Vienna, 2007). This corpus is made up of recordings of lessons delivered in
English in Viennese high schools.5 A subcorpus was extracted which comprised
six Grade 11 lessons by three different teachers. The students were 16-17 years
old. Detailed proficiency information was not available for the learners but the institutional level should correlate approximately with B1 proficiency on CEF. Each
lesson was approximately 45 minutes long, totalling c. 4 hours 20 minutes across
the six lessons in the subcorpus. This gave a total of c. 37000 words of transcribed
speech.
Question structures were extracted by concordancing the wh-words what,
which and who(m) in WordSmith Tools (Scott, 2008). The concordances were
manually sorted to exclude occurrences of non-interrogative wh-words such as
relative pronouns. The remaining interrogatives were further sorted to isolate the
relevant syntactic structures using the following criteria:
a. Main clause interrogatives -- embedded questions excluded
b. Active sentences -- passive questions excluded
c. Full finite clauses -- fragments excluded (e.g. `Which one?')
This left a total of 208 questions. These were categorised according to syntactic
form. The categorisation reflected the question forms in the experiments, with the
addition of copula questions, which were not tested in the experiments but which
proved important in the analysis of the input (see Table 10).
Table 10. Categorisation of question forms in the CLIL Corpus
Simple Tense Subject

Wh-V-DP

Simple Tense Object

Wh-do-DP-V

Periphrastic Tense Subject

Wh-aux-V-DP

Periphrastic Tense Object

Wh-aux-DP-V

Copula

Wh-be-XP

Recall that only periphrastic tense subject questions are unparsable by an Austrian-
German grammar and would thus punish the L1 representation, reducing the

Variational learning in L2 455

likelihood that it would be accessed to parse English. A high frequency of periphrastic tense subject questions should lead to swift abandonment of the L1 grammar to parse English. The role of copula questions is also crucial. The distribution
of the copula in English is consistently V2 in contexts such as inversion, negation
and with adverbials (see examples 24-27). In addition, there are no differences
with regard to semantic interpretation in English and German copula sentences.
Such sentences in the input will reward the L1 grammar, increasing the likelihood
that it will be accessed to parse English.
(24) On the mat is the cat -- Auf dem Teppich ist die Katze
(25) That is not funny -- Das ist nicht lustig
(26) That is always the case -- Das ist immer der Fall
(27) When is the party? -- Wann ist das Fest?

In the CLIL corpus, copula questions account for almost half of all question
forms while periphrastic tense subject questions are the least frequent form (see
Table 11).
Table 11. Frequency of question forms in CLIL corpus
Simple tense
subject

Simple tense
object

Periphrastic
tense subject

Periphrastic
tense object

Copula

11.1%
(23 of 208)6

27.9%
(58 of 208)

4.8%
(10 of 208)

11.5%
(24 of 208)

44.7%
(93 of 208)

Summarising, instructed L1 Austrian-German-L2 English speakers would be able
both to syntactically parse and correctly semantically interpret 44.7% of questions
in the input by relying on their L1 grammar. A further 27.4% of question forms
would be syntactically parsable but would be assigned an ambiguous interpretation. It must, however, be acknowledged that this input study should be seen as
preliminary. Obviously, a more detailed consideration of the input would have
to go beyond just interrogatives and include frequencies of syntactic structures
in declarative and embedded clauses. Nevertheless, the frequency of question
forms is informative. It goes some way to explaining why simple tense subject
questions seem to be most problematic for the learners; Wh-V-DP structures account for more than half of all question forms typically available to learners. Given
that the vast majority of these are copula questions which are both syntactically
and semantically cognate with German structures, the L1 grammar will often be
rewarded and thus be assigned a high probability of selection to parse future input. Finally, such frequency effects raise the possibility that previous L2 results
may be reanalysed from a VL perspective. For example, if, as seems likely, copula

456 Tom Rankin

structures are generally more frequent in the L2 English input, the verb-raising
properties of be in English might go some way to explaining the findings that V-in
situ poses a learnability problem in L2 English.
10. Discussion and conclusions
Table 12 summarises the results of the experiments in terms of the research questions outlined above.
Table 12. Research questions and answers based on results
RQ1: Does the animacy of non-overtly casemarked wh-phrases affect question interpretation in native German?

YES

RQ2: Do upper-intermediate proficiency L1
German-L2 English learners parse L2 whquestions with a V2/OV grammar?

PARTIALLY: V2, not OV but...

RQ3: If (1) and (2), does animacy of whYES, and it also increases the probability of acphrases influence L1 Germans' interpretation cessing an OV grammar. So, YES to (2)...
of English wh-questions?

In light of previous findings, these results suggest that transfer of V2 and OV is
more extensive in terms of parsing than previous production or judgement studies have found. In such studies (cf. Kaltenbacher, 2001), OV has been found to be
restructured early and uniformly. The results from the picture interpretation task
are broadly in line with these findings as the influence of German OV in parsing
is weaker than V2. However, it is somewhat surprising that there is any influence
at all at this level of proficiency. Eubank (1991: 223) observed that "determining
`headedness' of the VP in clearly marked languages like English comes fairly easily,
even for speakers whose L1 has a different parameter value."
On the issue of V2 transfer, recall that Westergaard (2003) and Robertson and
Sorace (1999) report that V2 influence in L2 English is more pervasive with auxiliary verbs; V2 with thematic verbs is lost quickly. The participants in this picture
interpretation study, however, retain grammatical representations with thematic
verb movement to parse English simple tense subject questions. In fact, unlike in
Robertson and Sorace's findings, a majority of participants showed evidence of
retaining thematic V2 grammars (12 of 19).
A note on do-support and verb movement is in order at this point. It has been
widely assumed that do-support in questions and negation cannot be parsed by a
verb movement grammar and that it thus motivates the acquisition of a verb in situ

Variational learning in L2 457

representation for English. However, the results from this L1 German-L2 English
question interpretation task suggest that where do-support can be parsed by the
L1 grammar, as is the case for L1 Germans whose dialect permits tun-support, this
does not lead to parsing failure and it therefore does not motivate grammar restructuring. White (2003: 163) observes that learners may treat English sentences
with do-support "just like other sentences with auxiliaries", rendering them thus
irrelevant as cues for verb movement. Although I have assumed that the influence
of dialectal German tun-support is at work in the learners' parses of English, it
would require more cross-linguistic work to decide whether this is really the case
or whether there is a general tendency for learners, irrespective of the L1, to parse
English do-support as any other aspectual or modal auxiliary.
It is argued that the findings are compatible with Slabakova's (2008) take on
Variational Learning in L2A, and, furthermore, that VL can be compatible with
the basic assumptions of FT/FA. Slabakova (2008) proposes that the competence
of the L2 learner is made up of a number of different UG-licensed grammatical
representations. However, the L1 grammar will have a privileged status in that it
will be accessed to parse input unless there is a formal mismatch between the input
and the parse assigned by the L1 grammar. The parsing success of any particular
grammatical representation will reinforce the `strength' of that grammar and the
likelihood that it will continue to be accessible.
Of course, to complete the VL model, a more complete analysis of the input
is necessary. The quantitative distribution of grammatical patterns in the input
provides the key testing ground for Variational Learning's predictions. The more
frequently the L1 grammar is compatible with the L2 input, the more pervasive
L1 influence should remain at higher levels of proficiency. An expanded analysis of the input might account for the stronger influence of V2 compared to OV.
SVO, SAuxVO and S-be-DP/AdjP can be parsed by a V2 representation. Assuming
that the L1 grammar is preferentially accessed to parse such sentences, it will be
rewarded, leading to a greater likelihood of the V2 grammar being accessed subsequently. However, sentences such as SAuxVO are incompatible with OV, as are
a host of other sequences. Thus, OV will be less successful in parsing and will
be `punished' in line with Yang's algorithm, thus less likely to be accessed subsequently. This would explain why OV parses are less likely at higher proficiency
levels, but still persist in a limited range of contexts where the input is compatible
with a head-final VP.
To conclude, in addition to syntactic transfer, it seems that L1 processing cues
are also transferred to the L2 in the form of animacy cues for ambiguity resolution
(in line with findings in the Competition Model). Taken together, the findings call
for more detailed consideration of the interaction between L2 processing/parsing
and grammatical development. There has been an upswing recently in research

458 Tom Rankin

on L2 parsing/processing (see papers in VanPatten & Jegerski, 2010). In particular, online ambiguity resolution in the L2 has been a subject of specific interest
(e.g. Jackson, 2010; Jackson & Bobb, 2009; Jackson & Roberts, 2010). However,
this research has tended to concentrate on issues specific to online processing
and whether similar processing routines are available in the L2 as in the L1 (e.g.
Clahsen & Felser, 2006). In order to flesh out the Variational Learning model,
it would be necessary to pay closer attention to the interface between parsing/
processing and the development of L2 grammatical knowledge. Thus, further
steps in the study of VL should seek to draw on existing research on how learners parse the L2 and combine this with a quantitative perspective by examining
how often particular grammatical parses may be successful in accommodating
the input available to learners. L2 instruction provides a testing ground as the
input available to L2ers who are studying a language in their L1 community is
relatively restricted and thus more easily quantifiable. Such studies would go some
way to establishing exactly what L2 input is available to learners and would help
to determine the nature of the relationship that obtains between the frequency of
occurrence of grammatical structures in the input and parses of those structures
by L2 learners.

Notes
1. One additional student was excluded after reporting being a balanced Turkish-German bilingual.
2. The control group estimated their proficiency in German as `beginner', `intermediate' or
`advanced' and stated whether their daily language was predominantly English, German, or a
roughly equal split between the two.
3. A reviewer raises the issue of whether the tense forms are appropriate for the task, and specifically whether the picture task can really elicit the simple tense. S/he points out that the scenes
(see Figure 3) depict a snapshot of ongoing activity which is incongruous with a simple tense.
It could be that the learners show more non-target responses to the simple tense as it shows a
word-for-word correspondence with L1 German, even though it is situationally incorrect, while
the natives use a strategy of choosing the response closest to the intended meaning. This is an intriguing and thorny issue. A decisive response to the reviewer's comments would require further
research to test the learners' versus natives' responses in an on-line methodology. However, it is
possible that the issue may not be as serious as the reviewer suspects. A pictorial depiction of an
ongoing activity can elicit both progressive and simple tenses depending on whether attention
is focussed on the activity depicted or the description of the static picture itself. For example,
one could ask `Why is the Mona Lisa smiling?' (the ongoing activity of the person depicted),
or `Why does the Mona Lisa smile?' (the static properties of the picture). Of course, the question remains whether the natives adopt the `closest intended meaning strategy' or whether they
switch between aspectual interpretations. Similarly, it would remain an open question whether

Variational learning in L2 459
the learners even have access to different aspectual interpretations, given that German does not
have any grammaticalised simple/progressive distinctions. Further research must clarify these
issues.
4. There were requests for repetition. No participants made use of the `don't know' option.
5. Certain caveats apply here. While the experimental evidence comes from tertiary-level students of English as a foreign language, the input evidence comes from secondary-level CLIL
instruction, i.e. where English is the medium of instruction but not the object of study. However,
the CLIL corpus provides the most relevant dataset currently available in the Austrian educational context. It provides evidence for the sort of English input available to learners in a classroom setting. Work currently in preparation seeks to compare experimental results from tertiary-level learners with the input directly available to those learners.
6. Three of these were instances of non-target production of Wh-V-DP structures as in Ex. (16)
above, `What means suppress?'

References
Ayoun, D. (2003). Parameter-setting in language acquisition. London: Continuum Press.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1989). The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42. DOI: 10.1017/S0142716406060024
Database of English learner texts. (2007). Compiled by the Centre for English Language Teaching.
Vienna: University of Vienna. http://fdz-englisch.univie.ac.at/home/delt-login/
Epstein, S., Flynn, S., & Martohardjono, G. (1996). Second language acquisition: theoretical and
experimental issues in contemporary research. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 19, 677-758.
DOI: 10.1017/S0140525X00043521
Eroms, H. W. (1998). Periphrastic "tun" in present-day Bavarian and other German dialects. In
I. Tieken-Boon van Ostade (Ed.), DO in English, Dutch and German history and present day
variation (pp. 139-158). Munster: Nodus.
Eubank, L. (1991). Transfer or universal grammar: Reply to Jordens. In L. Eubank (Ed.), Point
counterpoint: Universal grammar in the second language (pp. 219-230). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.3.11eub
Flynn, S. (1989). The role of the head-initial/head-final parameter in the acquisition of English
relative clauses by adult Spanish and Japanese speakers. In S. Gass & E. Schachter (Eds.),
Linguistic perspectives on second language acquisition (pp. 89-108). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781139524544.008
Flynn, S., & Espinal, I. (1985). The head-initial/head-final parameter in adult Chinese L2 acquisition of English. Second Language Research, 1(2), 93-117.
Gruter, T. (2006). Another take on the l2 initial state: Evidence from comprehension in L2
German. Language Acquisition, 13(4), 287-317. DOI: 10.1207/s15327817la1304_2
Gruter, T., & Conradie, S. (2006). Investigating the L2 initial state. Additional evidence from
the production and comprehension of Afrikaans-speaking learners of German. In R.

460 Tom Rankin
Slabakova, S. A. Montrul, & P. Prevost (Eds.), Inquiries in linguistic development: In honor of
Lydia White (pp. 89-114). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/z.133.06gru
Jackson, C. N. (2010). The processing of subject-object ambiguities by English and Dutch L2
learners of German. In B. VanPatten & J. Jegerski (Eds.), Research in Second language processing and parsing (pp. 207-230). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.53.09jac
Jackson, C. N., & Bobb, S. (2009). The processing and comprehension of wh-questions among
second language speakers of German. Applied Psycholinguistics, 30, 603-636. 
DOI: 10.1017/S014271640999004X
Jackson, C. N., & Roberts, L. (2010). Animacy affects the processing of subject-object ambiguities in the second language: Evidence from self-paced reading with German second language learners of Dutch. Applied Psycholinguistics, 31, 671-691. 
DOI: 10.1017/S0142716410000196
Kaltenbacher, M. (2001). Universal grammar and parameter resetting in second language acquisition. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Kilborn, K. (1989). Sentence processing in a second language: The timing of transfer. Language
and Speech, 32, 1-23.
Robertson, D., & Sorace, A. (1999). Losing the V2 constraint. In E. Klein & G. Martohardjono
(Eds.), The development of second language grammars: A generative approach (pp. 317-361).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.18.16rob
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1994). Word order and nominative case in nonnative language
acquisition: a longitudinal study of L1 Turkish-L2 German interlanguage. In T. Hoekstra
& B. Schwartz (Eds.), Language acquisition studies in generative grammar (pp. 317-368).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.8.14sch
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access
model. Second Language Research, 12(1), 40-72. DOI: 10.1177/026765839601200103
Scott, M. (2008). WordSmith Tools version 5. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
Slabakova, R. (2008). Meaning in the second language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
DOI: 10.1515/9783110211511
Sprouse, R. A. (2011). The interface hypothesis and full transfer/full access/full parse. A brief
comparison. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1(1), 97-100. DOI: 10.1075/lab.1.1.16spr
Vainikka, A., & Young-Scholten, M. (1996). Gradual development of L2 phrase structure. Second
Language Research, 12(1), 7-39. DOI: 10.1177/026765839601200102
VanPatten, B., & Jegerski, J. (2010). Research in second language processing and parsing.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.53
Westergaard, M. (2003). Unlearning V2: Transfer, markedness and the importance of input cues
in the acquisition of word order in English by Norwegian children. In S. H. Foster-Cohen
& S. Pekarek Doehler (Eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook Vol. 3 (pp. 77-101). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/eurosla.3.07wes
White, L. (1990/91). The verb-movement parameter in second language acquisition.Language
Acquisition, 1(4), 337-360. DOI: 10.1207/s15327817la0104_2
White, L. (1991). Adverb placement in second language acquisition: Some effects of positive and
negative evidence in the classroom. Second Language Research, 7(2), 133-161. 
DOI: 10.1177/026765839100700205
White, L. (1992). Long and short verb movement in second language acquisition. Canadian
Journal of Linguistics, 37, 273-286.
White, L. (2003). Second language acquisition and universal grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511815065

Variational learning in L2 461
Yang, C. D. (2002). Knowledge and learning in natural language. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Author's address
Tom Rankin
Department of Foreign Language Business Communication
WU Vienna
Welthandelsplatz 1
1020 Vienna
Austria
tom.rankin@wu.ac.at

