Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: 2327-3798 (Print) 2327-3801 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Examining radical position and function in Chinese
character recognition using the repetition blindness
paradigm
Yi-Chuan Chen & Su-Ling Yeh
To cite this article: Yi-Chuan Chen & Su-Ling Yeh (2017) Examining radical position and
function in Chinese character recognition using the repetition blindness paradigm, Language,
Cognition and Neuroscience, 32:1, 37-54, DOI: 10.1080/23273798.2016.1227856
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2016.1227856

View supplementary material

Published online: 20 Sep 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 431

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE, 2017
VOL. 32, NO. 1, 37-54
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2016.1227856

REGULAR ARTICLE

Examining radical position and function in Chinese character recognition using
the repetition blindness paradigm
Yi-Chuan Chena and Su-Ling Yehb,c,d
a

Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; bDepartment of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan; cGraduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; dNeurobiology and Cognitive Science
Center, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Repetition blindness (RB) is the failure to report the second occurrence of repeated items in a rapid
serial visual presentation stream. The two-stage model of RB by Bavelier (1994) states that more
properties shared between the repeated items lead to a larger RB effect. We used RB paradigm
to examine the position (left or right) and the function (semantic or phonetic) of radicals in
Chinese character recognition. Compared to the repeated radicals with the same position and
function, RB was reduced when they were in different positions (Experiment 1A), but not when
they had different functions (Experiment 1B). Similar RB-effect was observed when only one, or
both, of the repeated radicals provided valid semantic or phonetic cues to characters
(Experiments 2A and 2B). These results suggest that radicals are encoded with position but not
function information. The radical function is likely implemented in lateral connections between
semantic and phonological representations of characters.

Received 6 November 2015
Accepted 29 June 2016

Introduction
How readers can rapidly recognise Chinese characters
is one of the key topics of understanding reading
Chinese script (e.g. Chen & Yeh, 2015; Zhou, Ye,
Cheung, & Chen, 2009). Two contrasting views of
Chinese character recognition have been debated
over the past decades. The fact that each Chinese character has a similar size and corresponds to one syllable
and one morpheme (DeFrancis, 1989) leads to the holistic processing view: a character is a basic processing
unit that is not able to be further decomposed (Chen,
1984; Chen & Liu, 2000; Cheng, 1981; Chua, 1999;
Hoosain, 1991; Yu, Cao, Feng, & Li, 1990). But Chinese
characters have a complex internal structure,
suggesting an alternative analytic processing view:
about 70-80% of traditional Chinese characters
belong to the type called phonograms () that
consist of two radicals (Liu, Su, & Chen, 2001; see
Figure 1 for an example). A radical is formed by a
group of strokes (such as dots, lines, and curves) and
recurs in various characters (Taft & Zhu, 1997). Take
the phonogram  ([feng1], "maple") for example. It
contains two radicals at different positions:  on the
left and  on the right. In addition, the two radicals
carry different functions: the radical  ([mu4], "tree")

Reading; orthography;
semantic; phonetic; lexical
access

conveys the semantic category, and the radical 
([feng1], "wind") provides a phonological cue to the
whole character. Accordingly,  is the semantic
radical () and  is the phonetic radical () of
the character  (Zhou et al., 2009). Further evidence
has demonstrated that radicals are likely the processing unit in recognition of Chinese characters (e.g.
Chen & Yeh, 2015; Fang & Wu, 1989; Feldman & Siok,
1997; Taft & Zhu, 1997).
In the present study, we aim to examine whether a
radical's position, and/or its function, is encoded
during the processing of Chinese character recognition
using the repetition blindness (RB) paradigm. RB is a
novel method useful to show radical representations
in the orthographic processing of Chinese character
(e.g. Chen & Yeh, 2015). It is also a well-established
method to examine the early stages of orthographic,
phonological, and morphemic processing of English
words (e.g. Bavelier, Prasada, & Segui, 1994; Harris &
Morris, 2001a). Based on the results from the RB paradigm, we would be able to further unearth any orthographic processing rule that is universal by comparing
the results of radical representations observed in the
present study to our current understanding of sublexical
representations in English.

CONTACT Su-Ling Yeh
suling@ntu.edu.tw
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed at http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2016.1227856
(c) 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

KEYWORDS

38

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

Figure 1. An example of phonogram "" which consisted of
semantic radical "" on the left and phonetic radical "" on
the right. Some characters sharing the same semantic radical
or phonetic radicals are listed.

Specifically, previous research has demonstrated that
sublexical units such as letter clusters or morphemes (e.g.
er in the word worker) serve as orthographic mediators to
access lexical representations; in addition, these representations are position-sensitive (er should be a suffix
rather than a prefix, see Crepaldi, Rastle, & Davis, 2010;
Harris, 2001; McCormick, Brysbaert, & Rastle, 2009).
However, it is still under debate whether morphemes
genuinely provide semantic information for lexical
access; that is, whether transparent morphemes (e.g. er
in worker), as compared to opaque morphemes (e.g. er
in corner), can facilitate visual word processing (see
Dunabeitia, Perea, & Carreiras, 2008; Feldman,
O'Conner, & Moscoso del Prado Martin, 2009; though
see Davis & Rastle, 2010; Rueckl & Aicher, 2008). In
summary, sublexical units in English are represented
with orthographic and positional information, while not
necessarily represented with semantic information.

participants' reaction time (RT) to discriminate characters
from non-characters (known as character decision task,
CDT, Taft, 2006) was shorter when the characters contained radicals presented at typical rather than atypical
positions. In another report, Ding, Peng, and Taft (2004)
observed a facilitatory priming effect between characters
sharing the same radical only if the radical was at the
same position (such as  in  and ), rather than at
different positions (such as  in  and ). According
to these results, Taft and colleagues (Taft, 2006; Taft,
Zhu, & Ding, 2000) proposed that a radical is encoded
with its position information before the reader accesses
character representations. Specifically, when viewing a
character (e.g. ), strokes activate position-free radical
representations first (e.g.  and ); the position-free
radical representations are then attached with position
tags to form position-sensitive radical representations
(e.g. < and >, , and . label the character boundary), which then activate the character representation.
Character structure constitutes another way to represent radical position. Yeh and colleagues (Yeh, 2000;
Yeh, Li, & Chen, 1997, 1999; Yeh, Li, Takeuchi, Sun, & Liu,
2003) demonstrated that Chinese readers categorise characters into five types of structure: in addition to the most
common horizontal and vertical structure, there are also
L-shaped (e.g. ), P-shaped (e.g. ), and enclosed (e.g.
) structures. Characters that have the same structure
are perceived to be more similar than those that have
different structures in terms of sorting and visual search
performance (Yeh & Li, 2002). Perfetti, Liu, and Tan's
(2005) radical spatial representation is similar to the idea
of character structure proposed by Yeh and colleagues
that Perfetti et al. raised four types of spatial relationships
(left-right, top-bottom, close outside-inside, and open
outside-inside) to represent the possible configural
layouts for radicals to be arranged in a character.

Radical function
Radical position
A radical can appear in different positions within a character. For example, the radical  is typically presented on
the left (e.g. ) in a horizontal-structure character; but
in other instances, it can also appear on the top (e.g. )
or on the bottom (e.g. ) in a vertical-structure character.
Radical position and character structure provide orthographic information regarding how radicals are organised
to construct a character (Taft, Zhu, & Peng, 1999; Yeh & Li,
2002). For instance, the radicals  and  can be combined horizontally to form the character  ([jia1], "to
add") or vertically in the character  ([ling4], "another").
Taft and Zhu (1997) demonstrated first that radical
representations are position-sensitive. Specifically,

Chinese radicals can serve as semantic or phonetic
radical in terms of their potential cuing function in a
character. In a Chinese dictionary, characters are categorised according to their semantic radicals. Most characters that contain the semantic radical , for
example, have a categorical meaning related to "tree",
such as  ("pine tree"),  ("plum"), and  ("forest") -
such characters are considered transparent. Sometimes
the cue of a semantic radical can be vague, such as 
("school") and such characters are termed opaque.
English words sharing all letters except one are called
neighbours (such as gave-have). Neighbours are "friends"
if they have similar sounds (such as gave-wave) whereas
they are "enemies" if they have different sounds (such as

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

gave-have, see Jared, McRae, & Seidenberg, 1990). Similar
ideas have been proposed for Chinese characters that
contain the same phonetic radical. For example, the phonetic radical  ([feng1]) appears in three characters: two
of them ( and ) have the sound of [feng1] making
them friends, whereas the pronunciation of the remaining
character  [lan2] is different from the other two, making
it an enemy to  and  (Lee et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2001).
The semantic and phonetic radical in each character
are often explicitly taught in elementary schools in
order to facilitate the learning of new characters. The
fact that semantic and phonetic cues are provided by
separate parts within a character (i.e. different radicals)
presents a unique property of Chinese.
Chen and Allport's (1995) study is perhaps the first one
reporting that a Chinese reader's performance is modulated by the function of radicals: Chinese readers in this
study attended to semantic radicals in a character semantic
matching task and attended to phonetic radicals in a character sound matching task. Feldman and Siok (1997)
demonstrated that the combinability of a radical (the
number of characters that contain a given radical) in
terms of either serving as semantic or phonetic radical, is
a critical modulating factor for participants' performance
in CDT. Other studies have focused on either the transparency of semantic radicals (Chen & Weekes, 2004; Feldman
& Siok, 1999a, 1999b; Leck, Weekes, & Chen, 1995; Li &
Chen, 1999; Yan, Zhou, Shu, & Kliegl, 2012) or the cuing validity of phonetic radicals (Fang, Horng, & Tzeng, 1986; Lee,
Tsai, Su, Tzeng, & Hung, 2005; Lee et al., 2004, 2007; Liu,
Chen, & Sue, 2003; Shu, Anderson, & Wu, 2000; Shu &
Wu, 2006; Tsai, Lee, Tzeng, Hung, & Yen, 2004).
Even though a collection of empirical evidence has been
reported thus far, current dominant models of Chinese character processing do not include radical functions. In Taft's
(2006) interactive-activation model, for example, radicallevel representations have position tags but no function
tags. The meaning and sound of a character are only
accessed through a concept unit (lemma), which in Taft's
model is activated by the orthographic representation of a
character (see also Taft, 2003). Similarly, in Perfetti et al.'s
(2005) computational model, radicals are simply orthographic inputs; the meaning and sound of a character
would have to be accessed through the orthographic representation of the character. One of the difficulties of deconstructing radical function in such models is that, unlike radical
position being a physical property (e.g. it appears on the left
or right side of a character), radical function appears to be an
abstract taxonomy without obvious determinant rules.
The debate on whether radicals are represented with
position or function information was first raised by Taft
and Zhu (1997) and Feldman and Siok (1997): specifically,
Taft and Zhu (1997) demonstrated that radical position

39

was responsible for influencing participants' performance in a CDT; but Feldman and Siok (1997) argued
that, in Taft and Zhu's (1997) design, radical position
was confounded with radical function, and the latter
was the main factor determining the participants' performance in a CDT. Surprisingly, these two factors were
never examined together in a single study. Hence in
the present study using the RB paradigm, we hold
either position or function of a radical constant while
manipulating the other factor to address the debate.

The RB paradigm
RB is the failure to report the second occurrence of
repeated items in a rapid serial visual presentation
(RSVP) stream (Kanwisher, 1987). In a RB task, for
example, the sentence "It was lunch time so lunch had
to be served" is presented word by word in RSVP, and
the participants were asked to report all of the words.
The occurrence of RB refers to the instance when the
sentence was misreported as "It was lunch time so had
to be served", even though the omission of the repeated
word "lunch" leads to an ungrammatical sentence. Given
that the RSVP is designed to provide a simplified but
well-controlled situation to study people's rapid processing of a series of words (i.e. the identification task in
RSVP, Forster, 1970; Gilbert, 1959), the RB phenomenon
therefore demonstrate a common deficiency of visual
system when reading (see Bavelier et al., 1994).
According to the token individuation hypothesis
(Kanwisher, 1987), each item presented in RSVP not
only activates a corresponding type node, but also has
a token representation associated with it. "Type node"
is a pre-existing representation used for recognition, analogous to the "what" in semantic memory. The token is a
spatiotemporal representation of an event, analogous to
the "where and when" in episodic memory. In order to
successfully report a visual event, the activated type
has to link to its token. RB results from the limitation
that when a given activated type has already linked to
a token, it interferes with the establishment of the type
linking to a second token, causing "blindness" to the
repeated item (see Morris, Still, & Caldwell-Harris, 2009
for a review and a recent comprehensive model for RB).
Bavelier (1994, 1999) further elaborated on Kanwisher's token individuation hypothesis and proposed
that RB is not only caused by the failure to link a type
to two different tokens, but also by the failure to consolidate the types being bound in tokens because only
stabilised bound tokens can be encoded in memory.
When representations of the repeated items in a RB
task (critical item 1 and critical item 2, called C1 and C2
hereafter) share more common properties (i.e. C1 and

40

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

C2 have less information to be distinct from each other),
the token associated with C2 is less likely to be consolidated and hence RB is more likely to occur (as reflected
by a larger magnitude of RB). This is evidenced by the
result that RB is larger for two identical words (or two
identical pictures) than for a word and a picture referring
to the same object, since both visual features and
meaning are the same in the former case, while only
the meaning is the same in the latter (Bavelier, 1994,
Experiment 3). This two-stage model (including tokenization and consolidation) considers the RB effect as a gradient phenomenon that is determined by the degree of
similarity between C1 and C2.
The RB paradigm has been demonstrated to be a
useful tool to examine the orthographic, phonological,
and semantic representations of English words. For
example, RB occurs not only for identical words (such as
lunch-lunch in the first example), but also for orthographically different words with the same sound (such as ateeight), an effect called phonological RB (Bavelier &
Potter, 1992). Furthermore, Semantic RB effect has been
reported between synonyms in different languages (e.g.
English and Spanish in proficient bilinguals; see MacKay
& Miller, 1994; though see Altarriba & Soltano, 1996). On
top of that, semantic priming effect (e.g. Neely, 1991)
has also been reported under the RB paradigm as well:
when a semantically related cue of repeated item was
presented before the repeated item (such as pans-potspots with other filler words in between), the RB effect
can be ameliorated (O'Reilly & Neely, 1993; Parasuraman
& Martin, 2001). Taken together, the RB effect is susceptible to the orthographic, phonological, and semantic
processing of English words when a common (or
related) representation(s) is accessed.
The RB paradigm has also been utilised to investigate
the internal representations of letter clusters in English
words: when presenting the word list town-walletrocket-colony one-by-one in RSVP, participants sometimes reported the second and third words as walletrock, where the repeated letter cluster et in rocket was
missing (Harris, 2001; Kanwisher & Potter, 1990).
Further examination of letter-cluster RB effect (such as
the two-letter cluster et in the above example) demonstrated that letter clusters are position-sensitive representations (Harris, 2001); however, letter-cluster RB
effect was neither modulated by whether the letter
cluster constitutes a morpheme, nor by whether the
letter cluster were pronounced regularly (in terms of grapheme-to-phoneme correspondences rules; see Bavelier
et al., 1994; Harris & Morris, 2001a). These results suggest
that letter clusters merely serve as orthographic inputs
that are intermediate between letter and word levels,
which is consistent with the findings of recent studies

suggesting that the decomposed morphemes at an
early stage are simply "morpho-orthographic" units
(e.g. Davis & Rastle, 2010; Marslen-Wilson, Bozic, &
Randall, 2008; Rueckl & Aicher, 2008; though see Dunabeitia et al., 2008; Feldman et al., 2009).
Given that the RB paradigm has been demonstrated
to be a useful tool to examine the internal representations of sublexical letter clusters in English words, we
therefore consider it suitable to examine the position
and function of radical representations in Chinese character processing as well. Radical-RB effect in Chinese
characters was first reported by Yeh and Li (2004; see
also Chen & Yeh, 2015). For example, when C1 and C2
were two characters, such as  and  which share a
common radical (the left radical ""), participants were
likely to report C2 as  or , either omitting the
repeated radical of C2, or replacing it with another
radical (e.g. ) and reporting an incorrect character, .
Chen and Yeh (2015) recently demonstrate that RB is a
sensitive paradigm to study early orthographic processing of Chinese characters: the radical-RB effect can be
observed in characters in a wide range of frequencies. In
contrast, in CDT - a commonly used method to study
Chinese character processing - radical effects were only
observed in low-frequency, rather than in high-frequency
characters (e.g. Ding et al., 2004; Li & Chen, 1999; Wu &
Chen, 2003). Furthermore, radical-RB effect has been verified as occurring at radical-level representations, rather
than a sort of character-level inhibition due to overall similarity given the following reasons: first, the radical-RB and
character-RB effects can be dissociated in terms of their
time course, and critically, it was earlier for radical-RB
effect (Yeh & Li, 2004). Second, the radical-RB effect was
reduced with longer presentation time of C1 (Chen &
Yeh, 2015, Experiment 1). This pattern is consistent with
the sublexical RB (Harris & Morris, 2001b) rather than
lexical inhibition in English (Chialant & Caramazza,
1997). Third, radical-RB effect was not susceptible to the
proportion of the repeated radical within in a character
(i.e. similarity at the character level determined by the
number of overlapped strokes, see Chen & Yeh, 2015,
Experiment 2). Finally, Chen and Yeh (2015) reliably
observed explicit radical-RB effect (i.e. repeated radical
was omitted or replaced whereas the non-repeated
radical was reported) by analysing the participants' error
patterns. Combining these previous results, we believe
that the radical-RB is an ideal paradigm to examine the
representation of radicals.

Overview of the experiments
We used the RB paradigm to examine whether radicals
are encoded with their position and/or function.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Bavelier's (1994) two-stage model was adopted to assess
the effect: radical representations sharing more properties lead to a larger RB effect. In Experiment 1A, we
manipulated the position of repeated radicals as same
or different while keeping their function the same
(either both semantic or both phonetic radicals); in Experiment 1B, we manipulated the function of the repeated
radicals as same or different while keeping their position
the same (either both on the left or both on the right, see
Yeh & Chen, 2002, for a similar design). The hypothesis is
that, if radicals are represented by their position (or function), radical-RB effect would be larger when the repeated
radicals have the same position (or function).
In order to further explore the functional role of radicals, in Experiment 2 we manipulated whether both
repeated radicals fulfil their designated function (i.e. providing valid semantic or phonetic cue to the character). If
semantic radicals truly convey the meaning of a character during recognition, the RB effect should be larger for

41

repeated semantic radicals when both C1 and C2 are
transparent (i.e. the semantic cue is valid in both characters) than when one is transparent and the other opaque
(i.e. the semantic cue is only valid in the former but not in
the latter). Similarly, if phonetic radicals truly convey the
sound of characters, the RB effect should be larger for
repeated phonetic radicals when C1 and C2 are friends
(i.e. the phonetic radical provides the same cue to both
characters) than when C1 and C2 are enemies (i.e. the
phonetic radical provides the different cues to each character). These two hypotheses were tested in Experiments
2A and 2B, respectively. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results for currently available Chinese character processing models.

Experiment 1A: radical position manipulated
In this experiment, we compared the RB effects for
repeated radicals with the same function and position
(e.g. -, see Figure 2(a)) and for those with the
same function but located at different positions (e.g.
-, see Figure 2(b)). If radical position is represented,
then the RB effect should be larger when the repeated
radicals are at the same position than at different
positions.

Method
Participants
Sixty undergraduate students at National Taiwan University (NTU) participated in the experiment in
exchange for course credit. All of them were native
Mandarin Chinese speakers, and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision by self-report. They were naive
regarding the goal of the study. The protocol was
approved by the ethical committee in the Department
of Psychology, NTU.

Figure 2. Example of C1 and C2 used in Experiments 1A and 1B.
(a) Characters share the radical having the same position and
function; (b) characters share the radical having the same function but locating at different positions; (c) characters share the
radical having the same position but serving different functions.

Stimuli and design
Stimuli were displayed on a 15-inch color-calibrated
monitor with a refresh rate of 70 Hz controlled by a personal computer. Participants sat at a viewing distance of
60 cm in a dimly lit chamber. All of the visual stimuli were
presented in white in the centre of a black background.
The RSVP sequence consisted of seven items including
four symbols and three characters (Figure 3). Each item
was presented at a rate of 43 ms/item in the order of S,
S, IR, C1, S, C2, and S (S: symbol; IR: irrelevant character;
see Yeh & Li, 2004). In order to avoid any undesirable
priming effect, the three characters did not have
obvious semantic relationships, and the concatenation
of their pronunciations did not sound like any two- or

42

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

three-character word. They did not share the same syllables, nor did they rhyme.
C1 and C2 were different in both font and size in order
to avoid the possibility that the repeated radicals would
visually merge (e.g. Harris, 2001; Morris & Harris, 1999). IR
and C2 were in the Chia font (, 1.15 x 1.24, width x
height) and C1 was in the Fang font (, 1.53 x 1.43).
C1 and C2 were characters with horizontal structure
(such as , the radical is on the left and the radical 
is on the right), while IR was a character with vertical structure (such as , the radical  is on top of the other radical
). The 4 symbols were selected randomly without replacement from a set of 30 symbols, including &, , , $, etc.,
subtended from 1.21 x 0.80 to 1.43 x 1.24 (see
Appendix 1). The beginning and the end of a RSVP
stream were signalled by a fixation cross (1.15 x 1.24).
Three within-subject factors were manipulated: Position (same or different), Function (semantic or phonetic),
and Radical Repetition (repeated or unrepeated). Given
that C1 and C2 were horizontal characters in the
present study, the repeated radicals in C1 and C2 were
both on either the left or right side in the same-position
condition, and on the left in C1 and on the right in C2 (or
vice versa) when in the different-position condition. For
the factor of Function, the repeated radicals in half of
the trials were semantic radicals and in the other half,
phonetic radicals (Appendix 1, (1) and (2)). The semantic
radicals were obtained from a Chinese dictionary published by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan (2000). In
addition, we double checked with four other dictionaries
commonly used in Taiwan in order to ensure that all the
semantic radicals we chose in this study are defined

Figure 3. The sequence of the RSVP used in the current study. (a)
An example of the repeated-radical trial that C1 () and C2 ()
share the radical . (b) An example of the unrepeated-radical
trial. The only difference is that C1 is replaced by a different character () without sharing any radical. IR: irrelevant character; C1:
critical item 1; C2: critical item 2.

consistently by all five dictionaries.1 All phonetic radicals
used in the present study were listed in a manual of phonetic radicals (Liu et al., 2001).
For each of the Position x Function conditions, a list of
14 characters was first selected as C2. Character frequency (according to Tsai, 1996) and stroke counts of
C2s were matched in these four conditions. The values
were submitted to two-way analysis of variances
(ANOVAs) and none of the effect was significant (all Fs
< 1, ps > .5). Each C2 was paired with 2 types of C1s: In
the repeated condition, 14 characters sharing one
repeated radical with C2 were selected. In the unrepeated condition, 14 characters not sharing any radical
with C2 were selected. Both the character frequency
and the stroke counts of C1s in the repeated and unrepeated conditions were matched (three-way ANOVA of
Position x Function x Radical Repetition, all Fs < 1.75, ps
> .1). The factor of Radical Repetition was counterbalanced across participants in a yoked design. That is,
two versions were constructed so that, in each version,
a given C2 was only presented once and was paired
with either repeated or unrepeated C1.
Using this design, in the different-position condition,
either C1 or C2 had the repeated radical appear in its
typical position (i.e. semantic radical on the left and phonetic radical on the right). For example, the repeated
semantic radical  in  and  appears in its typical
position (left) in C1 (so C1 is the typical character and
C2 is atypical), while the repeated phonetic radical 
in  and  appears in its typical position (right) in C2.
In order to prevent confounding the RB effect with the
presentation order of typical and atypical radical position
of a character, we counterbalanced the typical radical
position in C1 or C2 across participants. Hence, half the
participants saw the repeated radical appear at its
typical position in C1, and the other half, at its typical
position in C2 (i.e. the order to present C1 and C2 were
swapped in these two conditions).
An additional group of filler trials, which illustrated the
occurrence of radical-RB, comprised one-third of the
trials in the experiment. There was one filler trial, for
example, with  and  as C1-C2 that could have
been the result of radical-RB of the second  in 
and . Adding such filler trials served to reduce the proportion of trials containing repeated radicals in the
experiment. In addition, adding filler trials helped
reduce the likelihood that participants strategically
filled a radical even when they did not see it, which
would therefore prevent a potential underestimation of
radical-RB effect. There were 84 trials in total (7 trials x
2 Position x 2 Function x 2 Radical Repetition conditions
+ 28 filler trials), presented in a completely randomised
order for each participant.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Procedure
Participants initiated a trial by pressing the space bar. A
tone was presented for 150 ms to signal the start of a
trial, and followed by a fixation cross for 500 ms before
the RSVP sequence was presented. Participants were
asked to write down all of the three characters they saw
in each RSVP stream. They were encouraged to guess if
not certain, but no feedback was given. In the practice
session, they conducted seven unrepeated trials using
characters that were not used in the main experiment. If
a participant failed to report all three characters for three
trials, the practice session would be rerun. This time the participant reported the characters orally, and the experimenter made sure that he or she had followed the
instructions and had seen the three characters presented
in each trial. Less than 10% of the participants failed the
first practice session, and no one failed the second one.
Results and discussion
In all the experiments in this study, a trial was counted as
accurate only when both C1 and C2 were correctly
reported, regardless of their order (Kanwisher, 1987;
Park & Kanwisher, 1994). The accuracy data were analysed using logit mixed model (see Jaeger, 2008) in the
lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015, version 1.1-8) in R
(version 3.2.1). The fixed factors were Position, Function,
and Radical Repetition (Figure 4(a)), and the random
factors were Subject and Trial.2
The results revealed that the main effect of Radical
Repetition was significant: a significant radical-RB effect
was found, as evidenced by higher accuracy in the unrepeated than in the repeated condition (68.1% vs. 52.1%,
z = 2.87, p < .005). The main effect of Position was also
significant with higher accuracy in the different than in
the same position (62.4% vs. 57.9%, z = 1.96, p < .05).
The two-way interaction of Radical Repetition x Position
was significant (z = 3.12, p < .005), indicating a larger
radical-RB effect when the radicals were located at the
same position than when they were at different positions
(25.2% vs. 6.7%, t(59) = 5.67, p < .001). No other main
effect or interaction was significant.
In Experiment 1A, the position of the repeated radicals
was either same or different while their function was held
constant. The results revealed that when the repeated radicals appeared at the same position, the radical-RB effect
was robustly observed (see also Chen & Yeh, 2015). Critically, the magnitude of radical-RB was larger when the
repeated radicals appeared at the same position than at
different positions. This result suggests that a radical and
its position information are represented together, leading
to a higher similarity (and thus a larger magnitude of RB)
between radicals that are in the same position.

43

In an orthographic priming study, Ding et al. (2004)
demonstrated that the facilitatory priming effect was
larger when prime and target characters shared a
radical at the same position. Even though radical-RB
(an inhibitory effect) and orthographic priming (a facilitatory effect) are effects in different directions, both results
suggest that radicals are more similar when located at
the same position than at different positions. The result
of Experiment 1A therefore provides supporting evidence for the multi-level interactive-activation model
(Taft, 2006) which emphasises the importance of
radical position in Chinese character processing.

Experiment 1B: radical function manipulated
Experiment 1B was designed to compare the RB effects
for repeated radicals that have the same function and
position (e.g. -, Figure 2(a)) vs. those located at the
same position but having different functions in C1 and
C2 (e.g. - Figure 2(c)). If radical function is represented, then the RB effect should be larger when the
repeated radicals have the same function than when
they have different functions.

Method
Participants
Another group of 60 undergraduates studying at NTU
participated in this experiment.
Stimuli and design
The following three within-subject factors were manipulated: Function (same or different), Position (left or right),
and Radical Repetition (repeated or unrepeated). Note
that we used the same set of characters in the same positions and the same-function conditions from Experiment 1A in this experiment in order to be able to
compare the results in the two experiments. Half the
repeated radicals had the same function. In each function condition, half of them were repeated on the left
and the other half on the right (Appendix 1, (1) and
(3)). Character frequency and stroke counts of C2s were
matched (two-way ANOVA of Function x Position, all Fs
< 2.37, ps > .1), and so were those for C1s (three-way
ANOVA of Function x Position x Radical Repetition, all
Fs < 2.68, ps > .1). Again, the repeated radical being presented at its typical position in either C1 or C2 was counterbalanced across participants. Other details were
identical to those in Experiment 1A.
Results and discussion
A logit mixed model was conducted on the fixed factors of
Function, Position, and Radical Repetition (Figure 4(b)).3

44

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

Figure 4. Mean accuracy of participants' character identification performance in Experiments (a) 1A and (b) 1B. The error bars indicate
1 standard error of the means.

Only the main effect of Radical Repetition was significant:
a significant radical-RB effect was observed given the
higher accuracy in the unrepeated than in the repeated
condition (63.2% vs. 44.4%, z = 2.24, p < .05). Unlike Experiment 1A, the critical interaction between Radical Repetition x Function was not significant (z = 1.90, p = .06).
We further compared the reduction of the radical-RB
magnitude due to either changing position (Experiment
1A) or changing function (Experiment 1B). When changing position, the radical-RB effect was reduced by
18.5% (from 25.2% to 6.7%); when changing function,
the radical-RB effect was reduced by 11.0% (from
24.3% to 13.3%). The reduction of the radical-RB effect
was larger when changing position than when changing
function (t(118) = 1.72, p < .05, one-tailed).
In Experiment 1B we manipulated the function of
the repeated radicals (either same or different) while

keeping their positions constant. There was no significant difference for the magnitude of radical-RB
whether the repeated radicals had the same function
or not, suggesting that the radical is unlikely to be
represented with its function (i.e. semantic or phonetic) during Chinese character recognition. In
addition, the larger radical-RB reduction when changing position rather than changing function suggests
that radical position is more clearly encoded than
radical function.

Discussion of Experiment 1
The question of whether radicals are represented by position (left or right) and/or function (semantic or phonetic)
was examined in Experiments 1A and 1B. The results
demonstrated that the radical-RB effect was larger

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

when the position and function of repeated radicals were
the same as compared to when only the position of the
repeated radicals was changed. The radical-RB effect was
similar when the position and function of repeated radicals were the same as compared to when only the function was changed. According to Bavelier's (1994) twostage model suggesting that the RB effect should be
larger when the representations of the critical items
share more properties, the reduction of the radical-RB
effect attributable to changing position indicates that
radicals were represented with position. On the other
hand, the absence of significant reduction of the
radical-RB effect when the radical function was different
suggests that radicals might not be represented with
function.
When comparing the results of Experiments 1A and 1B,
two patterns further support that Chinese radical was represented with position but not with function. First, the
reduction of radical-RB effect due to changing position
(18.5%) was more pronounced than when it was due to
changing function (11.0%). Second, the reduction of
radical-RB effect due to changing position was certainly
attributed to the higher accuracy in the repeated condition
in the different-position than in the same-position conditions (see the black bars in Figure 4(a)). The small
reduction of radical-RB effect due to changing function,
though not significant, was mainly attributed to the
lower accuracy in the unrepeated condition in the different-function than in the same-function conditions (see
the white bars in Figure 4(b)), while the accuracies in
the repeated trials were similar. Radical identity and position information therefore determined the accuracy in
the repeated conditions in Experiment 1B.
Radical position is a concrete feature and radicals can
be located either left or right in a horizontal character, or
one above the other in a vertical character (e.g. Taft &
Zhu, 1997; Yeh & Li, 2002; Yeh et al., 2003). Given that
radicals serve as basic orthographic units of Chinese
character processing (Chen & Yeh, 2015; Feldman &
Siok, 1997; Taft & Zhu, 1997), radical position (or structure) is therefore necessarily represented in order to
provide a constraint when radicals are bound to character representations (Perfetti et al., 2005; Taft, 2006; Taft
et al., 1999). Radical function, on the other hand, lacks
any concrete determinant properties. As demonstrated
in the manipulation of the different-function conditions
in Experiment 1B (see Figure 2(c)), a radical located at a
given position can either be semantic or phonetic in a
character.
In addition to examining radical function in categorical terms (i.e. either being semantic or phonetic radical)
as in Experiment 1B, radical function may influence
Chinese character processing in a more fine-grained

45

fashion. That is, whether a Chinese radical genuinely
fulfil its functional role by providing a semantic or phonetic cue to the character - this is how previous
studies examined the functional role of semantic and
phonetic radicals during Chinese character processing
(see the Radical function section in Introduction). Accordingly, the functions of repeated radicals were manipulated as follows: in Experiment 2A, either one or both
of the repeated semantic radicals fulfilled the function.
And similarly, in Experiment 2B, either one or both of
the repeated phonetic radicals fulfilled the function. Following the prediction of the two-stage model of RB, the
radical-RB effect should be larger when both radicals
fulfil the function.

Experiment 2A: function of semantic radical
manipulated
In Experiment 2A, the function of the semantic radical
was manipulated. A semantic radical fulfils its function
when its semantic category is congruent with the
meaning of the character (i.e. transparent), such as the
semantic radical  (dog) in the character  (wolf).
Otherwise, a semantic radical does not fulfil its function
in a character (i.e. is opaque), such as in the example of
the semantic radical  (dog) in the character  (guess).

Method
Participants
A new group of 48 participants from the same pool as in
Experiment 1 took part in this experiment.
Stimuli and design
We manipulated two factors, Semantic Function (same or
different function) and Radical Repetition (repeated or
unrepeated). Twenty semantic radicals were selected
from the Chinese Dictionary published by Ministry of Education in Taiwan (2000). For semantic radicals, we chose
three characters with similar character frequency and
stroke counts, and two of them were transparent characters (one for same-function C1 and the other for C2) and
one was opaque (for different-function C1, paired with
the same C2 as in the other condition). That is, in the
same semantic function condition, the semantic radicals
in both C1 and C2 fulfilled the function (i.e. both C1 and
C2 are transparent characters); in the different semantic
function condition, the semantic radical only fulfilled the
function in C2 (i.e. C1 is opaque character and C2 is transparent character). The semantic radicals in all of these
characters were on the left.
Another group of 41 participants were asked to rate
the transparency of the semantic radicals in these 60

46

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

characters using a seven-point scale in which larger
numbers indicate higher transparency. The rated
means of 40 transparent characters were higher than
4.5, and the rated means of 20 opaque characters
lower than 3.5. Each C2 was paired with four kinds of
C1: same-function C1, different-function C1, and their
unrepeated controls respectively. The character frequency and stroke counts of the four kinds of C1 were
matched (two-way ANOVA of Semantic Function x
Radical Repetition, all Fs < 1.27, ps > .1).
In the same-function condition (such as  (wolf) and
 (fox)), C1 and C2 were semantically related. However,
semantic relatedness in the different-function condition
between opaque C1 and transparent C2 (such as 
(guess) and  (fox)) was low. Semantic relatedness in
the unrepeated condition was accordingly matched
in order to be comparable to their repeated condition.
In this design, the interaction between Semantic Function and Radical Repetition would be critical to indicate
that transparent and opaque semantic radicals are represented differently (e.g. Feldman & Siok, 1999a,
1999b). On the other hand, only a significant main

effect of Semantic Function without interaction would
suggest an effect elicited by the semantic relatedness
between C1 and C2 (i.e. semantic priming effect at the
character level).
Two groups of 24 participants were asked to rate the
semantic relatedness of C1 and C2 in the repeated and
unrepeated conditions separately; that is, one group
rated the list of character pairs that always share a
same semantic radical, while the other group rated the
list of character pairs that never have the same radical.
This was to control for orthographic similarity in order
to avoid the possibility that characters sharing the
same semantic radical may be rated as more semantically related than those that do not. A seven-point
scale where larger numbers represent higher semantic
relatedness was used. The mean ratings in the samefunction conditions were 5.25 and 5.40 in the repeated
and unrepeated condition, respectively, and the values
were larger than the mean ratings in the different-function conditions (1.99 and 1.79 in the repeated and unrepeated condition, respectively). The rating results were
submitted to a two-way ANOVA. Only the main effect
of Semantic Function was significant (F(1,76) = 1235.25,
p < .0001). The other main effect, Radical Repetition,
and their interaction were not significant (both ps
> .05). Therefore, the semantic relatedness between C1
and C2 in the repeated and unrepeated conditions was
well matched. The characters used in this experiment
are shown in Appendix 2.
The factors of Semantic Function and Radical Repetition were counterbalanced across participants in a
yoked design. That is, four versions were constructed
and, in each version, a given C2 was only presented
once and was paired with C1 in one of the four conditions. Two kinds of filler were presented: the first
kind consisted of 12 items that mimicked the occurrence
of radical-RB as used in Experiment 1. The second kind
consisted of five items, in which C1 and C2 shared a
non-character meaningless semantic radical which
could not stand-alone as a simple character, such as 
and . This aimed to reduce the likelihood that participants realised the transparency between radicals and
characters. There were 40 trials (5 trials for each of the
Semantic Function x Radical Repetition conditions and
20 fillers) in the main experiment. The procedures and
other details were the same as in Experiment 1.

Results and discussion
Figure 5. Mean accuracy of participants' character identification
performance in Experiments (a) 2A and (b) 2B. The error bars
indicate 1 standard error of the means.

The results are shown in Figure 5(a). A logit mixed
model on the fixed factors of Semantic Function and
Radical Repetition was conducted.4 The radical-RB
effect was significant: the accuracy was higher in the

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

unrepeated than in the repeated condition (68.5% vs.
50.8%, z = 2.90, p < .005). The factor of Semantic Function was also significant: the accuracy was higher in
the same than in the different condition (65.6% vs.
53.8%, z = 2.34, p < .05). However, their interaction was
not significant (z = 0.60, p = .55). The magnitude of
radical-RB was not significantly different between the
same- and different-function conditions (17.1% vs.
18.3%, t < 1, p > .8).
The results demonstrated significant radical-RB effects
in both same and different semantic function conditions,
and the magnitudes were similar. This result suggests
that semantic radicals in a transparent or opaque character plausibly access the same radical representation. This
finding is consistent with Feldman and Siok's (1999a,
1999b) results: the orthographic and semantic priming
effect between transparent characters (such as  and
) was additive when the stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) between the two characters was 43 ms, the same
presentation duration of C1 used in the current study.
Feldman and Siok further demonstrated that the interactions between semantic radicals and characters in
terms of radical transparency can be observed at
longer SOAs (72 or 243 ms, or across trials). Their
results suggest that semantic interactions between
semantic radical and characters likely occur at a later
stage of character processing. Our result is also consistent with the results that RB for letter clusters is insensitive to the morphemic information in English (Bavelier
et al., 1994).
The participants' performance was better when C1
and C2 were semantically related (i.e. in the same-function conditions) than when they were semantically unrelated in the different-function condition, suggesting the
semantic priming effect between C1 and C2 (e.g.
O'Reilly & Neely, 1993; Parasuraman & Martin, 2001).
This semantic priming effect demonstrates that the
meanings of C1 and C2 have indeed been accessed
during the processing of RSVP stream. Nevertheless,
the orthographic effect at the radical level (i.e. radicalRB effect) and the semantic effect at the character level
(i.e. semantic priming effect) were additive in modulating
participants' performance.

Experiment 2B: function of phonetic radical
manipulated
In Experiment 2B, we examined the function of phonetic
radicals on the RB effect. The phonetic radical provides
"friend" neighbours with the same phonological cue
(e.g.  and , both are pronounced [zhu4]), while providing different phonological cues to "enemy" neighbours (e.g.  [wang3] and [zhu4]).

47

Method
Participants
A new group of 48 participants from the same pool as in
Experiment 1 took part in this experiment.
Stimuli and design
Two factors, Phonetic Function (same or different function) and Radical Repetition (repeated or unrepeated),
were manipulated. Twenty-four phonetic radicals were
selected in order to fit the criterion that more than half
of the characters containing the phonetic radical had
the same sound (according to Liu et al., 2001). For each
phonetic radical, three characters were chosen as stimulus materials: two of them pronounced the sound in the
majority (one for same-function C1 and the other for C2)
and one character pronounced different sound (for
different-function C1, paired with the same C2 as in the
other condition). In the same phonetic function conditions, C1 and C2 are friends (e.g. -, both are pronounced [zhu4], so they are homophone); in the
different phonetic function condition, C1 and C2 are
enemies (e.g. -, pronounced [wang3] and [zhu4]).
In order to match the similarity in sound, the unrepeated
counterparts in the same-function condition were homophones and the unrepeated counterparts in differentfunction condition were not. In this design, the interaction between Phonetic Function and Radical Repetition was critical to indicate that friend and enemy
phonetic radicals are represented differently. Otherwise,
only a significant main effect of Phonetic Function
without interaction would suggest an effect elicited by
the homophone between C1 and C2 (i.e. the homophone
RB). The phonetic radical appeared on the right side in all
of these characters.
Each C2 was paired with four kinds of C1: same-function C1, different-function C1, and their unrepeated controls respectively (see Appendix 3 for the stimulus
materials). The character frequency and stroke counts
for the four kinds of C1 were matched (two-way ANOVA
of Phonetic Function x Radical Repetition, all Fs < 0.73,
ps > .3). The factors of Phonetic Function and Radical Repetition were in a yoked design. There were 24 trials, 6 trials
for each of the 4 Phonetic Function x Radical Repetition
conditions, as well as 16 filler trials simulating the occurrence of radical-RB. Hence, there were a total of 40 trials
in the experiment. The procedures and other details
were the same as in Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
The results are shown in Figure 5(b). A logit mixed model
was conducted on the fixed factors of Phonetic Function

48

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

and Radical Repetition.5 The radical-RB effect was significant that the accuracy was higher in the unrepeated than
in the repeated condition (45.5% vs. 27.3%, z = 2.80, p
< .001). The factor of Phonetic Function was also significant with the accuracy higher in the different than in the
same condition (45.3% vs. 27.4%, z = 3.63, p < .001).
However, the interaction of Phonetic Function x Radical
Repetition was not significant (z = 0.65, p = .52). The magnitude of radical-RB effect was not significantly different
between the same- and different-function conditions
(14.6% vs. 21.9%, t(47) = 1.53, p = .13).
In summary, radical-RB effects were significant and
similar in magnitude in the same and different phonetic
function conditions. It seems plausible that phonetic radicals either providing a same phonological cue (between
friends) or not (between enemies) access the same
representation.
It should be noted that the participants' performance
was worse (i.e. a lower accuracy) when C1 and C2 had the
same pronunciation (in the same-function condition)
than when they did not (in the different-function condition). That is, an additional inhibitory effect was
observed between homophones as compared to nonhomophones (i.e. the phonological-RB effect, Bavelier &
Potter, 1992; Bavelier et al., 1994). The observation of
phonological-RB effect indicates that the sound of C1
and C2 had indeed been accessed during the processing
of RSVP stream. Nevertheless, the orthographic effect at
the radical level (i.e. radical-RB effect) and phonological
effect at the character level (i.e. phonological-RB effect)
were additive in modulating participants' performance.

Discussion of Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we examined representations of radical
function in terms of whether the repeated radicals fulfil
their functions. Semantic radicals were examined in
Experiments 2A, and phonetic radicals in Experiment
2B. Two main results were observed: first, radical-RB
effect was robust and the magnitude was similar when
the repeated radicals both fulfilled the function as well
as when only one of them did (i.e. in the different-function condition). This result is true for both semantic and
phonetic radicals. Second, when C1 and C2 were semantically related, a facilitatory semantic priming effect was
observed. But when C1 and C2 were homophones, an
inhibitory phonological-RB effect was observed. These
opposite effects for semantically related and homophone characters were observed in the same experimental paradigm (i.e. the RB paradigm).
The results therefore suggest that, at the processing
level at which radical-RB occurred, the semantic radical
either in transparent or opaque characters had the

same representation, and similarly the phonetic radicals
either in characters with same or different pronunciations have the same representation. This result can be
accounted for by the analytic view of Chinese character
that radicals are represented before accessing character
representations in the orthographic processing (e.g.
Chen & Yeh, 2015; Taft, 2006). That a semantic radical
or a phonetic radical fulfils its function (i.e. provides
semantic or phonetic cue to the character) may be determined by the feedback from the meaning and sound of
character-level representations (see the discussion of
"the fate of radical representation" in the General
discussion).
Considering the results in Experiments 2A and 2B, an
alternative way to interpret radical function might be
considered. Radicals may simply serve as orthographic
inputs that carry orthographic identity and position information (Experiment 1A). Radical function may be represented within the connection network at the
character level. Characters having certain levels of
semantic-relatedness are linked by facilitatory connections (Experiment 2A), and most of these characters
happen to share the same semantic radical (given the
fact that the semantic radicals are used to categorise
characters). On the other hand, homophones, or phonologically similar characters, are linked by inhibitory connections, and some of these characters happen to
share the same phonetic radical. The different connections between characters that share the same semantic
radicals vs. those that share phonetic radicals may lead
to a spurious idea that semantic and phonetic radicals
are represented differently. In addition, given the fact
that the semantic and phonological relatedness
between two characters lead to different directions of
priming (i.e. facilitatory and inhibitory, respectively),
one should be very cautious to control the semantic
and phonological relatedness between characters in
future studies on Chinese character processing.

General discussion
In the present study, by utilising the RB paradigm, we
examined whether a radical is represented by its orthographic identity as well as its position and/or function
during Chinese character recognition. In Experiment
1A, the radical-RB effect was larger when the positions
of repeated radicals were the same as compared to
when they were different, suggesting that radical position was encoded. In Experiment 1B, radical-RB effect
was not significantly different when the functions of
repeated radicals were the same or different. Comparing
the results of Experiments 1A and 1B demonstrates that
the reduction of radical-RB effect was larger when

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

changing position than changing function, suggesting
that position was more clearly represented than
function.
We further examined a fine-grained role of a radical
function by manipulating whether the function was fulfilled by semantic radicals and phonetic radicals in Experiments 2A and 2B, respectively. The results demonstrated
that radical-RB effect was similar when elicited by semantic radicals either in transparent or opaque characters,
and also similar when elicited by phonetic radicals in
phonological friends or enemies. These results therefore
suggest that radical function was not represented at the
radical level. A facilitatory effect was observed between
semantically related characters whereas interference
was observed between homophones. We suggest that
radical function is likely to be embedded in the different
networks connecting semantically related characters and
between homophones that share the same radical.
In previous research, Yeh and colleagues (Chen & Yeh,
2015; Yeh & Li, 2004) have demonstrated that radical-RB
effect genuinely probes the stage of radical processing
rather than a sort of character-level inhibition, given
that its time course is earlier than character processing
and not susceptible to orthographical similarity at the
character level. These results therefore suggest that radicals are independently represented (see also Taft, 2006).
The current study further demonstrated that a radical
representation is encoded with its position information
within a character; whereas its functional role, such as
whether it serves as a semantic or phonetic radical, or
whether it provides a valid or invalid semantic (or phonetic) cue, seems not represented at the radical level.

How radical position is represented
We demonstrate that a radical is represented with its
position in Experiment 1A using horizontal characters
in which radicals are arranged on the left and right.
This is consistent with the results that the sublexical representation of letter clusters or morphemes in English are
position-sensitive (Crepaldi et al., 2010; Harris, 2001;
McCormick et al., 2009)
Radical position and character structure are highly
related, given that the possible positions that radicals
can occupy are constrained by each structure type (i.e.
radials would be only on left or right in a horizontal-structure character). Hence, researchers chose either structure
or position to represent spatial arrangement of radicals
in their models/studies (e.g. Perfetti et al., 2005; Taft,
2006; Taft & Zhu, 1997; Yeh, 2000; Yeh & Li, 2002).
In Taft's interactive-activation model consisting
stroke, radical, character, and word levels (Taft, 2006;
Taft et al., 2000), radical identities are activated by

49

strokes, then attached with a position tag, and finally
bounded to a character representation. Here we raise
two critical issues that may need to be considered. In
this model, position tag is first represented at the
stroke level at which strokes are free-floating features.
However, when it has not determined how many radicals
are going to be constructed by these strokes, there is no
clue regarding whether left and right (such as ) or top
and bottom (such as ) position tags would be formed.
This model therefore needs to provide a possible mechanism regarding how position tags can be determined at
the stroke level. Second, Taft and colleagues only considered horizontal (i.e. left-right) and vertical (i.e. top-
bottom) characters, while the other three types of structures - L-shaped (e.g. ), P-shaped (e.g. ), and
enclosed (e.g. ) - were not considered (Yeh & Li, 2002).
In Perfetti et al.'s (2005) computational model, radicals
and their spatial relationships are considered as orthographical inputs. There were four kinds of spatial
relationships in their model: left-right (such as ),
top-bottom (such as ), close outside-inside (such as
), open outside-inside (such as ). Two issues regarding their model need to be considered. First, these spatial
relationships are represented at the same level as radical
representations; that is, spatial relationships are merely
empty slots and represented independently of radicals.
The question remains: how could readers acquire the
spatial relationship of a character without knowing its
constituent radicals? Second, Perfetti et al. separated
close outside-inside and open outside-inside as two
kinds of spatial relationships. The example they used,
 and , are actually categorised as in the same
group by native Chinese readers in sorting tasks (Yeh
et al., 1997, 1999). On the other hand, L-shaped and
P-shaped structures are not included in Perfetti et al.'s
model. Perfetti et al.'s spatial constraints of radicals in
their computational model therefore do not seem fully
supported by empirical evidence collected from
Chinese readers.
Previous studies suggest that orthographic information of radicals is essential to form the perception of
character structure. For example, among the five structures, horizontal and vertical structures can be identified
by skilled readers but not always by non-readers or
unskilled readers (Yeh et al., 2003; Yeh, Lin, & Li, 2004).
This result suggests that readers' knowledge regarding
radicals likely serves as the basis of determining horizontal or vertical structure of a character. The remaining
three structures, L-shaped (e.g. ), P-shaped (e.g. ),
and enclosed (e.g. ), can be recognised by skilled
readers as well as non-readers. This should be attributed
to the salient strokes of the critical radical that provide
the structure (such as , , , respectively, which are

50

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

called "structural components"). In any case, these results
suggest that character structures are identified after the
orthography of radicals have been processed to a certain
level (though still before the character is identified).
Therefore, character structures, and further, the specific
positions of radicals, seem to be represented later than
the processing of radical identity, rather than earlier or
the same as the radical level as suggested by currently
available models (Perfetti et al., 2005; Taft, 2006).
In the current study, we only examined the factor of
radical position (left or right) in the horizontal-structured
characters. We predict that, in vertical-structured characters, radical-RB effect should be reduced when the
repeated radical was in the different positions (such as
 in-) than in the same position (such as  in) as well. In future studies, the RB paradigm can be
used to examine the interactions between position and
structure. For example, whether the same radicals in
different structures are encoded differently, such as 
in  (horizontal), (L-shaped),  (vertical), and 
(enclosed); and whether the position code is correlated
to the similarity between structures, such as that horizontal and L-shaped characters are more similar than horizontal and vertical characters (Yeh, 2000), can be
tested using the RB paradigm.

How is radical function represented?
We have demonstrated here that the distinct functions of
semantic and phonetic radicals, and whether semantic
radicals and phonetic radicals fulfil their function (i.e.
provide semantic or phonetic cue to the character),
seem not to be encoded at the radical level. Radicals
therefore are unlikely to carry the functional information
at the stage of early orthographic processing. Instead, we
suggest that radical function may be represented in the
connections between character representations that
share the same semantic or phonetic radicals.
That the transparency of semantic radicals is represented at the character level can be linked to English
morpheme studies given that semantic radicals in
Chinese characters are perhaps comparable to morphemes in English (e.g. Chen & Yeh, 2015; though see
Taft, Liu, & Zhu, 1999). A previous neuroimaging study
of English words (Devlin, Jamison, Matthews, & Gonnerman, 2004) suggests that words sharing the same morpheme (such as hunter-hunt) activate brain areas
similar to the addition of orthographically similar words
sharing letter clusters (such as passive-pass) and semantically related words (such as sofa-couch). Davis (2004)
therefore proposed a possibility that a morpheme may
be represented not in a specific system but distributed
in the orthographic and semantic systems of words. A

semantic radical, similarly, may be simply represented
with its identity and position at the radical level,
whereas its function may be represented by the connections between semantically related characters that
contain the same sematic radical.
That the function of phonetic radicals is represented
at the character level has been proposed by Tzeng, Lin,
Hung, and Lee (1995): they adopted the notion of "neighbourhood" in English words and suggest that the cuing
function of a phonetic radical is based on the proportion
of neighbours that have the same sounds (i.e. friends) vs.
different sounds (i.e. enemies). Later studies further
demonstrated that the cuing function is not only determined by the proportion of friend and enemy neighbours, but also weighted by the frequency of each
neighbourhood character (i.e. a character-level factor,
Lee et al., 2004). The phonological cuing function of a
phonetic radical is therefore suggested to be established
at character level in the neighbourhood (see also Yang,
McCandliss, Shu, & Zevin, 2009).
With respect to the current influential models of
Chinese character recognition, neither Taft's interactiveactivation model nor Perfetti et al.'s computational
model includes the representation of radical function
at any level. In both models, the meaning of characters
is represented in a semantic system, and the sound of
characters is represented in a phonological system. We
suggest that, in these two systems, lateral connections
should be added between character representations in
the following ways: facilitatory connections linking
semantically related characters in the semantic system,
and inhibitory connections linking homophones in the
phonological system. Future studies may need to
address whether orthographic similarity, such as characters sharing a common radical, increase the weighting
between these lateral connections at the character
level (e.g. Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1999).

The fate of radical representation
Our results in the current study suggest that radicals are
represented by orthographic identity as well as position
information, and radicals serve as orthographic inputs to
the representations at the character level. Nevertheless,
certain studies suggest that a radical further activates
its associated meaning and sound automatically irrespective of its possible functional role. As a result, the
semantic and phonological information of radicals
would likely interact with character meaning and
sound. For example, Feldman and Siok (1999a, 1999b)
in priming studies demonstrate that an opaque semantic
radical (such as  "dog" in  "guess") is inhibited at a
later stage of character processing. Stronger evidence

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

has been reported by Zhou and Marslen-Wilson (1999)
that the meaning of phonetic radicals (such as 
"green" in  "guess") is activated and then inhibited
during processing the character , given that the
meaning of the phonetic radical and the character containing that radical are incongruent. These results
suggest that a radical has no functional role since both
semantic and phonetic radicals activate associated
meanings; however, the activated semantic information
of radicals may interfere with character processing, and
hence needs to be inhibited after character meaning is
accessed.
Taft et al. (2000) suggest that a radical, when it is a
simple character (such as ), is represented as a position-free radical first, and then it can either become a
position-sensitive radical representation by combining
a position tag, or link to a lemma as a simple character
representation. This notion suggests dual roles of
radical representation that can be a simple character: a
position-free radical or a simple character associated
with lemma (see also Taft, 2006). Other semantic radicals
that are associated with a particular concept but themselves cannot be simple characters (such as  "dog"
and "heart") should link to a corresponding lemma
as well (though see Taft, 2006) in order for them to
induce transparency effect reported by Feldman and
Siok (1999a, 1999b).
Similarly, early studies of phonetic radicals have also
shown that the sounds of phonetic radicals are activated.
This phonological information can either facilitate or
interfere with the naming process of the whole character
when they have the same or different sounds (Flores
d'Arcais, Saito, & Kawakami, 1995; Hue, 1992; Liu, Wu, &
Chou, 1996; Seidenberg, 1985), which is known as
having a regularity effect.6 Note that these semantic
and phonological interactions between radical and character should be taken as feedback-modulation from the
character level to the radical level, or as an interaction at
the character level when the radical accesses its corresponding lemma representation (see Taft, 2006). Either
way, this should not be an effect from the radical level
to the character level during feed-forward processing.
Until now, semantic and phonetic radicals do not
appear to provide semantic and phonetic information to
characters at a sub-character level; however, our results
demonstrate that the semantic priming and phonological
inhibitory effects between characters were similar irrespective of whether the constituent radical is completely represented or not (i.e. suffers from radical-RB in the latter
case). This result seems to violate the traditional view
that the meaning and sound of a character would be
accessed after the orthographic processing of that character was finished, which is based on the radical-level

51

representations as orthographic inputs (Perfetti & Tan,
1998; Taft, 2006; Zhou, Shu, Bi, & Shi, 1999). Nevertheless,
some novel evidence suggests that the meaning of a character can be accessed without clear or complete orthographic information. For example, Yeh, He, and Cavanagh
(2012) demonstrate that a character can elicit semantic
priming effect even when that character is unrecognisable
due to visual crowding. Similarly, the sound of a character
can be accessed when it is presented at a parafoveal region
where detailed orthographic information is lacking (e.g.
Tsai et al., 2004). These results therefore challenge
current models regarding the orthography, phonology,
and semantic processing of Chinese characters.

Conclusion
According to previous and current studies of radicals in
Chinese characters that use the RB paradigm, we summarise radical representation as follows: (1) radical representation is necessary between the stroke and
character levels in orthographic processing; (2) radical
representations are encoded with orthographic identity
and position; (3) radicals are unlikely to be represented
by their function; instead, the so-called radical function
should be represented by the lateral connections at
the character level.

Notes
1. The other four dictionaries are the Mandarin Daily News
Dictionary (He, 1981), the Chinese Character Dictionary
(Huang, 1995), the Da-Xue Dictionary (Zhang, 1973),
and the Chinese Dictionary (Zhou, 1996).
2. In R, the model was glmer (Accuracy  1 + Position *
Function * Radical Repetition + (1 + Position * Function
* Radical Repetition|Subject) + (1 + Position * Function
* Radical Repetition|Trial), family = binomial, glmerControl (optimizer="bobyqa", optCtrl = list(maxfun =
100000))).
3. The model was glmer (Accuracy  1 + Function * Position
* Radical Repetition + (1 + Function * Position * Radical
Repetition|Subject) + (1 + Function * Position * Radical
Repetition|Trial), family = binomial, glmerControl (optimizer="bobyqa", optCtrl = list (maxfun = 100000))).
4. The model was glmer (Accuracy  1 + Semantic Function
* Radical Repetition + (1 + Semantic Function * Radical
Repetition|Subject) + (1 + Semantic Function * Radical
Repetition|Trial), family = binomial, glmerControl(optimizer="bobyqa", optCtrl = list(maxfun = 100000))).
5. The model was glmer(Accuracy  1 + Phonetic Function
* Radical Repetition + (1 + Phonetic Function * Radical
Repetition |Subject) + (1 + Phonetic Function * Radical
Repetition |Trial), family = binomial, glmerControl(optimizer="bobyqa", optCtrl = list(maxfun = 100000))).
6. To date, nevertheless, there seems to be a lack of evidence that suggests that semantic radicals have the activation of their associated sounds.

52

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This research was supported by Taiwan's National Science
Council [grant no. NSC94-2752-H-002-008-PAE]; and Ministry
of Science and Technology [grant no. MOST 101-2410-H-002083-MY3] to Su-Ling Yeh.

References
Altarriba, J., & Soltano, E. G. (1996). Repetition blindness and
bilingual memory: Token individuation for translation
equivalents. Memory & Cognition, 24, 700-711. doi:10.3758/
BF03201095
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., Christensen, R. H. B.,
Singmann, H., ... Grothendieck, G. (2015). Linear mixedeffects models using `Eigen' and S4. Retrieved from https://
cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lme4/lme4.pdf
Bavelier, D. (1994). Repetition blindness between visually different items: The case of pictures and words. Cognition, 51, 199-
236. doi:10.1016/0010-0277(94)90054-X
Bavelier, D. (1999). Role and nature of object representations in
perceiving and acting. In V. Coltheart (Ed.), Fleeting memories
(pp. 151-179). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bavelier, D., & Potter, M. C. (1992). Visual and phonological
codes in repetition blindness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18, 134-
147. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.18.1.134
Bavelier, D., Prasada, S., & Segui, J. (1994). Repetition blindness
between words: Nature of the orthographic and phonological representations involved. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1437-
1455. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.20.6.1437
Chen, H. C. (1984). Character detection in reading Chinese:
Effects of context and display format. Chinese Journal of
Psychology, 26, 29-34.
Chen, M. J., & Weekes, B. S. (2004). Effects of semantic radicals
on Chinese character categorization and character decision.
Chinese Journal of Psychology, 46, 181-196.
Chen, S. C., & Liu, I. M. (2000). Functional orthographic units in
Chinese character recognition. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 32
(Suppl.), 13-20.
Chen, Y.-C., & Yeh, S.-L. (2015). Binding radicals in Chinese character recognition: Evidence from repetition blindness.
Journal of Memory and Language, 78, 47-63. doi:10.1016/j.
jml.2014.10.002
Chen, Y. P., & Allport, D. A. (1995). Attention and lexical
decomposition in Chinese word recognition: Conjunctions
of form and position guide selective attention. Visual
Cognition, 2, 235-267. doi:10.1080/13506289508401733
Cheng, C. M. (1981). Perception of Chinese character. Acta
Psychologica Taiwanica, 23, 137-153.
Chialant, D., & Caramazza, A. (1997). Identity and similarity
factors in repetition blindness: Implications for lexical processing. Cognition, 63, 79-119. doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(96)
00789-5
Chua, F. K. (1999). Phonological recoding in Chinese logograph
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,

Memory, and Cognition, 25, 876-891. doi:10.1037/02787393.25.4.876
Crepaldi, D., Rastle, K., & Davis, C. J. (2010). Morphemes in
their place: Evidence for position-specific identification of
suffixes. Memory & Cognition, 38, 312-321. doi:10.3758/
MC.38.3.312
Davis, M. H. (2004). Units of representation in visual word recognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101,
14687-14688. doi:10.1073/pnas.0405788101
Davis, M. H., & Rastle, K. (2010). Form and meaning in early morphological processing: Comment on Feldman, O'Conner, and
Moscoso del Prado Martin (2009). Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 17, 749-755. doi:10.3758/PBR.17.5.749
DeFrancis, J. (1989). Visible speech: The diverse oneness of writing
systems. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Devlin, J. T., Jamison, H. L., Matthews, P. M., & Gonnerman, L. M.
(2004). From the cover: Morphology and the internal structure of words. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 101, 14984-14988. doi:10.1073/pnas.0403766101
Ding, G., Peng, D., & Taft, M. (2004). The nature of the mental
representation of radicals in Chinese: A priming study.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 530-539. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.30.2.530
Dunabeitia, J. A., Perea, M., & Carreiras, M. (2008). Does darkness
lead to happiness? Masked suffix priming effects. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 23, 1002-1020. doi:10.1080/
01690960802164242
Fang, S. P., Horng, R. Y., & Tzeng, O. (1986). Consistency effects
in Chinese character and pseudo-character naming tasks. In
H. S. R. Kao & R. H. Hoosain (Eds.), Linguistics, psychology and
the Chinese language (pp. 11-21). Hong Kong: University of
Hong Kong Press.
Fang, S. P., & Wu, P. (1989). Illusory conjunction in the perception of Chinese characters. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 15, 434-
447. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.15.3.434
Feldman, L. B., & Siok, W. W. T. (1997). The role of radical function in visual recognition of Chinese characters. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
23, 776-781. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.23.3.776
Feldman, L. B., & Siok, W. W. T. (1999a). Semantic radicals contribute to the visual identification of Chinese characters.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 559-576. doi:10.1006/
jmla.1998.2629
Feldman, L. B., & Siok, W. W. T. (1999b). Semantic radicals in
phonetic compounds: Implications for visual character recognition in Chinese. In J. Wang, A. W. Inhoff, & H.-C. Chen
(Eds.), Reading Chinese script: A cognitive analysis (pp. 19-
35). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Feldman, L. B., O'Conner, P. A., & Moscoso del Prado Martin, F.
(2009). Early morphological processing is morphosemantic
and not simply morpho-orthographic: A violation of formthen-meaning accounts of word recognition. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 16, 684-691. doi:10.3758/PBR.16.4.684
Flores d'Arcais, G. B., Saito, H., & Kawakami, M. (1995).
Phonological and semantic activation in reading Kanji characters. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 34-42. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.
21.1.34
Forster, K. I. (1970). Visual perception of rapidly presented word
sequences of varying complexity. Perception & Psychophysics,
8, 215-221. doi:10.3758/BF03210208

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Gilbert, L. C. (1959). Speed of processing visual stimuli and its
relation to reading. Journal of Educational Psychology, 50,
8-14. doi:10.1037/h0045592
Harris, C. L. (2001). Are individual or consecutive letters the unit
affected by repetition blindness? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 761-774.
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.27.3.761
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2001a). Illusory words created by repetition blindness: A technique for probing sublexical representations. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 118-126.
doi:10.3758/BF03196147
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2001b). Identity and similarity in repetition blindness: No cross-over interaction. Cognition, 81, 1-
40. doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(00)00138-4
He, R. (1981). Mandarin daily news dictionary. Taipei: Mandarin
Daily News.
Hoosain, R. (1991). Psycholinguistic implications for linguistic relativity: A case study of Chinese. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Huang, J. H. (1995). Chinese character dictionary. Taipei: WangWen.
Hue, C. W. (1992). Recognition processes in character naming. In
H. C. T. Chen & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), Language processing in
Chinese (pp. 93-107). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.11.007
Jared, D., McRae, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1990). The basis of consistency effects in word naming. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 687-715. doi:10.1016/0749-596X(90)90044-Z
Kanwisher, N. (1987). Repetition blindness: Type recognition
without token individuation. Cognition, 27, 117-143. doi:10.
1016/0010-0277(87)90016-3
Kanwisher, N., & Potter, M. C. (1990). Repetition blindness:
Levels of processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 16, 30-47. doi:10.1037/
0096-1523.16.1.30
Leck, K. J., Weekes, B. S., & Chen, M. J. (1995). Visual and phonological pathways to the lexicon: Evidence from Chinese
readers. Memory and Cognition, 23, 468-476. doi:10.3758/
BF03197248
Lee, C.-Y., Tsai, J.-L., Chan, W.-H., Hsu, C.-H., Hung, D. L., &
Tzeng, O. J. L. (2007). Temporal dynamics of the consistency effect in reading Chinese: An event-related potentials study. NeuroReport, 18, 147-151. doi:10.1097/WNR.
0b013e328010d4e4
Lee, C.-Y., Tsai, J.-L., Kuo, W.-J., Yeh, Z.-C., Wu, Y.-T., Ho, L.-T., ...
Hsieh, J.-C. (2004). Neuronal correlates of consistency and
frequency effects on Chinese character naming: An eventrelated fMRI study. NeuroImage, 23, 1235-1245. doi:10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.064
Lee, C.-Y., Tsai, J.-L., Su, E. C.-I., Tzeng, O. J. L., & Hung, D. L.
(2005). Consistency, regularity, and frequency effects in
naming Chinese characters. Language and Linguistics, 6,
75-107.
Li, H., & Chen, H. C. (1999). Semantic processing in Chinese character recognition: Evidence from lexical decision.
Psychologia, 42, 199-208.
Liu, I. M., Chen, S. C., & Sue, I. R. (2003). Regularity and consistency effects in Chinese character naming. Chinese Journal of
Psychology, 45, 29-46.

53

Liu, I. M., Su, I. R., & Chen, S. C. (2001). The phonetic function of
Chinese phonetic radicals. Kaohsiung: Kaohsiung Fu-Weng.
Liu, I. M., Wu, J. T., & Chou, T. L. (1996). Encoding operation
and transcoding as the major loci of the frequency effect.
Cognition, 59, 149-168. doi:10.1016/0010-0277(95)00688-5
MacKay, D. G., & Miller, M. D. (1994). Semantic blindness:
Repeated concepts are difficult to encode and recall under
time pressure. Psychological Science, 5, 52-55. doi:10.1111/j.
1467-9280.1994.tb00614.x
Marslen-Wilson, W., Bozic, M., & Randall, B. (2008). Early
decomposition in visual word recognition: Dissociating morphology, form, and meaning. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 23, 394-421. doi:10.1080/01690960701588004
McCormick, A. F., Brysbaert, M., & Rastle, K. (2009). Is morphological decomposition limited to low-frequency words? The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62, 1706-
1715. doi:10.1080/17470210902849991
Ministry of Education in Taiwan (2000). Chinese dictionary.
Retrieved October 27, 2001, from http://140.111.1.43.
Morris, A. L., & Harris, C. L. (1999). A sublexical locus for repetition blindness: Evidence from illusory words. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Perception
and
Performance, 17, 404-421. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.25.4.1060
Morris, A. L., Still, M. L., & Caldwell-Harris, C. L. (2009). Repetition
blindness: An emergent property of inter-item competition.
Cognitive Psychology, 58, 338-375. doi:10.1016/j.cogpsych.
2008.08.001
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition: A selective review of current findings and theories.
In B. Derek & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.), Basic processes in
reading: Visual word recognition (pp. 264-336). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
O'Reilly, J. A., & Neely, J. H. (1993). Repetition blindness is affected
by a word's meaning. Paper presented at the Meetings of the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, IL.
Parasuraman, R., & Martin, A. (2001). Interaction of semantic and
perceptual processes in repetition blindness. Visual
Cognition, 8, 103-118. doi:10.1080/13506280042000045
Park, J., & Kanwisher, N. (1994). Determinants of repetition
blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 20, 500-519. doi:10.1037/00961523.20.3.500
Perfetti, C. A., Liu, Y., & Tan, L. H. (2005). The lexical constituency
model: Some implications of research on Chinese for general
theories of reading. Psychological Review, 112, 43-59. doi:10.
1037/0033-295X.112.1.43
Perfetti, C. A., & Tan, L. H. (1998). The time course of graphic,
phonological, and semantic activation in Chinese character
identification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 101-118. doi:10.1037/02787393.24.1.101
Rueckl, J. G., & Aicher, K. A. (2008). Are CORNER and BROTHER
morphologically complex? Not in the long term. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 23, 972-1001. doi:10.1080/
01690960802211027
Seidenberg, M. S. (1985). The time course of phonological code
activation in two writing systems. Cognition, 19, 1-30. doi:10.
1016/0010-0277(85)90029-0
Shu, H., Anderson, R. C., & Wu, N. (2000). Phonetic awareness:
Knowledge of orthography-phonology relationships in the
character acquisition of Chinese children. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 92, 56. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.92.1.56

54

Y.-C. CHEN AND S.-L. YEH

Shu, H., & Wu, N. (2006). Growth of orthography-phonology
knowledge in the Chinese writing system. In P. Li, L. H. Tan,
E. Bates, & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), The handbook of east Asian
psycholinguistics, Vol. 1: Chinese (pp. 103-113). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Taft, M. (2003). Morphological representation as a correlation
between form and meaning. In E. Assink & D. Sandra (Eds.),
Reading complex words (pp. 113-137). Amsterdam: Kluwer.
Taft, M. (2006). Processing of characters by native Chinese
reader. In P. Li, L. H. Tan, E. Bates, & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.),
The handbook of east Asian psycholinguistics, Vol. 1: Chinese
(pp. 237-249). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taft, M., Liu, Y., & Zhu, X. (1999). Morphemic processing in
reading Chinese. In J. Wang, A.W. Inhoff, & H.-C. Chen
(Eds.), Reading Chinese script: A cognitive analysis (pp. 91-
113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Taft, M., & Zhu, X. (1997). Submorphemic processing in reading
Chinese. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 23, 761-775. doi:10.1037/02787393.23.3.761
Taft, M., Zhu, X., & Ding, D. (2000). The relationship between
character and semantic representation in Chinese. Acta
Psychologica Sinica, 32, 3-12.
Taft, M., Zhu, X., & Peng, D. (1999). Positional specificity of radicals in Chinese character recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40, 498-519. doi:10.1006/jmla.1998.2625
Tsai, C. H. (1996). Frequency and stroke counts of Chinese characters (On line). Retrieved August 31, 1999, from http://
technology.chtsai.org/charfreq/
Tsai, J.-L., Lee, C.-Y., Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., & Yen, N.-S.
(2004). Use of phonological codes for Chinese characters:
Evidence from processing of parafoveal preview when
reading sentences. Brain and Language, 91, 235-244.
doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2004.02.005
Tzeng, O. J. L., Lin, Z. H., Hung, D. L., & Lee, W. L. (1995). Learning
to be a conspirator: A tale of becoming a good Chinese
reader. In B. de Gelder & J. Morais (Eds.), Speech and
reading: A comparative approach (pp. 227-246). Erlbaum:
Taylor & Francis.
Wu, J.-T., & Chen, H.-C. (2003). Chinese orthographic priming in
lexical decision and naming. Chinese Journal of Psychology,
45, 75-95.
Yan, M., Zhou, W., Shu, H., & Kliegl, R. (2012). Lexical and sublexical semantic preview benefits in Chinese reading. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
38, 1069-1075. doi:10.1037/a0026935
Yang, J., McCandliss, B. D., Shu, H., & Zevin, J. D. (2009).
Simulating language-specific and language-general effects
in a statistical learning model of Chinese reading. Journal
of Memory and Language, 61, 238-257. doi:10.1016/j.jml.
2009.05.001
Yeh, S. L. (2000). Structure detection of Chinese characters:
Visual search slope as an index of similarity between

different-structured characters. Chinese Journal of
Psychology, 42, 191-216.
Yeh, S.-L., & Chen, Y.-C. (2002). Repetition blindness for subcharacter component revealed different representations of the
semantic radical and the phonetic component in Chinese
character recognition. Perception, 31, 113. doi:10.1080/
13506280344000077
Yeh, S. L., He, S., & Cavanagh, P. (2012). Semantic priming from
crowded words. Psychological Science, 23, 608-616. doi:10.
1177/0956797611434746
Yeh, S. L., & Li, J. L. (2002). Role of structure and radical in judgments of visual similarity of Chinese characters. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Perception
and
Performance, 28, 933-947. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.28.4.933
Yeh, S. L., & Li, J. L. (2004). Sublexical processing in visual recognition of Chinese characters: Evidence from repetition blindness for subcharacter components. Brain and Language, 88,
47-53. doi:10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00146-9
Yeh, S. L., Li, J. L., & Chen, I. P. (1997). The perceptual dimensions
underlying the classification of the shapes of Chinese characters. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 39, 47-74.
Yeh, S. L., Li, J. L., & Chen, K. M. (1999). Classification of Chinese
characters: Verification by different predesignated categories and varied sample sizes. Chinese Journal of
Psychology, 40, 67-87.
Yeh, S. L., Li, J. L., Takeuchi, T., Sun, V. C., & Liu, W. R. (2003). The
role of learning experience on the perceptual organization of
Chinese characters. Visual Cognition, 10, 729-764. doi:10.
1080/13506280344000077
Yeh, S. L., Lin, Y. H., & Li, J. L. (2004). Role of character structure in
judgments of visual similarity of Chinese characters for children in elementary school. Journal of Education and
Psychology, 27, 95-118.
Yu, B., Cao, H., Feng, L., & Li, W. (1990). Effect of morphological
and phonetic whole perception of Chinese characters on
the perception of radicals. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 3,
232-239.
Zhang, Q. Y. (1973). Da-Xue dictionary. Taipei: Chinese Acdamic
Institute.
Zhou, H. (1996). Chinese dictionary. Taipei: Wu-Nan Book.
Zhou, X., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1999). Phonology, orthography,
and semantic activation in reading Chinese. Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 579-606. doi:10.1006/jmla.1999.
2663
Zhou, X., Shu, H., Bi, Y., & Shi, D. (1999). Is there phonologically
mediated access to lexical semantics in reading Chinese. In J.
Wang, A.W. Inhoff, & H.-C. Chen (Eds.), Reading Chinese script:
A cognitive analysis (pp. 135-171). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Zhou, X., Ye, Z., Cheung, H., & Chen, H.-C. (2009). Processing
the Chinese language: An introduction. Language and
Cognitive
Processes,
24,
929-946.
doi:10.1080/
01690960903201281

