826607

research-article2019

LAS0010.1177/0023830919826607Language and SpeechJepson et al.

Special Issue Article

Prosodically Conditioned
Consonant Duration in
Djambarrpuyu

Language
and Speech
Language and Speech
2021, Vol. 64(2) 261-290
(c) The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830919826607
DOI: 10.1177/0023830919826607
journals.sagepub.com/home/las

Kathleen Jepson

The University of Melbourne, Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of
Language, Australia

Janet Fletcher

The University of Melbourne, Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of
Language, Australia

Hywel Stoakes

The University of Auckland, New Zealand; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of
Language, Australia

Abstract
Cross-linguistically, segments typically lengthen because of proximity to prosodic events such
as intonational phrase or phonological phrase boundaries, a phrasal accent, or due to lexical
stress. Australian Indigenous languages have been claimed to operate somewhat differently in
terms of prosodically conditioned consonant lengthening and strengthening. Consonants have
been found to lengthen after a vowel bearing a phrasal pitch accent. It is further claimed that this
post-tonic position is a position of prosodic strength in Australian languages. In this study, we
investigate the effects of proximity to a phrasal pitch accent and prosodic constituent boundaries
on the duration of stop and nasal consonants in words of varying lengths in Djambarrpuyu, an
Australian Indigenous language spoken in northeast Arnhem Land, Northern Territory, Australia.
Our results suggest that the post-tonic consonant position does not condition longer consonant
duration compared with other word-medial consonants, with one exception: Intervocalic
post-tonic consonants in disyllabic words are significantly longer than word-medial consonants
elsewhere. Therefore, it appears that polysyllabic shortening has a strong effect on segment
duration in these data. Word-initial position did not condition longer consonant duration than
word-medial position. Further, initial consonants in higher-level prosodic domains had shorter
consonant duration compared with domain-medial word-initial consonants. By contrast, domainfinal lengthening was observed in our data, with word-final nasals preceding a pause found to be
significantly longer than all other consonants. Taken together, these findings for Djambarrpuyu
Corresponding author:
Kathleen Jepson, School of Languages and Linguistics, Faculty of Arts, The University of Melbourne, Babel Building,
Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria, 3010, Australia.
Email: kjepson@student.unimelb.edu.au

262

Language and Speech 64(2)

suggest that, unlike other Australian languages, post-tonic lengthening is not a cue to prosodic
prominence, whereas prosodic domain-initial and -final duration patterns of consonants are like
those that have been observed in other languages of the world.
Keywords
consonants, duration, prosodic prominence, prosodic boundaries, Australian languages

1

Introduction

Prosodically conditioned lengthening ("temporal expansion") of segments has been found to occur
cross-linguistically, along with prosodically conditioned strengthening ("spatial expansion") (see
e.g., Cho, 2015 for an overview). Segments typically lengthen as a result of proximity to intonational phrase or phonological phrase boundaries, a phrasal accent, or due to lexical stress in many
languages (Keating, 2006). In this study, the effects of prosodic domain boundaries, and accentual
prominence on consonant duration are investigated in an Australian Indigenous language,
Djambarrpuyu.
Durational variation is a common correlate of prosodic prominence in a wide range of languages (Turk, 2012). For example, speakers of many varieties of English produce longer segments
in lexically stressed syllables and post-lexically accented syllables (e.g., Beckman & Edwards,
1994; Turk, 2012; Turk & White, 1999). Phrasal accent or prominence is often observed to affect
syllable onset duration, as well as that of the nucleus, with less effect on codas (Turk, 2014).
However, it has also been found that the effects of accentuation can extend beyond the syllable it
is metrically or phonologically associated with. For example, segments in a word that receives a
post-lexical pitch accent may be somewhat longer compared with segment durations in the same
word when unaccented. This is found in Finnish where the range of accentual lengthening effects
extended from the word onset position to the first segment of the fourth syllable in the word, and
affected each segment in between (Suomi, 2007). Phrasal prominence and stress-related lengthening can also affect multiple discontiguous segments. As Turk and Dimitrova (2007) showed for
English four-syllable words, there are multiple optional sites of accentually conditioned lengthening: the word-initial primary stressed syllable, the secondary stressed syllable, and the final syllable. In Dutch, accented words are longer than unaccented words, and this overall lengthening is
achieved through an increase in each segment's duration (Eefting, 1991). Cho and Keating (2009)
also found for English that the effect of accent is not limited to a single syllable, but rather is realised across the whole word, with consonants in word-initial secondary-stressed syllables affected
by being in an accented word in a similar way to primary-stressed syllables. Likewise, domainfinal lengthening has been found to effect non-final stressed syllables in English words (Cho, 2016;
Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2007).
In terms of prosodic structure and domain boundaries, effects of duration are seen cross-linguistically in domain-initial (post-boundary) strengthening, as well as domain-final (pre-boundary)
lengthening. "Domain" here refers to a prosodic constituent such as a word, or higher-level constituent such as an intonational phrase or utterance. The effects of the domain-initial position have
been said to be restricted to the first segment, with these segments seen to be longer than elsewhere
(see e.g., Keating, 2006; Turk, 2012). For example, Voice Onset Time is found to be longer for
stops in domain-initial versus medial position in Korean (Cho & Jun, 2000; Keating, Cho,
Fougeron, & Hsu, 2004), nasal duration domain-initially is longer than domain-medially in English
(Fougeron & Keating, 1997), and in French, /n/ is found to have longer duration in word and accentual phrase-initial positions (Keating et al., 2004). Domain-final lengthening, however, is often

Jepson et al.

263

found to affect syllable rhymes (that is, the syllable-final vowel-consonant sequence), and has a
larger range of effect, either spreading across a number of segments, or multiple unconnected
lengthening sites (see e.g., Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2007). Further, domain-initial and domainfinal lengthening have been shown to distinguish a number of levels of prosodic constituent boundaries through differing degrees of durational adjustment. Domain boundaries distinguished by
lengthening is seen, for example, in French (Fougeron, 2001), English (Fougeron & Keating,
1997), and Korean (Cho & Keating, 2001).
Although initial strengthening at the left edge of a prosodic unit (a prosodic word, or an intonational phrase, for example) has been considered to be restricted strictly to the initial segment, initial
strengthening, like domain-final lengthening, has been found to extend beyond the initial segment.
For example, Cho and Keating (2009) in their investigation of effects of proximity to prosodic
boundaries, lexical stress and phrasal accent on articulatory and acoustic characteristics in English
/ne/ and /t/ syllables, conclude that the initial boundary effect is not strictly local to the initial
consonant--proximity to the initial boundary also affects the following vowel--and acoustic duration alone does not reliably vary due to initial position. In Korean, syllables beyond the initial
syllable show strengthening when words are in phrase-initial position (Cho, 2016).
A further factor relevant in the study of segment duration is the number of syllables in the word.
Polysyllabic shortening is a mechanism whereby syllable duration, especially that of primary
stressed syllables in accented words, is negatively correlated with the number of syllables in the
word but tends to be less evident in longer words (Crystal & House, 1990; Siddins, Harrington,
Kleber, & Reubold, 2013; Turk, 2012; Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2000; White & Turk, 2010).
As the number of studies of typologically diverse languages grows, it is becoming apparent that
there is variation in how prominence- and boundary-related lengthening are manifested cross-linguistically. Cho (2015) surveys a range of studies of pre-boundary lengthening across a range of
languages, including Finnish, Italian, Korean, Hebrew, and Japanese, and concludes that there are
language-specific durational lengthening patterns. For example, in Japanese the final mora constitutes the domain of phrase-final lengthening (Shepherd, 2008), whereas Hebrew phrase-final disyllabic words constitute the domain of pre-boundary lengthening (Berkovits, 1993). It is similarly
found in Northern Finnish that final lengthening is observed up to the initial syllable of phrase-final
disyllabic words (Nakai, Kunnari, Turk, Suomi, & Ylitalo, 2009). Cho (2015) concludes that it is
important to consider durational patterns across typologically different languages, as cross-linguistic differences help us determine what is language-specific or universal about boundary-related
prosodic strengthening. This sentiment also rings true for prominence-related strengthening, and
hence we aim to add to what is known in these areas.

2

Prosodic Lengthening Effects in Australian Languages

The effects of prosodic prominence and prosodic boundaries on segment and syllable duration in
Australian Indigenous languages have been explored in only a handful of studies to date (e.g.,
Bishop, 2002; Butcher & Harrington, 2003; Fletcher & Evans, 2002; Fletcher, Evans, & Round,
2002; Fletcher, Stoakes, Loakes, & Singer, 2015; Pentland, 2004; Tabain & Butcher, 2015).
Australian languages are traditionally described as "stress" languages with no use of lexical tone
(Dixon, 2002; Evans, 1996; Goedemans, 2010). They have also been described as "fixed accent"
languages but with alternating rhythm (see also Baker, 2014).
In the majority of the world's languages for which there are quantitative phonetic analyses of
stress and prominence, vowels are traditionally considered to be the locus of prominence-related
lengthening (see e.g., Cho, 2016; Turk, 2012 for overviews). By contrast, in Australian languages,
vowels associated with an accentually prominent or lexically stressed syllable do not consistently

264

Language and Speech 64(2)

lengthen compared to unaccented vowels. Evidence of stressed or accentual vowel lengthening has
been found in Arrernte, a Pama-Nyungan language of Central Australia (Tabain, 2016);
Pitjantjatjara, a Pama-Nyungan language of Central Australia (Tabain, Fletcher, & Butcher, 2014);
and in varieties of Bininj Kunwok and Dalabon, two non-Pama-Nyungan languages spoken in
Northern Australia (Fletcher & Evans, 2002), but not in Mawng, a non-Pama-Nyungan language
of Northern Australia (Fletcher et al., 2015); Warlpiri a Pama-Nyungan language of Central
Australia (Pentland, 2004); nor in preliminary studies of Djambarrpuyu (Jepson, Fletcher, &
Stoakes, 2016), the language under investigation in this paper, or in Gupapuyu, a closely related
language variety (Graetzer, Fletcher, & Hajek, 2016). There is also contrastive vowel length in
some of these languages (Pitjantjatjara, Warlpiri, Djambarrpuyu, and Gupapuyu). Therefore,
there is a possibility that due to duration being used contrastively in the phonological system, this
parameter is not used, or used only minimally, to realise stress contrasts (see Berinstein, 1979).
Gordon (1997) argues that, for Estonian, there are limits to which a single phonetic parameter can
serve multiple prosodic functions, referring specifically to Estonian consonant onset duration in
stressed syllable and domain-initial positions. However, in some of the studies mentioned above,
and in an overview of studies of acoustic cues to stress by Lunden, Campbell, Hutchens, and
Kalivoda (2017), it is not always the case that a parameter is excluded from being used to cue stress
or phrasal prominence because of use elsewhere in the system, and that durational variation attributed to these aspects of prosodic structure can occur without obscuring phonemic contrasts of the
same parameter.
It has been claimed that Australian languages operate somewhat differently from stress languages like English or German in that consonants contribute to the durational marking of prominence rather than vowels (e.g., Butcher, 2006). In particular, the position of prosodic strength
appears to be the post-tonic position. Specifically, prominence effects are manifested on the consonant after the vowel that bears a tonic stress (i.e., a phrasal pitch accent), irrespective of whether
the consonant is affiliated with the tonic syllable or not. In the phonological literature, a rule of
gemination of consonants following stressed short vowels is often proposed, resulting in consonants in the post-tonic position being analysed as ambisyllabic (see Baker, 2014). Butcher (2006)
refers to this prominence-related lengthening as post-tonic or medial strengthening, and discusses
a range of related phenomena that have shaped this proposed prosodic trait in Australian languages.
For example, Australian languages neutralise coronal contrasts in word-initial position (Dixon,
2002)--the full range of contrasts is often restricted to intervocalic or intercontinuant positions.
This tendency for preserving or enhancing the place information of consonants in medial contexts has been termed the "Place of Articulation Imperative" by Butcher (2006). It also relates to
debates around syllable typology and phonotactics in Australian languages. With very few exceptions, the maximum coda in Australian languages is more complex than the maximum onset: thus,
many Australian languages contrast homorganic and heterorganic clusters in the coda but have
only singleton consonants in the onset (Baker, 2014; Dixon, 2002; Evans, 1996). This is quite
different from English or other mainstream European languages, where onsets tend to be privileged (Hooper, 1976). Butcher (2006) also refers to the well-known tendency of many languages
(approximately a third) to show "initial-dropping," whereby the initial consonant or even syllable
of words has been lost (see also Blevins, 2001; Dixon, 2002). This has led to a suggestion that the
unit of articulatory planning in some Australian languages could be a vowel-consonant (VC)
rather than the universally assumed consonant-vowel (CV) sequence (see e.g., Tabain, 2016 for a
good discussion). Subsequent experimental work on Arrernte (e.g., Tabain, 2016; Tabain, Butcher,
& Breen, 2004) has shown little evidence of a CV or a VC preference with regard to magnitudes
of coarticulation or hyperarticulation of stop burst features, for example. Furthermore, segmental
timing patterns of Arrernte CV versus VC sequences under stress favor a CV planning unit

Jepson et al.

265

(Tabain, 2016). The Yolngu languages, including Djambarrpuyu, show little evidence of initialdropping but show similar phonotactic patterns to a range of other Australian languages (see
Section 3.1).
The situation is therefore somewhat complex with regard to post-tonic lengthening because it is
found across a range of languages that have never been analysed as having an underlying VC syllable. In Warlpiri, stops following primary stressed vowels are lengthened in words that are in
utterance-initial position (Pentland, 2004). Nasals do not show an effect of post-tonic position in
Pentland's study, though are found to be lengthened in post-tonic position in heterorganic clusters
in an electropalatography study by Fletcher, Loakes, and Butcher (2008). An EMA (electro-magnetic articulography) study of Warlpiri also shows there is a greater degree of tongue raising of
post-tonic /j/ in target words that are focused, suggesting articulatory strengthening and localised
hyperarticulation in this context (Butcher & Harrington, 2003).
Somewhat differently to Warlpiri, in Mawng, sonorants have a longer mean duration after an
accentually prominent vowel--82 ms compared with 68 ms after a non-prominent vowel (Fletcher
et al., 2015). By contrast there is minimal lengthening of accented (i.e., tonic) versus unaccented
vowels. Fletcher et al. (2015) suggest that the lengthening of the sonorant boosts the sonority of the
entire vowel + sonorant sequence, similarly enhancing the prominence-lending pitch movement
associated with accented syllable. They conclude that the post-tonic sonorant in Mawng forms part
of the entire accentual gesture. A similar pattern is observed in studies of Bininj Kunwok, in which
post-tonic nasals in the first consonant (C1) position of a heterorganic consonant cluster are longer
than nasals in following consonants (C2), intervocalic, and word-initial positions (Fletcher &
Butcher, 2014; Fletcher, Butcher, Loakes, & Stoakes, 2010).
This "lengthening and strengthening" of post-tonic consonants appears to serve dual purposes
of signaling prosodic prominence on the one hand and maintaining and possibly enhancing paradigmatic consonant contrasts on the other. The nature of the sound systems of most Australian
languages is such that there are often at least five places of articulation for stops and nasals, thus,
through their lengthening, contrasts may be better maintained. The strengthening and lengthening
of these intervocalic or intercontinuant consonants is also associated with the cueing of phrasal
prominence in some of the languages as discussed above, although further research is needed to see
whether these patterns hold across other Australian languages for all classes of consonants. Further,
there may be some domain-initial effects in some Australian languages, albeit, not duration-related.
Tabain and Butcher (2015) showed for Pitjantjatjara that despite neutralisation of the phonemic
alveolar and retroflex contrast for stops in word-initial position--which is a location where primary lexical stress and word-initial position coincide--this position does affect the center of gravity of stop bursts for the neutralised apical such that it is higher in word-initial position than both
of the non-neutralised counterparts in non-initial position. Furthermore, burst duration is also
longer for /p, k, c/ in word-initial position than elsewhere, showing two prosodic effects: domaininitial and stress-related strengthening.
In the following sections we outline some of the linguistic and phonological features of
Djambarrpuyu before presenting the data and methods used to investigate prosodically conditioned consonant lengthening of nasals and stops in Djambarrpuyu.

3

The Djambarrpuyu Language

Djambarrpuyu is one of 40-60 clans in a large socio-cultural and linguistic bloc in northeast
Arnhem Land, Northern Territory, Australia (Wilkinson, 2012). Linguistic affiliation in Arnhem
Land is complex, and contributes to linking an individual to a clan, areas of land, and ceremonial
practices. Traditional linguistic practices have changed since the 1920s when missions were started

266

Language and Speech 64(2)

Table 1. Consonant phoneme inventory of Djambarrpuyu.

Lenis
Fortis
Nasal

Bilabial

Dental (lamino)

Alveolar (apico)

Retroflex/
Post-alveolar

Palatal (lamino)

Velar

Glottal

p~b
(b)
p
(p)
m
(m)

t ~ d
(dh)
t
(th)
n
(nh)

t~d
(d)
t
(t)
n
(n)
l
(l)
r
(rr)

~
()

()

()

(l-)

(r)

c~
(dj)
c
(tj)

(ny)

k~
(g)
k
(k)

()


(')

Lateral
Rhotic
Glide

w
(w)

j
(y)

Parenthesised italics are used for orthographic conventions.

throughout Arnhem Land, and they are continuing to change. Today, a language variety referred to
as "Djambarrpuyu" is spoken as a primary language of communication by approximately 4,300
people (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2016b) in a number of communities in northeast Arnhem
Land. It is therefore assumed that Djambarrpuyu is a lingua franca, or koine of the area (Wilkinson,
2012), with people recognised as speakers of Djambarrpuyu living hundreds of kilometers westwards from the traditional language affiliation land areas, and identifying as belonging to clans
with which other language varieties are traditionally associated.
Linguistically, Djambarrpuyu is analysed as being in the Dhuwal/Dhuwala group of the
Southern branch of the Yolngu subgroup of the Pama-Nyungan language family. Languages in the
Pama-Nyungan language family are associated with being exclusively suffixing morphologically.
This is typologically distinct from the language families that neighbour the Yolngu subgroup,
which allow prefixing. Djambarrpuyu is a highly agglutinating language, and word order is relatively free (Wilkinson, 2012). The Southern Yolngu branch is divided into three subgroups; the
Dhuwal/Dhuwala group having the most member varieties. The words "dhuwal" and "dhuwala"
are shared proximal demonstratives meaning "this" or "here." A feature of languages in the Dhuwal
branch is final vowel deletion, which occurs in the majority of case-marking suffixes, some pronouns, and some demonstratives. It is observed in the language grouping terms (and demonstratives) Dhuwal versus Dhuwala.
The grammatical structure of Djambarrpuyu has been documented by Wilkinson (1991, 2012).
However, there is little phonetic research into the Djambarrpuyu language to date, though there
has been extensive phonetic analysis of Gupapuyu, a closely related variety which is also spoken
throughout northeast Arnhem Land (see e.g., Graetzer, 2012; Graetzer et al., 2016; Graetzer, Hajek,
& Fletcher, 2012).

3.1 Phoneme Inventory, Stress, and Phonotactics
The consonant phoneme inventory of Djambarrpuyu is presented in Table 1 and the vowels in
Table 2, based on Wilkinson (2012). Orthographic conventions are included in the tables in parthenthesised italics below the phonemic representation.

267

Jepson et al.
Table 2. Vowel phoneme inventory of Djambarrpuyu.
Front
Close


(i)

Open

Back

(e)

(a)


(u)

(a)


(o)

Parenthesised italics are used for orthographic conventions.

There are 25 phonemic consonants in the Djambarrpuyu inventory. Six places of articulation for
stops, and nasals, as well as two glides, two rhotics, two lateral approximants, and the glottal stop.
There are two series of stops that are generally described as being fortis and lenis. The stop contrast
is highly restricted in where it can occur phonotactically. The stop series are contrastive only in
intercontinuant morpheme internal position, and are neutralised word-initially, word-finally, and
following nasals and stops. The characterisation of the stop series has impressionistically been
related to duration (fortis stops having longer duration), the possibility of voicing (for lenis stops),
and patterns of lenition (of lenis stops). Processes of lenition of the lenis stop series to semivowels,
or approximants, occur in fast, and natural speech in Djambarrpuyu (Wilkinson, 2012).
There are six contrastive vowels in Djambarrpuyu: a three-way quality distinction, and contrastive vowel length. Vowel length is contrastive only in the initial syllable of words and long
vowels are less frequent overall in the language. Jepson and Stoakes (2015) also showed that consonants after phonemically short vowels have longer duration than consonants after phonemically
long vowels. As is the case throughout the Australian Indigenous languages (see e.g., Butcher,
2006), the vowel space is compressed and centralised relative to the cardinal vowels in
Djambarrpuyu, as is also observed in Gupapuyu (e.g., Graetzer et al., 2016).
In Djambarrpuyu, syllables are minimally CV and can maximally be CV(C)(C)() (Wilkinson,
2012). On top of positional restrictions for contrastive vowel length (word-initial syllables) and the
stop series (contrastive in intercontinuant position), there are also distributional differences by
place of articulation. For example, dental consonants do not occur in syllable-final position, except
when a dental nasal occurs in an intersyllabic homorganic cluster with a dental stop. And further,
alveolar consonants are uncommon, particularly in word-initial position.
In the analysis of syllable structure above, all syllables are consonant-initial, ensuring that for
an intersyllabic consonant cluster, consonants in the first consonant position (C1) in the cluster are
coda to the initial syllable, and the following consonant (C2) is traditionally analysed as being
onset to the following syllable. This is important for the present study because it means that a singleton consonant following the first vowel in the word forms the onset to the second syllable,
although as discussed previously, there are ongoing debates with regard to the status of the syllable
and underlying syllable structure in current phonological analyses of Australian languages. Medial
consonant clusters can occur within a morpheme and across morpheme boundaries.1 We are primarily concerned with clusters that span two syllables intramorphemically.
Djambarrpuyu, like all previously described Australian languages, is classified as having lexical stress. Stress in Djambarrpuyu is largely predictable (Wilkinson, 2012).2 Primary, or main
stress occurs on the initial syllable of a word. Secondary stress is assigned to the initial syllable of
subsequent "stress groups." Stress groups consist of two or three syllables and are treated as the
structural core to the metrical structure system in the Yolngu languages. As is found to be the case
for many Australian languages, stress assignment in Djambarrpuyu (after Wilkinson, 2012) is
affected by morpheme boundaries with the initial syllable of suffixing morphemes analysed as

268

Language and Speech 64(2)

attracting a secondary lexical prominence.3 The initial syllable of words is further defined as the
tonic syllable. It is the potential location of a major pitch movement associated with phrasal accent
or prominence (Jepson, forthcoming).
Acoustic cues to word-level and phrasal prominence in Djambarrpuyu have only just started to
be investigated (see e.g., Jepson, forthcoming; Jepson et al., 2016). A preliminary investigation
suggests that prosodic prominence does not affect the formant characteristics of vowels, nor are
vowels lengthened in primary stressed versus unstressed syllables. Other effects of word-level
prominence on a segment's articulation and acoustic characteristics have not yet been explored in
Djambarrpuyu, though Graetzer, Fletcher, and Hajek (2015) provide detailed results into consonant-vowel coarticulation in Gupapuyu.

4

Study Aims

The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of prosodic prominence and phrasing on consonant duration in Djambarrpuyu. It remains to be seen how phrasal prominence, and proximity to
the left or right edge of major prosodic constituents (determined by the presence of a pause and
post-lexical pitch patterns) affect the duration of consonants in this Australian Indigenous language. Specifically, we ask whether consonants in the post-tonic position (i.e., consonants occurring after an accented vowel, determined by the association of a prominence lending tonal event)
are longer than comparable consonants elsewhere within the accented word.
As has been found for other Australian languages, we hypothesise that consonant duration will
be longer in post-tonic position compared to consonants in other prosodic contexts. However,
because earlier work by Jepson and Stoakes (2015) found that post-tonic consonants are the locus
of another phonetic durational contrast prompted by segmental features--compensatory lengthening of consonants due to the phonological length of the preceding vowel--we anticipate that a
durational difference may be minimised due to this compensatory timing effect. It remains to be
seen whether Djambarrpuyu displays a similar pattern to Warlpiri where obstruents are primarily
affected, or whether it is more like Mawng and Bininj-Kunwok where sonorants exhibit more posttonic lengthening than obstruents, when a singleton and in clusters.
Regarding constituent-edge effects, it is further hypothesised that word-final consonants may
also be lengthened at a higher-level prosodic boundary. Given the absence of initial lengthening in
other Australian languages (see Section 2), we do not predict that word-initial consonants will be
longer than consonants in other positions within the word, despite these consonants being the onset
of a main stressed (and tonic) syllable, as well as being phonological word-initial and potentially,
in the initial position of a higher-level prosodic domain.
Because of the nature of the data--all words are accented--we do not compare consonants from
accented versus unaccented words in this paper. Therefore, we do not compare edge consonants
from accented words with those from unaccented words. These remain for future investigations.

5

Method

5.1 Speakers
Eight speakers (five women, i.e., D.B., H.G., H.M., M.G., and N.B., and three men, i.e., G.M., J.G.,
and S.M., of mean age = 46.5 years, age range = 32-68 years) who have all lived in Milingimbi,
a community in northeast Arnhem Land, for the majority of their lives, provided the recordings for
analysis. All speakers identified as speaking Djambarrpuyu, though had knowledge of a number
of other Yolngu and non-Yolngu traditional Australian Indigenous languages as well as Australian

269

Jepson et al.

Table 3. Examples of the three frame sentences that vary the placement of the target word within the
utterance.
Raanani
napurr uli
flatfish
1pl.excl usually
"`Flatfish' is how we usually say it."

bitjan
waa.
like.this talk

Napurr uli
waa
raanani
1pl.excl usually talk
flatfish
"We usually say `flatfish' in this way."
Napurr uli
bitjan
waa
1pl.excl usually like.this talk
"We usually say it like this: `flatfish'."

Utterance-initial position

bitjan.
Utterance-medial position
like.this

raanani.
flatfish

Utterance-final position

English. Speaker participants were recruited by the first author and were compensated for their time
participating in the recording sessions.

5.2 Corpus
A corpus of Djambarrpuyu utterances was constructed through elicitation of a wordlist in three
frame sentences to investigate aspects of segments and word-level prosody in Djambarrpuyu.
Wilkinson's Djambarrpuyu grammar (1991, 2012), the Online Yolu Matha Dictionary (Greatorex,
2014), Beulah Lowe's Gupapuyu dictionary (Lowe, 2004, 2014), and resources from the Yolu
Matha learning course run by Charles Darwin University were drawn on to create the wordlist. The
wordlist contained a number of words with sonorant segments to allow for the investigation of
post-lexical pitch patterns but there was also a large number of words that contained stops. Items
varied in segmental, phonotactic, and morphological structure. In total, the wordlist contained 140
prompting items. From that corpus, a curated dataset was constructed for analysis of positional
effects on the duration of consonants, specifically nasals and stops (further details of the experimental materials can be found below, in Section 5.5).

5.3 Elicitation and Recording Procedure
The wordlist was discussed with individual speakers before recording the experimental materials.
In the recording session, each item was presented verbally in English, Djambarrpuyu, or through
an explanation in English. Prompting by the researcher was adopted for consistency across speakers, who had differing levels of literacy. Speakers said each item in three frame sentences once. The
three frame sentences were constructed in consultation with Paula Madiwirr, a senior teacher at
Milingimbi Community Education Centre and were designed to place the target word in utteranceinitial, utterance-medial, and utterance-final positions. Examples are presented in Table 3, with the
item of interest in bold font.
Audio recordings were conducted in Milingimbi, a community of approximately 1,200 people
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2016a) in northeast Arnhem Land, Northern Territory, Australia,
by the first author. Recordings were made using a Countryman headset microphone with a hypercardioid pattern directional capsule covered by a wind shield and were of 24-bit bit-depth (16-bit
bit-depth for analysis) and 48-kHz sample rate. Recording sessions were conducted inside a house
with overhead fans and air-conditioning unit turned off. Speakers were seated either at a wooden
table facing parallel to a wall, or on a sofa. Exceptions to this standard are speaker S.M., who was

270

Language and Speech 64(2)

seated on a secluded veranda facing away from the house, and speaker G.M., who was sitting under
a tree and subsequently on a veranda.

5.4 Data Preparation and Acoustic Analysis
For construction of the full corpus, all utterances were transcribed and segmented in Praat (Boersma
& Weenink, 2017) using a modified Djambarrpuyu orthography. Transcriptions were then converted to SAMPA (Wells, 1997). Segmentation of data of four speakers was force-aligned using the
Munich Automatic Segmentation System (Schiel, Draxler, & Harrington, 2011) in R (R Core Team,
2016) using a modified SAMPA (language-independent) parameter definition that included acoustic
models for retroflex plosives, laterals, and nasals. For the remaining four speakers' data, the webbased Munich Automatic Segmentation System (Kisler, Reichel, & Schiel, 2017) was used to force
align consonant and vowel segmentation using the language-independent model, which now
includes acoustic models for retroflex, dental, and palatal places of articulation, trained on various
Australian languages including Yolu Matha varieties Gupapuyu and Djambarrpuyu.4 All segmentation was manually corrected in Praat using waveform and spectral information.
Duration of nasals /m, n, n, ,  , /. Nasals were segmented with reference to wide-band spectrograms and corresponding waveforms. The interval from the onset to the offset of the nasal
energy (i.e., nasal murmur) visible in the spectrogram as lower amplitude was measured. The nasal
energy in the spectrum coincided with the lower amplitude in the waveform. For word-initial postpausal nasals, the initial boundary was placed at the commencement of nasal energy visible in the
lower portions of the spectrogram. For word-final pre-pausal nasals, the final boundary was placed
at the cessation of voicing, determined by consulting the waveform and the spectrogram.
Duration of stops /p, b, t, d, t, d, c, , , , k, /. Stops were segmented with reference to
wide-band spectrograms and corresponding waveforms. The occlusion and release phrases of stops
were measured together. For intervocalic stops, duration was measured from the initial boundary,
placed where there was a marked drop in energy, and cessation of voicing, to the final boundary,
which was placed where there was a marked increase in energy and the voicing of the following
segment commenced. If a stop was the first member of a cluster in which the following member
was also a stop, the final boundary for the first consonant was placed at the mid-point of the overall
closure duration visible in the spectrogram and waveform. For word-initial stop initial boundaries,
a number of approaches were taken, depending on whether or not there was a preceding pause, and
whether the stop was phonetically voiced, voiceless, or lenited to an approximant. If the stop was
post-pausal and phonetically voiced, the boundary was placed at the commencement of voicing
visible in the lower portion of the spectrogram and also visible in the waveform. If the stop was
post-pausal and phonetically voiceless, the initial boundary was placed 60 ms before the stop burst,
which was identified by a marked peak in the waveform and a dark vertical bar in the spectrogram.
If the stop was not preceded by a pause, and was not lenited, the initial boundary was placed in the
same manner as for intervocalic stops. If the stop was not preceded by a pause, and was lenited, the
initial boundary was placed at the mid-point of the formant change and where the drop in energy
commenced, visible in the spectrogram. Word-final pre-pausal stop final boundaries were placed
after the stop release, or, if there was no release visible in the spectrogram or waveform, then a
boundary was placed 60 ms after the commencement of the closure period. Word-final non-prepausal stop boundaries were placed in the same manner as intervocalic stops, or stops preceding
another stop, depending on the following segment.

271

Jepson et al.

Table 4. Summary of data in the Djambarrpuyu dataset by consonant category and position in word.

Word-initial
Post-tonic intervocalic
Post-tonic C1 of cluster
Elsewhere intervocalic
Elsewhere C1 of cluster
Word-final

Nasal n

Fortis n

681
370
204
942
109
522

477
31
271
7

Stop na
604

73

Open cells indicate a position-by-consonant-category combination that does not occur.
aThese stops are, according to previous phonological analysis, non-contrastive.
C1 = first consonant; elsewhere = word-medially, not including post-tonic.

5.5 Experimental Materials
A summary of the consonant data, separated by consonant category and position within the word,
is provided in Table 4. Nasals and stops in word-initial, word-final, intervocalic, and first member
in a biconsonantal, intersyllabic cluster positions are investigated in this study. Only nasals in clusters are considered in the statistical analysis. While fortis stops in clusters are presented in the
summary of the data in Table 4 there were insufficient data for an analysis of fortis stops in clusters
(i.e., n = 31, 7). Lenis stops are not investigated in this paper due to limited numbers of tokens.
Note, the lenis symbol is used for word-initial stops orthographically and in phonological transcriptions, but those stops are non-contrastive. This is also the case for word-final stops that are
orthographically the fortis symbol. Further, due to position restrictions of the stop contrast, only
comparison of nasals across all (non-cluster) positions was possible.
A hierarchically associated Emu database was created for the full corpus using the emuR package in R (Winkelmann, Jaensch, Cassidy, & Harrington, 2016). The database was queried in R
using the emuR suite of commands, resulting in a dataset containing word-initial nasals and stops,
intervocalic nasals and fortis stops, first-member of a consonant cluster nasals, and word-final
nasals and stops. Those segments of interest were extracted from wordlist items of two to six syllables in length; this comprises 136 lexical items. Wordlist items included nouns, verbs, and pronouns. Further, only words with phonemically short vowels were included. The dataset for analysis
included 4,291 consonants in total, comprised of 2,828 nasals and 1,463 stops (see Table 4).
Durational values were extracted for all segments of interest using the dur() function from the
emuR package. Additional information regarding the number of syllables in the word, the existence of a pause before and/or after the target word, identity of the speaker, identity of the target
word itself, and position of the target word within the utterance, was also extracted and included in
the data frame for analysis. The combined (C1+C2) duration of clusters was included for the
investigation of consonants in clusters.
There are two further important aspects to these data. Firstly, all target words were in information focus due to the nature of the task and were realised with a post-lexical tonal event--usually a
peak in fundamental frequency--associated near the left word edge regardless of sentence frame
position. There were no cases of deaccentuation of the target word in any sentence position. This
means that we cannot investigate what effect presence or absence of accentuation may have over a
whole word. Secondly, in the corpus, we found pauses were often inserted before or after the target
word, irrespective of where it occurred in the sentence frame. A frame-initial word may be followed by a pause, for example. Understanding these pauses to indicate a prosodic domain boundary, the frame-initial word may prosodically be both domain-initial and domain-final (Turk, 2012;

272

Language and Speech 64(2)

Table 5. Distribution of items in the dataset arranged by position in frame sentence and presence or
absence of a pause.

Initial frame
Medial frame
Final frame

pause X ...
(before) n

... X pause
(after) n

pause X pause
(both) n

...X...
(neither) n

662
194
0

0
247
748

810
538
756

0
336
0

"X" = the target word; "pause" = locations of the pause in relation to the target word; "..." = non-pause (i.e., segmental content of another word) in relation to the target word; before = pause to the left of the word; after = pause
to the right of the word; both = pause on both sides; neither = no pause on either side.

Wightman, Shattuck-Hufnagel, Ostendorf, & Price, 1992). This also applies for frame-final words,
and frame-medial words. The distribution of tokens that were either preceded or followed by
pauses, or neither, is summarised in Table 5.

5.6 Statistical Analysis
Linear mixed-effects models were used to statistically model and test the data. Statistical analysis
was performed in R using the lmer() function from the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova, Brockhoff,
& Christensen, 2016). The step() function from the lmerTest package was used in model selection,
and F-values are reported from its output. Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc significance (p-) values
for individual comparisons were obtained using the ph.step() function (Harrington, 2017). P-values
< 0.05 are considered significant.
Position within the word ("position") is operationally defined with four categories: word-initial,
post-tonic, word-final, and elsewhere (i.e., not initial, post-tonic, nor word-final). Consonant category ("category") is coded as a binary distinction in all comparisons, as either nasal and fortis
stop, or nasal and non-contrastive stop (i.e., neutralised contexts). While the data were originally
elicited in frame sentences, exploration of the data indicated that the existence of a pause before or
after the target word reveals more about the data than simply including the frame category. Further,
in the step output, "frame", as a fixed effect, would be removed. Therefore, the effect of a pause is
investigated. The presence of a pause ("pause") before and/or after a target word is defined with
four categories: pause on neither side (neither); pause on both sides (both); pause before the target
word (before); pause after the target word (after). These are reduced to a binary opposition when
investigating word-initial and word-final consonants (pause vs. segment). Number of syllables in
the word ("word length") was also investigated as an effect; words were two to six syllables in
length. "Cluster" was included in the comparison of intervocalic and first member of a cluster
nasals and has two levels: first member of a cluster (C1) and intervocalic (C0). "Speaker" includes
the eight individuals who participated in the study. "Word" includes individual lexical items as
recorded in the wordlist. The duration of the second members of consonant clusters, irrespective of
consonant category, is included in the analysis of C1 duration ("post.seg.dur").
In total, six models are presented here to examine different factors in subsets of the data. These
models include one for nasals and fortis stops in intervocalic positions, nasals in C1 position in
clusters, word-medial nasals intervocalically versus in clusters, nasals in all (non-cluster) positions, word-initial nasals and stops, and word-final nasals and stops. Full models can be found in
the Appendix. Below are the final models.
For the analysis of the duration of intervocalic consonants, the following model was used:

273

Jepson et al.

duration ~ position + category + pause + word length
+ position:category + (1 + position | speaker ) + (1 | word )
Position (post-tonic, non-post-tonic/elsewhere), consonant category (nasal, fortis stop), presence of
a pause (before, after, both, neither), and number of syllables in the word (2-6) were included as fixed
effects with an interaction between position and consonant category. Random effects included random
intercepts for speaker and word, as well as by-speaker random slopes for the effect of position.
For the analysis of the duration of nasals in clusters, the following model was used:
duration ~ position + pause + word length
+ (1 + post.seg.dur | speaker ) + (1 | word )
The model included the fixed effects of position, presence of a pause, and number of syllables in the word. As random effects, there were intercepts for speaker and word, and by-speaker
random slopes for the effect of the duration of the following segment. Note, no interactions were
included in this model as they were not retained in the model provided in the step function
output.
For the comparison of intervocalic nasals and nasals in the C1 position of consonant clusters,
the following model was used:
duration ~ cluster + pause + word length + cluster:word lenngth
+ (1 + position | speaker ) + (1|word ) .
The model included as fixed effects whether the segment was in a cluster or not, the presence of
a pause, and number of syllables in the word, as well as an interaction between cluster information
and the number of syllables in the word. Random effects included random intercepts for speaker,
and word, as well as by-speaker random slopes for the effect of position.
To investigate the duration of nasal singleton consonants in all positions, the following model
was used:
duration ~ position + pause + word length + position:pause
+ (1 + position | speaker ) + (1 | word )
Position, presence of a pause, and number of syllables in the word are included as fixed effects
with an interaction between position and presence of a pause. Random effects included intercepts
for speaker and word and by-speaker random slopes for the effect of position.
For the analysis of the effect of a pause on the duration of word-initial nasals and stops, a separate model was used. Stops are not contrastive in the word-initial position, and thus a larger model
including fortis stops in the intervocalic positions would not be a motivated comparison. The final
model for the investigation of word-initial consonants was:
duration ~ pause + word length + (1+ pause + category | speaker ) + (1 | word )

274

Language and Speech 64(2)

Figure 1. Duration values (ms) of fortis stops and nasals in intervocalic post-tonic (coloured grey) and
intervocalic elsewhere (coloured white) position within the word.
ms = milliseconds.

Presence of a preceding pause and number of syllables in the word were included as fixed
effects. As random effects, the model included intercepts for speaker and word, and by-speaker
random slopes for the effect of a pause, and consonant category. Note, consonant category was
removed from the model due to a non-significant effect result in the step output.
Finally, to investigate the effect of the presence of a pause on the duration of word-final consonants, the following model was used:
duration ~ pause + category + word length + category:pause (1 | speaker )
Presence of a pause, consonant category, and number of syllables in the word were included as
fixed effects with an interaction between the pause and consonant category, and the model also
included random intercepts for speaker. Note, random intercepts for word identity was removed
from the model in the step function output.

6

Results

As there are position restrictions on where the stop contrast can occur in Djambarrpuyu phonotactically (see Section 3.1), consonants in this section are referred to according to their manner of
articulation; for example, "nasal" or "stop," when presenting data from positions where the stops
are non-contrastive. In positions where the stop contrast occurs, the stop in the series is mentioned;
for example, "fortis."
Results are presented firstly for intervocalic consonants, followed by the results from the analysis of nasals in clusters, then a specific analysis of singleton nasals across all positions, and the
section is concluded with the results from the analysis of consonants at word-boundaries.

275

Jepson et al.

Table 6. Results of statistical comparisons for intervocalic word-medial (post-tonic and elsewhere) fortis
stop and nasal consonants (n = 2,060).
Comparison
Position
Elsewhere ~ ptonic
Category
Fortis ~ nasal
Word length
2~3
2~4
2~5
2~6
3~4
3~5
3~6
4~5
4~6
5~6
Pause
Before ~ after
Before ~ both
Before ~ neither
After ~ both
After ~ neither
Both ~ neither
Position:category
E. fortis ~ P.T. fortis
E. fortis ~ E. nasal
E. fortis ~ P.T. nasal
P.T. fortis ~ E. nasal
P.T. fortis ~ P.T. nasal
E. nasal ~ P.T. nasal

Estimated difference (ms)

Standard error (ms)

p-value

15.7

7.3

1

77.7

2.7

<0.001

71.3
99.0
97.7
103.1
27.7
26.5
31.8
-1.3
4
5.3

7.1
7.6
6.3
6.3
7.8
6.5
6.5
6.8
6.9
5

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.014
0.002
<0.001
1
1
1

-10.2
-14
1.6
-3.7
11.8
15.6

2.9
2.6
3.8
2.5
3.7
3.6

0.0072
<0.001
1
1
0.038
<0.001

8.7
70.7
93.4
62.1
84.7
22.7

8.1
3.5
8
7.6
4.6
7.7

1
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.28

Position comparison of intervocalic post-tonic consonants (ptonic) and intervocalic consonants word-medially (elsewhere); words of differing number of syllables (2-6); presence of a pause, to the left of the word (before), to the right
of the word (after), on both sides (both), or no pause on either side (neither); and an interaction between consonant
category (fortis; nasal), and position in the word (E.; P.T.).
ms = millisecond; elsewhere = word-medially; ptonic = post-tonic; E. = elsewhere; before = pause to the left of
the word; after = pause to the right of the word; neither = no pause on either side; both = pause on both sides;
P.T. = post-tonic.

6.1 Duration of Singleton Consonants
Figure 1 shows the distribution of duration values for fortis stops and nasals in intervocalic posttonic position and in non-post-tonic intervocalic position. Table 6 presents the comparisons from
the statistical analysis of word-medial singleton consonants. There is a significant effect of consonant category on consonant duration, F(1, 894) = 807.15, p < 0.001, such that fortis stops are an
estimated 78 ms  3 ms, p < 0.001, longer than nasals. In Figure 1, it appears that post-tonic fortis
stops have longer duration than their non-post-tonic medial counterparts. Position approached

276

Language and Speech 64(2)

Figure 2. Duration values (ms) of fortis stops and nasals in intervocalic post-tonic position in disyllabic
words (coloured black) as well as intervocalic post-tonic (coloured grey) and intervocalic elsewhere
(coloured white) position within words of three to six syllables in length.
ms = milliseconds.

significance as an effect on the duration of consonants, F(1, 10) = 4.63, p = 0.057, but with a trend
in the opposite direction than hypothesised. Further investigation into the discrepancy between the
Figure 1 and the statistical comparisons by position, presented in Table 6, revealed that the duration
of the post-tonic consonant category as a whole was strongly influenced by the number of syllables
in the word, F(4, 123) = 78.37, p < 0.001. In Figure 2, post-tonic consonants in disyllabic words
are plotted separately from post-tonic consonants in words of longer lengths and consonants in
non-tonic medial positions. Comparisons between consonants from words of differing lengths are
included in Table 6 and show all comparisons are significant for consonants in two-syllable words.
Therefore, the appearance of longer duration values of consonants in post-tonic position is due in
part to the effects of word length. Recall that the non-post-tonic medial position consonants are
from words of three or more syllables in length.
There also appears to be an effect of a word's proximity to pauses, and therefore higher-level
prosodic boundaries, for all consonants irrespective of position category, F(3, 1,998) = 12.75,
p < 0.001. Consonants in words that are followed by a pause (i.e., there is a following prosodic
phrase boundary) have longer duration than consonants in words not followed by a pause, irrespective of whether there is a pause preceding the word or not. However, the effect is small (i.e., <16 ms
in all cases).
The interaction between position and consonant category was significant, F(1, 717) = 5.52,
p = 0.019. However, the comparisons of interest (i.e., post-tonic fortis stops vs. elsewhere fortis
stops, post-tonic nasals vs. elsewhere nasals) did not add to our understanding of the effect of
position on consonant duration, as the results were reflected in the overall effects of position and
category independently.

6.2 Duration of Nasals in Clusters
Figure 3 plots the duration of the initial nasal in clusters according to proximity to the tonic vowel
(here also referred to as "post-tonic" for ease of comparison with intervocalic consonants). Table 7
presents the comparisons from the statistical analysis of nasals in the first position of consonant

277

Jepson et al.

Figure 3. Duration values (ms) of nasals as the first member of a consonant cluster (C1) in post-tonic
position in disyllabic words (coloured black) as well as C1 post-tonic (coloured grey) and C1 elsewhere
(coloured white) position within words of three to six syllables in length.
ms = milliseconds.

Table 7. Results of statistical comparisons for C1 nasals in consonant clusters (n = 313).
Comparison
Position
Elsewhere ~ ptonic
Word length
2~3
2~4
2~5
2~6
3~4
3~5
3~6
4~5
4~6
5~6
Pause
Before ~ after
Before ~ both
Before ~ neither
After ~ both
After ~ neither
Both ~ neither

Estimated difference (ms)
23

Standard error (ms)

p-value

7.3

0.032

18.5
31.7
31.4
43.2
13.2
12.9
24.7
-0.3
11.5
11.8

15
14.9
13.7
14.4
16.4
15.6
16.5
13.9
15.7
14.4

1
0.649
0.453
0.075
1
1
1
1
1
1

1.8
-10.8
3.4
-12.5
1.6
14.2

5.2
4.6
6.8
4.2
6.5
6.2

1
0.32
1
0.051
1
0.39

Position comparison of post-tonic C1 nasals and C1 nasals word-medially; words of differing number of syllables (2-6);
presence of a pause, to the left of the word, to the right of the word, on both sides, or no pause on either side.
ms = millisecond; elsewhere = word-medially; ptonic = post-tonic; word length = number of syllables in the word;
before = pause to the left of the word; after = pause to the right of the word; both = pause on both sides; neither =
no pause on either side.

278

Language and Speech 64(2)

Figure 4. Duration values (ms) of singleton nasals in word-initial (coloured white), intervocalic posttonic (coloured light grey), intervocalic elsewhere (coloured dark grey), and word-final (coloured black)
positions within the word.
ms = milliseconds.

clusters. There are only a small number of tokens in the fortis C1 category (see summary in Table 4)
so these were not included in this analysis. Position in the word has a significant, albeit small,
effect on the duration of consonants, F(1, 255) = 9.87, p = 0.0019, such that C1 nasals in the
elsewhere position have longer duration than their post-tonic counterparts by an estimated 23 ms 
7 ms, p = 0.002. Likewise, presence of a pause on either side of the word had a small effect on
consonant duration irrespective of word-internal position, F(3, 288) = 4.32, p = 0.0053. As for the
singleton analysis, the number of syllables in a word had an effect on consonants irrespective of
word-internal position, F(4, 43) = 2.6, p = 0.049. The individual comparisons, however, showed
that the consonants in two-syllable words were not significantly different from consonants in
words of other lengths. A proportional analysis of the relative contribution of C1 to overall cluster
duration showed that C1 consonants in post-tonic position constituted 60% (mean) of the duration
of the entire consonant cluster, and C1 consonants in non-post-tonic medial clusters constituted
56% (mean) of the duration of the entire consonant cluster. This has not yet been investigated statistically. Nevertheless, it suggests that the contribution of C1 consonants to the duration of the
entire consonant cluster is similar for clusters in both word-medial positions.
An additional comparison between nasals when the first member of a consonant clusters versus
intervocalic nasals showed that there was a significant effect of being in a cluster, F(1, 445) = 13.28,
p = < 0.001, with nasals in clusters being an estimated 11 ms  3 ms, p = 0.019 shorter than intervocalic nasals. Further, position in the word was removed as a factor from the model, as it did not
have an effect on the duration of these consonants.

6.3 Duration of Word-Initial and Word-Final Consonants
As nasal consonants are the only consonants in our investigation that occur in all word positions,
the results of a series of analyses investigating those consonants are presented here first. Position
within the word has a significant effect on the duration of nasals, F(3, 14) = 15.87, p < 0.001, such
that word-final nasals are longer than nasals in all other positions. This is shown in Figure 4, which

279

Jepson et al.
Table 8. Results of statistical comparisons for singleton nasals (n = 2,515).
Comparison
Position
Final ~ initial
Final ~ elsewhere
Final ~ ptonic
Initial ~ elsewhere
Initial ~ ptonic
Elsewhere ~ ptonic
Pause
Before ~ after
Before ~ both
Before ~ neither
After ~ both
After ~ neither
Both ~ neither
Word length
2~3
2~4
2~5
2~6
3~4
3~5
3~6
4~5
4~6
5~6

Estimated difference (ms)

Standard error (ms)

p-value

24.1
31.9
29
7.9
5
-2.9

7.5
5.2
6.6
8.9
7.5
5.3

0.002
<0.001
0.007
1
1
1

-33.2
-24.7
-21.3
8.5
11.9
3.4

2.6
2.4
3.5
2.3
3.4
3.4

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.051
1

15.9
18.1
19.4
24
2.2
3.5
8.1
1.3
5.9
4.7

4.6
5.2
4.3
4.5
5.9
5
5.5
5.3
5.4
4.1

0.024
0.04
<0.001
<0.001
1
1
1
1
1
1

Position comparison of consonants in word-initial, post-tonic, word-medial, and word-final positions; presence of a
pause, to the left of the word, to the right of the word, on both sides, or no pause on either side; words of differing
number of syllables (2-6). The comparisons from the interaction between position and presence of a pause are not
included.
ms = millisecond; final = word-final; initial = word-initial; elsewhere = word-medially; ptonic = post-tonic; before =
pause to the left of the word; after = pause to the right of the word; both = pause on both sides; neither = no pause
on either side; word length = number of syllables in the word.

plots the duration values of nasals in word-initial, post-tonic, elsewhere, and word-final positions.
Table 8 presents the comparisons from the statistical analysis of singleton nasals. All comparisons
with nasals in the word-final category are found to be significant, whereas all other comparisons
were not significant. In other words, neither post-tonic (as seen above) nor word-initial position are
significant predictors of longer nasal duration in these data. Number of syllables in the word also
had a significant effect on consonant duration, F(4, 176) = 8.58, p < 0.001. The presence of a
pause was also a significant effect on consonant duration, F(3, 2,401) = 58.31, p < 0.001, as was
the interaction between position and the presence of a pause, F(9, 1,755) = 26.96, p < 0.001. This
is investigated further for word-initial and -final consonants, below.
We now consider the influence of higher-level prosodic domain boundaries through the presence or absence of pause on word-initial and word-final consonant duration. We were interested to
see if a pause before a word had an effect on the duration of word-initial consonants. It is assumed
that if there is a preceding pause, the consonant is domain-initial at a higher prosodic level, as well

280

Language and Speech 64(2)

Figure 5. Duration values (ms) of word-initial nasals and neutralised stops where there is a preceding
pause (coloured grey) or no pause (coloured white), and thus a segment of the preceding word.
ms = milliseconds.

Table 9. Results of statistical comparisons for nasals and neutralised stops in word-initial position
(n = 1,285).
Comparison
Pause
Pause ~ segment
Word length
2~3
2~4
2~5
2~6
3~4
3~5
3~6
4~5
4~6
5~6

Estimated difference (ms)

Standard error (ms)

p-value

-41.0

9.6

0.036

9.3
7.8
5.9
13.6
-1.5
-3.4
4.3
-1.9
5.8
7.7

4.2
5.5
4.7
4.8
6.1
5.4
5.4
6.4
6.5
5.7

0.31
1
1
0.055
1
1
1
1
1
1

Presence of a pause before the word-initial consonant (pause) or not (segment); words of differing number of syllables
(2-6).
ms = millisecond; word length = number of syllables in the word.

as word-initial so we were interested to see whether higher-level prosodic domain-initial position
has an effect on consonant duration. For this analysis, we investigated both nasal and neutralised
stop consonants.
Figure 5 plots word-initial nasals and stops depending on whether or not the word is preceded by
a pause. Table 9 presents the comparisons from the statistical analysis of word-initial consonants.
Phrasal context (determined by the presence of a pause) has a significant effect on the duration of a
word-initial consonant, F(1, 7) = 18.1, p = 0.0033, regardless of consonant category, which, as mentioned above (see Section 5.6), was not included in the final model based on the output from the step

Jepson et al.

281

Figure 6. Duration values (ms) of word-final nasals and stops where there is a following pause (coloured
grey) or no pause (coloured white), and thus a segment of the following word.
ms = milliseconds.

function. Specifically, consonants that occur in word-initial position after a pause (i.e., prosodic
phrase-initial position) are shorter than word-initial consonants that are not preceded by a pause by
an estimated 41 ms  9.64 ms, p = 0.003. In other words, initial consonants that are domain-medial
are significantly longer than their domain-initial counterparts. Number of syllables in the word, again,
had a significant, though small, effect on consonant duration, F(4, 113) = 2.71, p = 0.034. No individual comparisons for word length reached significance.
Regarding word-final consonants, it was shown in Figure 4 that nasals in word-final position are
significantly longer than word-initial or word-medial (intervocalic post-tonic or elsewhere) nasals.
The interaction between proximity to a boundary marked by a pause and word-final position is
further considered for both neutralised stops and nasals here. Figure 6 shows the duration values of
stops and nasals in word-final position plotted separately by the presence or absence of a following
pause. Table 10 presents the comparisons from the statistical analysis of word-final consonants.
There is considerable variation in the duration values of word-final stops followed by a pause. The
presence of a following pause had an effect on consonant duration, F(1, 595) = 15.1, p < 0.001.
Number of syllables in the word, again, had an effect on consonant duration, F(1, 581) = 3.19,
p < 0.013. Category did not have a significant effect on the duration of these word-final consonants, F(1, 590) = 1.6, p = 0.21. However, the interaction between category and presence of a
following pause was significant, F(1, 588) = 7.3, p = 0.007, which showed that nasals and stops
are effected differently by the presence of a following pause. Word-final nasals followed by a pause
have longer duration than word-final nasals followed by another word by an estimated 55 ms  6
ms, p < 0.001. There is no significant duration difference between word-final stops, p = 1.

7

Discussion

This investigation into prosodically conditioned consonant lengthening has provided some
insightful results on the effects of prosodic boundaries and prominence on the duration of singleton consonants and consonants in clusters in Djambarrpuyu. We made three predictions:
Firstly, that post-tonic consonants will have longer duration than other

282

Language and Speech 64(2)

Table 10. Results of statistical comparisons for word-final nasals and neutralised stops (n = 595).
Comparison
Pause
Pause ~ segment
Category
Nasal ~ stop
Word length
2~3
2~4
2~5
2~6
3~4
3~5
3~6
4~5
4~6
5~6
Category:pause
N. pause ~ N. segment
N. pause ~ S. pause
N. pause ~ S. segment
N. segment ~ S. pause
N. segment ~ S. segment
S. pause ~ S. segment

Estimated difference (ms)

Standard error (ms)

p-value

33

8.5

0.002

-10.5

8.4

1

8
24.4
-7.1
4.5
16.4
-15.2
-3.6
-31.5
-19.9
11.6

8.2
7.2
12.1
14.1
10.2
14
15.7
13.4
15.1
17.6

1
0.014
1
1
1
1
1
0.35
1
1

55.1
11.6
22.5
-43.5
-32.6
10.9

6.1
8.9
13.8
9.7
14
15.5

<0.001
1
1
<0.001
0.36
1

Presence of a pause after the consonant (pause), or not (segment); category of the consonant (nasal; stop); words of
differing number of syllables (2-6); interaction between consonant category (nasal; stop) and presence of a pause after
the segment (pause) or not (segment).
ms = millisecond; word length = number of syllables in the word; N. = nasal; S. = stop.

word-medial consonants, secondly, that we will observe an effect of domain-final lengthening
when a word-final consonant is followed by a pause, and lastly, that we will not find an effect
of domain-initial lengthening. Below we summarise and discuss the findings of each analysis
and consider their broader implications.
Our prediction that there would be post-tonic lengthening of consonants in Djambarrpuyu
was not supported by these data except in the case of disyllabic tokens (e.g., Figure 2; see word
length comparisons in Table 6). Rather, there was a more general tendency for intervocalic nasals
in non-post-tonic position to be marginally longer than their post-tonic counterparts. This was
also observed for nasals in the C1 position in consonant clusters (see Figure 3). This is in contrast
to previous studies of other Australian languages, including Mawng and Bininj Kunwok, where
nasals tended to lengthen in post-tonic position compared to other word-medial positions (Fletcher
et al., 2010; Fletcher et al. 2015). It was also argued in previous studies that the sonority of these
segments could be enhanced through lengthening, and generally contribute to the entire phrasal
accentual prominence gesture, which is also typically associated with a strong rising pitch movement throughout the initial segmental sequence. Rather a different pattern of consonant duration
patterning is found in our study. Unlike earlier studies, we factored word length into the analysis
of post-tonic lengthening. While we observed longer post-tonic consonants in disyllabic words,
the effects were not evident at all in longer words. It should also be noted that in one of the earlier

Jepson et al.

283

studies of Warlpiri (Butcher & Harrington, 2003), the effects appeared strongest in focused disyllable tokens that were compared with unfocused counterparts. However, we did not compare
consonants following the first vowel of a word when the word was accented (and hence the consonant would be post-tonic) with consonants in the same position in unaccented words. It should
also be pointed out that reported duration differences associated with this effect are not typically
large in magnitude.
Furthermore, across Australian languages, the post-tonic position is the first position within a
word where it is possible for all consonant contrasts to be realised. This includes stop series and all
coronal consonants.5 Therefore, it appears that the relevant phonological contrasts of Djambarrpuyu
signal this to be a prominent position in the language in some sense (see discussion in Keating,
2006). The lengthening of these consonants may have served to enhance these consonant contrasts,
as well as encode prosodic prominence. However, our data do not concur with previous findings
for other Australian languages that lengthening the post-tonic consonant is an additional cue to
prosodic strength in Djambarrpuyu alongside prominence-lending pitch movements associated
with the tonic vowel (see Butcher, 2006; Cho, 2016).
Word-initial position did not have an effect on consonant duration in these data. We found that
word-initial nasals had comparable duration values to those in the word-medial positions. This
result suggests that the word-initial consonant is not a site of temporal expansion, unlike other
languages (see Cho, 2015; Fletcher, 2010), although further acoustic and additional articulatory
investigations might tell a more complex story of "strength" (see, e.g., Keating et al., 2004 on
English, Korean, French, and Taiwanese; Tabain & Butcher, 2015 on Pitjantjatjara). The effect of
a higher-level prosodic domain boundary on word-initial consonant duration was investigated
through comparing word-initial consonants which were preceded by a pause with those that were
not preceded by pause. We showed that consonants--both nasals and neutralised stops--when not
preceded by a pause had longer duration than segments that were. That is, being in the initial position of a higher-level prosodic domain did not appear to condition lengthening of word-initial
consonants, but rather shortened them. Similar findings have been reported for French (Fougeron,
2001) and English (Cho & Keating, 2009). Our results resonate with Cho and Keating (2009) findings for English nasal /n/ in particular, which was found to not show an effect of proximity to an
initial boundary overall, but it was discovered to have shorter duration in utterance-initial position
compared with utterance-medial position when the word was accented. Cho and Keating's findings
for /t/, however were markedly different, such that Voice Onset Time was longer for utteranceinitial stops, when unaccented. This highlights again that it may prove quite fruitful in the future to
investigate unaccented words regarding domain-initial lengthening, to assess whether there is a
further durational effect of accentuation, or an interaction between proximity to a boundary and
accentuation in Djambarrpuyu.
Word-final position appeared to have an effect on the duration of consonants particularly when
they were also in final position of a higher-level prosodic domain. Nasals in word-final position
preceding a pause were significantly longer than nasals in all other positions, including word-initially, word-medially, and word-finally, not preceding a pause. This was predicted, as the phenomenon of domain-final lengthening is more or less universally attested (see Cho, 2016 for discussion),
and the word-final consonant or syllable rhyme is often found to show this effect (Turk, 2012; Turk
& Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2007).
Taken together, these data suggest that Djambarrpuyu speakers are able to encode prosodic
domain boundaries in different ways through insertion of a pause or through segment lengthening,
and that these operate distinctly at the left versus the right domain edges. Left-dislocation is an
important strategy for marking information structure prominence in many Australian languages
(Simpson & Mushin, 2008), and this may further condition domain-final lengthening of word-final

284

Language and Speech 64(2)

consonants. Pre-pausal lengthening has certainly been observed for vowels in previous analyses of
Australian languages (e.g., Bishop, 2002; Fletcher & Evans, 2002) and the results shown here suggest that this is also apparent in pre-pausal word-final consonants in Djambarrpuyu. Therefore, in
the present study, lengthening of consonants at the right boundary of words that occur before a
pause may increase the sense of junction at the domain-final boundary. Without an articulatory
investigation, we cannot be sure whether the shorter duration values observed for word-initial segments following a pause is due to a shorter articulation of the segment, or a delay in voicing resuming or beginning after the pause (Fougeron, 2001). In general, a deeper investigation is required. It
would include taking into account speech rate and tempo, which were not examined here.
Comparing word-initial and word-final consonants with their counterparts from unaccented words
(or, at least, non-focused words) would also enhance the analysis. Further, it would also be interesting to investigate the articulatory correlates of consonants in different word and utterance positions
to ascertain if there is additional strengthening in terms of gestural magnitude as was found for
Pitjantjatjara (Tabain & Butcher, 2015) and Warlpiri (Butcher & Harrington, 2003).
Returning to post-tonic consonants, there are a number of interesting implications of the results
reported in this study. Firstly, as mentioned previously, intervocalic post-tonic consonants in disyllabic words are indeed significantly longer than all other word-medial consonants. There is a statistical trend for consonants in other positions in two-syllable words to also have longer duration
than their counterparts in longer words, but individual comparisons do not show an effect of the
same magnitude, if at all (see word length comparisons in Tables 6-10). Therefore, it may be that
polysyllabic shortening is affecting the duration of post-tonic consonants in longer words, and that
this is why we observe longer duration values for intervocalic post-tonic consonants in disyllabic
words, and not in words of more syllables (see e.g., White & Turk, 2010). Nevertheless, the
observed duration differences between words of different syllable length highlights the value in
working with a wide range of data in terms of word length and word structure. Secondly, these
results have noteworthy implications for the analysis of the relationship between consonant duration and phonemic vowel length in Djambarrpuyu. Previously, it has been reported that consonants lengthen after phonemically short vowels in word-initial syllables (see Jepson & Stoakes,
2015). The findings presented here suggest that the relationship may be better described as consonants being shortened after phonemically long vowels. That is, the post-tonic consonants analysed
in this study follow phonemically short vowels, and thus are the longest consonants that occur in
that post-tonic position. Yet they have similar duration values to other word-medial consonants.
Therefore, post-tonic consonants following phonemically long vowels would have shorter duration
values than consonants elsewhere within the word.
These findings tell us more about the possible scope of phonetic realisation of prosodic prominence and effects of prosodic boundaries, and how competing phonologically motivated goals--
for example, phoneme distinctions, and metrical structure--are negotiated. On the topic of
phonemic distinctions, it may be that post-tonic consonants are already overloaded in terms of the
functions of durational differences. The duration of these consonants correlates inversely with the
phonemic length of the preceding vowel, and the language contrasts long and short stops, realised
primarily by closure duration. Therefore, it is possible that the functional load of duration to encode
these aspects of the language means there are reduced lengthening effects associated with prominence (see Berinstein, 1979).
In future work, it would be insightful to manipulate the information structure of the utterance
frames. Tokens in this study were realised with information focus regardless of utterance position, so the effect that phrasal prominence or accentuation may have on a whole word is not able
to be teased apart from other conditioning factors at this stage. Nor can the combined effects of
proximity to a boundary and accentuation be separated in these data. It is important to note that

285

Jepson et al.

even outside of this prominent information structure position, it may also be the case that
accentual prominence is obligatory on nouns in Djambarrpuyu, as found in Mawng (Fletcher,
Singer, & Loakes, 2012), so we may not expect to find patterns of deaccentuation akin to languages like English. Further research could also involve an investigation into individual speakers to ascertain if all individuals use similar lengthening strategies for encoding boundaries and
prosodic prominence. Cross-linguistically, individuals have been found to have different patterns of lengthening and strengthening (see Cho & Keating, 2001, 2009; Fougeron, 2001), so a
next step could include a closer exploration of interspeaker differences, now we have a better
understanding of how consonant duration interacts with prominence and domain-boundaries in
Djambarrpuyu.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the generous, patient, and knowledgeable people in Yurrwi (Milingimbi) who
worked with us for the larger project of Katie Jepson's PhD. We extend a great "thank you" to the people who
were recorded for the analyses presented here: Donna Bambalarra, George Milaypuma, Helen Gowunbuy
Dhamarrandji, Helen Milminydjarrk, Jimmy Ginigiri, Margaret Guwankil, Nellie Burratja, and Sammy
Marritja. Thank you also to Paula Madiwirr for her guidance in constructing the frame sentences used in
recording the speech materials. Finally, we thank the two reviewers, as well as Martine Grice and the editors,
for their generous comments and enormously helpful suggestions.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the
Dynamics of Language (Project ID: CE140100041) and the University of Melbourne PhD Fieldwork Grant
Scheme.

ORCID iD
Kathleen Jepson

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7367-7077.

Notes
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

There are 14 possibilities for intramorphemic two-member consonant clusters: nasal + nasal; nasal +
stop; stop + nasal; stop + stop; stop + semi-vowel; lateral + nasal; lateral + stop; lateral + semivowel;
rhotic + nasal; rhotic + stop; rhotic + semivowel; semivowel + nasal; semivowel + stop; semivowel
+ semivowel. Further possibilities are observed intermorphemically.
In her grammar, Wilkinson (1991, 2012) follows the approach of Wood (1978) and Waters (1979) in
their analyses of stress in Gaalpu and Djinang, respectively. These are two (relatively) distantly related
languages in the Yolngu subgroup.
Further, word-final syllables are generally treated as extrametrical for stress assignment. This means
word-final syllables are not stressed unless the word is monosyllabic, the word is a compound and the
second member is monosyllabic, or if a monosyllabic form is reduplicated. In the latter two cases, this
may also result in stress falling on adjacent syllables.
"Yolu Matha" refers to language spoken by Yolngu, and linguistically includes a reduced number of
languages in the Yolngu subgroup.
Due to distributional difference in the stop series, and the rarity of lenis stops in contrastive positions in
the dataset used in the present study, it is not possible to delve further into how prosodic position may
affect fortis and lenis stops differently at this stage, using our current dataset.

286

Language and Speech 64(2)

References
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2016a). 2016 Census QuickStats: Milingimbi. Retrieved from http://quick
stats.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/SSC70186
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2016b). Australia, Census 2016, Language spoken at home by Sex (SA2+).
Retrieved from http://stat.data.abs.gov.au/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ABS_C16_T09_SA
Baker, B. (2014). Word structure in Australian languages. In H. Koch & R. Nordlinger (Eds.), The languages
and linguistics of Australia (pp. 139-213). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Beckman, M. E., & Edwards, J. (1994). Articulatory evidence for differentiating stress categories. In
P. A. Keating (Ed.), Phonological structure and phonetic form (pp. 7-33). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Berinstein, A. E. (1979). A cross-linguistic study on the perception and production of stress. UCLA Working
Papers in Phonetics, 47, 1-59. Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/content/qt0t0699hc/qt0t0699hc
.pdf
Berkovits, R. (1993). Utterance-final lengthening and the duration of final-stop closures. Journal of Phonetics,
21(4), 479-489.
Bishop, J. (2002). Aspects of intonation and prosody in Bininj Gun-wok: An autosegmental-metrical analysis.
(Doctor of Philosophy thesis). The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Retrieved from
http://hdl.handle.net/11343/39569
Blevins, J. (2001). Where have all the onsets gone? Initial consonant loss in Australian Aboriginal languages.
In J. Simpson, D. Nash, M. Laughren, P. Austin, & B. Alpher (Eds.), Forty years on: Ken Hale and
Australian languages (pp. 481-492). Canberra, Australia: Pacific Linguistics.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2017). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (Version 5.3). Retrieved from http://
www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/
Butcher, A. (2006). Australian Aboriginal languages: Consonant-salient phonologies and the "Place-ofArticulation Imperative." In J. Harrington & M. Tabain (Eds.), Speech production: Models, phonetic
processes, and techniques (pp. 187-210). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Butcher, A., & Harrington, J. (2003). An acoustic and articulatory analysis of focus and the word/morpheme boundary distinction in Warlpiri. In S. Palethorpe & M. Tabain (Eds.). Proceedings of the sixth
International Seminar on Speech Production (pp. 19-24). Sydney, Australia: Macquarie Centre for
Cognitive Science.
Cho, T. (2015). Language effects on timing at the segmental and suprasegmental levels. In M. Redford
(Ed.), The handbook of speech production (pp. 505-529). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1002
/9781118584156
Cho, T. (2016). Prosodic boundary strengthening in the phonetics-prosody interface. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 10(3), 120-141. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12178
Cho, T., & Jun, S.-A. (2000). Domain-initial strengthening as enhancement of laryngeal features: Aerodynamic
evidence from Korean. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 99, 57-69.
Cho, T., & Keating, P. (2001). Articulatory and acoustic studies on domain-initial strengthening in Korean.
Journal of Phonetics, 29(2), 155-190. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.006/jpho.2001.0131
Cho, T., & Keating, P. (2009). Effects of initial position versus prominence in English. Journal of Phonetics,
37(4), 466-485. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2009.08.001
Crystal, T. H., & House, A. S. (1990). Articulation rate and the duration of syllables and stress groups in
connected speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 88(1), 101-112. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.399955
Dixon, R. M. W. (2002). Australian languages: Their nature and development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. Retrieved from https://ebookcentral.proquest.com
Eefting, W. (1991). The effects of "information value" and "accentuation" on the duration of Dutch words,
syllables, and segments. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 89(1), 412-424. Retrieved
from https://doi.org/10.1121/1.400475.
Evans, N. (1996). Current issues in the phonology of Australian languages. In J. Goldsmith, J. Riggle, &
A. Yu (Eds.), The handbook of phonological theory. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons. Retrieved

Jepson et al.

287

from https://search-ebscohost-com.ezp.lib.unimelb.edu.au/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=447
40&site=ehost-live
Fletcher, J. (2010). The prosody of speech: Timing and rhythm. In W. J. Hardcastle, J. Laver, & F. E. Gibbon
(Eds.), The handbook of phonetic sciences (pp. 523-602). Chichester, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Fletcher, J., & Butcher, A. (2014). Sound patterns of Australian languages. In H. Koch & R. Nordlinger
(Eds.), The languages and linguistics of Australia (pp. 91-138). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Fletcher, J., Butcher, A., Loakes, D., & Stoakes, H. (2010). Aspects of nasal realization and the place of
articulation imperative in Bininj Gun-wok. In M. Tabain, J. Fletcher, D. Grayden, J. Hajek, & A. Butcher
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 13th Australasian International Conference on Speech Science and Technology
(pp. 78-81). Melbourne, Australia: The Australasian Speech Science and Technology Association.
Fletcher, J., & Evans, N. (2002). An acoustic phonetic analysis of intonational prominence in two Australian
languages. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 32(2), 123-140. Retrieved from https://doi
.org/10.1017/S0025100302001019
Fletcher, J., Evans, N., & Round, E. (2002). Left-edge tonal events in Kayardild (Australian) - a typological
perspective. Paper presented at the Speech Prosody 2002, an international conference, Aix-en-Provence,
France. Retrieved from http://isle.illinois.edu/sprosig/sp2002/pdf/fletcher-evans-round.pdf
Fletcher, J., Loakes, D., & Butcher, A. (2008). Coarticulation in nasal and lateral clusters in Warlpiri.
Paper presented at INTERSPEECH 2008, the 9th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, Brisbane, Australia. Retrieved from https://www.isca-speech.org/archive
/interspeech_2008/i08_0086.html
Fletcher, J., Singer, R., & Loakes, D. (2012). Intonation and focus-marking strategies in Mawng. Paper presented at Tone and Intonation in Europe, Oxford.
Fletcher, J., Stoakes, H., Loakes, D., & Singer, R. (2015). Accentual prominence and consonant lengthening
and strengthening in Mawng. In The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS 2015 (Ed.), Proceedings of the 18th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Glasgow, UK. Retrieved from https://www.international
phoneticassociation.org/icphs-proceedings/ICPhS2015/Papers/ICPHS0837.pdf
Fougeron, C. (2001). Articulatory properties of initial segments in several prosodic constituents in French.
Journal of Phonetics, 29(2), 109-135. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.006/jpho.2000.0114
Fougeron, C., & Keating, P. (1997). Articulatory strengthening at edges of prosodic domains. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 101(6), 3728-3740. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1121/1.418332
Goedemans, R. (2010). An overview of word stress in Australian Aboriginal languages. In H. van der Hulst,
R. Goedemans, & E. van Zanten (Eds.), A survey of word accentual patterns in the languages of the
world (pp. 55-86). Berlin, Germany; New York, NY: de Gruyter Mouton.
Gordon, M. (1997). Phonetic correlates of stress and the prosodic hierarchy in Estonian. In J. Ross &
I. Lehiste (Eds.), Estonian prosody: Papers from a symposium. Retrieved from http://www.linguistics
.ucsb.edu/faculty/gordon/estonian.pdf
Graetzer, S. (2012). An acoustic study of coarticulation: Consonant-vowel and vowel-to-vowel coarticulation
in four Australian languages. (Doctor of Philosophy Thesis). The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/11343/37860
Graetzer, S., Fletcher, J., & Hajek, J. (2015). Locus equations and coarticulation in three Australian languages.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 137(2), 806-821.
Graetzer, S., Fletcher, J., & Hajek, J. (2016). Hyperarticulation in short intonational phrases in three Australian
languages. In J. Barnes, A. Brugos, S. Shattuck-Hufnagel, & N. Veilleux (Eds.), Proceedings of Speech
Prosody 8 (pp. 173-177). Boston, MA: International Speech Communication Association. Retrieved
from https://doi.org/10.21437/SpeechProsody.
Graetzer, S., Hajek, J., & Fletcher, J. (2012). The effects of prosodic context and word position on Gupapuyngu
vowels. In Q. Ma, H. Dong, & D. Hirst (Eds.), Speech prosody 2012, sixth international conference (pp.
91-94). Shanghai, China: ISCA Archive. Retrieved from https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/sp2012/
papers/sp12_091.pdf
Greatorex, J. (2014). Yolu Matha Dictionary. (Online dictionary database). Retrieved from http://yolngu
dictionary.cdu.edu.au/

288

Language and Speech 64(2)

Harrington, J. (2017). ph.step. (r function). Retrieved from http://www.phonetik.uni-muenchen.de/~jmh
/lehre/Rdf/ph.step.R
Hooper, J. (1976). An introduction to natural generative phonology. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Jepson, K. (forthcoming). Aspects of prosody in Djambarrpuyu. (Doctor of Philosophy thesis). The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Jepson, K., Fletcher, J., & Stoakes, H. (2016). Acoustic correlates of primary stress in Djambarrpuyu. Poster
presented at the Sixteenth Australasian International Conference on Speech Science and Technology,
Parramatta.
Jepson, K., & Stoakes, H. (2015). Vowel duration and consonant lengthening in Djambarrpuyngu. In The
Scottish Consortium for ICPhS 2015 (Ed.), Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences, Glasgow, UK. Retrieved from https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/icphs-proceed
ings/ICPhS2015/Papers/ICPHS0826.pdf
Keating, P. (2006). Phonetic encoding of prosodic structure. In J. Harrington & M. Tabain (Eds.), Speech production: Models, phonetic processes, and techniques (pp. 167-186). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Keating, P., Cho, T., Fougeron, C, & Hsu, C. (2004). Domain-initial articulatory strengthening in four
languages. In J. Local, R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.), Phonetic interpretation: Papers in Laboratory
Phonology VI (pp. 145-163). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kisler, T., Reichel, U. D., & Schiel, F. (2017). Multilingual processing of speech via web services. Computer
Speech & Language, 45, 326-347. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2017.01.005
Kuznetsova, A., Bruun Brockhoff, P., & Haubo Bojesen Christensen, R. (2016). lmerTest: Tests in Linear
Mixed Effects Models (Version 2.0-32). Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lmer
Test
Lowe, B. (Ed.) (2004). Yolu-English dictionary. ARDS Inc.
Lowe, B. (Ed.) (2014). Yolu-English dictionary. ARDS inc. Retrieved from https://ards.com.au/resources/
downloadable/gupapuy%C5%8Bu-dictionary/
Lunden, A., Campbell, J., Hutchens, M., & Kalivoda, N. (2017). Vowel-length contrasts and phonetic cues
to stress: An investigation of their relation. Phonology, 34(3), 565-580. Retrieved from https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0952675717000288
Nakai, S., Kunnari, S., Turk, A., Suomi, K., & Ylitalo, R. (2009). Utterance-final lengthening and quantity in Northern Finnish. Journal of Phonetics, 37(1), 29-45. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
wocn.2008.08.002
Pentland, C. (2004). Stress in Warlpiri: Stress domains and word-level prosody. (Masters of Philosophy thesis). The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
R Core Team. (2016). R: A language and environment for statistical computing (Version 3.2.4 Revised).
Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org/
Schiel, F., Draxler, C., & Harrington, J. (2011). Phonemic segmentation and labelling using the MAUS
technique. Paper presented at the New Tools and Methods for Very-Large-Scale Phonetics Research,
Pennsylvania. Retrieved from https://epub.ub.uni-muenchen.de/13684/
Shepherd, M. (2008). The scope and effects of preboundary prosodic lengthening in Japanese. USC Working
Papers in Linguistics, 4, 1-14. Retrieved from http://gsil.sc-ling.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/
2008_1_Shepherd.pdf
Siddins, J., Harrington, J., Kleber, F., & Reubold, U. (2013). The influence of accentuation and polysyllabicity
on compensatory shortening in German. In F. Bimbot, C. Cerisara, C. Fougeron, G. Gravier, L. Lamel,
F. Pellegrino, & P. Perrier (Eds.), INTERSPEECH 2013, 14th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (pp. 1002-1006) Lyon, France: ISCA Archive. Retrieved from
https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/archive_papers/interspeech_2013/i13_1002.pdf
Simpson, J., & Mushin, I. (2008). Clause-initial position in four Australian languages. In I. Mushin &
B. Baker (Eds.), Discourse and grammar in Australian languages (pp. 25-57). Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Suomi, K. (2007). On the tonal and temporal domains of accent in Finnish. Journal of Phonetics, 35(1),
40-55. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2005.12.001

Jepson et al.

289

Tabain, M. (2016). Aspects of Arrernte prosody. Journal of Phonetics, 59, 1-22. Retrieved from https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2016.08.005
Tabain, M., & Butcher, A. (2015). Lexical stress and stop bursts in Pitjantjatjara: Feature enhancement of
neutralized apicals and the coronal/velar contrast. Journal of Phonetics, 50, 67-80. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2015.02.004
Tabain, M., Butcher, A., & Breen, G. (2004). VC vs CV syllables: A comparison of Aboriginal languages
with English. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 34(2), 175-200. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025100304001719
Tabain, M., Fletcher, J., & Butcher, A. (2014). Lexical stress in Pitjantjatjara. Journal of Phonetics, 42,
52-66. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2013.11.005
Turk, A. (2012). The temporal implementation of prosodic structure. In A. C. Cohn, C. C. Fougeron, M. K.
Huffman, & M. E. L. Renwick (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of Laboratory Phonology (pp. 242-253).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Turk, A. (2014). Durational effects of phrasal stress. In J. Caspers, Y. Chen, W. Heeren, & J. Pacilly (Eds.),
Above and beyond the segments: Experimental linguistics and phonetics (pp. 311-322). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Turk, A., & Dimitrova, S. (2007). English phrasal stress targets multiple, optional lengthening sites. In
J. Trouvain & W. J. Barry (Eds.), 16th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (pp. 1177-1180).
Saarbrucken, Germany: Universitat des Saarlandes. Retrieved from http://www.icphs2007.de/conference
/Papers/1394/1394.pdf
Turk, A., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (2000). Word-boundary-related duration patterns in English. Journal of
Phonetics, 28(4), 397-440. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.006/jpho.2000.0123
Turk, A., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (2007). Multiple targets of phrase-final lengthening in American English
words. Journal of Phonetics, 35(4), 445-472. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2006.12.001
Turk, A., & White, L. (1999). Structural influences on accentual lengthening in English. Journal of Phonetics,
27(2), 171-206. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1006/jpho.1999.0093
Waters, B. (1979). A distinctive features approach to Djinang phonology and verb morphology. Work Papers
of SIL-AAB, Series A, Volume 4.
Wells, J. C. (1997). SAMPA computer readable phonetic alphabet. In D. Gibbon, R. Moore, & R. Winski
(Eds.), Handbook of Standards and Resources for Spoken Language Systems. Berlin, Germany; New
York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
White, L., & Turk, A. (2010). English words on the Procrustean bed: Polysyllabic shortening reconsidered.
Journal of Phonetics, 38(3), 459-471. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2010.05.002
Wightman, C. W., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., Ostendorf, M., & Price, P. J. (1992). Segmental durations in
the vicinity of prosodic phrase boundaries. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 91(3).
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1121/1.402450
Wilkinson, M. (1991). Djambarrpuyu: A Yolu variety of Northern Australia. (Doctor of Philosophy thesis).
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
Wilkinson, M. (2012). Djambarrpuyu: A Yolu variety of Northern Australia. Munich, Germany: Lincom
Europa.
Winkelmann, R., Jaensch, K., Cassidy, S., & Harrington, J. (2016). emuR: Main package of the EMU Speech
Database Management SystemR package (Version 0.1.9).
Wood, R. (1978). Some Yuulngu phonological patterns. In S. A. Wurm (Ed.), Papers in Pacific Linguistics,
Series A, No. 51 (pp. 53-117). Canberra, Australia: Pacific Linguistics.

Appendix
Full models for each analysis that were used with the step() function (Kuznetsova et al., 2016) are
included below.

290

Language and Speech 64(2)

Intervocalic Consonants
duration ~ position*category*pause + word length + pause:woord length
+ (1 + position | speaker ) + (1 | word )

Nasals in Clusters
duration ~ position + pause + word length + post.seg.dur
+ position:word length + position:post.seg.dur + word lengtth:post.seg.dur
+ (1 + position + post.seg.dur | speaker ) + (1 | word )

Nasals in Clusters versus Intervocalically
duration ~ position*cluster*pause + word length
+ (1 + position | speaker ) + (1 | word )

Singleton Nasals in All Position within the Word
duration ~ position + pause + word length + position:pause
+ pause:word length + (1 + position | speaker ) + (1 | word )

Word-Initial Consonants
duration ~ pause + category + word length + pause:word lenggth
+ word length:category + (1 + pause + word length + cattegory | speaker ) + (1 | word )

Word-Final Consonants
duration ~ pause + category + word length + pause:category
+ (1 + pause + category | speaker ) + (1 | word )

