The Relationship Between Event
Representation and Linguistic Skill
in Narratives of Children and
Adolescents With Down Syndrome
Donna M. Boudreau*
Robin S. Chapman
Waisman Center on Mental
Retardation and Human
Development
University of Wisconsin-
Madison

Children and adolescents with Down syndrome present with greater difficulty in
expressive language than nonverbal cognitive domains. As narratives involve an
understanding of the relationship(s) between events and their verbal expression,
this divergence has implications for understanding narrative abilities in persons
with Down syndrome. In this project, we investigated the relationship between
event representation and linguistic expression in narratives of children and
adolescents with Down syndrome (n = 31) and groups of typically developing
children matched for mental age (n = 31), syntax comprehension (n = 28), or
expressive language (n = 27). A short wordless film, the Pear Story (Chafe,
1980), was viewed individually by each participant and then each participant
retold the story to an adult who (presumably) had not seen the film. Findings
suggest a disparate relationship between linguistic expression and event representation in narratives of children and adolescents with Down syndrome.
Participants with Down syndrome produced narratives that were significantly
longer and more complex than the expressive-language-matched-group, with no
differences observed in event structure when compared to the MA-matched
group. Comparatively, use of linguistic devices and cohesion were poorer in the
children and adolescents with Down syndrome than in the MA-matched children,
with no differences observed in comparison to children matched for expressive
language.
KEY WORDS: narrative, Down syndrome, event representation, language,
children

C

hildren and adolescents with Down syndrome show greater impairment in expressive language than in nonverbal cognition and
syntax comprehension when expressive language is measured
by mean length of utterance and number of different words in conversational and narrative samples (Chapman, Schwartz, & Kay-Raining Bird,
1991; Chapman, Seung, Schwartz, & Kay-Raining Bird, 1998). The divergence of expressive language and nonverbal domains in this population has significant implications for the development of narrative skills,
which are believed to build on an integration of linguistic and cognitive
abilities, as well as social and pragmatic skills (Hemphill, Picard, &
Tager-Flusberg, 1991).
*Currently affiliated with Portland State University, Portland, OR

1146

Journal
of Speech,
Language,
and
Hearing
Research
* *
Vol.Vol.
4343
* *
1146-1159
* *
October
2000
* (c)American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Journal
of Speech,
Language,
and
Hearing
Research
1146-1159
October
2000
1092-4388/00/4305-1146

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Narratives comprise varying genres, including
scripts, personal events, and fictional stories (Hedberg
& Westby, 1993). Described as a recounting of past events
that preserve chronological order (Peterson, 1990), narratives play an important role in successful communicative exchanges and academic success (Berman &
Slobin, 1994; Chafe, 1980; Peterson & McCabe, 1991).
Berman (1995) suggests that narrative abilities of young
children are anchored in knowledge that is derived from
their mental representation of events and the verbalizations that accompany these representations (see also
Lahey & Bloom, 1994; Nelson, 1986; Trabasso & Rodkin,
1994). The construction of mental representations draws
upon information from the present context as well as
knowledge accessed from long-term memory. Thus, a
narrator must "hold in mind a complex model of relations among events while using language to express
these relations" (Lahey & Bloom, 1994, p. 356).
In typical development, event representation and
linguistic aspects of narrative skill are thought to develop in synchrony (Berman & Slobin, 1994). However,
the disparity between nonverbal cognition and expressive language in persons with Down syndrome may lead
to more advanced mental representations of events than
the expressive language used to convey narratives. Thus,
difficulties experienced in narrative production by children and adolescents with Down syndrome may be attributed to expressive language limitations rather than
a global deficit involving difficulty in constructing a mental representation of an event. The purpose of this project
was to examine the relationship between linguistic abilities and event representation in narratives of persons with
Down syndrome, asking in particular if higher levels of
cognition are reflected in the event content of narratives.
Indices sensitive to developmental change in both event
representation and linguistic skill were selected to measure these two aspects of narrative.

The Development of Narratives: Event
Representation and Linguistic Skill
Event Retelling
The aspect of narrative ability most likely to reflect
cognitive understanding is the overall content of information conveyed (Hudson & Shapiro, 1991). Earliest
emerging narrative genres are scripts, or an account of
what typically happens during a generalized event such
as taking a bath or going shopping (Nelson, 1986). In
early development, narratives about past personal experiences often center on familiar experiences and
events, as well as on experiences that may be emotionally salient or negative (Miller & Sperry, 1986; SuttonSmith, 1986). Children also increase the genre of narrative that they are capable of producing with age and by

age 3 or 4 can recount specific experiences independently
(Hudson & Shapiro, 1991).
Over time narratives increase in length, with developmental trends observed in the content conveyed,
including quantity and type of information included. For
example, research has found that the amount of information recalled in narrative tasks increases consistently
with age (Griffith, Ripich, & Dastoli, 1986). Additionally, children gradually are able to comprehend and express causal and inferential relationships in narratives
(Lahey & Bloom, 1994). Causal relationships constitute
the essence of a narrative in some genres and involve
learning how to describe the intentions of characters'
and others' mental states (Kemper & Edwards, 1986;
Trabasso & van den Broek, 1985). Similarly, the ability
to make inferences depends on the creation of mental
models, which are contingent upon world knowledge in
long-term memory, as well as information from the
present context (Bishop & Adams, 1992; Lahey & Bloom,
1994). Understanding and expression of causal relationships and inferences in narratives is dependent in part
on a child's ability to hold multiple events in consciousness at the same time, which supports understanding
of the relationship between events (Lahey & Bloom,
1994).

Linguistic Skill
A minimum level of linguistic ability is necessary
for the production of narratives (Hudson & Shapiro,
1991). Children must retrieve lexical referents to represent agents and events. Additionally, the development
of morphosyntactic skills is critical to differentiating
some narrative genres, as well as for marking causal
and temporal relations. For example, recounting an
event necessitates the use of past-tense verb markers,
whereas scripts typically are expressed using presentprogressive verb forms. Lexical diversity and the ability to shift tense in narratives increase with age (Berman
& Slobin, 1994; Miller, 1991).
Developmental increases are also observed in the
use of cohesion, which is established through the choice
of linguistic devices used to tie meaning across sentences
(Berman & Slobin, 1994; Halliday & Hasan, 1976; Liles,
1985). Initially, frequency and diversity of cohesive devices used by young children are minimal, with children
typically depending on the conjunctive and to establish
intersentential connections (Hedberg & Westby, 1993;
Hudson & Shapiro, 1991). Children extend the frequency
with which other forms of cohesion are included with
increasing age (Hudson & Shapiro, 1991). An acceleration in the use of cohesive devices at approximately age
5 has led some researchers to suggest that a global reorganization occurs at this point in development, with
some qualitative changes in how the child perceives and
Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1147

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

reports narrative organization (Karmiloff-Smith, 1985;
Orsolini, 1990). This linguistic change may also be a
function of increasingly complex mental representations,
in that the use of cohesive devices is dependent in part
on the child's ability to construct and retain more complex mental models (Lahey & Bloom, 1994) as well as
an ability to perceive listeners' needs related to information being conveyed (Baltaxe & D'Angiola, 1992).
An additional measure of adequacy of productive
narratives is overall fluency. Mazes, which consist of the
presence of false starts, repetitions, and repairs in spontaneous speech (Miller, 1991), are one measure of verbal fluency. It has been hypothesized that verbal repairs
are a result of self-monitoring at the semantic level of
meaning, such as monitoring intersentential cohesive
adequacy (Baltaxe & D'Angiola, 1992), as well as a
marker of word utterance formulation problems (Miller
& Chapman, 1992). Thus, fluency may be reduced as a
result of both significant linguistic demands, as well as
the complexity of the relationship among events.

Narrative Abilities of Children With Mental
Retardation and Language Impairment
Event Representation
Research addressing narrative structure in groups
of children with mental retardation has found poorer
performance on measures of story structure on their part
as compared to that of language-matched peers (TagerFlusberg, 1995), as well as poorer ability to recall events
from previously heard narratives (Luftig & Johnson,
1985). However, these groups have been heterogeneous
with respect to level of language impairment relative to
nonverbal cognitive functioning. Results of studies investigating narratives in persons with Down syndrome
(DS) are inconsistent regarding the relationship between
cognitive ability and narrative structure, due in part to
varied methodologies and matching criteria. For example, in a study comparing children with autism and
a control group of children with DS, participants were
matched for verbal ability using a composite score from
the McCarthy Scale of Verbal Ability and the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test. Results revealed no differences
between the groups on number of words produced, story
events, or references to characters or props, despite the
fact that children with DS were of younger mental ages
than the group with autism. In both groups, there was
a tendency for participants with higher mental ages to
produce narratives that were more elaborate and well
formed (Loveland, McEvoy, Tunali, & Kelley, 1990). KayRaining Bird and Chapman (1994) found that children
with DS had more difficulty in gist recall of textual units
on a story-retelling task than MA-matched peers, although there was no difference in memory for item order.

1148

However, this task relied primarily on verbal auditory
memory skills, an area of particular difficulty for children with DS (Marcell & Weeks, 1988). An additional
project involving children with DS and mental-agematched controls found poorer performance by the group
with DS than MA-matched, typically developing peers
or peers with Williams syndrome (Reilly, Klima, &
Bellugi, 1990). Matching criteria in this study (full scale
versus nonverbal IQ) and small sample size (n = 4 per
group) limits generalization of these findings, however.
Research with other groups of children with primarily language deficits, such as children with specific language impairment (SLI), has found structural differences in narrative and expository retellings in preschool
and school-age children when compared to MA-matched
peers. For example, children with SLI recalled fewer
events on a story-retelling task (Boudreau & Hedberg,
1999; Copmann & Griffith, 1994) and produced shorter
stories with fewer episodes than MA-matched peers
(Roth & Spekman, 1986). Additionally, children with SLI
have difficulty responding to inferential questions about
stories presented orally (Bishop & Adams, 1992) as well
as oral stories supported by pictures (Ellis Weismer,
1985). These findings may suggest difficulties in (a) establishing a mental representation from narratives, (b)
accessing knowledge from mental representation and/
or long-term memory (Lahey & Bloom, 1994), or (c)
mapping linguistic structures onto mental representations (Berman, 1995).

Linguistic Skill
Although comparisons of children with mental retardation (MR) and typical peers matched on verbal
ability have found similar performance in the use of lexical cohesion, MLU, narrative length, and lexical diversity (Tager-Flusberg, 1995), children with MR present
with more difficulty in the use of referential devices than
language-matched peers (Hemphill et al., 1991; TagerFlusberg, 1995). A comparison of children with MR to
typically developing peers matched for mental age revealed poorer performance by the MR group on measures of MLU and lexical diversity (Abbeduto, Benson,
Short, & Dolish, 1995). Thus, differences between children with MR and typical peers varies greatly as a function of matching criteria.
Only minimal research has examined linguistic skill
in narratives of persons with DS. Results suggest that
this population performs poorly in comparison to MAmatched peers on syntactic complexity (MLU), lexical
diversity (number of different words), and fluency (total
number of words) (Chapman et al., 1998). Age effects
have been observed for all linguistic measures analyzed.
The use of cohesion in narratives of persons with
Down syndrome has not been investigated. However,

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

difficulty in establishing coherence within narrative
tasks has been evidenced in other populations of children with language and learning difficulties (Baltaxe &
D'Angiola, 1992; Liles, 1985, 1987; Liles, Duffy, Merritt,
& Purcell, 1995). It has been suggested that the use of
some forms of cohesion are delayed rather than deviant
in children with SLI, as comparisons of children with
SLI to matched control groups of varying language skills
(e.g., morphosyntactic skills, comprehension, or expression of words) found few differences among groups in
use of reference. Specifically, children with language
impairment performed most similarly to the oldest and
most mature language-matched group in maintaining
referents in a story-construction task (van der Lely, 1997).

Research Questions
In this study, we evaluated content and linguistic
skill in narratives of children and adolescents with Down
syndrome to further understand the relationship between nonverbal cognitive functioning and linguistic
expression in this population. Narratives of children
from three control groups matched for nonverbal mental age, syntactic comprehension, or expressive language
abilities served as the models from which to compare
these aspects of narrative. Research questions were as
follows:
1. Do children and adolescents with Down syndrome
differ from children matched for nonverbal mental age,
syntactic comprehension skills, or expressive language
on measures of event representation?
2. Do children and adolescents with Down syndrome
differ from children matched for nonverbal mental age,
syntactic comprehension skills, or expressive language
on the use of linguistic structures, cohesion, or fluency
in narrative production?
3. What is the relationship between expressive language and nonverbal cognition and measures of event
retelling?
It was hypothesized that the content of narratives
in children and adolescents with Down syndrome would
be commensurate with nonverbal cognitive functioning,
reflecting higher level representational skills than are
found in children matched for syntactic comprehension
or expressive language abilities. In comparison it was
hypothesized that the performance of the group with
Down syndrome on measures of linguistic skill (including lexical diversity and syntactic complexity) as well
as fluency of narratives would be significantly poorer than
that of both MA-matched and syntax-comprehensionmatched groups (and would more closely resemble the performance of the group matched for expressive language
abilities). We also hypothesized that the ability to use
cohesive devices, dependent in part on both knowledge

of linguistic structure and an understanding of the relationship among events, would be higher in participants
with Down syndrome than in expressive-languagematched peers. Finally, we hypothesized that nonverbal
cognition would be a better predictor of narrative structure in participants with DS than expressive language.

Method
Participants
This study used subject data from an archival database described in Chapman et al. (1991, 1998). This
database consisted of longitudinal data collected over a
6-year period investigating language and cognitive abilities in children and adolescents with Down syndrome.
Participants in the current project consisted of a group
of 31 children and adolescents with Down syndrome
(Trisomy 21) and three typically developing control
groups matched for (a) mental-age-equivalent scores
based on mean scores from Pattern Analysis and Bead
Memory subtests of the Stanford Binet (Thorndike,
Hagen, & Sattler, 1986), (b) syntactic comprehension
based on age-equivalent scores of Test of Auditory Comprehension of Language (Carrow-Woolfolk, 1985), or (c)
mean length of utterance (MLU-morphemes) based on
a 12-min conversational sample (Chapman et al, 1991).
ANOVA and post hoc comparisons (Tukey HSD) revealed
no significant differences between the group with Down
syndrome and the control groups on matching variables.
Participants with Down syndrome ranged in ages from
12;2 to 26;10 (years;months), and all were recruited from
Wisconsin and Northern Illinois. Children were excluded
from the study if sign language was used as the primary means of communication (as indicated by parent
report), had a history of illness associated with cognitive or language loss, or presented with severe visual
impairment. The typically developing children ranged
in age from 2;3 to 8;5 and were recruited from Madison
and surrounding communities. All participants completed a hearing assessment using pure tone average
thresholds performed by a certified audiologist and were
excluded from the study if they had a loss of greater
than 40 dB in the better ear. Table 1 summarizes participant characteristics.

Procedure
The narrative task was one of a battery of measures
administered at Time 4 in the longitudinal study previously described (Chapman et al., 1991, 1998). Administration of all assessment measures was completed by
two certified speech-language pathologists (doctoral students). Narratives were audio (Sony TCM-5000 EV audio recorder with external Sound Grabber mike) and
Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1149

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Participant characteristics.
Down
syndrome
(n = 31)

Mental-age
matched
(n = 31)

Syntaxmatched
(n = 28 )

MLUmatched
(n = 27)

18;10
(4;6)
12;2-26;10

5;6
(1;6)
2;35-8

4;9
(1.4)
2;3-7;8

3;9
(1;11)
2;3-8;6

MA-SBa
SD
Range

5;8
(1;9)
2;5-10

5;8
(1;8)
3;7-10;1

4;9
(1;10)
2;9-12;4

4;2
(2;3)
2;3-9;9

TACL-Rb
SD
Range

4;11
(1;4)
2;8-8.0

6;6
(1;11)
3;5-9;9

4;11
(1;3)
2;10-9;9

4;5
(2;4)
2;9-9;9

MLUc
SD
Range

4.36
(1.87)
1.26-9.06

Age (years;
months)
SD
Range

6.84
5.86
(1.97)
(2.35)
3.47-12.68 2.93-12.25

4.64
(2.0)
2.21-9.75

Mean age equivalent from Stanford Binet Subtests: Pattern Analysis
and Bead Memory
b
Age equivalent from the Test of Auditory Comprehension of Language-
Revised
c
Mean Length of Utterance based on a 12-min conversational
language sample
a

video recorded (Panasonic WV 3260 video camera with
an external solar powered microphone) and subsequently
transcribed and entered in Systematic Analysis of Language Transcript (SALT) computer software (Miller &
Chapman, 1992).
The narrative task consisted of watching a brief silent video, The Pear Film (Chafe, 1980), with an examiner. This black-and-white film is approximately 6.5 min
long and depicts the story of a boy who steals a basket of
pears from an unsuspecting pear picker (see Appendix A
for film summary). Selection of a nonverbal stimulus provided a shared point of reference for each participant and
allowed for an investigation of the understanding of the
relationships between events that was not restricted by
auditory memory difficulties. Following a viewing of the
film, a second examiner entered the room, and the participant was asked to tell this examiner about the movie
he or she had just viewed. Participants were unaware
that the second examiner was familiar with the film. If
the participant hesitated at any point, the second examiner was encouraged to continue using open-ended
prompts such as "Can you tell me more about the movie?"
or "What else happened in that movie?"

Analyses of Event Structure
Event structure was measured by tallying the number of events each participant included in his or her
narrative. The film was initially divided into a set of
1150

idea units reflecting all components of the event. To create an analysis tool reflecting a range of possible events
that could be recalled, the narratives of 20 adults (Chafe,
1980) were analyzed, and all common and unique events
recorded. From this list, those event items included in
the narrative retellings of at least 75% of the sample
were used to create the scoring measure (Appendix A).
Each participant's narrative was analyzed using the
event checklist, with a point given for each idea unit
included in the event retelling, for a maximum of 55
possible points. As the focus of this level of analysis was
a participant's underlying representation/understanding of the event, utterances were not penalized for errors in linguistic structure or cohesion. For example, if
a participant included an idea unit that contained a linguistic error of syntax (e.g., "Him picks pears") or inappropriate referential first mention (e.g., "He was picking pears"), credit was still given for the idea unit
reflected. Additionally, more than one idea unit could be
represented in a given phrase or sentence (e.g., "The
man picking pears saw the boy on the bike"). Finally,
single-word utterances were credited when it was possible to relate the word to an idea unit. For example, in
the utterance fall, the participant was credited with the
idea unit "boy falls off bike."
Subsequently, event structure was further analyzed
by examining the types of events recalled. Of interest
was the inclusion of causal relationships, inferences, and
characters depicted in the film. Narratives from adults'
retellings in the original study by Chafe (1980) were
reviewed, and all causal relationships, inferences, and
characters identified. Two physical causal relationships,
both relating to the boy's falling off the bike, were identified: that the girl's passing on the bike caused the boy
to fall (either because of distraction or the possibility of
physical interaction) and that the physical hitting of a
rock caused the boy's bike to tip over and fall to the
ground. Additionally, two inferences were identified as
important to an overall understanding of the film: that
the boy stole the pears from the pear picker and that
the pear picker was confused when he noticed his pears
missing and saw three boys walk by eating pears. Finally, there were six characters who participated in at
least one episode that could be mentioned by the child:
pear picker, boy, girl, group of boys, man with goat, goat.
Each narrative was analyzed for these events, and an
individual score was given for each of the three variables. Preliminary analyses completed to evaluate developmental sensitivity of these variables revealed significant correlations between chronological age of the
typically developing children and each measure of event
structure (total utterances, total events, inferences, and
characters), with the exception of causal relationships
for which the relationship with chronological age was
nonsignificant.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Analyses of Linguistic Skills
Linguistic Devices
Linguistic analyses of narrative transcripts included
measures of lexical diversity and syntactic complexity.
Scores were generated using the SALT program for the
following variables: mean length of utterance in morphemes (MLU) and number of different words (NDW).
Number of different words is a measure of semantic or
lexical diversity (Miller & Chapman, 1992).

Cohesion
A second analysis examined participants' use of
intersentential connections, or cohesion. The use of cohesive devices was coded in two categories: reference
(validity of referential first mention and subsequent
valid and invalid use of personal, demonstrative, and
comparative reference), as well as use of conjunctives
(additive, temporal, causal, and adversative markers).
Referential first mentions were initially judged as valid
or invalid based on whether the referent was clear given
the information shared up to that point in the narrative
(see Appendix B). All items judged as invalid referential
first mentions were further coded into one of three categories: errors of definite article (i.e. the boy, when this
character had not been previously introduced), errors
in pronoun use (i.e., He picked pears, when the protagonist referred to had not been previous introduced), or
errors of comparison (i.e., "One other boy," when no other
boy(s) had been introduced up to that point in the narrative).
Following coding of referential first mention, subsequent references throughout the text were identified
and coded as valid or invalid cohesive ties. Valid cohesive ties, linking utterances to previously introduced
characters or objects, included use of a definite article +
noun (i.e., the boy), pronouns (he was picking), possessive + noun (he rode his bike), possessive pronouns (it
was his); demonstratives (he went to the orchard and
fell there), and comparatives (she saw the other boy).
Invalid cohesive ties included indefinite referent (i.e., a
boy, when the character has already been introduced),
the use of personal reference in which there was confusion regarding the actual referent (i.e., The man and
boy were walking. Then he fell), and demonstrative referent (i.e., they saw him there) in which the location
was unclear.
Analyses of conjunctives consisted of coding all uses
of additive, temporal, causal, and adversative markers.
If the participant used a combination of conjunctions in
a given utterance (e.g., "and then"), only a single code
was given, reflecting the most complex level of conjunctive included in the following hierarchy: additive, temporal, causal, and adversative. All conjunctions used to

create ties between sentences, as well as intrasentence
conjunctions used to conjoin two independent unrelated
clauses, were coded (Appendix B). Conjunctions used to
create coordinated sentences within an utterance were
not considered markers of cohesion (Halliday & Hasan,
1976).

Fluency
Judgments of overall fluency of narratives produced
were completed by examining the presence of mazes.
Mazes, including presence of false starts, repetitions,
and repairs in speech production, were coded and subsequently analyzed in SALT to obtain the following
scores: total number of mazes, percent of utterances with
mazes, average number of words per maze, and ratio of
maze words to total number of words produced.

Reliability
Transcript reliability was completed on the original
project in which narratives were obtained (Chapman et
al., 1991). Portions of the narrative were transcribed as
unintelligible if the transcriber was not able to determine the production after listening three times. Reliability was established by having a second examiner
check each completed transcript and record any disagreements. Disagreements in the transcription check averaged 6.1 per 465 words for controls and 7.8 per 367 words
for the group with Down syndrome, reflecting a disagreement rate of 1.3% and 2% respectively.
Coding reliability for analysis of linguistic skills and
event structure was completed by having a second examiner, a graduate student in communicative disorders
with expertise in narrative development, analyze a random sample of 10% of the narratives. A training procedure was conducted before analyzing the reliability transcripts, which included analyses of practice transcripts
and discussions of judgment and discrepancies. Subsequently, four narratives from each of the four groups
were analyzed for a total of 16 transcripts. Reliability
for coding of event structure using a point-to-point percentage of agreement (McReynolds & Kearns, 1983) was
as follows: total events, 84%; causal relationships, 100%;
inferences, 97%; and characters, 89%. On linguistic variables, reliability coding of measures of cohesion was as
follows: conjunctives, 89 % accuracy, and reference, 88%
accuracy. Coding reliability was not conducted on measures generated by SALT (MLU and NDW).

Results
Statistical analyses were completed using SPSS statistical software, version 8.0. An alpha level of .05 was
maintained for all analyses. A series of MANOVAs was

Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1151

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

completed, comparing the group with DS to each control group in four areas of investigation: event retelling,
linguistic structure, cohesion, and fluency.

Analyses of Event Retelling
Three independent MANOVAs were completed to
compare performance of the group with DS to each
matched control group on the following dependent variables: total number of events and total number of utterances (Table 2). Results revealed no significant group
effect when comparing the group with DS to MA-matched
[F(2, 58) = .795, p > .05] or syntax-comprehensionmatched children [F(2, 3) = 2.471, p > .05]. A comparison to MLU-matched peers revealed a significant group
effect (Pillai's trace) [F(2, 54) = 5.651, p < .01, 2 = .173].
An examination of univariate Fs revealed significant
differences on total number of utterances produced [F(1,
55) = 11.018, p < .01, 2 = .167] as well as total events
recalled [F(1, 55) = 5.311, p < .05, 2 = .088]. Thus, participants with Down syndrome produced significantly
longer narratives and recalled more events overall than
expressive-language-matched children.
Further analyses were conducted to compare the
group with DS and matched control groups on the type/
complexity of events included. Each participant received
individual scores for the following variables: causal relationships, inferences, and characters included in their
narrative. A comparison of group means was not completed because of the proportion of children who received
a score of zero on variables of causal relationships or
inferences, thus limiting the ability to meaningfully interpret group means. Instead, both variables were recoded
into categorical variables (0 = no item mentioned, 1 = 1
or 2 items mentioned), and a series of chi-square analyses was completed. Although the proportion of children
with DS who included causal relationships was not significantly different than that for any matched group,
Table 2. A comparison of group means (and standard deviations
in parentheses) on measures of event structure for children with
Down syndrome and matched control groups.

Measures
of macro
structure

Down
syndrome
(n = 31)

MA-matched
group
(n = 31)

Syntaxmatched
group
(n = 28 )

MLUmatched
group
(n = 27)

Total events

7.00
(5.76)

8.16
(5.09)

5.46
(3.79)

3.89*
(4.48)

Total utterances

11.06
(8.20)

11.06
(4.92)

7.11
(4.25)

5.33**
(4.17)

*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001 - Comparison to group with Down
syndrome only.

1152

there was a significant difference between the group with
DS and expressive-language-matched peers on mention
of inferences (2 = 4.391, p < .05), favoring the group
with DS. Finally, the number of characters mentioned
was analyzed using ANOVA, and a significant main effect was found [F(3, 114) = 4.944, p < .01]. Post hoc comparisons using Tukey HSD, however, revealed no significant differences between participants with DS and
any matched group.

Linguistic Devices
Group means and standard deviations for dependent measures are presented in Table 3. To compare
Table 3. Group means (and standard deviations in parentheses) on
linguistic measures for group with Down syndrome and matched
controls.

Down
syndrome
(n = 31)

MA-matched
group
(n = 31)

Syntaxmatched
group
(n = 28 )

MLUmatched
group
(n = 27)

32.55
(23.75)

47.65*
(22.22)

30.50
(16.75)

21.74
(22.05)

MLUa

5.87
(2.59)

9.27*
(3.28)

8.50***
(2.5)

6.47
(3.18)

Total connective

5.89
(6.28)

8.48
(6.21)

5.28
(4.41)

3.27
(4.32)

Linguistic
measures
Different words

Average
connectives

.39
(.29)

.69**
(.44)

.61*
(.33)

.38
(.39)

Percent correct
first mention

.52
(.26)

.75***
(.25)

.65
(.27)

.64
(.34)

Percent correct
cohesive tiesb

.88
(.21)

.85
(.23)

.80
(.20)

.88
(.24)

Total mazes

6.90
(8.02)

7.19
(5.19)

4.75
(4.54)

2.96**
(3.46)

% Utterances
with mazes

.37
(.23)

.45
(.20)

.49
(.38)

.40
(.30)

Avg. word
per maze

1.31
(.92)

1.78*
(.77)

1.63
(.73)

1.39
(1.20)

Maze words as
percent of total
wordsc

.12
(.008)

.12
(.006)

.13
(.009)

1.23
(4.06)

MANOVA comparing linguistic measures: number of different words
and MLU
b
MANOVA comparing cohesive measures: total connectives, average
connective, percent correct first mention, and percent correct cohesive
ties
c
MANOVA comparing fluency measures: total mazes, percent of
utterances with mazes, average words per maze, and maze words as
a percent of total words
a

*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001. Comparison to group with Down
syndrome only.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

performance on the linguistic measures, a series of 2 x 2
multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) was completed using two groups (DS + control group) as the fixed
factor and linguistic measures of average length of utterance in morphemes (MLU) and number of different
words as dependent variables. A comparison of the group
with DS and MA-matched children revealed a significant multivariate group effect (Pillai's Trace) [F(2, 59) =
11.837, p < .001, 2 = .286]. Univariate tests revealed
significant differences on both measures of MLU [F(1,
60) = 22.503, p < .001, 2 = .273] and number of different words produced [F(1, 60) = 6.687, p < .05, 2 = .100].
A significant multivariate group effect was also observed
when the group with DS was compared to the syntaxcomprehension-matched control group [F(2, 56) = 15.366,
p < .001, 2 = .354], with univariate tests again revealing significant differences between the two groups on
MLU [F(1, 57) = 16.199, p < .001, 2 = .221] only. Although a comparison with the expressive-languagematched group revealed a significant group effect [F(2,
55) = .760, p = .001, 2 = .220], all univariate Fs were
nonsignificant.

Cohesion
A second series of 2 (DS + control group) x 4 (cohesive measures) MANOVAs was completed to determine
if the group with DS differed from any control group on
use of cohesive devices (Table 3). Dependent variables
included measures of total number of connectives produced in narratives, average number of connectives per
utterance, percent of referents that were introduced correctly on first mention, and subsequent percent correct
cohesive ties. Results (Pillai's trace) revealed significant
group effects when comparing the group with DS and
MA-matched children [F(4, 51) = 4.810, p < .01, 2 =
.274], with univariate Fs indicating that the MAmatched group produced a significantly higher average
number of connectives per utterance [F(1, 54) = 8.495, p
> .01, 2 = .135] and a greater percent of correct referential first mentions [F(1, 54) = 11.523, p < .001, 2 = .176].
Comparison of the DS group to the syntax-matched
group again revealed a multivariate group effect [F(4,
47) = 6.155, p < .001, 2 = .112]. The syntax-matched
group produced a significantly greater number of
connectives per utterance than the group with DS [F(1,
50) = 6.326, p > .05, 2 = .112]. A final comparison with
the expressive language-matched group revealed no significant difference on any cohesive measures [F(4, 44) =
.089, p > .05].

Fluency
Results of maze analyses were compared using
MANOVA, with children with DS + control group as the
fixed factors and total mazes, percent of utterances with

mazes, average words per maze, and mazes words as
percent of total number of words as dependent variables
(Table 3). Results of multivariate analyses revealed significant group effects in comparing participants with
Down syndrome to MA-matched [F(4, 57) = 6.178, p >
.001, 2 = .302] and syntax-matched peers [F(4, 54) =
4.50, p < .01, 2 = .250]. Univariate analyses revealed
significant differences in comparison to the MA group
only on average words per maze [F(1, 60) = 5.041, p <
.05, 2 = .078]. Finally, a significant group effect [F(1,
53) = 2.811, p < .05, 2 = .175] was observed in comparing the group with DS to expressive-language-matched
peers. Univariate analyses revealed that the group with
DS produced significantly more mazes [F(1, 56) = 5.602,
p < .05, 2 = .091] than the expressive-language-matched
group.

Relationship of Event Structure and
Measures of Language and Cognition
A series of multiple regression analyses was completed to determine how well scores on the dependent
variable, total events recalled, were predicted by performance on measures of expressive language and cognition. Stanford Binet subtests were entered individually, with Pattern Analysis as the first variable in Model
I. Subsequently, Bead Memory and MLU were entered
into the equation. Table 4 displays variables of R square
change and significant F change after forced entry of
each variable in the model. For the group with DS, the
model accounted for 53% of the overall variance. Pattern Analysis entered as the first variable accounted for
a significant portion of variance, which did not significantly increase with the addition of Bead Memory as
Table 4. Multiple regression analyses for group with Down
syndrome and typically developing children, with total events
recalled as dependent variable.

Down syndrome
(n = 31)
Variables
entered

Typically
developing children
(n = 84)

R square
change

Sign F
change

R square
change

Sign F
change

Model I
Pattern Analysis
Bead Memory
MLU

.252
.003
.277

.005**
.736
.001***

.521
.037
.026

.001***
.011*
.029*

Model II
MLU
Pattern Analysis
Bead Memory

.517
.014
.001

.001***
.379
.855

.310
.247
.026

.001***
.001***
.029*

*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001

Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1153

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

variable two. Entry of MLU as variable three, however,
made a significant contribution--greater than that accounted for by either cognitive subtest. Comparatively,
in a second analysis in which the level of entry of language and cognitive measures was reversed, MLU accounted for a significant portion of variance, with no
other variable contributing significantly to the variance
in the model.
In the same series of regression analyses with children from the control groups (n = 84), Model I accounted
for .57% of the overall variance on the dependent variable, total events recalled. Although Pattern Analysis
again accounted for a large, significant portion of the
overall variance, the addition of Bead Memory as variable two was significant as well, as was MLU as variable three. Similar findings were observed in the revised
order of entry in Model II, with MLU as the first variable accounting for a significant portion of variance and
with significant contributions to variance made by the
addition of Pattern Analysis and Bead Memory.

Discussion
The purpose of this project was to compare the relationship between nonverbal cognition and linguistic skill
to the content and form of narratives of children and
adolescents with Down syndrome. It was initially hypothesized that performance on measures of event
content would be commensurate with nonverbal cognitive functioning in participants with Down syndrome,
whereas specific deficits in expressive language would
result in the use of linguistic structures and cohesive
devices that were disparate from the complexity of the
event content. Findings support both these hypotheses,
suggesting a dissociation between linguistic and cognitive aspects of narratives in this population of children.

Event Retelling
Participants with Down syndrome produced mean
event scores that were significantly higher than those
of the expressive-language-matched peers, with actual
scores most similar to the MA-matched group. Additionally, participants with Down syndrome produced narratives that were significantly longer than those of both
the syntax-matched and expressive-language-matched
groups. In addition, their narratives were significantly
more likely to express inferential relationships than the
group matched for expressive language. These findings
support our initial hypothesis that difficulties experienced by persons with Down syndrome in narrative exchanges may be a function of a limited ability to map
linguistic structures on to a more complex understanding of relationships among events. Appendix C provides
1154

sample narratives of participants with Down syndrome
and matched control peers, exemplifying qualitative differences in linguistic structure of narratives that contain similar content.
In addition to a hypothesis regarding actual frequency of events recalled, we also anticipated differences
among groups in the types of events included. As the
understanding and expression of causal relationships
and inferences are dependent upon complex mental representations of events, we anticipated that participants
with DS would be more likely to include causal relationships and inferences in their narrative retellings
than either language-matched group because of higher
average nonverbal cognition in the group with DS. Additionally, as research suggests developmental increases
in length of narrative and inclusion of characters with
age, we anticipated that mean scores on each of these
variables would be greater for participants with DS than
language-matched peers. Overall narrative length (excluding mazes) was greater for participants with DS than
for either the syntax-comprehension-matched or MLUmatched children. Additionally, participants with DS
verbally expressed inferences from the film more frequently than children matched for expressive language
age only. There were no differences between the group
with DS and any matched group on mean number of
characters included or causal relationships expressed.
These findings suggest that the group with DS possessed
a more complex level of understanding of the relationships among events. As the group with DS was significantly older than children matched for expressive language, participants likely brought a greater level of world
knowledge to the narrative task--knowledge critical to
understanding inferential information. These findings
contrast somewhat with previous research that has found
poorer performance by children with DS on measures of
narrative structure (Kay-Raining Bird & Chapman,
1994; Reilly et al., 1990). However, this study differed
from previous projects by using a nonverbal task, thus
reducing the issue of auditory memory, as well as by
matching mental-age peers on nonverbal cognition
rather than a combined (verbal and nonverbal) performance IQ, in which the linguistic limitations in persons
with DS likely reduce their combined score.
Interestingly, few children in any group included
causal relationships in their narratives, suggesting that
this variable was not a sensitive measure of narrative
complexity in this context. In that the cause-effect relationships in this film were physical (e.g., boy hit the rock
and fell off the bike; boy turned to look at the girl and hit
the rock), narrators may not have viewed it as necessary
to explicitly describe the sequence of these causal events.
Because the narrative task was presented nonverbally
and was not accompanied by comprehension questions,
we cannot speak to the issue of whether cause-effect

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

relationships or inferences were understood by children
but just not verbalized in productive narratives.

Linguistic Structure of Narratives
The fact that MA-matched children produced a significantly higher proportion of referential first mentions
correctly than participants with DS further supports
research documenting difficulties in referential communication in persons with mental retardation (Abbeduto,
Short-Myerson, Benson, Dolish, & Weissman, 1998;
Kernan & Sabsay, 1987). In referential communication,
the task is twofold: The speaker must determine what
information is already accessible to the listener, as well
as linguistically encode information for the listener appropriate to information that is or is not known. Although the inappropriate use of definite referents or
pronouns as referential first mention by persons with
DS contributes to the lack of narrative coherence, it does
not necessarily arise from failure to accurately presuppose listener's status. It could also be a function of inadequate linguistic means for encoding new and old information (Kernan & Sabsay, 1987). Interestingly, the
groups did not differ in the proportion of appropriate
references to characters and events throughout the text
using cohesive ties (averaging 80%). However, this measure conceals the absolute differences in frequency of
successful ties, which increased developmentally.
Finally, although participants with DS produced a
higher number of mazes overall than the expressivelanguage-matched group, this finding is likely a function of the significantly longer narratives produced in
the group with DS rather than true differences in fluency in favor of expressive-language-matched children.
This hypothesis is supported in that no differences were
observed between the group with DS and any matched
group on percent of utterances with mazes or maze words
as a percent of total words.

Relationship of Nonverbal Cognition
and Language to Narrative Skills
Results of regression analyses indicated that language and cognitive measures predicted total events
recalled for both groups of participants. For the group
with DS, the variance accounted for by MLU matched
or exceeded that of nonverbal cognition, regardless of
order of entry. Although it was predicted that nonverbal
cognition would account for the greatest proportion of
variance on the dependent variable, this finding is likely
due to the variance shared by these two variables, as
reflected in the regression analyses (see Table 4). These
results illustrate the difficulty of separating linguistic
skills from nonverbal cognition in assessment of event

structure, with the ability to express events best predicted by the interaction of nonverbal cognition and
MLU. MLU was a significant predictor of events recalled
for typically developing children as well, with a roughly
equivalent proportion of variance attributed to nonverbal cognitive skills regardless of order of entry. The equitable distribution of variance accounted for by MLU
and nonverbal cognition for typically developing children may be a function of larger sample size (n = 87) or
possible differences in the strength of the relationship
between MLU and nonverbal cognition in this population of children.

Limitations of the Study
Although the use of the Pear Story film provided a
nonverbal shared point of reference to elicit event narratives from participants, it also has several limitations
related to variables of interest in this project. Although
we were interested in analyzing the complexity of the
type of events children included, such as causal relationships and inferences, the limited differences among
groups of varying cognitive and language abilities on
these measures suggests the frequency and complexity
of these instances were not great enough to be highly
sensitive to developmental change. Additionally, although measures of event content provided a sufficient
and sensitive means of measuring children's representation of the event, an understanding of the disparity
between this nonverbal aspect of narrative ability and
linguistic expression would have been strengthened further by the addition of comprehension questions following the narrative retelling.

Clinical Implications
Results from this project suggest the importance of
varying the complexity of narrative input to children
and adolescents with Down syndrome, both orally and
in texts. Although the importance of increasing productive language by providing language models that extend
slightly beyond a child's MLU is acknowledged, providing narrative input and demands that require higher
levels of cognitive organization may be important to continue to extend the ability of children with Down syndrome to create mental representations of increasing
complexity.
These results also underscore the need to attend to
content of narratives as well as linguistic structure. Eliciting narratives around a shared point of reference is
one strategy that enables analyses at the linguistic level,
as well as an understanding of the relationships between
events. Thus, the use of videos and films, storybooks,
and shared experiences are all appropriate stimuli for

Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1155

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

eliciting narrative productions. Additionally, incorporating comprehension measures with reduced language
processing and output demands may also provide some
insight into these two aspects of narrative skill. Finally,
these results suggest the importance of targeting the
clear linguistic deficits in lexical diversity, sentence
structure, and referential mention in intervention with
children with Down syndrome.
Narrative abilities in children with Down syndrome
present a complex picture, with language-production
abilities potentially obscuring the child's conceptualization of a narrative event. In light of this disparate relationship, it is critical that we select narrative tasks that
allow for measurement of these two aspects of skill.
Additionally, the critical role narrative competence plays
in social exchanges and academic success suggests the
need to continue to bridge the disparity between the way
children and adolescents with Down syndrome understand events in their world and their ability to share
this knowledge with others.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported in part by the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development PostDoctoral Fellowship (T32 HD07489) awarded to the
Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, and to the first
author; and by grants from the National Society for Down
Syndrome and the National Institute of Health (RO1HD23353) awarded to the second author. The helpful
comments of Rose Sevcik, Mabel Rice, and several anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.

References
Abbeduto, L., Benson, G., Short, K., & Dolish, J. (1995).
Effects of sampling context on the expressive language of
children and adolescents with mental retardation. Mental
Retardation, 33, 289-288.
Abbeduto, L., Short-Myerson, K., Benson, G., Dolish, J.,
& Weissman, M. (1998). Understanding referential
expressions in context: Use of common ground by children
and adolescents with mental retardation. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1348-1362.
Baltaxe, C. A. M., & D'Angiola, N. (1992). Cohesion in the
discourse interaction of autistic, specifically languageimpaired, and normal children. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 22, 1-21.
Berman, R. A. (1995). Narrative competence and storytelling
performance: How children tell stories in different contexts.
Journal of Narrative and Life History, 5, 285-313.
Berman, R. A., & Slobin, D. (1994). Relating events in
narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bishop, D. V. M., & Adams, C. (1992). Comprehension
problems in children with specific language impairments:
Literal and inferential meaning. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 35, 119-129.

1156

Boudreau, D. M., & Hedberg, N. L. (1999). A comparison
of early literacy skills in children with specific language
impairment and typically developing peers. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 8, 249-260.
Carrow-Woolfolk, E. (1985). Test of Auditory Comprehension of Language-Revised. Allen, TX: DLM Teaching
Resources.
Chafe, W. L. (1980). The pear stories: Cognitive, cultural
and linguistic aspects of narrative production. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.
Chapman, R. S., Schwartz, S. E., & Kay-Raining Bird,
E. (1991). Language skills of children and adolescents
with Down syndrome: I: Comprehension. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 34, 1106-1120.
Chapman, R. S., Seung, H. K., Schwartz, S. E., & KayRaining Bird, E. (1998). Language skills of children and
adolescents with Down syndrome II: Production deficits.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41,
861-873.
Copmann, K. S. P., & Griffith, P. L. (1994). Event and
story structure recall by children with specific learning
disabilities, language impairments, and normally achieving children. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 23,
231-248.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-Revised. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Ellis Weismer, S. (1985). Constructive comprehension
abilities exhibited by language-disordered children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 28, 175-184.
Griffith, P. L., Ripich, D. N., & Dastoli, S. L. (1986). Story
structure, cohesion, and propositions in story recalls by
learning-disabled and nondisabled children. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 15, 539-555.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in
English. London: Longman Group.
Hedberg, N. L., & Westby, C. E. (1993). Analyzing storytelling skills: Theory to practice. Tucson, AZ: Communication Skill Builders.
Hemphill, L., Picardi, N., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1991).
Narrative as an index of communicative competence in
mildly mentally retarded children. Applied Psycholinguistics, 12, 263-279.
Hudson, J. A., & Shapiro, L. R. (1991). From knowing to
telling: The development of children's scripts, stories, and
personal narratives. In A. McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.),
Developing narrative structure (pp. 89-136). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1985). Language and cognitive
processes from a developmental perspective. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 1, 61-85.
Kay-Raining Bird, E., & Chapman, R. S. (1994). Sequential recall in individuals with Down syndrome. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 1369-1380.
Kemper, S., & Edwards, L. L. (1986). Children's expression of causality and their construction of narratives.
Topics in Language Disorders, 7, 11-20.
Kernan, K. T., & Sabsay, S. (1987). Referential first
mention in narratives by mildly mentally retarded adults.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 8, 336-369.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Lahey, M., & Bloom, L. (1994). Variability and language
learning disabilities. In G. P. Wallach & K. G. Butler
(Eds.), Language learning disabilities in school-aged
children and adolescents (pp. 354-372). New York:
Macmillan College Publishing.

Orsolini, M. (1990). Episodic structure in children's fantasy
narratives: "Breakthrough" to decontextualized discourse.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 5, 53-79.

Liles, B. Z. (1985). Narrative ability in normal and languagedisordered children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 28, 123-133.

Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1991). Linking children's
connective use and narrative macrostructure. In A.
McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.), Developing narrative
structure (pp. 29-53). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Peterson, C. (1990). The who, when, and where of early
narratives. Journal of Child Language, 17, 433-455.

Liles, B. Z. (1987). Episode organization and cohesive
conjunctives in narratives of children with and without
language disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 30, 185-196.

Reilly, J., Klima, E. S., & Bellugi, U. (1990). Once more
with feeling: Affect and language in atypical populations.
Development and Psychopathology, 2, 367-391.

Liles, B. Z., Duffy, R. J., Merritt, D. D., Purcell, S. L.
(1995). Measurement of narrative discourse ability in
children with language disorders. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 38, 415-425.

Roth, F. P., & Spekman, N. (1986). Narrative discourse:
Spontaneously generated stories of learning-disabled
children and normally achieving students. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51, 8-23.

Loveland, K. A., McEvoy, R. E., Tunali, B., & Kelley, M.
L. (1990). Narrative story telling in autism and Down's
syndrome. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 8,
9-23.

Sutton-Smith, B. (1986). The development of fictional
narrative performances. Topics in Language Disorders, 7,
1-10.

Luftig, R. L., & Johnson, R. E. (1982). Identification and
recall of structurally important units in prose by mentally retarded learners. Journal of Mental Deficiency, 86,
495-502.
Marcell, M. M., & Weeks, S. L. (1988). Short-term memory
difficulties in Down's syndrome. Journal of Mental
Deficiency Research, 32, 153-162.

Tager-Flusberg, H. (1995). "Once upon a ribbit": Stories
narrated by autistic children. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 13, 45-59.
Thorndike, R. L., Hagen, E. P., & Sattler, J. M. (1986).
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Fourth Edition.
Chicago, IL: The Riverside Publishing Co.

McReynolds, L. V., & Kearns, K. P. (1983). Single-subject
experimental designs in communicative disorders. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.

Trabasso, T., & Rodkin, P. (1994). Knowledge of goals/
plans: A conceptual basis for narrating Frog Where Are
You? In R. A. Berman & D. I. Slobin (Eds), Relating events
in narrative (pp. 85-108). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Miller, J. (1991). Quantifying productive language impairments. In J. Miller (Ed.), Research on child language
disorders (pp. 189-210). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Trabasso, T., & Van Den Broek, P. (1985). Causal thinking
and the representation of narrative events. Journal of
Memory and Language, 24, 612-630.

Miller, J. F., & Chapman, R. S. (1992). Systematic Analysis
of Language Transcripts (SALT). Madison, WI: Language
Analysis Laboratory, Waisman Center.

van der Lely, H. K. (1997). Narrative discourse in grammatical specific language-impaired children: A modular
language deficit? Journal of Child Language, 24, 221-256.

Miller, P. J., & Sperry, L. L. (1988). Early talk about the
past: The origins of conversational stories of personal
experience. Journal of Child Language, 15, 293-315.

Received April 2, 1999

Nelson, K. (1986). Event knowledge and cognitive development. In K. Nelson (Ed.), Event knowledge: Structure and
function in development (pp. 87-118). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Accepted July 10, 2000
Contact author: Donna Boudreau, PhD, Portland State
University, PO Box 751, Portland, OR 97207-0751. Email:
boudreaud@pdx.edu

Appendix A (page 1 of 2). Idea Units from The Pear Story.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Rooster crows twice
Man on a ladder
Man is picking pears
Climbs down ladder
Puts pears into basket
Picks up fallen pear
Cleans pear with bandana
Goat bleats
Puts bandana on neck
Man comes with goat

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Picker brushes off pants
Climbs back up ladder
Man and goat leave
Goat tries to eat pear
Man resumes picking
Boy comes on bicycle
Boy stops/gets off bike
Begins to take pear
Boy looks at picker
Takes whole basket

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Puts pears on bike
Boy rides away
Pear falls as he is riding
Girl comes on bike
Boy passes the girl
Boy looks at girl
Boy's hat comes off
Boy hits rock
Boy falls off bike
Pears spill

Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1157

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix A (page 2 of 2). Idea Units from The Pear Story.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

Boy gets up/dusts off
Boy pushes up pant leg
Boy hurt his knee
Three boys come along
Boy plays paddle ball
Boys help thief boy up
Boys help pick up pears
Thief boy picks up bike
Boys help put basket on bike

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

One boy throws rock
Thief boy leaves
Three boys walk away
Thief boy is limping
Boy finds hat in road
Boy whistles
Returns hat to thief boy
Thief boy gives pears
Boy shares pears

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

Boys walk/eat pears
Picker descends ladder
Fills basket with pears
Notices/counts baskets
Leans/scratches head
Boys walk by, eat pears
Picker sees boys

Appendix B (page 1 of 2).

Indefinite article + noun: A girl, some boys
Single nouns (one-word utterances): Pears, man

that is, I mean, thus, similarly
Temporal: then, next, after that, previously, finally, at last, soon,
first, next
Causal: so, because, thus, otherwise
Adversative: but, yet, only, except, instead, rather, actually, in
fact

First Mention Errors

Additional Coding Rules

Rules for Coding Referential First Mention
(Adapted from Kernan & Sabsay, 1987)
First Mention Correct

The following are exceptions to invalid first mention errors:

1. When making decisions about appropriateness of
referential first mention, look for examiner prompt(s) prior
to the utterance as type of information exchanged may
alter the appropriateness of linguistic devices used for first
mention.

Part of previously mentioned whole: The basket on the bike.
Possessed item:
The boy rode his bike.
Unique item, typically one of:
The sun, the moon, the
ground

2. An element is identified as a cohesive marker if its
meaning cannot adequately be interpreted by the listener
unless the listener searches outside that sentence/
independent clause for the completed meaning.

Rules for Coding Use of Reference and
Conjunctive (Adapted from Liles, 1985;
Halliday & Hassan, 1976)

3. Do not code an item as a cohesive marker if the information is recoverable within the sentence/clause (i.e., the
boys took their car home). If the referent is within a
different independent clause (i.e., the boy rode the bike
home and then he went to the store), it should be marked
as a cohesive tie.

Definite article + noun: The boy got pears.
Pronoun: He picked some. It fell off the tree.
Comparative: First came the other boy

Valid Cohesive Ties
Personal: Along came a boy. He was riding his bike.
Demonstrative: He was in the orchard and fell there.
Comparative: There were two boys. One was walking and the
other boy was riding a bike.

Invalid Cohesive Ties
Indefinite article: A boy or some man (when have already
introduced these characters).
Personal reference: He walked away (and cannot determine
the referent).
Demonstrative: They saw him over there (and can not determine location).

Conjunctive Categories and Repertoire of
Connective Markers

4. If the child makes an error in pronoun (he for she) but the
referent to which the pronoun is tied is evident, do not
code as error.
5. Omit an exact imitation of an examiner's utterance,
although this utterance may be used to judge the appropriateness of subsequent utterances. Similarly, if the child
repeats an utterance exactly, code on the initial production.
6. If some part of the utterance is unintelligible, restricting
knowledge of the referent, do not code this part of the
utterance (i.e., the XXX or XXX man) UNLESS the unintelligible portion is separated by at least a word and the
referent you are coding is not dependent upon the
unintelligible utterance to determine appropriateness of its
use (i.e., there's a XXX on there)
7. Do not code utterances contained within mazes.

Additive: and, also, nor, and, not, or, else, besides, by the way,

1158

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 43 * 1146-1159 * October 2000

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix B (page 2 of 2).
Rules for Coding Event Content
1. One point should be given for each idea unit included in
the child's retelling.
2. A single utterance can reflect several idea units and should
be scored accordingly.
3. If the child makes a linguistic error, still credit the corresponding idea unit if the content of the expression is
clearly identifiable given knowledge of the film (i.e. The
man picked apples).

4. Credit words that are similar in semantic meaning to the
events occurring in the film (i.e., pears rolled or tipped
versus spilled; boy crashed versus hit or fell).
5. If the child is at a 1-2 word MLU and uses a single word in
an utterance (i.e., pears or man), identify the idea unit
most closely reflected by that utterance.

Appendix C. Sample Narratives.
Group: DS Events: 3 MLU: 4.25
That boy steal apples.
Yeah, and the boys help him put those apples in.
He gives him three apples.
And that's all.
It's a short one.
Group: DS Events: 3 MLU: 6.5
One kid stole the basket of pears.
A kid (uh) stole the basket (away from hi*) away from him.
So he will shared a pears with the (B*)>
He shared the pears with the boys.
A girl got (a) pears too.
She take the pears away.
That's it.
Group: DS Events: 8 MLU: 6.57
(W*) A (b* l*) little XX start watching.
A man was (do uh) picking pears on the tree.
Yeah, four of them.
(N* an* so* uh some some boy um) some boy taked (it) all of
the pears.
He steal the whole basket.
(And he goes) and (he, he) he went in on the bike.
And he put it in the basket and then he put it on the bike to
hear why the XX way in the walk.
He started to ran over the walk and kicked her.
XXX (she's she's) she's X boys XX picked the pears.
They picked them up.
And they put them back in the basket again.
(N* a* A* Th* Th*) This was a real funny part.
(Um) and (it uh uh the bas*) the basket is going to be but (that)
right back to the ground.
And the boys are all gone.
And the man was looking for all the pears XX.

Group: MA-Matched Events: 3 MLU: 5.80
First this guy (uh) was picking (uh) some fruit from the tree.
(Um) then a kid stealed it.
They steal but just three.
They just steal three and (uh)>
(That) and then he was looking and {then was um} then he was
looking at them.
And then it was done.
Some fruit.
He stole one big pail of it.
They stole three of it.
(Then they looked) then the man who was picking looked at the
X and XX.
And (the) the man (uh) was looking for all the paper on XX.
Group: MA-Matched Events: 8 MLU: 12.09
Well, (it w*) it was a bout a boy and (um) his dad was picking
pears off the pear tree.
And (um he um he) he put them in a bucket and (he wanted he
wanted to s*) he wanted to go down to the ocean so well he
fell on his bike.
And (um) these kids came along and they picked up all the
pears that fell out.
(And um) and he was so grateful that he gave them three
pears.
Because there were three people then he gave them three
pears.
(And and then um) and then he gave them his hat.
And he said "thanks".
(he he) he rode along again.
And then when his dad (when they) saw that they had pears,
he got really mad.
(And) and then that was the end.

Boudreau & Chapman: Narratives in Children With Down Syndrome

1159

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 02/21/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

