JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001
Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

CHILDREN'S PRODUCTION
AND COMPREHENSION OF
POLITENESS IN REQUESTS
Relationships to Behavioral
Adjustment in Middle
Childhood
ROBERT PEDLOW
Telstra Corporation

ROGER WALES
Latrobe University

ANN SANSON
Melbourne University

This study investigated the production and comprehension of requests by 10-year-old
children with and without hostile-aggressive and anxious-fearful behavior problems. A
representative sample of 100 children completed tasks involving the production and comprehension of politeness in requests. The results from the production task showed that
when the children were explicitly asked to ask politely they primarily used "please" to
indicate politeness, whereas face-saving politeness was marked by the use of question
directives and hints. Children with hostile-aggressive and comorbid behavior problems
were less likely than comparison group children to use question directives and hints in
some social contexts, whereas children with anxious-fearful behavior problems were the
same as the comparison group. The results of the comprehension task showed that children without behavior problems were more likely to judge nonpolite requests (which did
not contain any politeness features) to be effective, compared with children with behavior
problems.

This study investigated two major research questions concerning
children's production and comprehension of politeness in requests. The
first question of interest was to look at children's understanding of
politeness in requests as a way of speaking or register compared with
their understanding of the functional significance of different request
forms, that is, how specific features of language work in specific

AUTHORS' NOTE: The work described in this article was completed by the first author in
fulfillment of the requirements for the Ph.D. in the Department of Psychology, Melbourne
University, in 1998.
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 20 Nos. 1 & 2, March/June 2001 23-60
(c) 2001 Sage Publications, Inc.

23

24

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

situations (Robinson, 1974). This was studied by comparing children's
understanding of what it means to ask politely with their understanding of the effects of the relationship between the linguistic form and
social context of requests. The findings were used to compare two alternative conceptualizations of politeness, namely, the face-saving model
proposed by Brown and Levinson (1978, 1987) and the social normative concept of politeness described by Ferguson (1976). The second
problem of interest was to explore the effects of hostile-aggressive and
anxious-fearful behavioral adjustment problems on children's ability
to produce and comprehend politeness in requests.
The study of children's production and comprehension of polite
forms of language has received considerable attention in recent years
(Snow, Perlman, Gleason, & Hooshyar, 1990; see also Baroni & Axia,
1989; Bates, 1983; Ervin-Tripp, 1976, 1977). The development of
requesting is an area of politeness that has received significant attention, because any speech act that has clear interactive consequences
may be seen as a request for a response of a certain kind (Labov &
Fanshel, 1977, p. 93). Thus, the handling of requests is a key aspect of
conversational competence, particularly in a developmental context
where the child speaker is frequently at a power disadvantage compared with the hearer. Furthermore, according to Labov and Fanshel
(1977), we find that most of these requests are employed to accomplish
other purposes, which strongly affect the social and emotional relations of the persons involved. Thus, requests have been identified as
having a significant social interactional role.
A number of researchers have investigated children's use and understanding of politeness in requests. Studies by Blum-Kulka (1990)
and Snow et al. (1990) of children's use of requests in family settings
suggested that for children, a high level of directness is considered
polite or at least not impolite when directed toward older, more powerful others within the family. Becker (1986) reported that 10-year-olds
use a variety of features to distinguish nice versus bossy requests. The
features that they made use of included grammatical form, use of the
word please, and request for an object compared with other requests.
Becker also found that children judged as bossy any direct requests
from low-status others. Wilkinson, Wilkinson, Spinelli, and Chiang
(1984) showed that a number of factors influence children's judgments
regarding the appropriateness of different request strategies, including indirectness, use of please, requests for object versus action, and
age of the intended hearer. Wilkinson et al. (1984) also asked the children to explain the reasons for their judgments. Factors that significantly influenced the explanations that children produced included
age of the child, linguistic ability, form of the request, and use of please.
Garton and Pratt (1990) found that 8- to 12-year-old children's ratings
of the politeness, effectiveness, and likelihood of use of different request
forms were highly correlated with effectiveness, except when the child

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

25

was addressing another child of the same age. They also found that
children did not differentiate between hearers based on age; that is,
their ratings did not vary with the age of the intended hearer. In a similar study, Bernicot (1991) found that 5-, 7-, and 10-year-old children's
explanations for the appropriateness of requests were primarily
related to the request form. She also reported that there was an age
effect; that is, the number of explanation types and length of explanations increased with the age of the child.
Ervin-Tripp (1976) showed that one important element of the politeness of requests is their overall form. Following Garvey (1984), the
request types that Ervin-Tripp identified can be ordered from least to
most direct:
hint (e.g., I'm very thirsty),
question directive (e.g., Do you know how to do this sum?),
permission directive (e.g., Could I have a glass of water?),
embedded imperative (e.g., Could you get me a glass of water?),
need/want statement (e.g., I need a drink), and
imperative (e.g., Give me the ball).
Research by a number of other authors (e.g., James, 1978) has provided
further support for this ordering. Another very basic strategy to indicate politeness in requests is the use of please. A number of studies
(e.g., Gleason, Perlman, & Blank, 1984) have confirmed that children
begin to use this strategy to indicate politeness around 2 to 3 years.
Most of the research on children's politeness has followed the broad
approach to linguistic politeness outlined by Brown and Levinson
(1978, 1987). Their face-saving model viewed linguistic politeness as a
means for the strategic avoidance of conflict in social interactions.
However, Watts, Ide, and Ehlich (1990) noted that this view of politeness does not match the everyday usage of politeness. Linguistic politeness, in common with many other theoretical constructs in psychology
(e.g., intelligence), began as a lay concept that has been refined and
elaborated into a theoretical construct (Ide, 1989). The everyday usage
of politeness refers to a socially acceptable or normative way of speaking (Fraser, 1990). Watts et al. (1990) noted that researchers in politeness have barely addressed the distinction between what they refer
to as first-order politeness (i.e., the everyday sense of the term) and
second-order or theoretical models of politeness.
The difference between these two senses of politeness is of particular interest in the study of children's politeness because there is evidence that parents explicitly teach and are concerned about their children speaking politely. However, most of what parents teach explicitly
seems to relate to the use of particular forms (e.g., saying please and
thank you) (Becker & Smenner, 1986; see also Gleason et al., 1984).
This finding suggests that much of children's exposure to direct

26

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

socialization in politeness may be to everyday politeness rather than
politeness as a means of conflict avoidance in social interactions.
Watts et al. (1990) distinguished between first-order or everyday
politeness and second-order or theoretical models of politeness. Fraser
(1990) proposed a definition of first-order politeness as a social norm or
socially acceptable way of speaking, stating that "there are standards
of behavior in society and in any age by which the speaker is deemed to
have spoken correctly or not" (p. 223). Fraser noted that, with the exception of some early work in linguistics (e.g., Mathews, 1943), everyday politeness has been largely ignored by researchers. For the current
research, everyday politeness was defined in terms of children's understanding of what it means to ask in a usual, polite, or rude way. This is
likely to be a familiar concept to children from parental socialization in
politeness (Becker, 1990).
There has been in practice surprisingly little research directly
investigating the association between social behavior and linguistic
politeness (Tomasello, 1992). Robinson's work on mothers' answers to
children's questions looked at the ways in which mothers socialized
children in the use of different linguistic forms and variation with
respect to social class (Robinson, 1972). The act of requesting has been
identified as a key element of linguistic interactions (Labov & Fanshel,
1977) and one with important social interaction implications. Furthermore, the ability to use requests appropriately in social interactions
represents an important sociolinguistic skill that children must
acquire (Becker, 1986). Camras, Pristo, and Brown (1985) showed that
the style of the requests children attributed to angry speakers was significantly less polite than that attributed to happy or neutral speakers.
This suggests that children understand the relationship between
request style and the affective relationship between participants, and
provides some evidence of a direct linkage between request style and
broader aspects of social interaction. This suggests that it may be of interest to explore the ways in which children with different levels of
social adjustment vary their requests to mark the different aspects of
linguistic politeness in their interactions.
Only two studies were located that directly investigated the production and comprehension of linguistic politeness by children with different levels of social adjustment. One study by Bates and Silvern (1977)
looked at the relationship between IQ, social adjustment, and comprehension and production of polite speech in preschool children. For each
child, they administered the Peabody IQ test, obtained teacher ratings
of social adjustment, and tested production and comprehension of
polite speech in a game situation. The game required children to "ask"
a hand puppet politely (production) or to decide which of two hand puppets "asked" the most politely (comprehension). Bates and Silvern
found that comprehension of politeness was significantly related to
individual differences in social adjustment, but that production was

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

27

not. They concluded that, because production of polite forms was not
related to their measure of social adjustment, the politeness indices
and the teacher ratings of social adjustment reflected some common
underlying difference in the children's social sensitivity.
Becker, Whitaker, and Gesten (1992) investigated requests and
rerequests in normal and emotionally disturbed children. The test situation used in this research was set up in the school and involved the
experimenter and a confederate whom the child was asked to make a
request to. A key finding was that requests by the emotionally disturbed group did not differ from requests by the normal comparison
group on either degree of directness or use of semantic softeners or
aggravators. A couple of issues need to be noted regarding this study.
First, the emotionally disturbed group comprised a heterogeneous
group of children who are likely to have had a range of behavioral
adjustment problems of varying severity. Second, the authors note that
the situation used did not generate a wide range of variation in the
requesting strategies produced. Overall, the experimenters commented that it would be premature to conclude that children's choice of
an appropriate request is unrelated to their social competence. The
current research addressed the methodological issues with this study
by using groups of children with well-defined behavioral problems and
presenting a range of request situations.
According to Brown and Levinson's model, politeness is a function of
the linguistic form and the relationship between the speaker and
hearer. Thus, in different contexts the same linguistic form will convey
varying levels of politeness (e.g., an unnecessary level of indirectness
between equals or intimates may convey sarcasm). For the current
research, it is argued that politeness theory essentially predicts a specific interaction between social context dimensions and use of politeness (face-redressive strategies); that is, more face-redressive strategies should be used when making requests to others who are more
powerful, distant, or both and when making requests that are more
imposing. Furthermore, politeness theory makes a strong claim that
this interaction should be invariant across all speakers. The current
research explored the hypothesis that this interaction may vary
between normally developing children and children with different
types of social behavior problems.
The current research followed in significant respects from the
approach used by Becker (1986) and by Wilkinson et al. (1984) in that it
investigated children's ability to produce and evaluate requests differing in politeness. To address the research questions discussed, a
selected group of 100 children from the Australian Temperament Project (ATP) respondent population (Prior, Sanson, & Oberklaid, 1989)
was tested in their own homes. The children completed tasks assessing
their ability to produce and evaluate politeness in requests.

28

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

The production task had two major objectives. The first was to examine the ways that children varied the styles of their requests in relation
to the way of speaking (i.e., ordinary speech, polite speech, and rude
speech) and the immediate social context (i.e., the power and distance
relationship between the speaker and hearer and the degree of imposition of the request on the hearer). The second objective was to compare
the production of these aspects of politeness by children with and without behavior problems.
The evaluation task explored judgments of the effectiveness of
request strategies in different context conditions by comparison group
children and children with behavior problems, and children's understanding of the social factors involved in using requests appropriately
in social interaction. This study had two major objectives: first, to
examine the effects of immediate social context and politeness features
on children's judgments of the effectiveness of requests; and second, to
examine differences between the evaluations of the effectiveness of different requesting strategies by children without behavior problems
and children with behavior problems. This study also explored children's explanations for their judgments of the effectiveness of different
strategies.

GENERAL METHOD
DESIGN

The children in this study were drawn from the ATP respondent
population. The ATP is a large-scale longitudinal study of the temperament and behavioral development of a group of Victorian children (for
details on sampling and measurement, see Sanson, Prior, & Oberklaid,
1985; for a summary of the project as a whole, see Prior et al., 1989).
The children were between 10 and 11 years of age when they were
interviewed for this study. The age of the children available for this
research was a fixed condition prior to the design of the study, which
represents an unavoidable limitation of using a preexisting sample.
Children of this age without behavior problems would be expected to
have mastered the majority of aspects of politeness. Four groups of
children were selected from the ATP respondent population on the
basis of parents', mainly mothers', ratings of the children on the hostileaggressive and anxious-fearful subscales of the Rutter Childhood Behavior Questionnaire parent form (Rutter, Tizard, & Whitmore, 1970),
at 6.5 and 8 years old.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

29

RESPONDENTS AND PROCEDURE

The Child Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ) scores used for defining
the groups in the study were based on population means for the ATP
sample. Because the ATP is a broadly representative sample of Victorian children (Prior et al., 1989), it was considered that these values
were reasonable estimates of the overall population values. Thus, groups
of children selected on this basis would be expected to show elevated
scores with respect to the overall population of Victorian children.
Comparison group children scored at least half a standard deviation
below the ATP population mean on both the hostile-aggressive and
anxious-fearful subscales at 6.5 and 7 years old. Hostile-aggressive
group children scored at least one standard deviation above the mean
on the hostile-aggressive subscale and half a standard deviation below
the mean on the anxious-fearful subscale, at both ages. Anxious-fearful
group children scored at least one standard deviation above the mean
on the anxious-fearful subscale and half a standard deviation below
the mean on the hostile-aggressive subscale, at both ages. Comorbid
group children scored at least one standard deviation above the mean
on the hostile-aggressive and anxious-fearful subscales at both ages.
Eligible families (i.e., where the child met the behavioral selection
criteria and was still resident in the state of Victoria) were contacted by
mail and telephone follow-up and asked if they wished to take part in
the study. For the comparison group, a random sample of families
where the child met the selection criteria was contacted and asked if
they were willing to take part. For the behavior problem groups, all of
the families where the children met the criteria were contacted. All the
children were tested by the experimenter in their own homes. The visits were scheduled for after school or on weekends. The task set was
designed to fit within a single testing session lasting approximately 1
hour.
Table 1 shows the percentage participation rates; the final numbers
of children in the four groups; their age, gender, socioeconomic status
(SES); and parents' ethnic background and scores on the CBQ
subscales at the time of interview. There was a significant difference in
the gender distribution between groups with more boys in the hostileaggressive and comorbid groups, c2(3) = 17.72, p < .01. There were no
other statistically significant differences between the four groups.
There was a trend toward a lower participation rate for the pure hostileaggressive group compared with the other groups, although this was
not statistically significant.

30

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Table 1
Background Characteristics of Comparison and Behavior Problem Groups
HostileComparison Aggressive

Variable
Participation rates (%)
Group (n)
a
Socioeconomic status (SES)
M
SD
Gender
Male
Female
Ethnicity
Both parents born in Australia
1 or 0 parents born in Australia
b
Child Behavior Questionnaire
Hostile-aggressive
M
SD
Anxious-fearful
M
SD

81
24
3.6
1.2

66
24
4.2
1.4

AnxiousFearful

Comorbid

77
23
3.7
1.1

83
24
4.3
1.2

10
14

20
4

11
12

18
6

20
4

17
7

20
3

18
6

.09
.14

.86
.37

.43
.40

.80
.49

.21
.24

.45
.29

.95
.39

.99
.41

a. Composite score of parents' education and occupation. Scale ranges from 1 (high SES)
to 8 (low SES).
b. Parent report measure at the time of interview.

PRODUCTION TASK STUDY: PRODUCTION
OF POLITENESS STRATEGIES IN REQUESTS
A number of major studies (e.g., Becker, 1986; Wilkinson et al., 1984)
have explored, following Brown and Levinson's model, children's ability to vary the politeness of their requests in response to (a) the power
and distance relationship between the speaker and hearer and (b) the
degree of imposition of the request on the hearer. The current study
began from this point, exploring children's ability to vary their
requests in response to the immediate social context. This study also
extended the research agenda in two major areas, namely the everyday
concept of politeness and the link between politeness and social behavioral adjustment. In summary, this study had three major aims:
1. To investigate politeness variation in children's requests in relation to
the power and distance relationships between the speaker and the
intended hearer and the degree of imposition of the request on the
hearer.
2. To investigate politeness variation in children's requests in relation to
the degree of conventional politeness.
3. To investigate differences between comparison group children and children with behavior problems and between groups of children with

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

31

different behavior problems in their use of politeness in the conditions
listed in the first two aims.

From the previous research in children's politeness and Brown and
Levinson's politeness theory, a general hypothesis was developed
about the relationship between social context and requesting strategies. The hypothesis was that more indirect, less obvious forms would
be used in requests to more powerful and/or distant others and for
requests that imposed more on the other.
Research concerning children with developmental behavior problems has shown that these children experience many difficulties in
their ordinary day-to-day social interactions (e.g., Hymel, Rubin,
Rowden, & LeMare, 1990). Furthermore, relatively little attention has
been given to the linguistic detail of these children's social interactions
and how this compares with children without behavior problems.
Becker et al. (1992) found that requests by a group of emotionally disturbed children did not differ from requests by a normal comparison
group on either degree of directness or use of semantic softeners or
aggravators. Becker et al.'s study did not distinguish between types of
emotional disturbance in the children studied. No research was located
specifically on the politeness skills of children with internalizing or
comorbid behavior problems. There is a range of research evidence that
suggests that children with aggressive behavior problems may show
differences in their ability to use and understand linguistic politeness.
For the current study, the children were presented with two different production tasks: producing appropriate requests in different
social contexts and producing requests with varying levels of everyday
politeness. Varying requesting strategies according to the characteristics of the intended hearer entails a set of knowledge and experience
about social interactions with others. On the other hand, producing
requests with differing levels of everyday politeness is a simpler task.
Thus, it was hypothesized that the hostile-aggressive and comorbid
groups would be less likely to vary their use of politeness strategies in
requests in relation to the social context conditions compared with the
comparison and anxious-fearful groups, and that the four groups
would not differ in their production of everyday politeness.
For outcome measures, this study looked at the overall requesting
strategy and the use of please. The approach adopted for categorization
of requests is based on the approach presented by Ervin-Tripp (1976).
This approach to the categorization of request forms has been adopted
by a number of other researchers (e.g., Bernicot, 1991; James, 1978;
Nippold, Leonard, & Anastopoulos, 1982). For the current study, a more
explicit category was added before need/want statements, which are
referred to as assertions. This was based on an initial visual review of
the transcripts, which showed a small number of requests that all took

32

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

the form "I am using . . ." Request form and use of please were considered to be general indicators of politeness.
The analyses for this study focused on the distinction between
Request Types 1 to 5 (i.e., assertions to permission directives) and
Request Types 6 to 7 (i.e., question directives and hints). One problem
for quantitative research in politeness is the absence of any strong theoretical basis for quantification. The approach adopted here, distinguishing between these two groups of requests, was based on a conceptual difference between these types of requests. The first group
(assertions to permission directives) contains in the request form an
explicitly stated request for a stated object. Question directives are by
definition requests for information (e.g., "Do you know what time it
is?"), which may in practice be a request for the correct time, whereas
hints are not explicit requests of any kind (e.g., "It's getting cold in here,"
a request for the hearer to close the window) (Ervin-Tripp, 1976).
The hypotheses investigated in this study were as follows:
Hypothesis 1: All children's use of different types of requests would vary as a
function of the power and distance relationship between speaker and
hearer and the degree of imposition on the hearer, with less obvious requests used to more powerful or more distant others and for more imposing requests.
Hypothesis 2: The hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups would be less
likely to vary the form of their requests in relation to the social context,
compared with comparison group and anxious-fearful group children.
Hypothesis 3: The use of please would not vary in relation to social context.
Hypothesis 4: Request form would vary in relation to the normative politeness level of requests, with the more indirect/less obvious forms used
most frequently in polite requests, less frequently in usual requests, and
very infrequently in rude requests.
Hypothesis 5: The different groups would not vary in the ways that they
modulated the form of their requests in relation to level of normative politeness.
Hypothesis 6: All children's use of please would vary in relation to the normative politeness level of requests, with please used most frequently in
polite requests, less frequently in usual requests, and very infrequently
in rude requests.
Hypothesis 7: Children with hostile-aggressive behavior problems were expected to be less verbally expressive than children without behavior
problems.

METHOD
DESIGN

The overall design of this study consisted of the following factors:
behavior group, power (age of the hearer: child = low, adult = high), distance (familiarity of the hearer: family member = high, other = low),

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

33

degree of imposition of the request (request for action = high, request
for object = low), manner (usual/polite/rude). The children produced
one request token within each cell of the design. Because there was one
token per cell, it was not feasible to analyze the resulting data matrix
completely in a single analysis. To address this problem, two separate
analyses were conducted, aggregating over manner and power, distance, and rank, respectively. A potential risk of this analysis strategy
was that it was not possible to rule out apparently valid effects in each
of the separate analyses having been caused by small numbers of children producing all of the responses in some conditions. To rule out this
possibility completely, two separate supplementary analyses were conducted. First, a series of preliminary analyses were carried out to
determine whether there were any significant interactions between
the manner dimension and the power, distance, and rank (degree of
imposition) dimensions. No significant interactions were found
between these dimensions.
PROCEDURE

The children were tested individually in their own homes. The set of
tasks in the present study was given as part of the larger series of
tasks, which took about 1 hour to complete. At the beginning of the production tasks, the children were read the following instructions:
Now I am going to read you some descriptions of situations where you
need to ask other people for things. Some of these situations may not
have happened to you exactly but I'd like you to pretend. For each situation I would like you to tell me how you would usually ask. Then I'd like
you to tell me a really polite way to ask. Then I'd like you to tell me a
really rude way to ask.

During this part of the testing sessions, the children wore a clip-on lapel microphone. The experimenter then read the child each of the situations in random order, prompting when necessary:
How would you usually ask?
What would be a polite way of asking?
What would be a rude way of asking?
MATERIALS

The set of tasks consisted of eight hypothetical situations where the
child had to make a request to a specified other. The tasks were presented in random order that was held constant throughout. The complete set of tasks used is shown in the appendix. The intended hearer in
each case was an actual person (the mother, a sibling chosen by the

34

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

child, the child's current teacher, or a classmate chosen by the child).
The situations requiring requests to mother or sibling were set in the
home, whereas the situations requiring requests to the teacher or
classmate were set in the classroom. Although this confounds the
issues of physical context and social distance, it was considered to have
a higher face validity in terms of children's day-to-day experience. For
each hearer the child made two requests, one for a specified object and
the other asking the hearer to do something. Two examples are given
below:
You've got a new board game and you want [name of sibling] to play it
with you. How would you ask [name of sibling] to play it with you?
Mum's just come home with some shopping and you see that she's got
some sweet biscuits and you think that you'd like to have one. How would
you ask your mum for a biscuit?
REQUEST CODING

The tape-recorded sessions with each child were transcribed verbatim by the experimenter. Because the focus of the study was on the linguistic variation in the requests, no attempt was made to transcribe
the prosodic characteristics of the requests, although these clearly convey some significant politeness information. The requests were coded
into seven categories based primarily on those presented by
Ervin-Tripp (1976). Because in practice the great majority of the
responses (approximately 95%, including hesitations and mis-starts)
produced by the children for each item consisted only of a single clearly
identifiable request, relatively little systematic effort went into defining the parsing process. For hesitations and mis-starts, the final version was coded as the request. For the balance, the entire verbal
sequence produced for that item was considered and coded as the
request. Table 2 shows a complete description of the request coding categories used.
The requests were also coded for whether they included please. To
address the question of interrater reliability, a random sample of 25%
of the data was coded using the rules set out above by a second rater.
The second rater was provided with the coding rules and the data, but
was blind with respect to the experimental conditions and the research
hypotheses.
The disagreements between raters when reviewed reflected either
errors or inconsistent applications of the coding rules by one or other of
the raters. The interrater reliability was computed using the kappa
statistic (k = .83, p < .001). This suggests that the coding scheme is reliably classifying a high percentage of the requests produced.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

35

Table 2
Request Categories With Description and Examples (after Ervin-Tripp, 1976)
Request Category

Description

1 Assertions

These had the general form I am + using x
(e.g., "I am using your game").

2 Need/want
statements

Example of requests classified in this category are: "I wanna a
pencil," "I need the answer to the problem," "Mum, I want a
biscuit."

3 Imperatives

These generally include a verb, an object, and sometimes a
beneficiary. Examples of requests included in this category are:
"Gimmee the computer now, so that I can play it," "Tell me the
sum right now; help me now."

4 Embedded
imperatives

These are imperatives in which the agent and object are explicit.
Examples of requests included in this category are: "Can you
play this game with me?" "Could you come and play the board
game with me?" "Could you please help me work this sum out?"

5 Permission
directives

These are directives of the form
Modal + Beneficiary + Have/verb + ?
Examples of requests included in this category are: "Excuse me
Mrs. [name], could I please have that pencil?" "Could we please
have some of that to eat?"

6 Question
directives

These request forms give listeners who do not wish to comply an
alternative option of treating the request as an information
question. Examples of requests included in this category are:
"Would you like to play my new board game?" "Would I be able
to have a red pencil?"

7 Hints

These include a wide range of forms that on the surface are not
requests. Examples of responses included in this category are:
"Mrs. [name], I don't really understand this work," "I don't know
this sum."

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

The data from this study were analyzed via logit modeling, using the
LOGLINEAR procedure in SPSS (Norusis, 1988). Using logit analysis,
the objective is to find the best-fitting, most parsimonious model that
describes the data. This is accomplished by finding the model with the
minimum number of terms that gives a nonsignificant c2 goodness-of-fit index (GFI). To increase the cell ns to enable use of logit
modeling, the seven request categories were collapsed into two types,
based on their overall structural characteristics. The first type comprised categories one to five (see Table 2 for a description of the categories). Requests in categories one to five can readily be understood as
requests without taking into account the context of the requests. The
second type was made up of categories six and seven. Requests in these
categories cannot be unambiguously interpreted as requests without

36

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

taking into account the context; for example, a hint such as "that's a
really nice game" may function as a request in an appropriate social
context and be easily understood as such by both participants.
The model-fitting phase of the analysis involved finding the significant effects present in the data. The model-fitting method used was
partial chi-square analysis. This technique involves comparing a set of
related models, each containing all of the effects except for one. The c2
difference between the models is obtained, and if it is significant, this
indicates that this term makes a significant contribution to the overall
model c2. This is known to be a conservative technique and represents
a relatively stringent modeling strategy (Kennedy, 1983).
To fully interpret the results of logit analysis, it is necessary to consider the logit model parameters and the terms in the model. The
parameters indicate the size and direction of effects. An important distinction is that model parameters relate to the relative odds, not to raw
cell frequencies. A significant parameter value indicates that the relative odds of Category 1/Category 2 of the dependent variable are significantly different for the two categories of the independent variable that
are compared (DeMaris, 1991).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The results presented in Figures 1a to 1d show the percentages of
Type 1 responses (request categories one to five) compared with Type 2
responses (request categories six and seven) by the social context of the
request and group. The percentages shown in each column of the figures are based on frequencies summed over respondents and manner
of the request. The percentages shown have been calculated for
response type within group; that is, the Type 1 responses sum to 100%
and Type 2 responses sum to 100% across all the columns within each
type. The maximum total ns for each group (i.e., Type 1 + Type 2
responses) is equal to the number of respondents times the number of
responses. The differing ns reflect differences in the numbers of
respondents in each group and a small amount (less than 2% of responses) of missing data where responses were inaudible on the tape.
Preliminary screening showed that missing data were randomly distributed, and this issue was not analyzed further.
The data shown in Figures 1a to 1d were subjected to logit analysis
to explore the following matters: (a) the interaction between request
types used and the social context of the request (i.e., the power and distance relationship between the speaker and the intended hearer and
the degree of imposition on the hearer) and (b) differences between
groups on the interaction between social context and request types
used. The most parsimonious model of the data in Figures 1a to 1d comprised the following terms: request type, Request Type  Group,
Request Type  Distance, Request Type  Degree of Imposition on the

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

37

Type 1 Directives
(n=465)
Type 2 Directives (n=94)

50
40
30
20
10
0

Type 1 Directives
(n=451)
Type 2 Directives
(n=41)

RO
1
RA
1
RO
2
RA
2
RO
3
RA
3
RO
4
RA
4

%

RO
1
RA
1
RO
2
RA
2
RO
3
RA
3
RO
4
RA
4

%

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

Figures 1a to 1d.

Comparison, Hostile-Aggressive, Anxious-Fearful, and Comorbid Group Children's Percentages of Requests by Type
and Social Context.
Note. Type 1 = assertions to permission directives, Type 2 = question directives and hints,
RO = requests for object, RA = request for action, 1 = sibling, 2 = parent, 3 = teacher, and
4 = classmate.

Hearer, Request Type  Distance  Group, GFI c2(22) = 36.72, p = .27.
The nonsignificant p value for the GFI indicated that there was a good
fit of the model to the data.
The model parameters1 for Request Type  Group were -3.68 (hostileaggressive group vs. comparison group), -2.22 (anxious-fearful vs.
comparison group), and 1.16 (comorbid vs. comparison). The modeling

%

38

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Type 1 Directives
(n=465)
Type 2 Directives (n=94)

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Type 1 Directives
(n=482)
Type 2 Directives
(n=64)

RO
1
RA
1
RO
2
RA
2
RO
3
RA
3
RO
4
RA
4

%

1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4
RO RA RO RA RO RA RO RA

results indicated that the relative odds of using Type 2 compared with
Type 1 requests were significantly less overall for children in the hostileaggressive and anxious-fearful groups, compared with comparison
children. The model parameters for Request Type  Distance (-5.58)
and for Request Type  Degree of Imposition on the Hearer (10.54)
indicated that the relative odds of children in all groups using Type 2
versus Type 1 requests were significantly less for requests to unfamiliar hearers compared with familiar hearers, and that the relative odds
of children in all groups using Type 2 versus Type 1 requests were significantly greater for requests to others to do something, compared
with requests for objects.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

39

The model parameters for the three-way interaction term were
Hostile-Aggressive/Comparison  Distance  Request Type (.80), Anxious-Fearful/Comparison  Distance  Request Type (0.32), and
Comorbid/Comparison  Distance  Request Type (2.72). These results
showed that the comorbid group showed significantly greater odds of
using Type 2/Type 1 requests for requests to unfamiliar others compared with the comparison group. Thus, compared with the comparison group children, the comorbid group showed evidence of preferring
a more deferent, less obvious style with unfamiliar others, whereas the
hostile-aggressive and anxious-fearful groups did not.
In summary, the results of the analyses showed only very limited
support for Hypothesis 1. Thus, there was no significant effect for the
power relationship between the speaker and intended hearer on
request type; there was a significant effect of social distance on request
form in the reverse direction, that is, more indirect forms were used
more frequently to more familiar others; and finally, there was a significant effect of degree of imposition of the request on the other. The
results indicated partial support for the second hypothesis. Children in
the comorbid group were significantly less likely to vary the form of
their requests in relation to the distance between speaker and hearer,
compared with the other groups.
Figure 2 shows the percentage use of please by social context and
group. The percentages in each column are based on frequencies
summed over respondent and manner of the request. The percentages
sum to 100% within each group. The data shown in Figure 2 were subjected to logit analysis to explore the distribution of the use of please by
the social context of the request and group. The best-fitting model of
the data in Figure 2 comprised the following terms: please, Please 
Distance, please by degree of imposition, and included manner of the
request as covariate, GFI c2(26) = 16.28, p = .96. The model parameters
were Please  Distance (1.1) and Please  Type (-.8) with manner
(-4.6). Because the covariate was the only term with a significant
model parameter value (parameter value greater than 2.0), these
results suggest that when covariance with manner of the request is
controlled for, use of please does not vary significantly with social context. That is, the results showed that use of please covaried with
whether the request was made in a usual, polite, or rude manner. There
was no evidence that use of please varied with power or distance relationships between the speaker and hearer or with the degree of imposition of the request on the hearer or the child's group. Because use of
please did not vary with the immediate social context of the requests,
the results supported Hypothesis 3.
Figure 3 shows the percentages of Type 1 compared with Type 2
requests by group and manner of the request. The percentages shown
in each column in Figure 3 are based on frequencies summed over
respondent and social context condition. The results in Figure 3

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Comparison (n=267)
Hostile-aggressive
(n=219)
Anxious-fearful
(n=252)
Comorbid (n=227)

RO
1
RA
1
RO
2
RA
2
RO
3
RA
3
RO
4
RA
4

%

40

Figure 2.

Percentage Use of Please by Social Context and Group (collapsed
over manner).
Note. RO = requests for object, RA = request for action, 1 = sibling, 2 = parent, 3 = teacher,
and 4 = classmate. Variation in group ns reflects the difference in respondent numbers
between groups and a small amount of missing response data.

60

Host-agg

Comparison

Comorbid

Anx-fear

50
40

Type 1

%

30

Type 2

20
10

e
d
u
R

al
su
U

d
e
u
R

U

su

al

e
d
u
R

al
U

su

e
d
u
R

U

su

al

0

Figure 3.

Percentages of Requests by Overall Request Type, Group, and Manner (collapsed over social context conditions).
Note. Type 1 = assertions to permission directives, Type 2 = question directives and hints,
Host-agg = hostile-aggressive, and Anx-fear = anxious-fearful. Varying group ns reflect
group ns and missing responses.

suggest that across all four groups, Type 2 requests were produced
most frequently for the usual manner, less frequently for the polite
manner, and very rarely for the rude manner. Overall, the comparison
group children showed the most frequent use of Type 2 requests in all
except the rude condition. These findings were confirmed by the

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

Figure 4.

41

Percentage Use of Please by Group and Manner (collapsed over social context conditions).

results of logit analysis of these data. The best-fitting, most parsimonious model of the data in Figure 3 comprised the following terms:
requests type, Request Type  Group, Request Type  Manner, GFI
c2(6) = 4.09, p = .663. The parameter values for Request Type  Group
were -4.1, -2.4, and -1.6. These showed that hostile-aggressive and
anxious-fearful groups were significantly less likely to use Type 2, compared with Type 1 requests. The parameter values for Request Type 
Manner were -2.5 and -8.1. These results showed that Type 2 requests
were significantly less likely to be used by all groups in the polite and
rude conditions, compared with the usual condition. These results
showed that Hypothesis 4 was not supported, that is, the more indirect,
less obvious request forms were used less often in polite as compared
with usual requests. This is a notable result in that it indicated that the
less direct, more complex, and more potentially ambiguous request
forms were not being used to signal explicit politeness or explicit rudeness. There was no significant interaction between manner and group,
which indicated that Hypothesis 5 was not supported by the data.
Figure 4 shows the use of please in requests by manner of the
request and group. There was a consistent pattern in these data, with
please used most frequently in the polite condition, less often in the
usual condition, and infrequently in the rude condition. Although
there is some difference in the frequency overall of use of please by
group, the variation by manner did not show any evidence of interaction with group. The best-fitting model of the data in Figure 4 comprised the following terms: please, Please  Manner, GFI c2(9) = 10.33,
p = .324. The parameter values for Please  Manner were 10.6 and
-15.4, which showed that please was significantly more likely to be

42

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

used in the polite compared with usual manner requests and was significantly less likely to be used in the rude compared with usual manner. The results supported Hypothesis 6, suggesting that all groups of
children used please to mark conventional or everyday politeness.
The research reported in this study explored several key questions
in politeness in children's requests. First, this study explored politeness variation in requests to others of varying power and social distance and in requests that varied in the degree of imposition on the
other. Second, this study explored the politeness variation in request
due to manner of the request. Finally, the study compared the politeness skills of children without behavior problems and children with
behavior problems to explore the contribution of social and behavioral
factors to children's linguistic politeness skills.
The first major issue explored in this study was the use of different
request types and use of please in response to the social context of
requests by comparison group children and children with behavior
problems. The results showed that the requesting strategies used varied with social distance of the hearer and degree of imposition on the
hearer. There were no differences for requesting strategy by power of
the hearer, which is not consistent with the predictions of politeness
theory. This may reflect the fact that for mothers and teachers who
were the high-power hearers in this research, there is a strong conventional or role-based expectation that they will assist children. The
effect for requesting strategy by social distance of the hearer was in the
opposite direction to that predicted by politeness theory; that is, the
more indirect, less obvious forms such as question directives and hints
were used more frequently for requests to familiar others. Thus, more
indirect forms were not more likely to be used for requests to distant
others as politeness theory would predict, but rather were more likely
to be used for requests made to close others. One possible interpretation of this finding relates to the fact that the close others were the
child's mother and a sibling. Between individuals with extended familiarity with one another's style of communicating, even a hint may in
effect be a very clear direct communication. The use of please showed
little or no variation with the social context of the request.
The second major issue explored in this study was the use of different request strategies in requests varying in manner by comparison
group children and children with behavior problems. The results
showed that use of please varied with manner of the request, with
please being used very frequently in conventionally polite requests and
very infrequently in rude requests. The results also showed that the
interaction between use of please and manner of the request did not differ for comparison group children, compared with children with behavior problems. Saying please in requests seems to be associated for these
children with their everyday understanding of asking politely. The
results suggest that comparison group children and children with

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

43

behavior problems in this age group have mastered this conversational
rule. The results also showed that the more indirect request strategies
were used less frequently in conventionally polite requests. Overall,
the strategy that the children used to convey conventional politeness
could be described as more directly expressing the object of the request
while indicating formal politeness through the use of please.
These findings show that for these 10- to 11-year-old children, variation in requesting style associated with conventional or everyday
politeness differs from the variation in requesting style associated
with social context. This finding suggests that theories of politeness,
such as Brown and Levinson's model that explains politeness in terms
of the immediate social context, may not fully describe the way politeness functions in children's everyday interactions. It is notable that the
results show that the different groups of children appear to differ on
their use of politeness strategies in relation to social context, but not in
relation to manner of the request. Labov and Fanshel (1977) suggested
that for the speaker, selection of a particular request strategy in a
given situation involves some consideration of the hearer's role in the
situation. By contrast, there is evidence that the use of please in
requests is an indicator of everyday politeness (e.g., Gleason et al.,
1984). The current findings offer some evidence that children employ
these strategies differentially to indicate everyday and strategic
politeness.

EVALUATION TASK STUDY: EVALUATION OF
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF POLITENESS
STRATEGIES IN REQUESTS
The first overall objective of this task was to explore the factors
influencing children's evaluations of the effectiveness of different
request strategies. As reviewed in the introduction, several major
studies have explored children's judgments of the politeness of
requests (Becker, 1986; Wilkinson et al., 1984). This research has
shown that children use a number of the features of requests, such as
indirectness and use of please, to judge whether a given request is
polite. The results of this work have also shown that children take
account of aspects of the context, such as the age of the intended hearer,
in judging the politeness of different requests. The current study modified this research agenda to explore children's judgments of the effectiveness of politeness as a social strategy in request situations. Based
on work by Ervin-Tripp, Strage, Lampert, and Bell (1987) and Bernicot
(1991), a key question here was whether children primarily relied on
the form or the social context of requests to judge the effectiveness of
different strategies.

44

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

From the literature, two methods were suggested that children may
employ to judge the expected effectiveness of different request strategies. It was hypothesized that the expected effectiveness of a request
could be judged based on either the presence of politeness strategies in
isolation or the relationship between the request form and the social
context. The first rule would correspond to the conversational maxim
of "be polite." Following this rule in a given context, children would
judge a request containing politeness features as more likely to be
effective than a request not containing politeness features. The second
rule corresponds to Brown and Levinson's basic assumption: Respect
the other's face. Following this rule, in a given context children would
judge requests that provided enough face redress in the situation to
minimize the threat to the other's face as more likely to be effective
than requests that did not.
The second major objective of this research was to compare judgments of the effectiveness of different request strategies by children
with and without behavior problems. The research by Rubin and
Borwick (1984) suggested the possibility of an association between
social adjustment and children's knowledge of the effectiveness of different social strategies. Broadly speaking, the findings suggested that
better adjusted children are more sensitive to differences in social situations, compared with less well-adjusted children. It was hypothesized
that this may result in children with behavior problems being less
likely than children without behavior problems to take the social context into account when judging the effectiveness of different request
strategies.
The potential association between children's behavioral adjustment
and their judgments of the effectiveness of different request strategies
was further explored by eliciting children's explanations for the effectiveness of different strategies. It was hypothesized that children with
aggressive behavior problems would primarily explain the effectiveness of requesting strategies in terms of compliance or noncompliance
with everyday politeness. By contrast, it was hypothesized that children without behavior problems and children with anxious-fearful
behavior problems would explain the effectiveness of different strategies based on the extent to which they take account of the other person's perspective.
The specific hypotheses tested in this study were:
Hypothesis 8: Requests containing polite features would be more likely to be
judged to be effective than requests without polite features.
Hypothesis 9: The presence, as compared with absence, of polite features in
requests would result in a greater increase in the likelihood of children
judging requests to be effective (a) when directed to more powerful versus less powerful others, (b) when directed to close versus distant others,
and/or (c) for more versus less imposing requests.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

45

Hypothesis 10: Children in the hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups
would be more likely to judge the effectiveness of requests based solely
on the form without taking into account the context, compared with children in the comparison and anxious-fearful groups.
Hypothesis 11: Children in the comparison and anxious-fearful groups
would use more explanations for the effectiveness of requesting strategies that make reference to other person compared to children in the
hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups.
Hypothesis 12: Conversely, children in the hostile-aggressive and comorbid
groups would use more explanations that make reference to whether the
request was conventionally polite or rude.

METHOD
MATERIALS

The materials comprised a set of requests in context, varying on the
following dimensions: power, distance, and degree of imposition of the
request. For each combination, two request forms were presented: a
polite and a nonpolite form. Polite forms used a variety of features
associated with polite styles of speaking (e.g., using please, indirect
forms, etc.). Nonpolite forms used more obvious direct requests with no
politeness features. Two examples of the situations and requests are
shown below, a request to a sibling and a request to a classmate (see the
appendix for full details). The requests presented are shown in Table 3.
The requests were presented in a random order, which was held constant across all respondents. The basis for using a constant random
order was to remove one potential source of variability in the data.
Your older brother/sister has a football/basketball which he/she doesn't
use much but which you'd like to use. So you say to him/her, "Would it be
OK if I used your football/basketball?"
You want to borrow a pen from your friend at school. So you say to your
friend, "Give me your pen."
PROCEDURE

The children were read each of the situations, followed by the
requests. The situations systematically varied the age and familiarity
of the other and the degree of imposition of the requests on the other.
The child's task was to judge whether the request would be an effective
way of asking, that is, whether the other person would be likely to do
what was asked or give the child what they were asking for. The children were also asked to explain their judgments.

46

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Table 3
Polite and Nonpolite Requests
Request Type

Request

Polite
Nonpolite

Have you got a spare pen I could use?
Give me that pen.

Polite
Nonpolite

Hi that looks good, could I have a go?
Give me a go.

Polite
Nonpolite

Mum, could I have a drink?
I want a drink.

Polite
Nonpolite

Could I see that one, my friend said it is really good.
I want to see that one.

Polite
Nonpolite

Would it be okay if I used that football/basketball?
I'm going to use your football/basketball now.

DATA ANALYSIS

From an initial inspection of the content of the children's responses
and on the basis of the politeness literature, a preliminary set of categories was developed. The final set of categories used is shown in
Table 4. The categories from "rights of the other" to "other's usual
behavior" were collapsed into one category (reference to the other).
This grouping reflects the strong thematic similarity between these
categories. To validate the final set of categories, 20% of the main study
data was recoded by a second rater using the categories shown in
Table 4. The second rater was blind with respect to the experimental
conditions and hypotheses for the research. Interrater reliability was
computed using the kappa statistic (k = 81, p < .001). This showed that
the category scheme reliably classified a high percentage of the explanations the children produced.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figures 5a and 5b show the percentages of nonpolite and polite
requests judged to be effective by immediate social context and group.
Visually comparing Figures 5a and 5b, the results suggested that
requests using politeness strategies were consistently judged to be
more effective than requests that did not include politeness strategies.
The results in Figure 5a suggested that the comparison group tended
to judge nonpolite requests as more effective, compared with all the
behavior problem groups. Also, overall, requests for objects tended to
be judged as more effective than requests for actions, and there was
some suggestion of an interaction between age of intended hearer and
group. Furthermore, there is a tendency for children in the comorbid
group to judge polite requests as less effective, compared with children

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

47

Table 4
Types of Explanations for the Effectiveness of Requests
Explanation

Description

Rude

Explanations that describe the request as rude or lacking in
manners.

Ask

Explanations that describe the request as asking the other.

Tell

Explanations that describe the request as telling or ordering
the other.

Tone

Explanations that relate to how the request was produced rather
than what was said. Often, expressions such as "nicely" or
"meanly" were used to describe manner (e.g., "cos you said it in a
nice way"). Explanations that referred to the wording of the
request.

Reference to the
other person's
point of view

Explanations that refer to:
rights of the other to possessions (e.g., "it's his stuff")
feelings of the other (e.g., "she'd feel OK if you asked like that")
the other as making different choices from time to time (e.g.,
"depends on what mood she's in")
the basic idea that others are due consideration (e.g., "that's not
the way to treat your sister")
respect for other's time (e.g., "then he wouldn't have to wait till
you've/I've finished")
the other's right for their activities not to be interrupted (e.g.,
"Mum doesn't like to be interrupted when she's looking at
dresses")
the extent to which the activity, game, or toy is shared or not
shared
the acceptability of a request depending on whether the other is
a close or a more distant friend (e.g., "it'd be OK if he was a
really good friend")
the other's typical behavior; appeals to normative behavior
(e.g., "ya don't treat ya parents like that")

Please +/-

Explanations that refer to including or excluding please from
the request (e.g., "you didn't say please," "it'd be better with a
please in there").

in the other groups. The results in Figure 5b showed some evidence of
ceiling effects, although it should be emphasized that this is likely to
reflect social reality. The request situations presented were intentionally selected to represent everyday events, and it is likely that polite
requests would normally be successful in these situations.
To explore the factors significantly influencing children's judgments, the results shown in Figures 5a and 5b were subjected to logit
analysis. The best-fitting, most parsimonious model of the data is
shown in Table 5. The statistically significant overall GFI, c2(52) = 97,
p < .001, indicated that the model did not provide a comprehensive
description of the variation in the data; thus, some caution is required
in interpretation of the findings. The first term in Table 5 is a main

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Comparison
Hostile-aggressive
Anxious-fearful
Comorbid

RA

1
RO
1
RA
2
RO
2
RA
3
RO
3
RA
4
RO
4

%

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

%

48

Comparison
Hostile-aggressive
Anxious-fearful
Comorbid
RA1 RO1 RA2 RO2 RA3 RO3 RA4 RO4

Figures 5a and 5b.

Percentages of Request Forms Judged Effective by Politeness, Context, and Group.
Note. RA = request for action, RO = request for object, 1 = sibling, 2 = parent, 3 = teacher,
and 4 = classmate.

effect term indicating that overall, more requests were judged to be
effective than not effective. The second term in Table 5 indicated that
polite requests were judged as more effective than nonpolite requests
overall, which supported Hypothesis 8.
The third term showed that hostile-aggressive and comorbid group
children judged nonpolite requests overall as significantly less likely to
be effective, compared with the comparison and anxious-fearful groups.
The direction of this finding was unexpected. This result suggests that
children without behavior problems and children with anxious-fearful
behavior problems may judge the use of politeness features in requests

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

49

Table 5
Logit Model of Children's Judgments of the Effectiveness of Different Request Styles
Model Terms
Judgment
a
Judgment  Form
Judgment  Group  Form
Hostile-aggressive comparison
Anxious-fearful comparison
Comorbid comparison
Judgment  Power  Form
Judgment  Distance  Form
b
Judgment  Request Type  Form
Judgment  Distance  Power  Request Type
Judgment  Power  Form  Group
Hostile-aggressive comparison
Anxious-fearful comparison
Comorbid comparison

Model Parameters
-12.7
18.9
2.3
1.2
1.9
3.2
-3.2
4.2
4.2
-2.4
-1.8
-1.8

Note. Goodness of Fit Index: c2(52) = 97, p < .001.
a. Form included politeness features/no politeness features.
b. Request for object/request for action.

to be less important in gaining compliance, compared with children
with hostile-aggressive behavior problems. This provides some support for Hypothesis 10 because it suggests that children with hostileaggressive behavior problems may rely more on the form of the
request, that is, whether the request contains politeness features, in
judging whether it will be effective compared with the other groups.
The fourth, fifth, and sixth terms in Table 5 indicated that power,
social distance, and request type all influenced the relationship
between the request form and children's judgments of the effectiveness
of the request strategies. Specifically, nonpolite requests to more powerful others were judged as more likely to be effective than nonpolite
requests to less powerful others, nonpolite requests to close others
were judged as more likely to be successful compared with nonpolite
requests to more distant others, and less imposing nonpolite requests
(i.e., requests for objects) were judged as more likely to be successful
compared with more imposing (i.e., request for action) nonpolite
requests. These results provided partial support for Hypothesis 9.
However, the effect for power is in the opposite direction to that predicted by politeness theory. Given the relatively limited fit of the model
to the data, the remaining higher order terms were not interpreted.
To further explore differences in the understanding of linguistic
politeness in requests by children with and without behavior problems,
the children were asked to explain their effectiveness judgments. The
explanations that the children produced were classified using the categories shown in Table 4. The results of the classification, with c2 analyses, are shown in Table 6.

50

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Table 6
2
Frequencies of Explanations for the Effectiveness of Requests by Group With c Statistics
Explanation
HostileType
Comparison Aggressive
Polite
Rude
Ask
Tell
Tone
Other person
Please +/-

77
51
8
7
12
126
36

76
50
17
4
9
70
30

AnxiousFearful

Comorbid

c2

p

106
64
17
11
8
99
13

84
46
22
17
7
70
22

6.8
3.5
6.4
9.7
1.6
23.8
11.8

.01
.05
.01
.01
.ns
.001
.01

The results indicated that the hostile-aggressive group used more
explanations that described the request as polite or rude, compared
with the other groups. The comorbid group used significantly more
explanations that described the request as asking or telling the other.
The comparison group produced more explanations that made reference to the other person's feelings, compared with the hostile-aggressive
and comorbid groups, and they were also more likely to produce explanations that referred to the need to say please.
The results can be interpreted as showing that their judgment as to
whether the request form is polite or rude represents a key aspect for
all children in deciding whether a request strategy is likely to be effective. However, there is evidence that children may employ a range of
other social reasoning strategies focusing on aspects of the social context. It is notable that explanations that related to the other's emotional state and to involvement with the other (i.e., feelings, consideration, respect for others, degree of friendship) were more often used by
children in the comparison and anxious-fearful groups than by children in the hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups. This finding suggests that children with aggressive behavior problems may as a group
be less likely to employ these other-oriented social reasoning strategies. Bernicot (1991) identified five types of explanations: nonexplanation, context related (the physical situation), content of the request
(what was said), politeness of the request (that the request was polite),
and how clearly the intent was conveyed. The explanation type referring to politeness of the request was similar to that produced in the current study; however, the other explanation types produced by the children in Bernicot's study did not occur in the current research. It seems
likely that the differences in the kinds of explanations that the children produced may be related to the difference between the tasks in
the two studies. Bernicot asked the children to explain why the request
was or was not polite, whereas in the current study the child's task was
to explain whether the request would be effective.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

51

The first overall objective of this task was to explore the factors
influencing children's judgments of the effectiveness of requests. The
results showed that children's judgments of the effectiveness of
requests were primarily influenced by the request form (i.e., whether
the request contained politeness features), with a smaller effect from
the social context (i.e., the power and distance relationship between
the speaker and hearer and the degree of imposition of the request on
the hearer). The results also showed that requests containing politeness features were judged to be more effective, regardless of the social
context.
Overall, it is quite challenging to attempt to compare the findings
with previous research because on detailed examination most studies
seem to use somewhat different methods. The finding that children
appear to rely primarily on the form of the request in judging whether
a request will be effective is consistent with the findings of Bernicot
(1991). Looking at the effect for age of the intended hearer, this can be
compared with Garton and Pratt (1990). They reported no effect for age
of intended hearer on children's judgments of effectiveness. Considering the familiarity dimension, Baroni and Axia (1989) reported a
significant effect for familiarity of the hearer in children's attributions
of polite and nonpolite requests.
The second overall objective of this task was to investigate the differences between the judgments of the effectiveness of different
requests by comparison group children and children with behavior
problems. The results showed that the comparison and anxious-fearful
group children judged nonpolite requests to be more effective than children in the hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups. The direction of
this finding may reflect the fact that children with hostile-aggressive
behavior problems often have a history of negative interactions with
others in the family. Work by Blum-Kulka (1990) indicated that in family interactions, a high level of directness and relatively little use of formal politeness may be seen as normal and appropriate by the participants. However, Blum Kulka's findings may reflect a history of positive
relationships and interactions within the families she studied. Her
description suggests that the family groups she studied did not include
children with behavioral problems. The present research suggests that
there may be a difference in the politeness styles used in interactions
within the family involving children with hostile-aggressive behavior
problems, compared with family interactions involving children who
do not have these behavior problems.
Overall, the results from the comprehension task suggested that all
children can use form and context in judging whether a particular
request strategy is likely to gain the other's compliance, although
request form appears to play a primary role. The results also indicated
that children with hostile-aggressive behavior problems may be less
likely than other children to take account of the social context in

52

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

judging the effectiveness of different request strategies. This may be
one factor associated with these children experiencing fewer successful interactions compared with other children. However, from the current research, it seems most likely that there are bidirectional influences between language and nonlinguistic social interaction.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
This work addressed two major theoretical issues regarding politeness in the context of 10- to 11-year-old children's requesting skills.
The first was to compare the face-saving view of linguistic politeness
described in Brown and Levinson's model, with the everyday or "folk"
view of linguistic politeness as a normative way of speaking or register.
The second was to explore the relationship between children's
nonlinguistic social and behavioral adjustment and their linguistic
politeness skills.
The findings from the production task supported the argument for a
distinction between everyday and strategic or face-saving politeness in
children's requests. The children used different combinations of strategies to signal explicit politeness, as compared with the combinations of
strategies they used for requests to different others. This finding is
within a single domain (requests), and with only two politeness strategies, some caution needs to be used in generalizing to all politeness.
However, this result is broadly consistent with other research
reviewed earlier (Fraser, 1990; Kasper, 1991), suggesting a distinction
between strategic politeness and politeness as social indexing. There
seems to be very limited work in English that is relevant to this distinction. Very approximately, the distinction seems to be between formal
and informal registers or ways of speaking that are not specifically
bound to the social context, although they are recognized as appropriate for some contexts as distinct to others, versus the strategic usage of
different linguistic forms in response to specific aspects of the immediate social context. The current research suggests that these 10- to
11-year-old children are aware of a distinction of this kind in their use
of polite language in requests.
It is of some interest that there is evidence from other research that
children's knowledge and use of politeness routines, such as the use of
please in requests, is associated with explicit socialization by parents
(Gleason et al., 1984). This is consistent with the suggestion by Robinson (1974) of individual differences in the ways that mothers socialize
children in the use of different linguistic forms. The findings from the
current study may suggest that children with hostile-aggressive
behavior problems receive this explicit socialization from parents but
do not have the range and types of social interactions that would enable

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

53

them to learn the more complex socially modulated forms of politeness
in requests.
The results from the production task also showed that children with
hostile-aggressive behavior problems differed from the other children
in their use of politeness in response to the social context of the
requests. Specifically, children with hostile-aggressive behavior problems were less likely to use more indirect forms in requests to close
compared with distant others and/or when making requests for action
compared with requests for objects. This finding suggests that these
children may be either less aware of, or less inclined to acknowledge,
these social context factors in their use of language in interactions. By
comparison, the groups of children studied did not differ in their use of
different politeness features in requests where the children were
asked explicitly to vary the everyday politeness of the requests.
There is a significant body of previous research examining children's ability to vary the requests they produce in relation to the social
context. A number of studies (Axia & Argenti, 1989; Axia, McGurk, &
Glachan, 1988; James, 1978; Wilkinson et al., 1984) have investigated
how children vary their requests in relation to the age, social status,
and familiarity of the hearer. Regarding the direction of the effect for
indirectness, Blum-Kulka (1987) argued that contrary to prior
research in this area, indirectness does not parallel politeness. She
found that the most indirect request forms were not rated as the most
polite. Blum-Kulka argued that politeness implies a concern with
pragmatic clarity and that the most indirect forms were not sufficiently clear to the hearer to qualify as polite. She concluded that selection of appropriate forms required a compromise between clarity and
face considerations. The current findings provide some support for her
view. Specifically, when children are asked to make their requests
explicitly polite, they use more direct, obvious forms consistent with
Blum-Kulka's argument about the value of clarity.
The results from the evaluation task showed that for children with
and without behavior problems, requests that contained polite features were judged to be more effective than requests that did not. This
may indicate that the children understood the use of polite strategies
in requests to be the socially approved way of requesting. The results
also showed that nonpolite requests to adults were judged as more
likely to be effective than nonpolite requests to other children. This
finding may reflect the children's expectation that parents and teachers will normally comply with requests consistent with their social role
(e.g., parents provide food for children). Nonpolite requests to close others were judged as more likely to be effective than nonpolite requests to
distant others. This finding was consistent with politeness theory,
which would predict that nonpolite requests to close versus distant
others have less potential to threaten the other's face. Finally,

54

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

nonpolite requests for objects were judged as more likely to be effective
than nonpolite requests for action. This finding was also consistent
with politeness theory, because requests for objects were less imposing
on the other than requests for action.
The results of the evaluation task also showed that the comparison
group children judged nonpolite requests as more likely to be effective,
compared with children in all the behavior problem groups. This finding suggested that children without behavior problems may have a
higher expectation of gaining others' compliance, possibly reflecting
these children's more positive interactions with others. This task also
found that the hostile-aggressive and comorbid groups produced more
explanations for the effectiveness of their requests, which referred
to the requests being polite or rude, whereas children in the normalcomparison and anxious-fearful groups produced more explanations
referring to the other's feelings. This finding suggests that children
with hostile-aggressive behavior problems primarily refer to the form
of the request in evaluating the effectiveness of different strategies,
whereas children in the other groups also made use of social considerations (e.g., the feelings of the other).
A number of studies have examined children's judgments of the
politeness of requests and their explanations for their judgments (Axia &
Baroni, 1985; Baroni & Axia, 1989; Wilkinson et al., 1984). Wilkinson
et al. (1984) examined 10-year-old children's judgments of the appropriateness of varying request forms in different social contexts. They
found that the major factors resulting in requests being judged as
appropriate were indirectness, a request for information rather than
for action, and presence of please. These findings are broadly consistent
with the findings of the current research. Bernicot (1991) explored 5-,
7-, and 10-year-old French children's judgments of the effectiveness of
different request strategies. She found significant effects for form of
the request, good versus poor cooperation between speaker and hearer,
and age of the child. The effect for form of the request was broadly consistent with the current findings, with requests containing politeness
strategies being judged as more likely to be effective. The other two factors have no comparison in the current study.
Before considering the broader implications of the findings of the
two studies, it is necessary to review the strengths and limitations of
the methodology used in this research. One issue was the selection and
grouping of respondents. As discussed, the groups differed on gender
distribution. Although there was no evidence of a difference for gender
on the outcome variables, it cannot be ruled out that the gender difference may have contributed to the observed relationships between
behavior problems and children's politeness skills.
A further issue concerned the testing process used in this research.
The data for this study were based exclusively on children's responses
to hypothetical situations. As has been recommended by a number of

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

55

researchers, to maximize the validity of the procedure, the request situations were developed to have face validity for children's everyday
experience (e.g., Robinson, 1974). Thus, for the request situations, the
names of the appropriate people were inserted (e.g., the child's brother
or sister), and situations were constructed that were consistent with
children's everyday experience. However, it is clear that the test situation that involved interacting with a male experimenter was to some
extent an artificial situation. Thus, with this research, as with other
politeness studies using elicited data, it is necessary to be cautious
about making any strong generalizations to children's behavior outside of the test situation.
The first major objective of this research was to explore the distinction between first-order politeness and second-order politeness, as it is
typically conceptualized in models such as Brown and Levinson's theory. There is relatively little previous research in the area of everyday
politeness. Ferguson (1976) reviewed a body of work on politeness formulae (e.g., "thank you"), which he described as conversation rituals
associated with specific events such as greetings among others. The
use of these formulae seems likely to be an important part of what children (and adults, for that matter) understand as everyday politeness.
Notably, the current research has shown that there seem to be other
elements to everyday politeness and the use of formulae (e.g., the
emphasis on pragmatic clarity). Using please in requests would seem
to fit in the category of a politeness ritual and was clearly seen by all
the children as a key feature of everyday politeness in requests.
This discussion touches on a very basic issue common to many theoretical domains in psychology. A great many psychological constructs,
including intelligence and temperament, began as lay concepts that
have been refined and elaborated into theoretical entities. The findings
of the present research suggest that the theoretical concept of politeness, as elaborated in Brown and Levinson's model, does not adequately describe some aspects of the way that politeness works in these
10-year-old children's use of language in their day-to-day interactions.
The second overall objective of this research was to investigate the
relationship between children's behavioral adjustment and their linguistic politeness skills. The current research suggests that children's
sensitivity to context in producing polite strategies in requests may to
some extent reflect their behavioral adjustment and their range of
social experiences. There are also differences in the judgments that
children with and without aggressive behavior problems make about
the effectiveness of different requests and the ways that these children
explain their judgments. It seems likely that this may be linked to
characteristic patterns of interaction between children with aggressive behavior problems and their mothers during development. This is
also consistent with the suggestion by Robinson (1972) of individual
differences in mothers' socialization of children in the use of different

56

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

linguistic forms in question-answer interactions. Future longitudinal
research on politeness and behavioral adjustment is suggested to
explore this issue further.
The findings of the production study did not support key elements of
Brown and Levinson's model of linguistic politeness. Specifically, there
was no effect for distance of the hearer, contrary to one of the basic predictions of Brown and Levinson's computational model. It is notable,
however, that other researchers have found similar results regarding
the lack of an effect for distance in children's requests (see Meier, 1995).
Children's judgments of the effectiveness of request strategies in different social context conditions matched fairly closely the predictions
of Brown and Levinson's model. The apparent difference between children's responses to social context in these two tasks needs further
investigation. It may be that this finding reflects the types of knowledge tapped by the two tasks; that is, the production task may tap
knowledge of actual requests used in similar situations, whereas evaluation task performance may more strongly reflect knowledge of social
norms of approved politeness.
The findings from the current research do not have direct implications for intervention with children with developmental behavioral
problems, but rather suggest directions for research and development
of intervention strategies. Becker (1988) noted that "pragmatic skills
such as knowing how to make polite requests, take turns in a conversation, greet others, and make apologies are important not just for communicative competence but because it leads to them being more
favourably perceived by their parents" (p. 175). Although further research is required, the present results support Putallaz and Gottman's
(1981) suggestion that limited pragmatic language skills may result in
and/or reinforce negative outcomes for children with developmental
behavior problems.
The current findings provide evidence that children's politeness and
being related to social context is influenced by a conventional or everyday concept of politeness, which is realized in distinct ways in their
requesting strategies. The development of an adequate theoretical
understanding of politeness will require further data on whether and
how this distinction is realized in other aspects of children's language.
The results of this research also provide some evidence of differences
between children with hostile-aggressive behavior problems and other
children in their use of politeness in requests. Further research is
needed to investigate the extent to which this difference between
groups is a general characteristic of children's pragmatic language
skills.
In conclusion, this research suggests that a full account of children's
use of politeness in social interaction needs to deal with the everyday
concept of politeness and the use of politeness in the management of
social interactions. Furthermore, this research has shown evidence

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

57

that children's politeness skills are linked to their broader
nonlinguistic social behavior. Continuing research in this area has the
potential to provide insight into the ways that children's ability to use
language to manage social interactions emerges as part of their overall
social and behavioral development.
APPENDIX
PRODUCTION OF POLITENESS INTERVIEW

Now I am going to read you some descriptions of situations where you need
to ask other people for things. Some of these situations may not have happened
to you exactly, but I'd like you to pretend. For each situation, I would like you to
tell me how you would usually ask. Then I'd like you to tell me a really polite
way to ask. Then I'd like you to tell me a really rude way to ask.
1. You've got a new board game and you want [name of sibling] to play it
with you. How would you ask [name of sibling] to play it with you?
[prompt as needed] How would you usually ask? What would be a polite
way of asking? What would be a rude way of asking?
2. You're working on a math problem in class and you can't do it. You see
[name of classmate] who knows how to do it. How would you ask him or
her for help with the problem?
3. You've got a new board game and you want your mum to play it with you.
How would you ask your mum to play the game with you?
4. You're working on a math problem in class and you need some help with
it. How would you ask the teacher for help with the problem?
5. You're doing some drawing in class and you need another color texta for
your drawing. How would you ask the teacher for another texta?
6. Mum's just come home with some shopping and you see that she's got
some sweet biscuits and you think that you'd like to have one. How
would you ask your mum for a biscuit?
7. Your pen's run out at school and you need another one to do some writing. You see [name of classmate] who's got a couple of pens. How would
you ask him or her if you can borrow a pen?
8. You happen to see that [name of sibling] has got a new computer game
that you like. How would you ask [name of sibling] if you could borrow it?
COMPREHENSION INTERVIEW

Now I am going to read you some ways of asking other people for things in
different situations. Some of these situations may never have happened to you,
but I'd like you to pretend. I'd like you to tell me if you think that the way I read
out would be an effective way to ask in that situation. By effective, what I mean
is do you think that if you asked that way that the person you were asking
would be likely to do what you asked or to give you what you were asking for.
[check tape is running; after each situation, say: Would that be an effective way
to ask? If you are not sure, which do you think more, yes or no? Why is that?]

58

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

1. You're playing catch with your younger brother/sister and the ball goes
over the fence. You don't feel like going to get it. So you say to your brother/
sister, "Go get me the ball would ya?" [be careful with intonation]
2. You want to borrow a pen from your friend at school. So you say to your
friend, "Have you got a spare pen I could use?"
3. Your friend has a new computer game that you'd like to have a go with.
So you say to your friend, "Hi that looks good, could I have a go?"
4. You're out with your mum on a really hot day and you want to get a
drink. So you say to your mum, "Mum, could I have a drink?" [careful
with intonation]
5. You want to see a particular video which you don't think your parents
will agree to. So you say to your parents, "I want to see that one."
6. Your older brother/sister has a football/basketball which he or she
doesn't use much but which you'd like to use. So you say, "Would it be
OK if I used your football/basketball?"
7. You want to borrow a pen from your friend at school. So you say to your
friend, "Give me your pen."
8. You're playing catch with your younger brother/sister and the ball goes
over the fence. You don't feel like going to get it. So you say to your
younger brother/sister, "Get me the ball." [careful with intonation]
9. Your friend has a new computer game that you'd like to have a go with.
So you say to your friend, "Give me a go." [careful with intonation]
10. You're out with your mum on a really hot day and you want to get a
drink. So you say to your mum, "I want a drink."
11. You want to see a particular video [movie on TV if no video] which you
don't think your parents will agree to. So you say to your parents,
"Could I see that one, my friend said it is really good?"
12. Your older brother/sister has a football/basketball which he or she
doesn't use much but which you'd like to use. So you say, "I want to use
your football/basketball."

NOTE
1. The logit model parameters reflect the relative odds of Type 2 to Type 1 in the different levels of the independent variables. A statistically significant parameter value indicates that the relative odds of Type 2 to Type 1 requests differ significantly between
levels of the independent variable. The parameters follow an approximately normal distribution; thus, parameters greater than +/-2 are statistically significant. It is also important to appreciate that the parameter values reflect the relative odds controlling for
the effects of other variables in the model. As a consequence of these factors, care is required in relating the model back to the cell frequencies. A positive parameter value in
this model indicates that the relative odds of Type 2 compared with Type 1 requests in
the second level of the independent variable are greater than in the first level; a negative
value indicates that the reverse is true.

Pedlow et al. / PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION OF POLITENESS

59

REFERENCES
Axia, G., & Argenti, E. (1989, April). Context and linguistic politeness in 7 and 9 year old
Italian children. Poster presented at the 1989 Convention of the Society for Research
in Child Development, Kansas City, KS.
Axia, G., & Baroni, M. R. (1985). Linguistic politeness at different age levels. Child Development, 56, 918-927.
Axia, G., McGurk, H., & Glachan, M. (1987, September 11). A cross-national study of the
case of linguistic politeness. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Developmental Section, British Psychological Society, York, England.
Baroni, M. R., & Axia, G. (1989). Children's meta-pragmatic abilities and the identification of polite and impolite requests. First Language, 9, 285-297.
Bates, E. (1983). Language and context. New York: Academic Press.
Bates, E., & Silvern, L. (1977). Social adjustment and politeness in preschoolers. Journal
of Communication, 27, 104-111.
Becker, J. A. (1986). Bossy and nice requests: Children's production and interpretation.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 32, 393-413.
Becker, J. A. (1988). The success of parents' indirect techniques for teaching their preschoolers pragmatic skills. First Language, 8, 173-182.
Becker, J. A. (1990). Processes in the acquisition of pragmatic competence. In G.
Conti-Ramsden & C. E. Snow (Eds.), Children's language (Vol. 7, pp. 7-24). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Becker, J. A., & Smenner, P. C. (1986). The spontaneous use of thank you by preschoolers
as a function of sex, socioeconomic status and listener status. Language in Society, 15,
537-546.
Becker, J. A., Whitaker, E. M., & Gesten, E. L. (1992). Requests and rerequests in normal
and emotionally disturbed children. Bulletin de Psychologie, XLVI, 60-66.
Bernicot, J. (1991). French children's conception of requesting: The development of
metapragmatic knowledge. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 14,
285-304.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1987). Indirectness and politeness in requests: Same or different? Journal of Pragmatics, 11, 131-146.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1990). You don't touch lettuce with your fingers: Parental politeness in
family discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 14, 259-288.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1978). Universals in language usage: Politeness phenomena. In E. N. Goody (Ed.), Questions and politeness: Strategies in social interaction
(pp. 56-310). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Camras, L. A., Pristo, T. M., & Brown, M.J.K. (1985). Directive choice by children and
adults: Affect, situation and linguistic politeness. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 31,
19-31.
DeMaris, A. (1991). A framework for the interpretation of first-order interaction in logit
modelling. Psychological Bulletin, 110, 557-570.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1976). Is Sybil there? The structure of some American English directives. Language in Society, 5, 25-65.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1977). Wait for me roller skate! In S. Ervin-Tripp & C. Mitchell-Kernan
(Eds.), Child discourse (pp. 165-188). New York: Academic Press.
Ervin-Tripp, S., Strage, A., Lampert, M., & Bell, N. (1987). Understanding requests. Linguistics, 25, 107-143.
Ferguson, C. A. (1976). The structure and use of politeness formulas. Language in Society, 5, 137-151.
Fraser, B. (1990). Perspectives on politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 14, 219-236.

60

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March/June 2001

Garton, A. F., & Pratt, C. (1990). Children's pragmatic judgments of direct and indirect
requests. First Language, 10, 51-59.
Garvey, C. (1984). Children's talk. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gleason, J. B., Perlman, R. Y., & Blank, E. (1984). What's the magic word: Learning language through politeness routines. Discourse Processes, 7, 493-502.
Hymel, S., Rubin, K. H., Rowden, L., & LeMare, L. (1990). Children's peer relationships:
Longitudinal prediction of internalising and externalising problems from middle to
late childhood. Child Development, 61, 2004-2021.
Ide, S. (1989). Preface. Multilingua, 8, 97-99.
James, S. L. (1978). Effects of listener age and situation on the politeness of children's
directives. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 7, 307-317.
Kasper, G. (1991). Linguistic politeness: Current research issues. Journal of Pragmatics,
14, 191-218.
Kennedy, J. (1983). Analysing qualitative data. New York: Praeger.
Labov, W., & Fanshel, D. (1977). Therapeutic discourse: Psychotherapy as conversation.
New York: Academic Press.
Mathews, W. (1943). Polite speech in the eighteenth century. English, 1, 493-511.
Meier, A. J. (1995). Passages of politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 24, 381-392.
Nippold, M. A., Leonard, L. B., & Anastopoulos, A. (1982). Development in the use and
understanding of polite forms in children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
25, 193-203.
Norusis, M. J. (1988). SPSS-XTM advanced statistics guide. Chicago: SPSS.
Prior, M. R., Sanson, A. V., & Oberklaid, F. (1989). The Australian Temperament Project. In G. Kohnstamm, J. Bates, & M. Rothbart (Eds.), Temperament in childhood
(pp. 537-554). Chichester, NY: Wiley.
Putallaz, M., & Gottman, J. (1981). Social skills and group acceptance. In S. Asher & J.
Gottman (Eds.), The development of friendship: Description and intervention (pp.
116-149). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Robinson, W. P. (1972). Mothers answers to children's questions: From socio-economic
status to individual differences. In W. P. Robinson & S. Rackstraw (Eds.), A question of
answers (pp. 159-182). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Robinson, W. P. (1974). Language and social behavior. London: Penguin.
Rubin, K. H., & Borwick, D. (1984). Communicative skills and sociability. In H. Sypher &
J. Applegate (Eds.), Communication by children and adults: Social cognitive and strategic processes (pp. 153-170). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rutter, M., Tizard, J., & Whitmore, K. (Eds.). (1970). Education, health and behavior.
London: Longmans Green.
Sanson, A. V., Prior, M., & Oberklaid, R. (1985). Normative data on temperament in Australian infants. Australian Journal of Psychology, 37, 185-195.
Snow, C. E., Perlman, R. Y., Gleason, J. B., & Hooshyar, N. (1990). Developmental perspectives on politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 14, 289-302.
Tomasello, M. (1992). The social bases of language acquisition. Social Development, 1,
67-87.
Watts, R. J., Ide, S., & Ehlich, K. (1990). Introduction. In R. J. Watts, S. Ide, & K. Ehlich
(Eds.), Politeness in language: Studies in its history, theory and practise (pp. 1-17).
Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wilkinson, L. C., Wilkinson, A. C., Spinelli, F., & Chiang, C. P. (1984). Metalinguistic
knowledge of pragmatic rules in school-age children. Child Development, 55,
2130-2140.

