Applied Psycholinguistics 22 (2001), 61-82
Printed in the United States of America

Phonological decoding in severely
and profoundly deaf children:
Similarity judgment between
written pseudowords
C. TRANSLER
University College of London
J. E. GOMBERT
Universite de Haute Bretagne
J. LEYBAERT
Universite Libre de Bruxelles
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Catherine Transler, Department of Human Communication Science, University College of
London, 2 Wakefield Street, London WC1 NPG, UK. E-mail: catherine.transler@psycho.univparis5.fr
ABSTRACT
This study attempted to determine whether phonological decoding could be observed among severely
and profoundly deaf children during reading. For this purpose, the ability of 20 deaf children to detect
phonological similarities between three written pseudowords (a model item and two test items) was
investigated. In the first condition, one of the test items was a homophone of the model (e.g., kise,
kyse, kine). In the second condition, one of the test items had the same first syllable as the model
item, as defined by its structure or by nasalization (e.g., lan.jier, lan.du, la.nud). The results demonstrated that deaf children with good speech levels, as well as hearing children matched on word
reading level, were sensitive to homophony when visual proximity between the model and test items
were controlled. They were also sensitive to syllabic structure when the first syllables were CV and
in the nasalization condition. By contrast, deaf children with poor speech abilities did not show this
pattern of results in all conditions. The possibility that the latter results could be explained by deaf
children's sensitivity to orthographic frequency phenomena is discussed. A link between sensitivity to
phonology in written language and speech skills is suggested, and the implications of those results for
a general understanding of the reading processes of deaf children are presented.

For beginning readers, the decoding mechanism, consisting of applying correspondences between visuo-orthographic forms and phonological forms, represents a key step in literacy development (Ehri, 1998; Frith, 1985; Goswami &
Bryant, 1990). When children possess some mastering of decoding skills at the
grapho-phonemic level, they develop the use of infralexical reading units that
 2001 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/01 $9.50

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

62

are larger than graphemes (Duncan, Seymour, & Hill, 1997; Ehri & Robbins,
1992; Seymour, Duncan, & Bolik, 1999; Seymour & Evans, 1994). The automatization of this process enables children to develop their reading abilities up to
an expert reading level. However, the attainment of good decoding skills depends on the preliminary development of accurate phonological representations
(Duncan, Seymour, & Hill, in press; Gombert & Cole, 1999). This developmental process is greatly compromised in severely and profoundly deaf children
because of the absence of numerous, precise, and redundant oral language inputs. Thus, our aim is to determine the existence (and the conditions of existence) of decoding processes during silent reading in deaf children.
Before tackling the question of reading processes among deaf children, it may
be worthwhile to note that phonological development is not exclusively dependent on the auditory modality because phonological representations do not correspond to surface features of speech. Phonological representations are of an
abstract nature, representing the "meaningless primitives out of which meaningful units are formed" (Hanson, 1989, p. 73). Recent studies support the hypothesis that phonological segmental information could be obtained by deaf people
through sensorial modalities other than audition. One main source of information that enables the emergence of phonological representations in deaf children
is speech reading (Campbell, 1997; Dodd, 1976). Nevertheless, phonological
information contained in visual speech reading is poorer, scarcer, and less precise than information based on auditory inputs for hearing people because many
phonemes have similar labial images or no labial correlates. As an example, the
bilabial consonants /p/, /b/, and /m/ have almost the same labial images, and the
velar consonants /k/ and /g/ are not readily visible.
Speech articulation abilities also play a role in the constitution and use of
phonological representations. Deaf people with good speech intelligibility
(which is often associated with good residual hearing) show stronger phonological coding effects during short-term memory tasks involving written material
than do deaf people with lower speech intelligibility (Conrad, 1979). But, in
general, phonological representations of severely and profoundly deaf people
are described as poorer and less precise than those of hearing people. One could
mention some exceptional cases of rich phonological development among profoundly deaf people who were early and intensively exposed to Cued Speech, a
visuomanual method of speech reading completion. However, those deaf children
constitute a minority among the deaf community (see reviews in LaSasso & Metzger, 1998; Leybaert, 1998; Leybaert, Alegria, Hage, & Charlier, 1998).
The question as to whether phonological codes may be activated during reading has been investigated using different experimental paradigms (see reviews
in Leybaert, 1993; Marschark, 1993). Evidence of phonological activation has
often been found in tasks where oral responses were required. Leybaert (1993)
observed fewer pronunciation errors in the reading of easy pseudowords containing one-letter-to-one-phoneme correspondences than in the reading of complex pseudowords containing several-letters-to-one-phoneme correspondences
or context-dependent correspondences. This result was interpreted as suggesting
that deaf people may be able to use grapheme-phoneme correspondence processes in reading pseudowords.

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

63

In experiments not requiring an oral response, evidence for grapho-phonological conversion was rarely observed. Leybaert and Alegria (1993) investigated
phonological assembly processes in deaf children (mean age = 13;3) in a Stroop
task. In this task, participants were asked to name the color of an item. When
this item was the name of another color (e.g., VERT, green, written in red ink)
there was an interference effect, which was interpreted as arising from an automatic activation of the word's phonological representation. In the case of pseudowords that were homophones of color names (e.g., French-speaking children
were asked to name the color of the pseudoword VAIRE_GREAN, homophone of
vert, green), an interference effect evidenced automatic activity of the assembly
process, which led to the activation of the color word's phonological representation. Leybaert and Alegria (1993) found a larger interference effect from homophone pseudowords than nonhomophone pseudowords matched for orthographic
similarity vis-a-vis the color word (e.g., VOURE) in deaf children when responses
were given orally but not when responses were given manually. In a control
group of hearing children, the interference effects created by the homophonic
pseudowords were significant in both response modalities.
In a lexical decision paradigm in which participants used a manual response
to identify items as words, significant regularity effects were observed in hearing groups, but no indication of phonological coding was found in deaf populations matched on reading level (Burden & Campbell, 1994; Merrills, Underwood, & Wood, 1994; Waters & Doehring, 1990).
By contrast, some strong evidence in support of phonological activation during silent reading in deaf people was provided by the observation of pronounceability effects in a letter detection task and by regularity effects found in lexical
decision tasks by Hanson (1986) and Hanson and Fowler (1987). However,
those populations consisted of deaf high school students. This limited the generalization of any conclusions concerning the reading strategies of most deaf people, among whom the mean grade level of school dropouts is the equivalent of
the third or fourth grade (Conrad, 1979; Paul & Quigley, 1994).
There is only one piece of evidence that supports the existence of phonological coding in the silent reading of isolated items by young deaf children. In a
lexical decision task with no time limit, frequent words and pseudowords were
presented on cards to young deaf children (mean age = 9;9) and hearing children
(mean age = 7;3). Deaf children with good speech abilities found it more difficult to reject pseudohomophones that were visually similar to frequent words
(e.g., pseudoword somo vs. source word some) than control pseudowords
matched in letter length and in similarity and frequency to source words (Beech &
Harris, 1997). This result indicates that, in reading pseudowords, deaf children
with good speech used phonological decoding processes. These children may
have developed phonological representations that were precise enough to be
used during the reading activity. This result was important as the use of the
phonological decoding by deaf people may be correlated with more general
abilities implicated in reading, such as vocabulary or comprehension (Conrad,
1979; Harris & Beech, 1998).
Despite these advances, our knowledge as to the way phonological decoding
occurs in deaf children during silent reading is far from complete. In particular,

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

64

Beech and Harris's (1997) study did not systematically examine deaf children's
abilities to associate reading units with phonological units as a function of their
speech abilities and their hearing levels with hearing aids. Our study addresses
this issue by investigating phonological decoding processes among deaf children
as a function of their speech abilities, in perception and in production, and their
hearing loss with and without hearing aids.
Our paradigm was inspired by a project undertaken by Blanton, Nunnally,
and Odom (1967). They used a similarity judgment paradigm with deaf teenagers (mean age = 16). Sixty short, high-frequency words in a binary choice format
were presented to deaf and hearing participants. In one condition (30 items), the
model word (FOUR) was an orthographic neighbor of one test item (FOUL) and
a homophone with the other test item (FORE). Participants were told that they
had to circle the word of the pair that they considered "best went with the
stimulus word." The deaf participants chose homophones significantly less often
(59.6% of the cases) than did hearing participants (83.7%). However, the authors did not calculate the scores of deaf participants according to chance levels.
A recalculation of their data revealed that, despite the high standard deviation
(7) mentioned by the authors, the responses of the deaf participants were significantly greater than the chance level, t(144) = 4.92, p < .01. Consequently, our
hypothesis was that this paradigm could provide evidence for the use of phonological strategies among deaf people, despite their performing more poorly than
controls.
We presented French hearing and deaf children with a similarity judgment
paradigm that included variations in phonological and visuo-orthographic similarity between model and test items. Contrary to Blanton et al. (1967), the items
we used (models and tests) consisted of pseudowords because our purpose was
to investigate nonlexical phonological coding only. To control individual differences among deaf participants, deaf children were separated into two groups as
a function of their speech skills, measured by both their speech production and
their speech recognition skills.
In one condition, one of the two test items was a homophone of the model
item. For example, for the model kise /kiz/, the test homophone was kyse /kiz/
and the concurrent test item was kyne /kin/. In comparison to Blanton et al.'s
(1967) material, the visuo-orthographic similarity with model items was systematically controlled for the two test items.
The second condition implied similarity of the first syllables in disyllabic
items. The syllabic structure of the French language is well documented. In
French, the syllable is a particularly relevant linguistic unit in oral and written
language. For French-speaking adults, the syllable is a unit of word recognition,
as revealed by syllabic priming effects in oral word recognition (Mehler, Dommergues, Frauenfelder, & Segui, 1981), as well as a unit in speech production
(Ferrand, Segui, & Grainger, 1996). For French-speaking children, evidence in
support of the syllable as a reading unit may be found in Cole, Magnan, and
Grainger's (1999) observations of first grade pupils in a letter detection task.
In the nasalization condition, the syllabic boundary of the first syllable was
defined by the pronunciation of the letter n, depending on the context (lanjier
/la.^ie/, landu /la.dy/, lanud /la.nyd/). In the open-closed syllable condition,

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

65

the syllabic boundary was defined by the phonological structure of the first
syllable (CV or CVC), as determined by the presence of a vowel or a consonant
following the second consonant of the item (paulon /po.lo/, paulat /po.la/,
paulta /pol.ta/).
We expected hearing children to make choices, according to phonological
similarity, between items at a level superior to the chance level in all experimental conditions. We also expected such results among deaf children, but their
results would depend on the quality of their speech abilities: the selection of
phonologically similar items was expected to be more frequent for deaf children
with higher speech abilities than for other deaf children.
METHOD
Participants
Deaf children. A total of 26 deaf children (11 males, 15 females) between the

ages of 8;11 and 13;6 years (mean age = 11;1) participated in this experiment.
All had a hearing loss greater than 70 dB in their better ear without aid (measured in tonal audiometry at frequencies of .25, .5, 1, and 2 kHz). Their deafness
had been diagnosed before the age of 2 years, and all wore hearing aids. They
were recruited in three specialized primary schools in northeastern France
(seven classes in total). Their most common form of communication was French
Sign Language. At school, sign language was alternated with oral methods in
various ways, depending on the classes. Cued Speech was used at school in
some courses and during speech and language therapy, but no child used it
intensively as a common form of communication. Most parents of the participants had normal hearing, two children had deaf parents, and one child had a
deaf father. The children had a normal level of intelligence, as tested by school
psychologists using nonverbal tests (PM47 or WISC-R performance tests). They
had no diagnosed behavior disorders, motor handicap, sensory deficit, or language difficulty other than those specifically associated with deafness.
Two tests were administered to the deaf children in order to separate them
into poor and good speech groups. A speech perception test was adapted from
Boon's clinical test (1995), which was composed of 39 items. We decided to
shorten this test to less than the standard duration of one hour. Several months
prior to our experiment, the total version had been administered to 21 deaf
subjects. We retained the 16 items that were the most correlated to the total
score. Eventually, 8 words and 8 pseudowords were presented in Cued Speech
(manual + oral) by the experimenter, who was assisted by a teacher. All the
items were repeated three times. Children were asked to choose the written form
among several alternatives with either similar coding or similar lip-read images.
Six alternatives were presented for pseudowords, while four alternatives were
presented for words. In order to succeed, children had to know the cued word
associated with the lip-read images. The severity of their deafness would not
enable them to succeed in the test solely on an acoustic basis. Finally, a score
on a scale of 16 points was applied to each participant. The chance level corresponded to 3.2 points (20% of mean probability).

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

66

Speech production was recorded, and speech intelligibility was estimated by
two independent speech-and-language therapists on a 5-point scale ranging from
(1) "unintelligible" to (5) "clearly intelligible." Children had to name 7 colors,
21 numbers, and 22 pictures of ordinary objects. The scores of the two speechand-language therapists were strongly correlated (r = 0.96, r2 = 0.91, p < .01).
Thus, the final score for each participant was the mean of the two scores.
The mean score for all deaf children in the speech perception test was 9.9/16
(SD = 3.9). The mean score for speech production was 2.3/5 (SD = 1.5). In the
latter test, the distribution of the scores did not follow a normal curve, and the
variability was particularly high. Two-thirds of the participants in the sample
had scores below 2.5 points. In order to separate participants into two groups
as a function of their general speech skills, criteria were chosen a posteriori,
corresponding to mean scores in speech perception and a score in speech production, that permitted the division of the population. Ten participants had
speech perception scores less than 10/16 and speech production scores less than
1.7/5. They constituted the poor speech group (D-). Ten participants were allocated to the good speech group (D+), defined by speech perception scores
greater than 10/16 and speech production scores greater than 1.8/5. Six participants (23%) were not included in either groups because they did not meet the
specified criteria: three presented perception scores inferior to 10 but production
scores superior or equal to 1.8, and three presented the inverse profile. Individual scores of the deaf participants are presented in Table 1.
Control group. A total of 26 hearing children composed the control group (14

males, 12 females). They were between the ages of 6;9 and 10;2 years (mean
age = 8;2). They were younger than the deaf participants, t(50) = -8.46, p <
.001. They were recruited in a primary school in northeastern France. Fifteen
children were in second grade, and twelve were in third grade. They were all
native French-speaking and monolingual; none had repeated a school year, and
none had any psychological, motor, sensory, or cognitive difficulties, as reported
by their teachers.
The control group and deaf participants were matched on a written word recognition level and not on sentence or text reading level, on the grounds that
more general reading processes (comprehension of sentences or texts) involve
syntactic abilities that are not investigated in this study. As standard reading
aloud tests could not be used with deaf children, the word reading level was
evaluated by a lexical decision task presented in a limited time (1 minute) and
by a test of orthographic recognition of frequent words (Khomsi, 1994).
The lexical decision task was created by the present authors: 20 frequent words
and 20 pronounceable pseudowords that were not orthographic neighbors of real
words were presented in random order. The frequency of the words had been
controlled in a previous experiment (Transler, Leybaert, & Gombert, 1999). Children were asked to detect words and to reject pseudowords. They had to process
as many items as they could in a minute. The mean number of correct responses
was 25.8/40 (SD = 10.4) for the hearing participants and 25.7/40 for the deaf
participants (SD = 11.3). The difference between the two groups was not significant, t(50) < 1.

67

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

Table 1. Sex ratio, age, hearing loss with and without aids, scores to the CS test (speech
perception) and to the speech intelligibility test (speech production) for deaf children,
plus written word recognition scores for deaf and hearing children (lexical decision and
word identification tests)
Lexical
Deafness
Cued
Speech
decision
Word
Age without Deafness speech intelligibility (words per identification
Sex (months) aids
with aids (/16)
(/5)
minute)
(/50)
Deaf
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
D7
D8
D9
D10
M
SD

participants D-
f
159
117
m 130
110
m 127
115
m 108
108
m 125
109
m 126
109
f
119
97
m 135
102
m 124
105
m 145
100
129.8 108.5*
14.1

111
65
87
57
61
65
50
47
62
52
61.5*

2
4
5
5
5
5
7
9
10
10
6.2
2.7

1.1
1
1.15
1.25
1.35
1.7
1.6
1
0.75
1.1
1.2
0.3

10
32
21
26
40
29
20
33
40
40
29.1
10.0

48
39
40
39
42
46
38
46
32
39
40.9
4.7

Deaf
D11
D12
D13
D14
D15
D16
D17
D18
D19
D20
M
SD

participants D+
f
158
120
m 146
109
f
161
106
f
160
114
m 119
100
f
109
110
f
101
72
f
162
120
f
107
99
f
108
86
133.1 107.5*
26.3

120
61
64
59
42
36
45
41
35
33
43.5*

10
11
12
13
13
13
14
15
15
16
13.2
1.9

4.5
1.75
2
1.75
3
4.85
4.4
1.75
4.4
5
3.34
1.4

24
40
40
40
34
28
25
40
40
10
32.1
10.2

49
41
47
43
35
28
39
48
47
35
41.2
6.9

--
--

--
--

--
--

25.8
10.38

42.4
3.94

Hearing participants (n = 26)
M
97.8
--
SD
9.02
--

Note: M = mean; SD = standard deviation; * = median.

The second test, Epreuve collective d'identification des mots ecrits (ECIME), was a collective test of word identification created by Khomsi (1994). Fortyfive written items were each associated with a picture. Participants were required to circle the words that were correctly associated with the pictures and
to cross out words that were not associated or that contained misspellings.
The mean number of correct responses (words + pseudowords) was 42.4/50

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

68

(SD = 3.9) for the hearing children and 40.6/50 (SD = 7.1) for the deaf children.
This difference was not significant, t(50) = 1.16, ns.
The mean of the scores of the two groups of deaf participants did not differ
on age, written word recognition level, or hearing loss measured without hearing
aids, t(18) < 1 in all cases. Their hearing loss, as measured with hearing aids,
was not significantly superior when the means were considered (66 dB for D-
and 53.6 dB for D+, t(18) = 1.18, ns), despite the median being greater for the
D- group (62 dB) than for the D+ group (44 dB). It is worth mentioning that
the fact that the written word recognition level was not different for deaf children with good speech and deaf children with poor speech was independent of
the procedure we used to select the participants.
Material

The items were triplets of pseudowords: the model, a phonologically similar test
item, and a second test item (concurrent item). Forty-four triplets were presented
(see Appendix 1). Each triplet was presented on one page of a booklet. The
model item was vertically centered on the left side of the page. Test items were
presented on the right side, one above the other. The items of all conditions
were mixed and presented in random order in the booklets.
Homophone condition. Two conditions of visuo-orthographic proximity were
presented. The number of letters in common between the homophone and the
model defined visuo-orthographic proximity. In the O+ condition, the visual
proximity between both test items and the model was the same in that they
differed by only one letter: for example, kyse /kiz/, kise /kiz/, kyne /kin/ (10
triplets). In the O- condition, the number of letters in common between models
and nonhomophones was greater than the number of letters in common between
models and homophones. In this condition, visual proximity favored nonhomophones: for example, nebe /nb/, naib /nb/, nere /nr/ (10 triplets).
All pseudowords in both conditions were monosyllabic. Almost all items
shared the same first letter in order to avoid an effect whereby the first letter
would be more salient than the other letters. The grapho-phonological rules
implied for decoding most of the pseudowords were simple and context-independent (except for three pseudowords, or 5%, for which pronunciation depended on the context: double consonants before e and the letter s, pronounced
/z/, between two vowels).
Open-closed syllable condition. The first letters of the test items and the first
letters of the model were identical (e.g., bar): that is, they all began with an
onset, a vowel, and a consonant. The syllablic boundaries varied as a function
of the presence of a cluster of consonants after the first vowel. In the CVC
condition (barser, bardi, barid), the consonant following the first vowel was
integrated in the first syllable (bar.ser /bar.se/; 6 triplets). In the CV condition
(baru, barand, bardan), the consonant following the vowel was integrated in
the second syllable (ba.ru /ba.ry/; 6 triplets). To avoid an eventual effect due to
the length and the type of the first syllable, test items were created in pairs.

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

69

Model and test items of the CVC and CV conditions began with the same letters
up to the probe consonant (e.g., bar.ser in the CVC condition and ba.ru in the
CV condition). Model items of the CVC and CV conditions that began with the
same letters were not presented in the same booklets in order to create a time
delay between their processing by the participants.
Nasalization condition. The triplets were composed using the same principles
as in the open-closed syllable condition. They began with the same letters, and
the phonology of the first syllable varied as a function of the letter positioned
after the letter n. In the CVN/ condition, the letter following the n in the model
item was a consonant (lanjier, landu, lanud), and the n was integrated in the
nasal vowel of the first syllable (lan.jier /la.^je/; 6 triplets). In the CV/N condition (lanut, lanic, lanci), the letter following the n in the model item was a
vowel (lanut); the n had a consonant status, the syllabic boundary occurred
before it (i.e., after an oral vowel: la.nut /la.ny/), and the n was integrated in
the second syllable (6 triplets). The matching of triplets was the same as in the
open-closed syllable condition.
Control tasks: Word-likeness and syllabification

Two control experiments were conducted for the disyllabic items to investigate
the similarity between experimental disyllabic pseudowords and real words and
to verify whether the syllabic structure was clear. The participants were 8 children from the second grade and 11 children from the third grade (mean age =
8;2). As a basis of their selection, they were diagnosed as not being subject to
any auditory, language, or learning deficits. They were all native French speakers, and no one was bilingual. They had not participated in the experiment of
similarity judgment (those participants had been recruited from another school
in the same area).
For the control of word-likeness, test items were presented by pairs (e.g.,
landu vs. lanud), and pairs were presented randomly. Children were told that
two little boys had invented new words; one boy was French and the other lived
far away in a foreign country. They were told that the French boy's new words
looked like real French words, whereas the words invented by the other boy did
not look like French words. Participants were asked to guess for each written
word pair which word had been invented by the French boy and to circle it. In
the nasalization condition, words beginning with a nasal syllable (CVN/) were
chosen by 53.9% of the total number of participants. This score was not significantly different from the chance level, t(18) = 1.43, ns. In the open-closed syllable condition, words beginning with a CV syllable were chosen by 60.5% of
the participants. This score was significantly superior to the chance level, t(18)
= 3, p < .01; thus, pseudowords with a CV syllable were judged as more similar
to real words than were words with a CVC syllable. This phenomenon is congruent with the fact that in French words with a CV syllable are more numerous
than words with a CVC syllable.
For the control of syllabic boundaries, an explicit syllabic segmentation was
presented to the same participants following the first test. Children were told

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

70

what a syllable is, and examples were given to show them how to segment
words into two syllables. They were then given a list of pseudowords and asked
to write a slash between each set of two syllables. The rates of unexpected
responses were low: CVC, 9%; CV, 5%; CVN/, 2%; and CV/N, 7%. Consequently, all items were considered as valid.
Procedure

All children were seen in their classrooms with their teachers present. They
were presented with the lexical decision test and then the word identification
test (20 minutes). These two tests were followed by the speech perception tests
for deaf participants. The total duration of this first test session was approximately one hour for the deaf children. In addition, an individual session for deaf
children was organized in the following days for the speech intelligibility test;
children were told that their voices were being recorded, and that they should
speak as well as they could.
The similarity judgment task was presented during a second session in the
presence of a teacher or speech therapist, who was told that he or she could
intervene to reformulate instructions but not to give new information. A first
booklet was distributed to all children. The pages were randomized so that no
two children had the same booklet. In each booklet, no two model items had
the same beginning: for instance, the pseudowords paulon, paulat, paulta and
paulni, paulto, paulot did not appear in the same booklet. The second booklet
was given to the children immediately after the first. The order of presentation
in the booklets was balanced. The children were told that all the words were
"invented" (i.e., did not exist in reality). They were told that they had to choose
words on the right side of the page that seemed most like the items on the left
side. Instructions were given in sign language to the deaf children. In sign language, the expression used could be translated as "choose the word that is about
the same as." Three examples were given. In those examples, no phonological
strategy was primed because both orthographic and phonological similarity
would enable the children to find the item that was most similar to the model
(e.g., trouf, traf, brok). The experimental task was not time limited. It took
about 20 minutes.
RESULTS

In each condition, the dependent variable was the number of choices of test
items that were phonologically most similar to the model item. The results in the
homophony, open-closed syllable, and nasalization conditions were analyzed
separately. In each condition, data were analyzed with a general ANOVA followed by planned comparisons (hearing vs. D+; D+ vs. D-). Then the scores in
each group were compared to the chance level (50%).
Homophone condition

Data were analyzed by a general ANOVA with a 3 x 2 design (Group [hearing,
D+, D-] x Orthographic Similarity [O+, O-]), with the last factor as a repeated
measure and participants as a random factor. The percentages of choices of the

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

71

Figure 1. Percentages of phonological similarity choices in the homophone conditions (O+
and O-) for deaf (D+ and D-) and hearing children.

phonologically similar items for the three groups of participants are presented
in Figure 1. The effect of orthographic similarity was significant, F(1, 43) =
30.16, p < .001, without significant interaction among the groups, F < 1. The
effect of group was significant, F(2, 43) = 11.4, p < .001.
The first planned comparisons showed that the scores of the hearing children
did not differ significantly from those of the D+ group, F(1, 43) = 1.5, ns. In
both groups, scores were superior to the chance level in the O+ condition: hearing, t(25) = 5.29, p < .01; D+, t(9) = 2.05, p < .05. However, the scores of both
groups were not superior to the chance level in cases where orthographic proximity was in competition with phonological proximity: hearing, t(25) = 1.01, ns;
D+, t(9) = -1, ns. As expected, hearing children were sensitive to phonological
proximity between items, though this effect disappeared when orthographic similarity was in competition with phonological similarity. Deaf children with high
speech level scores showed the same pattern of results. This is interpreted as
evidence supporting the existence of phonological decoding for deaf children
with high speech abilities.
The second planned comparison showed that the scores of deaf children with
the poor speech abilities were significantly lower than those of the D+ group,
F(1, 43) = 8.6, p < .01. In the condition O+, the choices of the D- did not differ
from the chance level, t(9) = -1.71, ns, preventing us from attempting any interpretation regarding their reading strategy. However, in the O- condition, deaf
children chose homophones at a lower level than the chance level, t(9) = -6.43,
p < .01; the visuo-orthographic proximity between models and tests determined
their responses.
Open-closed syllable condition

Data were analyzed by an ANOVA with a 3 x 2 design (Group [hearing, D+,
D-] x First Syllable [CVC; CV]), with the last factor as a repeated measure and
participants as a random factor. The percentages of choices of the phonologi-

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

72

Figure 2. Percentages of phonological similarity choices in the open-closed syllable condition (CVC, and CV) and in the nasalization condition (CVN/ and CV/N) for deaf (D+ and
D-) and hearing children.

cally similar items for the three groups of participants are presented in Figure
2. The main effect of group was significant, F(2, 43) = 4.43, p < .05. The effect
of first syllable was not significant, F(1, 43) < 1, nor was the interaction, F(2,
43 = 1.21, ns. The first planned comparison showed that there was no significant
difference between hearing children and deaf children with good speech skills,
F < 1. The choices of hearing children were significantly higher than the chance
level: CV, t(25) = 3.44, p < .01; CVC, t(25) = 2.64, p < .01. However, the scores
of deaf children with good speech skills, compared with the chance level, differed as a function of the phonological status of the first syllable. In the CV
condition, their choices were significantly higher than the chance level, t(9) =
3.16, p < .05, whereas this was not the case in the CVC condition, t(9) = 1.78,
ns. The lack of significant difference between scores in CVC and the chance
level for the D+ group was unexpected because the scores of deaf children in
the CVC condition were numerically higher than those of hearing children
(65.0% vs. 60.8%). The lack of significance is the consequence of the low
number of deaf participants integrated in this group, as well as a standard deviation higher in the deaf group than in the hearing group (respectively, 26.5% and
21.0%). These factors diminish the authority of the statistical test results.
The second planned comparison showed that the results of D- participants
were significantly inferior to those of the D+ group, F(1, 43) = 6.2, p < .05.
Their results were clearly not different from the chance level for each condition
of the first syllable phonological structure: CVC, t(9) < 1, ns; CV, t(9) < 1, ns.
To summarize, in this condition the scores of deaf children provide support
in favor of the existence of sensitivity to the phonological structure of syllables
only for deaf children with good speech and in the CV condition.

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

73

Nasalization condition

Data were analyzed by an ANOVA with 3 x 2 design (Group [hearing, D+, D-]
x First Syllable [CVN/; CV/N]), with the last factor as a repeated measure and
participants as a random factor. The percentages of choices of the phonologically similar items for the three groups of participants are presented in Figure
2. The effect of group was significant, F(2, 43) = 4.14, p < .05. There was no
significant effect of the first syllable, F(1, 43) = 1.33, ns, nor any interaction,
F(2, 43) < 1.
The first planned comparison showed that there was no significant difference
between the scores of hearing and D+ participants, F < 1. Hearing and D+ participants made choices superior to the chance level in both conditions: in the
CVN/ condition, hearing, t(25) = 5.33, p < .01, deaf D+, t(9) = 2.25, p < .05; in
the CV/N condition, hearing, t(25) = 7.91, p < .01, deaf D+, t(9) = 2.94, p < .01.
This pattern of results showed that hearing and deaf participants with good
speech were sensitive to similarity at a syllabic level.
The second planned comparison showed that the difference between the
scores of the D- and D+ groups was not significant, F(2, 43) = 2.6, p > .05. The
scores of the D- deaf group were not significantly different from the chance
level in the CVN/ condition, t(9) = 1.08, ns, but were slightly higher than the
chance level in the CV/N condition, t(9) = 2.23, p < .05. We will return to the
question of whether the visuo-orthographic properties of items could account
for those results independently from their phonological properties.
Comparison between open-closed syllable and nasalization conditions

A posteriori, it was decided to compare the scores in the open-closed syllable
conditions and the scores in the nasalization condition because the latter seemed
numerically higher for all groups. Data were analyzed by an ANOVA with a 3 x
2 design (Group [hearing, D+, D-] x Type of Disyllable [open-closed syllable,
nasalization]), with the last factor as a repeated measure and participants as a
random factor. There was indeed a main effect of the disyllabic item type, with
unexpectedly higher scores in the nasalization condition than in the open-closed
syllable condition, F(1, 43) = 9.9, p < .01. Those results will be discussed with
regard to the visuo-orthographic properties of items in each condition. Finally,
we found the same group effect that we observed earlier, F(2, 43) = 6.15, p <
.001, but the interaction was not significant, F < 1.
DISCUSSION

In this experiment, we examined the evidence for phonological decoding process among deaf children in a task of similarity judgment between pseudowords.
Our main interest was to determine whether deaf children would be sensitive to
phonological similarity between monosyllabic homophones and between disyllables sharing the same first syllable, as defined by open structure or by nasalization. Individual differences were controlled: deaf children were separated into

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

74

two groups as a function of their speech production and perception abilities.
Their scores were compared with a control group of hearing children matched
on word reading level.

Monosyllabic homophones

In this condition, the scores of hearing children were superior to the chance level
when the visuo-orthographic similarity between test items and control items was
controlled. However, when visuo-orthographic similarity was in competition
with phonological similarity, no dominant strategy was observed.
As expected, the results of deaf children differed significantly as a function
of their speech skills. Regarding the deaf children with the highest speech scores
(D+), the selection of similar items was superior to the chance level in the same
conditions as for the hearing group. As expected, they chose the homophone
test item in cases where the visuo-orthographic similarity between both test
items and the model item was equal (homophone condition O+). This result is
congruent with Blanton et al.'s (1967) observations concerning real words: deaf
people would choose homophonic words when visuo-orthographic similarity between model items and nonhomophone items was controlled (e.g., four, fore,
foul). Our results also extend Blanton et al.'s findings because our items were
only pseudowords, making direct access to the phonological form of the items
impossible. We may conclude from our data that the deaf children used phonological decoding processes at a sublexical level to read the items and then to
solve the experimental task. They could possibly have applied grapho-phonological conversion to diverse reading units (graphemes, rimes, or others). It is also
possible that they used sublexical analogy processes in their reading (Gombert,
Bryant, & Warrick, 1997; Goswami, 1988, 1998), leading to a phonological
assembly in a large sense (Peereman, 1991). These observations alone cannot
fully account for one interpretation over another.
On the contrary, deaf children with poor speech skills did not show any clear
evidence in favor of phonological decoding in the homophone condition; their
scores were not significantly superior to the chance level. This result is congruent with several studies indicating that deaf youngsters with poor speech did not
show evidence of phonological processing in reading tasks (e.g., Beech & Harris, 1997; Hanson, 1986; Leybaert & Alegria, 1993, 1995). This result does not
mean that such children have not developed any phonological representations.
Strictly speaking, we cannot conclude whether children are deprived of phonological representations or whether they have some but do not use them spontaneously in reading. This second hypothesis is plausible because some studies have
demonstrated that deaf participants who were sensitive to the phonological properties of material in other experimental paradigms like working memory and
spelling did not show any evidence of phonological coding during reading (Burden & Campbell, 1994; Waters & Doehring, 1990). In the absence of any evidence of a phonological decoding strategy in this task, we would surmise that
these deaf children adopted another strategy in order to respond to the demands

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

75

of the task. In the condition where nonhomophones shared more letters in common with the models than did homophones (O- condition), deaf children with
poor speech clearly adopted a visuo-orthographic strategy.
Sensitivity to syllabic structure and syllabic boundaries

When disyllables were presented, the scores in the control group of hearing
children were significantly superior to the chance level. Children were sensitive
to the fact that two pseudowords shared the same first syllable, as defined by
the open or closed structure or by the nasal or oral status of the vowel in the
first syllable. This revealed that hearing children were sensitive to the syllables
of the written items. Thus, those results are in accordance with studies that have
underlined the role of the syllable in reading in French (for children, see Cole
et al., 1999; Magnan & Cole, 1999).
Another question was whether deaf children with good speech would be sensitive to syllabic structure. In the open syllable condition (CV) and the nasalization condition, deaf children with good speech chose items sharing syllables
with similar boundaries at a significantly higher level than chance, just as hearing children did. The evidence was less strong for CVC (closed) syllables. A
possible explanation is that children find it more difficult to read items containing closed syllables or consonant clusters than items containing only open syllables (Sprenger-Charolles & Siegel, 1997). As mentioned before, CVC syllables
(closed syllables) are rarer than CV syllables (open syllables) in French, and
perhaps this is why CVC items obtained significantly lower scores in the wordlikeness task. Thus, a complementary hypothesis is that deaf children would
choose CV test items more often than CVC items because of their greater degree
of word-likeness. However, this explanation is very unlikely because, if that
were the case, this effect should also have been observed in the D- group. Thus,
the effects observed on CV items were more likely due to the participants'
sensitivity to the phonological similarities between items. From the results observed on the rest of the material, we can conclude that deaf children with good
speech level were sensitive to the syllabic structure of the items and that they
were able to perform a syllabic parsing.
To our knowledge, this is the first time that sensitivity to syllabic structure
of written material has been evidenced and related to speech abilities among
deaf children. Indeed, Transler et al. (1999) observed a utilization of syllabic
units during a copying task, but they found no strong evidence for phonological
coding in this task, nor any link with speech abilities and the use of syllabic
reading units. It is worth mentioning that the forced choice demanded by our
paradigm, combined with the linguistic constraints of our material (pseudowords
instead of words), probably amplified the pertinence of the phonological strategies necessary to find an adequate response. Future studies should aim to detect
whether sensitivity to syllabic structure occurs in more natural reading conditions among deaf children with good speech levels.
For deaf children with poor speech, given the absence of significant results
in the O+ homophone condition, one would not have expected any significant

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

76

result in conditions implying disyllabic items. Indeed, phonological decoding
was expected to be more difficult to do on disyllabic items than on monosyllabic
items. The primary reason is that the items were longer (disyllabic vs. monosyllabic) in the homophone condition. Moreover, in the nasalization condition, the
grapho-phonemic conversion of the letter n depended on the context, and in the
open-closed syllable condition, the consonant cluster created a pronounceability
difficulty. Those predictions were only partially verified.
In the open-closed syllable condition, scores of deaf children with poor
speech were not different from the chance level. However, their scores were
clearly superior to the chance level in the nasalization condition (CV/N). An
explanation in terms of word-likeness can be discarded because the results obtained in the control test of word-likeness of model items in the nasalization
condition were not significantly different as a function of the structure of model
items. Moreover, in post-hoc tests, no significant difference was observed in
this deaf sample between scores in the CVN/ and CV/N conditions. Finally, in
the CV/N condition, their scores were numerically superior to their scores in all
other conditions. The high scores of deaf children with poor speech in the nasalization conditions, especially in comparison to their lower scores in the open-
closed syllable condition, were not expected.
A closer look at the characteristics of the consonant clusters implied in the
nasalization and open-closed syllable conditions reveals that frequency phenomena differed within the two conditions. For items containing consonant digrams, the frequency of consonant digrams containing a syllabification was significantly higher in the nasalization condition than in the open-closed syllable
condition. In fact, digrams containing a syllabification between n and the consonant (n + consonants in CVN/ and CV/N triplets, either in models or in test
items) are more frequent than digrams containing a syllabification between the
two consonants in triplets of the CVC and CV conditions.1 It is possible that
deaf children with poor speech were sensitive to those frequency phenomena
that imply digram frequency and the orthographic syllabification phenomena.
This interpretation would be in line with the data obtained by Hanson. This
author systematically observed that deaf adults were sensitive to orthographic
structure during spelling (Hanson, Shankweiler, & Fisher, 1983), during a letter
report (Hanson, 1982), and during letter detection and word-like judgment (Hanson, 1986). She observed that even deaf adults with poor speech were sensitive
to orthographic structure, and that their use of positional frequency information
was the same as in hearing people (Hanson, 1986). Our data suggest that deaf
children, whatever the quality of their oral language, have developed orthographic sensitivity to frequency phenomena determining syllabic boundaries.
Future studies should investigate to what extent the sensitivity of deaf children
to frequency phenomena is independent of phonological abilities.
Speech abilities, hearing loss, and phonological decoding

Regarding our results, an important question concerns the relationships existing
between the abilities we measured among deaf children in the D+ group and
their experimental results. We chose our group of deaf children so that they

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

77

would share several characteristics. They had better intelligibility and better
speech perception (auditorily and visually measured); they also showed better
hearing thresholds, as measured with their hearing aids. This set of particularities is not surprising because other studies have evidenced close links between
some of these variables. Audiological studies showed that hearing level, as measured with conventional aids or cochlear implants, were positively correlated
with auditory speech perception and intelligibility (Osberger, Maso, & Sam,
1993). Dodd, McIntosh, and Woodhouse (1998) observed significant positive
relationships between lip-reading abilities, speech intelligibility, and visual
speech perception among young children with hearing impairments. However,
the nature of the links between hearing, visual speech perception, and speech
production abilities is far from clear. Thus, it would be premature to give an
interpretation of the relationships observed between one of those variables that
characterized the D+ group and the experimental results of this group. For instance, the hearing level in itself is not sufficient to predict speech perception
and intelligibility because there are still important disparities when the hearing
level is equivalent, especially among profound deaf children (Osberger et al.,
1993). It is also not possible to determine whether speech perception (auditory
and visual) precedes and determines speech intelligibility or whether those variables develop in interaction (Dodd et al., 1998).
In spite of the fact that the link between those variables has yet to be elucidated, it is clear that most of those variables, taken alone or together, have
already been found to predict important individual differences among the deaf
population concerning the phonological coding of written material (Beech &
Harris, 1997; Conrad, 1979; Hanson, 1986; Leybaert & Alegria, 1993, 1995;
Reynolds, 1986). Our study reinforces the evidence in this area, showing that
there is a strong relationship between deaf children's speech abilities, taken as
a whole, and their phonological coding abilities.
Reading strategies among deaf children

Reading strategies among deaf children are at once more diverse and more difficult to observe than reading strategies in the hearing population because of their
specificity. First, phonological decoding is probably one of the most investigated
reading strategies among deaf children because of its essential impact on the
whole process of reading development. In fact, we designed this study with the
purpose of observing this type of reading strategy. The utilization of phonological processes during reading in deaf people is heterogeneous and difficult to
observe; phonological representations not only are underspecified, but also have
multiple sources. However, we managed to find evidence for phonological assembly during silent reading in deaf children who had the most effective speech.
Our results are in accordance with the results of Beech and Harris (1997). Another question to raise in future studies is whether the phonological decoding could be automatically evoked by deaf children during silent reading, a
question that still lacks an affirmative answer (Burden & Campbell, 1994; Waters & Doehring, 1990).
Second, orthographic reading strategies have to be scrupulously studied in

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

78

this population. In particular, orthographic strategies could be considered as
developing independently from the development of abilities to use graphophonological assembly, as suggested by the double-foundation model of orthographic development proposed by Seymour (1997). Children could develop
some orthographic representations (i.e., a sensitivity to a frequent string of letters in written language) in spite of their difficulties to master phonological
decoding processes. However, this is only a hypothesis and requires more indepth studies. At present, studies dealing with this specific topic are rare (Pacton, Perruchet, Fayol, & Cleeremans, in press). The authors who did observe
deaf people's sensitivity to orthographic phenomena rarely dissociated legality
from pronounceability (Hanson, 1986) Nevertheless, our results and results observed by Hanson (1986) supply some evidence in favor of this hypothesis.
Finally, other reading strategies that we have not controlled in this experiment
could also have been activated. There are indeed specific reading strategies
among deaf people consisting in converting written material into sign or gesture
representations, such as sign language and fingerspelling (Hirsh-Pasek, 1987;
Treiman & Hirsh-Pasek, 1983). It is possible that these representations relate,
more or less directly, to orthographic or phonological representations, but this,
again, is a question for ongoing debate.

79

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

APPENDIX 1
Experimental triplets for the homophone, open-closed, and nasalization
conditions: model items (Mod.), phonologically similar test items (Phono.),
concurrent test items (Conc.), and mean bigram frequency of test items
Homophone condition
Homophones O+
Mod.

Phono.

Homophones O-
Conc.

kyse
kise
kyne
denc
danc
dene
drun
drin
dron
jeau
jaux
teau
toal
toil
toul
clun
klun
clus
drage
draje
droge
vense
vence
venre
rac
rak
ruc
fouse
fouze
fonse
Big. fq. M
820
1,128
SD
481
799
Comparison: t(9) = -1.18, ns

Mod.

Big. fq.

Phono.

lemme
laime
vaite
vette
nebe
naibe
neile
nele
jain
jin
kade
quade
luphe
lufe
vasse
vace
tac
taque
raxe
rakse
M
955
SD
472
Comparison: t(9) < 1

Conc.
lumme
vatte
nere
neple
jern
kafe
lupre
vause
toc
rane
1,134
714

Nasalization condition and open-closed syllable condition
Nasalization
Mod.
CV/N

Phono.

lanut
lanci
sonoc
sonfi
nenon
nendu
tinou
tindan
bonaux
bonfa
fanier
fanca
CVN/ lanjier
landu
songa
sonto
nendou
nenfie
tinfaux
tinsa
bonquis
bonta
fanja
fanro
Big. fq. M
769
SD
196
Comparison: t(11) < 1

Open-closed syllable
Conc.
lanic
sonif
nenud
tinand
bonaf
fanac
lanud
sonot
nenief
tinas
bonat
fanor
788
141

Mod.
CV

CVC

Big. fq.

Phono.

fabin
fabas
paulon
paulat
saran
sarot
baru
barand
bulir
bulap
mirin
mirus
fabtin
fabsou
paulni
paulto
sarpaux
sartou
barser
bardi
bulpeau
bulson
mirgon
micro
M
703
SD
343
Comparison: t(11) < 1

Conc.
fabsa
paulta
sarto
bardan
bulpa
mirsu
fabous
paulot
sarout
barid
bulons
miroc
627
232

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

80

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by grants from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (Programme Europe, Departement des Sciences de l'Homme et de la Societe), the
Direction Generale de la Recherche Scientifique, Communaute Francaise de Belgique
(A.R.C. 96/01-203), and the Houtman Fund (Belgium). We are very grateful to Ronald
Peereman for his comments on earlier versions of the manuscript, to Sylvie Chanusseau
and Emmanuelle Caens for their collaboration in establishing the speech intelligibility
level of deaf children, and to Joe Goldiamond, Marcin Ssczerbinski, and Liz Nathan for
their help in editing.

NOTE
1. The frequency of the digrams was evaluated with the French data base BRULEX
(Content, Mousty, & Radeau, 1990). The calculation of frequency takes into account
the orthographic syllabification between two letters (established on the basis of phonological syllabification, as defined by sonority principles). For instance, in French,
the digram B/S has a frequency of 49 (per million) and the digram N/C has a frequency of 610. It means that the digram N/C, with a syllabic boundary after the
letter n, is more frequent than the digram B/S, with a syllabic boundary after the b.
The mean frequency of digrams from the nasalization condition is 494 for nonexpected test items in the CV/N condition, 234 for model items in the CVN/ condition,
and 622 for expected test items in the CVN/ condition. Thus, digram frequency is
higher than in the open-closed condition: 173 in the CV condition, t(10) = 3.49,
p < .01, 86 in the CVC condition, t(10) = 1.6, ns, and 191 in the CVC condition,
t(10) = 2.16, p = .05.

REFERENCES
Beech, J. R., & Harris, M. (1997). The prelingually deaf young reader: A case of reliance on direct
lexical access? Journal of Research in Reading, 20, 105-121.
Blanton, R. L., Nunnally, J. C., & Odom, P. B. (1967). Graphemic, phonetic and associative factors
in the verbal behavior of deaf and hearing subjects. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 10, 225-231.
Boon, L. (1995). Perception visuelle de la parole par l'enfant sourd, tentative d'elaboration d'un
test de langage parle complete. Unpublished manuscript. Institut Marie-Haps, Louvain.
Burden, V., & Campbell, R. (1994). The development of word-coding skills in the born deaf: An
experimental study of deaf school-leavers. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 12,
331-349.
Campbell, R. (1997). Read the lips: Speculation on the nature and role of lipreading in cognitive
development of deaf children. In P. S. M. Marschark, D. Lillo-Martin, R. Campbell, &
V. S. Everhart (Ed.), Relations of language and thought: The view from sign language and
deaf children (pp. 110-146). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cole, P., Magnan, A., & Grainger, J. (1999). Syllable-sized units in visual word recognition: Evidence from skilled and beginning readers of French. Applied Psycholinguistics, 20, 507-532.
Conrad, R. (1979). The deaf school child: Language and cognitive function. London: Harper &
Row.
Content, A., Mousty, P., & Radeau, M. (1990). BRULEX, une base de donnees lexicales informatisee pour le francais ecrit et parle. L'Annee Psychologique, 90, 551-566.
Dodd, B. (1976). The phonological system of deaf children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 41, 185-198.
Dodd, B., McIntosh, B., & Woodhouse, L. (1998). Early lipreading ability and speech and language

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

81

development of hearing-impaired pre-schoolers. In R. Campbell, B. Dodd, & D. Burnham
(Eds.), Hearing by eyes: The psychology of lip-reading. London: Erlbaum.
Duncan, L. G., Seymour, P. H. K., & Hill, S. (1997). How important are rhyme and analog in
beginning reading? Cognition, 63, 171-208.
(in press). A small to large unit progression in metaphonological awareness and reading? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Ehri, L. C. (1998). Grapheme-phoneme knowledge is essential for learning to read words in English. In J. L. Metsala & L. C. Ehri (Eds.), Word recognition in beginning reading (pp.
3-40). London: Erlbaum.
Ehri, L. C., & Robbins, C. (1992). Beginners need some decoding skills to read words by analogy.
Reading Research Quarterly, 27, 13-27.
Ferrand, L., Segui, J., & Grainger, J. (1996). Masked priming of word and picture naming: The role
of syllabic units. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 708-723.
Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia. In K. E. Patterson, J. C. Marschall, & M. Coltheart (Eds.), Surface dyslexia (pp. 301-370). London: Erlbaum.
Gombert, J. E., Bryant, P., & Warrick, N. (1997). Children's use of analogy in learning to read and
to spell. In C. Perfetti, M. Fayol, & L. Rieben (Eds.) Learning to spell (pp. 221-235).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gombert, J. E., & Cole, P. (1999). Acitivites metalinguistiques, lecture et illettrisme. In M. Kail &
M. Fayol (Eds.), Le langage en developpement. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Goswami, U. (1988). Children's use of analogy in learning to spell. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 21-33.
(1998). The role of analogies in the development of word recognition. In J. L. Metsala & L. C.
Ehri (Eds.), Word recognition in beginning literacy (pp. 41-63). London: Erlbaum.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and learning to read. Hove: Erlbaum.
Hanson, V. L. (1982). Use of orthographic structure by deaf adults: Recognition of fingerspelled
words. Applied Psycholinguistics, 3, 343-356.
(1986). Access to spoken language and the acquisition of orthographic structure: Evidence from
deaf readers. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38A, 193-212.
(1989). Phonology and reading: Evidence from profoundly deaf readers. In D. Shankweiler &
I. Y. Liberman (Eds.), Phonology and reading disability, solving the reading puzzle (pp.
69-89). Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Hanson, V. L., & Fowler, C. A. (1987). Phonological coding in reading: Evidence from hearing and
deaf readers. Memory and Cognition, 15, 199-207.
Hanson, V. L., Shankweiler, D., & Fisher, W. F. (1983). Determinants of spelling ability in deaf
and hearing adults: Access to linguistic structure. Cognition, 14, 323-344.
Harris, M., & Beech, J. (1998). Implicit phonological awareness and early reading development in
prelingually deaf children. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 3, 205-216.
Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1987). The metalinguistics of fingerspelling: An alternate way to increase reading
vocabulary in congenitally deaf readers. Reading Research Quarterly, 22, 455-474.
Khomsi, A. (1994). Epreuve collective d'identification des mots ecrits (ECIM-E). Travaux de Psycholinguistique, 5. Departement de Psychologie, Universite de Nantes.
LaSasso, C. J., & Metzger, M. A. (1998). An alternate route for preparing deaf children for BiBi
programs: The home language as L1 and Cued Speech for conveying traditionally-spoken
languages. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 3, 265-290.
Leybaert, J. (1993). Reading in the deaf: The roles of phonological codes. In M. Marschark & D.
Clark (Eds.), Psychological perspectives of deafness (pp. 203-227). London: Erlbaum.
(1998). Phonological representations in deaf children: The importance of early linguistic experience. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 39, 169-173.
Leybaert, J., & Alegria, J. (1993). Is word processing involuntary in deaf children. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 11, 1-29.
(1995). Spelling development in deaf and hearing children: Evidence for use of morpho-phonological regularities in French. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 7, 89-109.
Leybaert, J., Alegria, J., Hage, C., & Charlier, B. (1998). The effect of exposure to phonetically
augmented lipspeech in the prelingual deafness. In R. Campbell, B. Dood, & D. Burnham
(Eds.), Hearing by eyes II: Advances in the psychology of speechreading and auditory-visual
speech (pp. 283-301). Hove: Taylor & Francis.

Applied Psycholinguistics 22:1
Transler et al.: Phonological decoding in deaf children

82

Magnan, A., & Cole, P. (1999, September). Phonological processing in first and second French
graders: Effects of vowel nasalization. Paper presented at the Ninth European Conference
on Developmental Psychology, Island of Spetses.
Marschark, M. (1993). Psychological development of deaf children. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Mehler, J., Dommergues, J., Frauenfelder, U., & Sequi, J. (1981). The syllable's role in speech
segmentation. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 298-305.
Merrills, J. D., Underwood, G., & Wood, D. J. (1994). The word recognition skills of profoundly,
prelingually deaf children. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 12, 365-384.
Osberger, M. J., Maso, M., & Sam, L. K. (1993). Speech intelligibility of children with cochlear
implants, tactile aids, or hearing aids. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 186-
203.
Pacton, S. Perruchet, P., Fayol, M., & Cleeremans, A. (in press). Implicit learning out of the laboratory: The case of orthographic regularities. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Paul, V. P., & Quigley, S. P. (1994). Language and deafness. San Diego: Singular Publishing
Group.
Peereman, R. (1991). La mediation phonologique dans la reconnaissance des mots ecrits. In R.
Kolinsky, J. Morais, & J. Segui (Eds.), La reconnaissance des mots dans les differentes
modalites sensorielles: Etudes de psycholinguistique cognitive (pp. 119-163). Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Reynolds, R. N. (1986). Performance of deaf college students on a criterion-referenced modified
cloze test of reading comprehension. American Annals of the Deaf, 131, 361-364.
Seymour, P. H. K. (1997). Foundations of orthographic development. In A. Perfetti, L. Rieben, &
M. Fayol (Eds.), Learning to spell: Research, theory, and practice across languages. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Seymour, P. H. K., Duncan, L. G., & Bolik, F. M. (1999). Rhymes and phonemes in the common
unit task: Replications and implications for beginning reading. Journal of Research in Reading, 22, 113-130.
Seymour, P. H. K., & Evans, H. M. (1994). Levels of phonological awareness and learning to read.
Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 6, 221-250.
Sprenger-Charolles, L., & Siegel, L. S. (1997). A longitudinal study of the effects of syllabic structure of reading and spelling in French. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 485-505.
Treiman, R., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1983). Silent reading: Insights from second generation deaf readers.
Cognitive Psychology, 15, 39-65.
Transler, C., Leybaert, J., & Gombert, J. E. (1999). Do deaf children use phonological syllables as
reading units? Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 4, 124-143.
Waters, G. S., & Doehring, D. G. (1990). Reading acquisition in congenitally deaf children who
communicate orally: Insights from an analysis of components reading, language, and memory skills. In T. Carr & B. A. Levy (Eds.), Reading and its development: Component skill
approaches (pp. 223-273). San Diego: Academic.

