Journal of Memory and Language 45, 133-159 (2001)
doi:10.1006/jmla.2000.2764, available online at http://www.academicpress.com on

Assimilation and Anticipation in Continuous Spoken Word Recognition
David W. Gow, Jr.
Massachusetts General Hospital and Salem State College
English coronal place assimilation is one of many productive phonological processes that change the phonological form of words. It may, for example, cause speakers to pronounce green as something approximating [gri]
or [grim] in different contexts. The present work examines how listeners recognize words that have undergone
this modification. Current accounts are broadly differentiated by two issues: (1) whether listeners generally recognize words that have undergone word-final, single-feature modification, and (2) how context effects in the perception of assimilated speech are interpreted. Experiment 1 employs form priming to demonstrate that listeners
tolerate single-feature mismatch resulting from both phonologically plausible and phonologically implausible
word form modification when recognizing words heard in context. Experiments 2 and 3 employ phoneme monitoring and negative rhyme priming paradigms, respectively, to demonstrate that listeners use assimilation to anticipate upcoming context. Evidence for anticipation is contrasted with claims that listeners use context to regressively infer the underlying form of place-assimilated segments.
(c)2001 Academic Press
Key Words: spoken word recognition; assimilation; phonological variation; feature mismatch; anticipation.

green may take the labial place of the following
/b/ in the phrase green beans. When this occurs,
the word green appears to be pronounced
[grim]. How, then, does the listener recognize
[grim] as a token of green /grin/?

A variety of phonological processes, including
assimilation, neutralization, epenthesis, mutation,
and neutralization, can alter the forms of spoken
words. A number of studies have demonstrated
that listeners are able to recognize words that
have been modified by these processes (Gaskell
& Marslen-Wilson, 1996; Gow, submitted; Kuijpers, Donselaar, & Cutler, 1996). This ability
raises important challenges for our understanding of spoken word recognition. Consider English place assimilation. Syllable-final coronal
segments such as /n/, /t/, or /d/ may take the
place value of the segment that immediately follows them. For instance, the /n/ at the end of

Processing Implications of Assimilation

The research reported in this paper was supported by
Grant R29DC03108 to the Massachusetts General Hospital
(David W. Gow, Principle Investigator) from the National
Institutes of Health. I thank Aditi Lahiri, Kenneth Stevens,
David Caplan, Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, and Pienie
Zwitserlood for their advice and generous encouragement of
this work and Mathew Norwood, Sherrie Brown, and Carrie
Landa for their invaluable assistance in carrying out the experiments. I am also indebted to Gareth Gaskell, Arthur
Samuel, and two anonymous reviews for their insightful
comments on earlier versions of this paper.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to David
Gow, Neuropsychology Laboratory, VBK 821, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114.
E-mail: gow@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

English place assimilation presents a significant problem to the listener. In order to recognize a word, listeners must distinguish it from
all other words they know, as well as other potential words they may not have encountered
yet. Marslen-Wilson (1993) notes that most
monosyllabic words differ from at least one
other word by just a single feature and that
roughly 70% of the words that a listener hears
are monosyllabic. To the extent that acoustic information can be expected to resolve the problem, Marslen-Wilson suggests that listeners
must discriminate between multiple candidates
on the basis of even single feature differences.
This raises a different problem. If listeners
discriminate word candidates on the basis of
single-feature mismatches, then they should not
treat [grim] as a token of green. Similarly, if
place assimilation can transform the coronal /n/
in a token of teen into an /m/ in teen player, listeners should recognize the token as an instance

133

0749-596X/01 $35.00
Copyright (c) 2001 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

134

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

of team and not teen. Thus, there is a tension between the need for strict matching criteria to
avoid lexical ambiguity and for flexible matching criteria to avoid the rejection of appropriate
candidates. If matching criteria are flexible, listeners need to invoke additional mechanisms
to avoid accessing too many candidates. If the
matching criteria are strict, listeners are faced
instead with the problem of avoiding the rejection of appropriate candidates when modification leads to mismatch.
There are currently three major approaches to
resolving this tension and modeling the recognition of modified forms of words: (1) accounts
stressing tolerance to mismatch, (2) representational accounts making certain assumptions
about the representation of entries in the lexicon
which then permit stringent matching criteria,
and (3) inferential accounts in which the listener
reconstructs possible underlying forms based on
following context. Before turning to the studies
reported in this paper, I will briefly review each
type of model.
Tolerance to Mismatch
The simplest account assumes that listeners
tolerate some mismatch in the mapping between
features that are recovered from the speech signal and features that make up the stored representations of words. For example, a listener
hearing [grim] might successfully recognize
green (and similar sounding words), because the
input matches the representation in every feature except one. Such a mechanism might also
explain our ability to recognize words that undergo modification as a result of other factors
including rate, reduction, and dialect. It may
also account for our ability to recognize words
when certain features cannot be reliably extracted from the signal, as in the case of words
heard in noise.
The tolerance account is consistent with evidence from a variety of experimental paradigms.
Evidence from shadowing and mispronunciation monitoring suggests that listeners may routinely repair or fail to recognize feature mismatches occurring toward the ends of words
encountered in fluent speech (Cole, 1973; Cole
& Jakimik, 1978; Marslen-Wilson & Welsh,

1978). Similarly, a number of studies have
demonstrated form priming given primes that
differ from probe stimuli by one to two features
(Connine, Blasko, & Titone, 1993; Radeau,
Morais, & Segui, 1995; Slowiaczek, Nusbaum,
& Pisoni, 1987). However, several other studies
using similar methodologies have failed to
demonstrate priming (Marslen-Wilson, 1993;
Slowiaczek & Pisoni, 1986). The differences in
the results may be attributable differences in
interstimulus intervals, in the number of related
trials in a session, and in the position of a mismatch within a word (Radeau et al., 1995; Zwitserlood, 1996).
While the tolerance-to-mismatch approach
appears to be both simple and powerful, it has
several serious limitations. Perhaps the most
significant is that the failure to maintain strict
matching criteria may lead to too many word
candidates. The listener's task is to uniquely recognize a portion of the speech stream as a particular word while distinguishing it from all other
words. Given the enormous size of the lexicon
and the fact that all human languages employ a
relatively small inventory of speech sounds, individual words (particularly short ones) tend to
have neighbors that differ in few features. For
example, bat [baet] differs by only one feature
from a number of words including bad, bath,
pat, and bet. This is not necessarily a fatal flaw
in the model. Listeners may initially access
these neighboring words and rely on subsequent
processing to rule out unlikely candidates. In
fact, there is some evidence that supports this
view. Listeners have been shown to simultaneously access multiple interpretations of both
homophones (Onifer & Swinney, 1981) and
oronyms such as sin tax-syntax (Gow & Gordon, 1995). When listeners do this, they presumably disambiguate the stimuli after access
through the use of higher level constraints. In
the end, it is unclear whether a model that shifts
the burden of disambiguation to post-lexical
processes is more parsimonious than one that resolves such ambiguity during initial activation.
Underspecification
The second category of models, representational accounts with stringent mapping criteria,

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

is exemplified by the approach of Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson (1991). Models such as Lahiri
and Marslen-Wilson's suggest that listeners
selectively tolerate feature mismatch that potentially arises from predictable phonological
processes while applying strict matching criteria
when mismatch cannot be attributed to such
processes. By limiting tolerance in this way,
representational accounts minimize the problem
of overgeneration.
Drawing on the phonological theory of underspecification (Archangeli, 1988; Kiparsky,
1985; Pulleyblank, 1988), Lahiri and MarslenWilson (1991) propose that lexical representations contain only those distinctive features that
are contrastive and insulated against phonological modification in a speaker's language.
Returning to the example of green, Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson suggest that coronal place of
articulation is not specified in the lexicon. Thus,
the representation of green does not include a
place value for the final segment. Given such a
representation, a listener hearing [grim] could
adopt strict criteria for the mapping between
features extracted from the speech signal and
the representation of the word green without encountering any mismatch that might remove
green as a candidate. The perceived [m] would
strictly match the stored /n/ because the stored
/n/ is unspecified for the place feature. This approach allows the listener to limit overgeneration of lexical candidates while maintaining
strict matching criteria for phonologically invariant features. While a model of this type
would still overgenerate when assimilation produced lexical ambiguity, as in the case of [tim]
in utterances of team player or teen player,
overgeneration would be limited to cases in
which the potential feature modification was
phonologically plausible.
A related strategy adopted by some researchers may in fact be a notational variant of
the same mechanism. In models such as
Stevens' (1998b) feature-based model, the
working lexicon contains multiple entries for
words that undergo systematic phonological
modification. In this model, a word like green is
specified in the long-term lexicon with a coronal
final nasal, but enters the working lexicon by ex-

135

panding the standard phonemic representation
/grin/ into a featural representation from which
phonological rules can generate potential alternate featural representations. This produces
additional representations of green in which the
final segment has either labial or velar place.
Like Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson's (1991) model,
this model can recognize modified forms of
words while maintaining strict matching criteria. It is unclear how this model could be distinguished from underspecification models based
on behavioral evidence.
Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (1991) base their
claims regarding underspecification in spoken
word recognition on a comparison of the interpretation of vowel nasality in English and Bengali. While Bengali contains vowel pairs that
contrast only in nasality, English contains only
oral vowels. In the context of linguistic underspecification theory (Archangeli, 1988; Kiparsky,
1985; Pulleyblank, 1988), this suggests that
vowel nasality is fully specified in Bengali but
underspecified in English. In both languages,
though, a vowel may assimilate the nasality of a
following segment. When words are presented
auditorily and gated at the offset of a nasalized
vowel before a nasal consonant, Bengali listeners tend to treat nasality as an underlying feature
and access words with nasal vowels, while English listeners tend to treat it as a surface feature
and use nasality to anticipate an upcoming nasal
consonant. In Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson's
analysis, English speakers detect nasality during
the vowel. However, because they are unable to
map it to the underlying representation of the
vowel, they map it in anticipation to the following segment.
Given the offline nature of the gating task, it
is unclear whether these results reflect normal
automatic processing or strategic processing
that may not play a role in normal processing.
Otake, Yoneyama, Cutler, and Lugt (1996) provide converging evidence for the use of assimilation to anticipate the segment that licenses
assimilation using phoneme monitoring, which
is less likely to reflect strategic processing.
However, monitoring latencies in this study are
strongly correlated with the perceived naturalness of the stimuli, and so it is uncertain whether

136

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

the results reflect monitoring facilitation due to
anticipation or interference due to the unnaturalness of some cross-spliced stimuli.
While the results of Lahiri and MarslenWilson (1991) and Otake et al. (1996) suggest
that listeners use noncontrastive feature change
to anticipate context, they do not necessarily
imply a specific type of underlying representation. As Anderson (1978) formally demonstrates,
any behavioral phenomenon that can be accounted for by one type of representation given
one set of processing assumptions may also be
accounted for by alternative representations
given different processing assumptions. It is only
through the accumulation of converging evidence
from related phenomena that one can begin to
make strong representational claims. Thus, one
can readily imagine how a system that employs
fully specified underlying representations might
also anticipate context, given a mechanism
for recognizing predictable mismatch. Indeed,
Gaskell, Hare, and Marslen-Wilson (1995) present a series of recurrent network simulations employing full featural specification that correctly
identify underlying coronal place in assimilated
surface noncoronals. Their networks achieve this
feat by reflecting the probability of underlying
coronality given surface noncoronality and an
appropriate context in a training set derived from
spontaneous speech. This mechanism should not
produce anticipation given a training set based
on another language where this type of place
assimilation did not take place.
From a linguistic perspective, the chief value
of underspecification is its ability to account
for a variety of phonological processes from a
representational perspective. From the perspective of the computational problem posed by word
recognition, its primary value is that it allows
listeners to maintain strict matching criteria
for phonologically invariant features of a word
while tolerating feature mismatch resulting from
predictable phonological processes. This aspect
of the underspecification account is not directly
addressed by the data presented by Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson (1991).
Phonologically invariant features are features
that are not modified through the application of
natural phonological processes in any context.

When a phonologically invariant feature is modified, the result is a phonologically implausible
modification. Labial place of articulation is
a phonologically invariant feature in English.
Labial segments do not assimilate the place of
articulation of another segment. Therefore, it is
phonologically implausible for an underlying
labial segment to be realized as coronal in any
environment. Conversely, a modification is
phonologically plausible if it could result from a
natural phonological process in some context. It
is phonologically plausible in English or German for a coronal segment to be realized with
noncoronal place. The underspecification account predicts that listeners should tolerate feature mismatches resulting from phonologically
plausible, but not implausible modification.
Two studies have contrasted tolerance to
phonologically plausible and implausible modification using form priming techniques. MarslenWilson, Nix, and Gaskell (1995) found no evidence of tolerance for either plausible or
implausible modification in a study employing
deliberately modified citation form prime tokens. The absence of priming in either condition
is at odds with a number of demonstrations of
form priming by items that have undergone
phonologically plausible modification in sentential contexts (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996;
Gow, submitted; Marslen-Wilson et al., 1995;
Zwitserlood & Coenen, 2000). Marslen-Wilson
and colleagues note the conflict and suggest that
it may reflect the unnaturalness of contextually
conditioned modification in stimuli presented
without context. Zwitserlood and Coenen (2000)
address this concern by contrasting phonologically plausible and implausible modification in
connected speech. In a study examining German
regressive place assimilation they found clear
evidence of priming by plausibly modified items
in contexts that support assimilation and weak
evidence for priming by implausibly modified
items in analogous contexts. While the latter result suggests that listeners tolerate at least some
mismatch caused by this type of phonologically
implausible modification, other results in the
same study fail to show tolerance for mismatch
produced by other types of phonologically
implausible modification. Given these mixed

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

results and the many methodological factors that
can affect demonstrations of tolerance to feature
mismatch, it is unclear whether listeners typically show the plausibility effect predicted by
the underspecification account.
While the psychological validity of the underspecification account cannot be adequately assessed on the basis of listeners' tolerance for
phonologically plausible versus implausible
modification, one of its predictions is addressed
by existing evidence. The underspecification account predicts that certain items should be lexically ambiguous. For example, the coronal stop
/t/ in the phrase right berries may assimilate the
labial place of the /b/ in berries. This would produce a phrase that sounds very much like ripe
berries. According to underspecification theory,
both right and ripe should be activated. Ripe
should be activated because it provides a perfect
match with the surface form of the token, and
right should be activated because there is no
mismatch between a /p/ and a /t/ given an underspecified representation of /t/. Gow (submitted) tested this prediction using a form-priming
task and found that this kind of phrase did not
produce lexical ambiguity for listeners. Across
three experiments, a reliable pattern of selective
priming by the underlying form of the word that
the speaker had intended to produce was found.
This result disconfirms at least one prediction of
the underspecification account.
The results of Gow (submitted) also imply
that natural assimilation is perceptually distinguishable from complete feature substitution
and that listeners use this distinction to unambiguously arrive at the true underlying of form
assimilated or potentially assimilated speech
when underspecification predicts that listeners
should encounter ambiguity. This view of assimilation is supported by acoustic, perceptual,
and articulatory evidence suggesting that assimilation is typically a graded feature modification
rather than a discrete feature substitution (Barry,
1985; Gow, submitted; Gow & Hussami, 1999;
Kerswill, 1985; Nolan, 1992). Underspecified
representations may be unnecessary for word
recognition if assimilation preserves sufficient
acoustic evidence to recover the underlying
forms of assimilated items.

137

Regressive Inference
The third major approach to the recognition
of modified word forms might be called the
regressive inferential approach (Gaskell, 1994;
Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996, 1998; MarslenWilson et al., 1995; Pulman & Hepple, 1993).
The idea behind this approach is that listeners
use postsegmental phonological context to determine if a segment's surface form should be
treated at face value or if it could have been
derived through assimilatory processes. In
essence, listeners solve an inverse problem. A
listener hearing greem [grim] would initially
access green. However, the continued activation of green would depend on the listener encountering a context that would license the
change of the final place feature. If the next segment were / b/ as in greem beans, green would
remain activated. However, if the next segment
were / k / as in greem kites, green would be deactivated because the velar could not license the
apparent nasal to labial (/n / to /m /) modification. This strategy is more problematic when
there is no unique solution to the inverse problem. For example, as noted above, the surface
form [raIp] berries could be derived from underlying forms of right berries or ripe berries.
Thus, a listener hearing the phrase ripe berries
might be expected to deactivate the appropriate
word ripe and access only the inappropriate
word right.
The regressive inference mechanism would
be potentially useful in two situations. When
there is potential lexical ambiguity (e.g., [raIp]
which could be a surface form of either right or
ripe), the listener might be able to eliminate the
derived form of a candidate ([raIp] from /raIt/)
if the context did not support the modification
(e.g., ripe cantaloupe). Regressive inference
might also be useful to listeners who encounter
a novel word. If you were told that there is an
animal called a greem duck, it would be useful
to know that green could not become greem
before /d/. Thus, in comparison to representational approaches such as underspecification or
multiple listing, the inferential approach makes
greater use of available phonological information to narrow the cohort in some situations.

138

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

Evidence for regressive inference comes from
results suggesting that continued activation depends on encountering context that could motivate the observed modification. Gaskell and
Marslen-Wilson (1994; 1998) found that listeners showed faster and more accurate monitoring
for underlying coronal segments with noncoronal surface forms when they appeared in contexts that licensed the observed modification as
compared with contexts that did not. Using similar stimuli, Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson (1996)
found greater priming of underlying coronals by
surface noncoronals for items appearing in contexts that support the observed modifications.
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson argue that this
context-sensitivity reflects regressive inferential
processing. There is another reasonable interpretation of Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson's context effects, however. In natural speech, assimilation always reflects context appropriately.
Given evidence from Lahiri and MarslenWilson (1991) and Otake et al. (1996) that listeners use assimilatory modification to anticipate features of segments that license it, it is
possible that the processing deficits incurred in
inappropriate assimilation contexts reflect the
disruption of normal processing when a natural
expectation is violated.
There is also direct evidence against the regressive inference model. In the ripe berries example, the labial [b] in berries is contextually
consistent with labial assimilation of the underlying coronal [t] in right. This means that the regressive inference model should make the same
prediction as underspecification theory. Listeners should access both right and ripe, and
phonological context should not eliminate right
as a viable candidate after activation. However,
results of priming studies by Gow (submitted)
show that listeners show selective priming for
the intended underlying form (ripe). Regressive
inference cannot account for this result.
In summary, three approaches to the problem
of recognizing assimilated speech have been
proposed. As described above, none appears to
provide a full or unambiguous accounting of the
behavioral evidence concerning the recognition
of assimilated wordforms. This suggests the
need for either an entirely new approach or a

synthesis that builds on the individual strengths
of current ones.
As a first step toward developing a new understanding of how listeners recognize assimilated speech, one might consider the relationships between existing accounts. Two dimensions
broadly distinguish between the three approaches
that have been discussed. The first dimension
concerns the types of feature modification listeners tolerate. The underspecification approach
advocated by Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (1991)
argues that listeners tolerate mismatch resulting
from phonologically plausible feature modification, but do not tolerate mismatch resulting from
phonologically implausible feature modification. Conversely, the tolerance account holds
that listeners show equal tolerance for phonologically plausible and implausible feature modification. The second distinguishing characteristic of these models is the role they assign to
postassimilation context. Gaskell and MarslenWilson (1996, 1998) provide evidence for context effects in the processing of assimilated
speech. They argue that these effects reflect regressive inferential processes by which postassimilation context is used to modulate the
activation of assimilated items. The mismatch
tolerance account provides no mechanism to
explain context effects. However, Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson's underspecification account
(1991) provides the basis for a different explanation of context effects. They suggest that listeners may use assimilation to anticipate upcoming features by associating evidence for a
feature occurring during an assimilated segment
with the subsequent segment. If listeners do anticipate, context effects such as those described
by Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson may reflect the
violation of expectation.
Goals
The goal of the current research is to contrast
the three processing models of assimilated word
recognition and develop a single approach that
accounts for the data.
The current experiments compare and evaluate
the three accounts by determining: (1) whether
listeners show different degrees of tolerance for
feature mismatch resulting from phonologically

139

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

plausible versus implausible feature modification, and (2) whether context effects attributed to
regressive inference may actually reflect anticipatory processing. The first experiment employs
form priming to evaluate the role of the phonological plausibility of modification in listeners'
tolerance to feature mismatch. Participants heard
sentences containing words that either underwent
phonologically plausible assimilatory modification or phonologically implausible modification.
English place assimilation allows coronal segments such as /n/ to assimilate labial place and
become /m/'s. However, it does not allow labial
segments such as /m/ to become /n /'s. In the
phonologically plausible assimilation condition,
words with underlying coronal nasals such as
green were produced in assimilated form, as in
The boy found a green [grim] boat in the yard. In
the phonologically implausible modification
condition the mirror modification was made by
mispronouncing a word ending in /m/ by replacing the /m/ with an /n/ prior to a coronal segment
such as /d/. For example, glum was pronounced
[glAn] in the sentence It was a pretty glum
[glAn] day at the factory. Immediately at the
offset of the modified word, participants were
presented with a lexical decision probe that was
either the written form of the word in unmodified
form (e.g., GLUM), or an unmodified form of an
unrelated word (e.g., BROOM). If listeners tolerate plausible modification but not implausible
modification, as the underspecification account
predicts, then plausibly assimilated primes
should produce priming while primes with implausible modification should not. Critically,
both types of modification produce the same
place feature mismatch. In both cases mismatch
is between /n/ and /m/.
The second and third experiments contrast
the predictions of regressive inference with those
of anticipatory processing. The anticipatory account predicts that assimilation should directly
influence the perception of postmodification
context, facilitating processing when it is appropriate and interfering with it when it is not. The
regressive inference account suggests that assimilation should not facilitate processing under any
conditions and that it can only interfere with it
indirectly by imposing a general processing cost

when modification is contextually inappropriate.
Again using assimilated speech presented in sentential contexts, the second experiment employs
phoneme monitoring, while the third experiment
employs negative form priming to determine
whether assimilation directly influences the perception of postmodification context.
EXPERIMENT 1
Method
Participants. The participants were 40 students and staff members drawn from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology community.
They included 20 women and 20 men between
the ages of 17 and 46 with a mean age of 25.3
years. All participants were native speakers of
American English with no discernible uncorrected deficits in hearing or vision. The participants in this and the following experiments were
paid for their participation and had the opportunity to earn a bonus on the basis of their performance. No participant took part in more than
one of the experiments reported here.
Stimuli. Fifty-six familiar words drawn from
major syntactic categories (i.e., nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) were selected as primes.
Half of these words ended in /m/ and the other
half ended in /n/ in their unmodified forms.
Items in the two groups could not be matched for
frequency. Items ending in /m/ had a mean frequency of 182 occurrences, while items ending
in /n/ had a mean frequency of 358.6 occurrences
(Francis & Kucera, 1982). These two groups
were selected because place assimilation of wordfinal /n/ is phonologically plausible in English,
while place assimilation of word-final /m/ is
not. Care was taken to select words that would
not form other words by changing the final /m/
to an /n/, or the final /n/ to an /m/. All primes
were monosyllabic, were monomorphemic, and
demonstrated regular spelling.
These words were embedded in sentences in
roughly sentence-medial position. Words ending in an /n/ were recorded in a context that encouraged assimilation. They were immediately
followed by a word beginning with a labial stop
such as /p/ in the sentence There is a green part
that seems to be missing. In this context the final

140

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

/n / in the word green can be assimilated to approximate the labial place of the following /p/
and be pronounced [grim]. The likelihood and
degree to which assimilation takes place has
been shown to vary widely within and between
speakers as a function of the casualness and
rate of speech (Barry, 1985; Holst & Nolan,
1995; Kerswill, 1985). In order to maximize
the likelihood of assimilation, the contexts
were simple and the speaker read them in a relatively rapid, fluent, and casual style. Multiple
tokens of each sentence were recorded so that
tokens that did not manifest clear assimilatory
modification (as judged by two observers)
could be discarded. This type of spontaneous
assimilation was chosen over assimilation-like
modification produced through deliberate mispronunciation, because there is evidence that
natural assimilation may preserve some elements of the gestural and acoustic form of the
underlying place feature (Barry, 1985; Holst &
Nolan, 1995; Kerswill, 1985).
Words ending in /m/ in their unmodified
forms were intentionally mispronounced, so that
the labial /m/ was replaced by the coronal /n/.
For example, glum was pronounced [glAn]. Deliberate mispronunciation had to be used in this
instance because /m/'s place of articulation cannot be changed in English through natural
phonological processes in any context.1 These
mispronounced tokens were produced in contexts in which the next word began with a coronal stop such as the /d/ in It was a glun day at
the factory. The use of coronal context following coronalization was intended to mimic the
conditions and effects of assimilation in a

1

Deliberate mispronunciation was deemed to be the best
available option for achieving this manipulation. It should
be noted that the contrast between phonologically plausible
and phonologically implausible modification is also potentially a contrast between different levels of modification if
spontaneous assimilation leads to less than full, discrete
change in a feature value. In pilot testing, spontaneously assimilated items and items showing deliberate segmental
mispronunciation consistent with contextually appropriate
assimilation showed similar levels of priming for underlying
forms under the experimental conditions described for Experiment 1. All priming effects in the pilot study were statistically significant in analyses by both subject and item.

phonologically implausible form. All experimental sentences are listed in Appendix A.
All of the sentences were recorded by the author, who is a male speaker of American English. They were read in a sound attenuating
chamber and digitally recorded on a DAT
recorder at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz using a
high quality microphone. All sentences were
read in a fluent, rapid, and casual style. The
speaker produced a minimum of three tokens of
each of the sentences. In addition to these experimental tokens, the reader produced tokens of an
additional 268 filler sentences with similar constructions which were read in the same style.
These recordings were then transferred to computer, volume equalized, and edited into individual tokens using the Soundedit 16 waveform
manipulation software package.
Because the talker was not experimentally
naive, it was necessary to demonstrate that the
stimuli showed the normal features associated
with spontaneous assimilation by naive speakers. Gow and Hussami (1999) examined the
acoustic consequences of spontaneous place assimilation of word-final coronals in six naive
talkers. They found that underlying coronals
that had undergone labial assimilation showed
spectral characteristics of both labial and coronal segments when examined at the penultimate
pitch period showing a clear F3 prior to consonant closure. The Gow and Hussami analyses
were repeated on the current stimuli. For comparison, two additional tokens of each item from
the spontaneous assimilation condition were
recorded. In one version, the labial-initial item
following the assimilated item was replaced in
the reader's script with a word beginning with a
coronal. Place assimilation does not occur in
this environment and so the resulting token is an
unmodified coronal. In the other version, the
item that normally undergoes assimilation was
replaced with a nonword ending in a labial
nasal. For example, green was replaced with
greem. This condition is equivalent to the type
of deliberate assimilation used by Gaskell and
colleagues (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996,
1998; Marslen-Wilson et al., 1995). All three
versions of these items were recorded under the
same conditions using the same equipment. For

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

purposes of analysis, tokens were downsampled
to a rate of 11.025 kHz and transferred to a
UNIX environment where measurements were
made using unpublished software developed at
the Research Laboratory of Electronics at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, based
on the work of Dennis Klatt. Formant frequencies and peak amplitudes were measured for
F1, F2, and F3 at the penultimate pitch period
that showed a clear F3 prior to the closure associated with the critical coronal, labial, or underlying coronal segment that had undergone labial
assimilation.
The results of the acoustic analyses are summarized in Table 1. Coronals that had undergone
labial assimilation showed an array of spectral
characteristics that distinguished them from both
unmodified coronals and unmodified labials.
They differed from unmodified coronals in F1,
t(27) = 2.0, p < .05, F2, t(27) = 2.1, p < .05, F3,
t(27) = 2.0, p <. 05, and A1, t(27) = 5.1, p < .05.
They differed from unmodified labials in measures of A1, t(27) = 3.5, p < .001, A2, t(27) = 2,9,
p < .001, and A3, t(27) = 2.0, p < .05. These results demonstrate that the place-assimilated
stimulus tokens employed in Experiment 1 combine spectral characteristics of coronal and noncoronal place. Moreover, the three-way distinction in A1 found between unmodified coronals,
coronals that have undergone labial assimilation,

TABLE 1
Acoustic Comparisons between Underlyingly Coronal
Stimuli That Have Undergone Labial Assimilation Employed in Experiment 1 and Unmodified Coronal and
Labial Segments Produced in Connected Speech

Measure

Unmodified
coronal

Assimilated
coronal

Underlying
labial

Formant frequency (Hz)
F1
F2
F3

256
1651
2687

332
1418
2518

332
1425
2614

Formant amplitude (dB)
A1
A2
A3

51.5
38.3
33.7

46.4
37.6
34.4

49.9
41.8
37.9

141

and unmodified labials demonstrate that these
three types of segments are acoustically distinguishable from one another. These results are
consistent with articulatory data suggesting that
English place assimilation typically produces an
amalgam of place information combining aspects of coronal and noncoronal place (Barry,
1985; Kerswill, 1985; Nolan, 1992). The similarity between this pattern and the pattern found in
analyses of speech produced by naive speakers
in the work of Gow and Hussami (1999) suggests that these stimuli are representative of normal place-assimilated segments produced by
English speakers in connected speech. Differences between spontaneously assimilated items
and items with underlying labial place demonstrate that spontaneous assimilation in these tokens does not reflect pure feature substitution.
The lexical decision stimuli consisted of an
equal number of one-syllable words and pronounceable nonwords. All stimuli appeared in
uppercase 18-point, boldface Helvetica font.
There were two types of probes in experimental
trials. Phonologically related probes were the
standard orthographic forms of the modified auditory prime stimuli that preceded them. For example, in sentences containing the primes [glAn]
or [glAm] the probe was GLUM, and in sentences containing the primes [grin] and [grim]
the lexical decision probe was GREEN. Phonologically unrelated probes consisted of frequencymatched items with no semantic association and
minimal phonological overlap with prime words.
To ensure that related and unrelated words were
matched as closely as possible, items that served
as related stimuli for words in one condition
served as unrelated probes for other words in
another condition. Zwitserlood (1996) notes that
listeners may develop a bias toward making
"yes" responses when there is a clear relationship between form overlap and the lexicality of
lexical decision probes. Therefore, a large number of unrelated filler trials were employed to obscure this correlation. None of the 268 filler trials
employed lexical decision probes that closely
resembled words immediately preceding them
in the auditory priming stimulus. This meant
that less than 9% of all trials in a testing session
employed lexical decision probes that were

142

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

phonologically related to the prime stimulus. In
other work, Gow (submitted) has demonstrated
that potential response bias can be eliminated
given this low proportion of related trials.
Procedure. Participants were tested individually while seated in a sound-attenuating chamber. They were told that they would hear a series
of sentences and that they should listen carefully
to each one in preparation for a sentence recognition test. They were also told that during the
presentation of each sentence they would be
presented with a visual letter string and that it
was also their task to decide as quickly and accurately as possible whether the letter string was
a real word and to signal their decision by pressing one of two buttons using different fingers on
their dominant hand. If subjects failed to make a
response within 1400 ms of the presentation of
the probe word they heard a 200-ms warning
tone. Lexical decision stimuli appeared for
500 ms with an onset immediately at the offset
of the prime word. Lexical decision probes were
presented in different positions in filler trials so
that participants could not predict when the
probe would appear in any given trial. Stimulus
presentation and data collection were carried
out using the PsyScope software package
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).
Visual stimuli were presented on a computer
monitor, and auditory stimuli were presented
through professional-quality headphones. The
participant entered lexical decision responses
using a multiple key button box. In experimental
trials, lexical decision probes were always presented immediately at the offset of the prime
word. Upon completion of the online task, participants completed a five-item forced choice
sentence completion task based on filler sentences they heard during the experiment.
Design. There were four experimental conditions formed by crossing two levels of modification type (phonologically plausible and
implausible modification) and two levels of
prime-probe phonological relatedness (related
and unrelated). Participants were tested in a between-subjects design requiring the use of four
different versions of the experiment. Each version included the same auditory and visual stimuli presented in different combinations. No au-

ditory or visual stimuli were repeated within a
testing version and each participant completed
an equal number of trials in each of the four experimental conditions. Trial order was randomized between subjects.
Results
Table 2 shows the mean reaction times and
accuracy rates in each of the four experimental
conditions. Participants or items showing an
overall accuracy rate below 85% or a mean reaction time greater than 1200 ms were excluded
from all analyses. Based on these criteria, no
participants were excluded, but three experimental items were dropped from the final analyses. Furthermore, all trials showing a reaction
time less than 250 ms or greater than 1200 ms
were eliminated from analyses to minimize the
effects of anticipatory or strategic processing.
This eliminated less than 2% of the data, which
was replaced with cell means. Trials on which
participants provided incorrect lexical decision
judgments were similarly excluded from analyses of reaction time data.
Participants showed no interaction between the
relatedness and plausibility variables, F1(1,39) =
0.05 p > .05; F2(1,52) = 1.2, p > .05, and no main
effect for the phonological plausibility of modification, F1(1,39) = 1.2, p > .05; F2(1,52) = 0.03,
p > .05. There was a significant overall reaction
time effect for the prime-probe relatedness,
F1(1,39) = 20.2, p < .001; F2(1,52) = 15.4, p <

TABLE 2
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds) for Lexical
Decisions in Experiment 1
Prime
condition

Related
probe

Unrelated
probe

Priming
effect

Phonologically
plausible
modification
(green ->/grim/)

642 (.99)

665 (.97)

23(.02)

Phonologically
implausible
modification
(flame->/flen/)

648 (.99)

672 (.97)

24(.02)

Note. Accuracy rates are shown in parentheses.

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

.001, with faster responses associated with
phonologically related pairs. Planned contrasts
further confirmed the existence of priming effects by both plausibly modified primes, t1(39) =
2.9, p < .005; t2(27) = 2.0, p < .05, and implausibly modified primes t1(39) = 3.4, p < .05;
t2(24) = 1.9, p < .05.
Analysis of the accuracy data revealed a parallel pattern of results. Participants showed no
main effect for the plausibility of modification,
F1(1,39) = 0.02, p > .05; F2(1,52) = 0.1, p > .05,
and no interaction between relatedness and
plausibility, F1(1,39) = 0.02 p > .05; F2(1,52) =
0.5, p > .05. There was a main effect for relatedness with greater accuracy on trials with phonologically related prime-probe pairs, F1(1,39) =
10.5, p < .001; F2(1,52) = 10.2, p < .001.
Planned contrast analyses revealed priming by
plausibly assimilated primes that was significant
by subject, t1 (39) = 1.9, p < .05, but not by item,
t2(27) = 1.0, p > .05, and priming by implausibly
modified primes that was significant in both
subject and item analyses, t1 (39) = 2.2, p < .05;
t2(24) = 2.0, p < .05.
Finally, the correlation between reaction time
and trial position was examined in related trials
to determine if emerging strategies played a role
in the facilitation effect for the two modification
types. No such correlation was found, r = 0.05,
p > .05, suggesting that the results reflect priming due to the automatic activation of lexical representations rather than the development of a response strategy for phonologically related trials.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that listeners tolerate some mismatch between the recovered and expected features that define a word
form in lexical activation and suggest that this
tolerance does not depend on the phonological
plausibility of the modification that produces
the mismatch. These findings are at odds with
the predictions of underspecification theory
(Lahiri & Marslen-Wilson, 1991).
Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (1991) argue that
listeners tolerate predictable feature mismatch as
a result of underspecification, but not mismatch
resulting from phonologically implausible modification. Thus, underspecification predicts that

143

the phonologically plausibly assimilated token
[grim] should prime green, but the implausibly
modified token [glAn] should not prime glum.
The nearly identical priming effects found in
trials with plausibly and implausibly assimilated
primes provide no support for even a weakened
form of the underspecification hypothesis.
The lack of a plausibility effect provides
some insight into the potential sources of mismatch tolerance. Normally listeners do not encounter phonologically implausible modifications. The fact that they tolerate phonologically
implausible modification suggests that tolerance
to mismatch does not depend on their having
heard a particular modification in the past or
having formulated rules to predict or explain
modification. Instead, it implies that mismatch
tolerance reflects a general property of the relationship between lexical activation and word
recognition. The broad class of activation-based
models that includes TRACE (McClelland &
Elman, 1986) and later versions of the cohort
model (Marslen-Wilson, 1987) provide a simple
mechanism to account for this tolerance. Listeners may simply recognize the word that most
closely matches the array of features recovered
from the speech signal.
Available results show, however, that such
tolerance has its limits. Listeners appear to rely
heavily on word onsets to recognize words and
to limit tolerance to mismatch to features occurring late in words that appear in connected
speech (Cole & Jakimik, 1978; Gow & Gordon,
1995; Marslen-Wilson & Welsh, 1978; MarslenWilson & Zwitzerlood, 1989). In Experiment 1,
the mismatch is always in a word-final segment.
Additional processing mechanisms might be
necessary to recognize assimilated items if the
assimilation took place at a word onset where
listeners typically show very stringent matching
criteria in online tasks addressing automatic
processing. However, English place-assimilation only occurs in syllable-final coronal segments. Across human languages, word onsets
appear to be insulated against modification by
productive phonological processes (Beckman,
1997; Gow, Manuel, & Melvold, 1996).
The fact that listeners tolerate some mismatch
when recognizing words does not necessarily

144

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

imply that they are insensitive to fine acoustic or
phonetic distinctions. While the evidence from
online tasks demonstrates that listeners access
words given nonword primes that differ by a
single feature, it appears that such access is
blocked when the mismatching prime is a real
word (Marslen-Wilson, 1993; Radeau et al.,
1995; Zwitserlood, 1989). Studies by Brown
(1990) and Marslen-Wilson (1990) suggest that,
under these conditions, activation of the real
word prime actually inhibits activation of the
mismatching probe. This is consistent with other
evidence from a variety of paradigms for competition between phonologically similar items
(Bard & Shillcock, 1993; Goldinger, Luce, &
Pisoni, 1989; Zwitserlood, 1989; Goldinger,
Luce, Pisoni, & Marcario, 1992; McQueen,
Norris, & Cutler, 1994). Listeners tolerate slight
mismatch in the absence of a close competitor
as long as there is sufficient bottom-up support
for a lexical candidate. However, if two candidates are both strongly activated, they may inhibit one another. In this way, small differences
in bottom-up support for competing candidates
may be amplified through competition, providing the appearance of extremely stringent
matching criteria when there is potential lexical
ambiguity.
The results of Experiment 1 contradict the
predictions of the underspecification account,
but they do not directly address the question of
whether listeners employ regressive inference in
the recognition of assimilated speech. Regressive inference provides a potential mechanism
for eliminating contextually unlikely lexical
candidates after they have been accessed. It may
be useful to have a phonological mechanism for
eliminating spuriously activated lexical items
that owe their initial activation to mismatch
tolerance. Furthermore, the demonstration of
mismatch tolerance does not suggest a reinterpretation of the basic evidence that has been
marshaled in support of regressive inference.
Context is critical in the inferential account because it allows listeners to determine if assimilation is the source of sound change. The crucial
evidence in support of the inferential account
comes from a series of results showing that performance on tasks drawing on lexical activation

is slowed when phonologically plausible feature
modification occurs in a context that would not
support the observed feature change (Gaskell &
Marslen-Wilson, 1996, 1998; Marslen-Wilson et
al., 1995).
Experiments 2 and 3 examine an alternate interpretation of these effects of inappropriate context. These effects may reflect the violation of a
listener's expectations rather than retrospective
inference. The experiments test the claim that
assimilation provides information about the segments that drive the assimilation and thus facilitates lexical processing by allowing listeners to
anticipate features of upcoming segments. In this
view assimilation context effects are typically
anticipatory rather than retrospective. In Experiment 2, participants monitored for the segments
that license the assimilation of a preceding wordfinal segment. If assimilation is used to anticipate
certain features in continuous word recognition,
then monitoring times should be shorter when
targets are preceded by contextually appropriate
assimilation than when they are preceded by
nonassimilation. Monitoring latencies should
also be shorter following nonassimilation as
compared to contextually inappropriate assimilation. The regressive inference account provides
no basis for predicting facilitated monitoring
for targets immediately following contextually
appropriate assimilation as compared to nonassimilation.
EXPERIMENT 2
Method
Participants. The participants were 45 individuals (19 men and 26 women) drawn from the
same general population as Experiment 1.
Stimuli. Thirty-two familiar words drawn
from major syntactic categories and ending in
the coronal nasal /n/ were identified. In all
cases, words were chosen that would not form
other valid words if the final /n/ was replaced
with an /m/ or //. For example, gain would be
excluded because substituting the /n/ with an
/m/ would produce game.
These words were incorporated into sentences in which they were immediately followed
within the same clause by another word drawn

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

from a major syntactic category. For each word,
three such contexts were created. In the labial
context, the word ending in /n / was followed by
a monosyllabic word beginning with a labial
stop (/p/ or /b/). The labial was voiced (/b/) for
half of the words and unvoiced (/p/) for the other
half. In these contexts, the final /n/ assimilates
the labial place of the stop and approximates an
[m]. For example, the word plane (/pleIn/), is
pronounced [pleIm]. Of the 32 tokens employed
in this context, 28 were taken from the assimilatory modification condition in Experiment 1.2
The coronal context sentence was formed by replacing the word beginning with a labial stop
with another monosyllabic word from the same
syntactic category (that also formed a sensible
continuation of the sentence) that began with a
coronal stop (/d/ or /t/). The coronal context was
neutral and did not bring about any change in the
pronunciation of the word ending in the /n/.
The third context, the velar context, was formed
the same way with the substitution of a monosyllabic word beginning with a velar stop (/k/ or
/g/). Voicing was matched for the labial and
velar contexts associated with each item. In the
velar context, the word-final /n/ was pronounced
as an //, so the word plane was pronounced
[pleI]. Sentences were used with simple vocabulary and syntactic structures, and frequent
use of contractions, to encourage relatively
spontaneous, casual readings with assimilation.
All experimental sentences are listed in Appendix B. In addition, there were 108 filler sentences written in a similar style.
All sentences were recorded along with the
stimuli used in Experiment 1 by the same
reader. The 14 tokens of appropriate place assimilation used in Experiment 1 were among the
tokens employed in Experiment 2. All tokens
were digitally recorded in a sound-attenuating
chamber using a high-quality microphone and a
portable DAT recorder sampling at 44.1 kHz.
The reader read each sentence at least three
2
An additional pilot study employing the complete set of
32 tokens showing assimilation of labial place demonstrated
significant priming for the underlying coronal interpretation
of the modified items under the conditions used in Experiment 1. This suggests that listeners were able to access the
underlying form of the prime items.

145

times in a fluent, spontaneous-sounding style
and attempted to make all three readings show
similar tone, rate, and inflection. He read the
coronal, labial, and velar context versions of
each sentence together, again attempting to
make each version sound as similar to the others
as possible, except of course at the points of
phonological difference.
These recordings were transferred to a computer, equated for amplitude, and edited using
waveform manipulation software. Each of the
recordings of experimental sentences was split
into two portions at an ascending zero-crossing
just prior to the release of the stop consonant.
Two listeners listened to the first half portion of
each sentence to ensure that the final segment
was perceivable as a [m] in labial contexts, an
[n] in coronal contexts, and an [] in velar contexts. Tokens that failed to meet this criterion
were removed from the study. The same listeners then listened to the second portion of these
sentences and for each sentence identified a
token that began with a clearly identifiable
token of a labial stop. This token was then crossspliced onto the tokens of the labial, velar, and
coronal context versions that yielded the highest
degree of continuity. Pre- and postsplice speech
was derived from different recorded tokens for
all items. Thirty-two speech tokens used in filler
trials were also created by cross-splicing two
different tokens of the same sentence together.
For these items, cross-splices appeared in locations that did not correlate with the position of
the target phoneme. As a further precaution
against cross-splicing artifacts, the listeners also
eliminated all tokens that at least one listener
felt sounded unnatural or showed perceptible
acoustic discontinuities that could signal the
presence or location of an edit. In experimental
trials, the monitoring target was always the first
segment of the word that immediately followed
the assimilated segment. As a result of the crosssplicing manipulation, this target was physically
identical across the three assimilation conditions for each word.
Procedure. Participants were tested individually in a sound-attenuating chamber. They were
told that they would hear a series of sentences
and that it was their task to listen for a particular

146

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

letter sound. If they heard that letter sound in a
sentence they were to press a response key as
quickly as possible. If they did not hear that letter sound they were to press a second response
key when they were sure they had heard the
whole sentence. Participants listened to the
stimuli using professional quality headphones.
They responded using a button box by pressing
the buttons with different fingers on their dominant hands.
Design. There were three experimental conditions defined by the three types of context that
preceded labial targets in experimental trials:
appropriate assimilation, nonassimilation, and
inappropriate assimilation. Participants were
tested in a between-subjects design requiring
the use of three different versions of the test.
Testing began with 5 practice trials to familiarize the subjects with the task, followed by two
blocks of 70 trials each, separated by a rest period. Each block contained 54 filler trials and
16 experimental trials. Blocking was based on
the target phoneme, with subjects monitoring
for /b/ in one block and /p/ in the other. The target never appeared more than once in any stimulus sentence and did not occur at all in 16 of
the filler trials. Each participant completed an
equal number of trials in each of the three
experimental conditions, and no stimulus was
repeated. Trial order was randomized between
subjects.
The experiment and stimulus materials were
designed to discourage participants from developing task-specific response strategies that might
mask spontaneous automatic processing. Target
phonemes only followed underlying coronal segments in experimental trials. Among experimental trials targets were equally likely to follow
any of the three assimilation contexts and so participants had no basis for developing response
strategies that would lead to differential responding across experimental conditions.
Results
The mean reaction times for each of the three
experimental conditions are summarized in
Table 3. Of the 45 participants who completed
the experiment, 9 were eliminated from all
analyses on the basis of having mean reaction

TABLE 3
Mean Monitoring Latencies (in Milliseconds) for WordInitial Stop Consonants in Experiment 2
Condition
Appropriate
assimilation

Target

Reaction time

(e.g., ten buns  /tm#bAnz/)
/b/
/p/
combined

609 (14.3)
554(12.1)
582 (9.3)

No assimilation

(e.g., ten buns  /tn#bAnz/)
/b/
631 (12.0)
/p/
605 (13.8)
combined
617 (9.0)

Inappropriate
assimilation

(e.g., ten buns  /t#bAnz/)
/b/
/p/
combined

703 (14.3)
647(16.4)
675 (10.8)

Note. The underlined phoneme is the target in each example. Mean standard errors are indicated in parentheses.

times greater than 1200 ms, or miss rates above
15%.3 Data for the remaining 36 participants
were gated at 2.5 standard deviations above and
below overall mean reaction times. This eliminated 5% of the data, which were subsequently
replaced with cell means.
There was a significant main effect for modification type F1(2,35) = 29.5, p < .001; F2(2,31)
= 24.9, p < .001. The interaction between modification type and target failed to reach significance. Given this lack of an interaction and the
parallel pattern of means across condition in
each of the target conditions, subsequent analyses collapsed across target to enhance statistical
power. Planned contrasts showed significant differences between the appropriate assimilation
and no modification conditions, t1(35) = 2.5, p <
.01; t2(31) = 2.9, p < .01, between the no modification and inappropriate modification conditions,
3
This exclusion rate (20%) is comparable to those found
in the most closely related studies of Gaskell and MarslenWilson (1998) who used similar criteria to eliminate
17-22% of their subjects in tasks employing similar stimuli.

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

t1(35) = 4.5, p < .001; t2(31) = 3.4, p < .005, and
between the appropriate and inappropriate assimilation conditions, t1(35) = 7.3, p < .001;
t2(31) = 5.5, p < .001.
Discussion
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to discriminate between two explanations for context sensitivity effects in the recognition of speech containing place assimilation. The critical result is that
listeners show longer monitoring latencies for
targets following word-final unmodified coronals
than for targets following word-final coronals
that have undergone contextually appropriate assimilation. This result is predicted by the anticipation account. Listeners hearing a coronal segment that has undergone labial assimilation are
able to anticipate that a labial segment will follow. This facilitates the recognition of the labial,
which is reflected in a savings in monitoring
time. When listeners hear an unmodified coronal,
they have no basis for anticipating what will follow. Place assimilation is an optional process, so
unmodified coronals may be followed by any
segment. This interpretation is supported by other
observations of the use of assimilation to anticipate features in the gating studies of Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson (1991) and the phoneme monitoring studies of Otake at al. (1996).
The advantage in monitoring latencies for targets following appropriate instances of assimilation as compared to targets following unmodified contexts is inconsistent with the predictions
of the regressive inference account. To see why,
it is necessary to expand on existing descriptions of the inference mechanism, which do not
make it clear when inference is invoked. There
are two possibilities. One is that the mechanism
is always active. If so, there should be no difference in the monitoring latencies associated with
unmodified and appropriately modified environments. In both environments the mechanism
would be invoked and would fail to find mismatch. A second possibility is that the mechanism is invoked whenever featural mismatch is
detected word-finally. For instance, it might be
invoked when listeners hearing [grim] have already strongly activated the word green, but
note a mismatch between the labial segment that

147

they hear and the coronal segment that they expect. This would require an additional mechanism that would accomplish word recognition
and simultaneously register mismatch. This
would generally make regressive inference more
useful. However, it would require inference to
be triggered following contextually appropriate
assimilation, but not following instances of
words ending in unmodified coronal segments.
This would mean that contextually appropriate
assimilation would lead to an increased processing load, which in turn would lead to longer
monitoring latencies. This is not what the results
of Experiment 2 show.
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson (1998) failed
to find the advantage for targets following
appropriately assimilated tokens over targets
following unmodified tokens. This difference
may be attributed to differences in how the
stimuli were constructed. Gaskell and MarslenWilson produced all modification by deliberately mispronouncing words. Their stimuli were
perceptually unambiguous at the surface level,
suggesting that feature cue modification was
relatively complete. In the current study, feature
modification was achieved through spontaneous
assimilation. While the tokens that were used
for this experiment are a highly selected set
meant to show a high degree of assimilation,
acoustic analyses of the tokens showing labial
assimilation reveal that they are not fully or
unambiguously noncoronal. The kind of spontaneous assimilation that characterizes natural
speech and the stimuli in this experiment may
provide an acoustic basis for anticipation that is
stronger than that present in the artificially assimilated stimuli employed by Gaskell and
Marslen-Wilson.
Given the evidence that contextually appropriate assimilation helps listeners anticipate upcoming context, there is a simple explanation
for the fact that both the current experiment
and Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson's (1998) first
experiment find long monitoring latencies associated with targets following contextually inappropriate assimilation. These long latencies may
reflect the disruption of processing caused by
the violation of the listener's phonetic expectations. A listener hearing a coronal that has

148

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

undergone velar assimilation anticipates that a
velar segment will follow. When a cross-spliced
labial segment follows, the listener's expectations are violated and that interrupts processing.
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson offer a different
account. They suggest that these long monitoring latencies reflect the increased processing
load associated with the detection of a nonword
discovered through regressive inference. In
principle, both anticipation and regressive inference effects could contribute to this result. However, it is imparsimonious to suggest that two
mechanisms are needed to explain a result that
one could account for.
The monitoring advantage for targets following contextually appropriate assimilation over
targets following contextually inappropriate assimilation suggests that context sensitivity in
the processing of speech containing assimilation is due to anticipatory processing rather
than to regressive inference. However, another
potential interpretation is that they reflect the
relative naturalness of the stimuli in the three
conditions. English coronal place assimilation
appears to be an optional process. When it does
occur, it produces segments that tend to differ
acoustically from both minimally contrasting
coronal and noncoronal segments. Moreover,
place assimilation appears only in a restricted
set of environments. If assimilation occurs most
of the time, then segments may typically show
contextually appropriate acoustic modification.
This would make instances of nonmodification
in environments that potentially support assimilation somewhat unusual. If so, slower monitoring latencies associated with nonmodification
may reflect the infrequency or unusualness of
the transition.
A third experiment was performed to determine if putative anticipatory effects could be observed in an experiment that controlled for possible stimulus naturalness artifacts. Experiment
3 employs a negative form-priming paradigm to
determine how preceding context affects lexical
activation. The strategy behind Experiment 3 is
to use assimilation to induce an expectation
about the place of articulation of a word's onset
and then to look for evidence of inhibition of the
anticipated form when listeners actually hear a

word whose onset has a different place of articulation. For example, listeners hearing a token
of ten in which the final coronal has undergone
velar assimilation may anticipate a word beginning with a velar such as /g/ or /k/ to follow. If
this token is actually followed by the word buns
which begins with the labial /b/, listeners may
show some initial activation of the word guns
through a combination of the effects of anticipation of an initial velar and direct acoustic support
for all of the other features that make up the
word. However, since listeners actually hear buns
they should ultimately access buns. A number
of results suggest that activation of one word
form may lead to inhibition of highly similar
word forms in auditory word recognition (Hamburger & Slowiaczek, 1996, 1999; Slowiaczek
& Hamburger, 1992). Thus, listeners who access buns should show significant inhibition of
guns if assimilation encourages the expectation
of an initial /g/ and increases the perceived similarity between the prime buns and the probe
item GUNS.
Inhibition effects in word recognition depend
on competition between candidates for recognition (Bard & Shillcock, 1993). Marslen-Wilson
(1990) summarizes a broad body of research
suggesting that items only enter the cohort of
candidates if they begin with an onset that
matches the onset they hear. For this reason, it
is important that assimilation is intended to affect the perception of the onset. It is hypothesized that the combined effects of anticipation
and perceptual similarity make guns a competitor with buns in Experiment 3. However, it is
conceivable that the perceptual similarity between buns and guns is sufficient, without anticipation, to allow guns into the cohort of items
activated by buns and thus subject it to the effects of competition. To address this possibility,
Experiment 3 included a control comparison in
which the prime items showed contextually appropriate assimilation. For example, listeners
heard a token of ten in which the final segment
had undergone labial assimilation (to approximate [tm]) immediately preceding the prime
word buns. Once again, buns was followed by
the lexical decision probe GUNS. If overlap between prime and probe forms was great enough

149

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

to make guns a member of the cohort and produce inhibition in this condition, it was reasoned that evidence of inhibition in the inappropriate assimilation context condition need not
reflect anticipation. However, if the appropriately assimilated prime context [tm] did not
produce inhibition, but the inappropriately assimilated prime context [t] did, the observed
priming could be attributed to the violation of
anticipation.
Unlike Experiment 2, all comparisons in Experiment 3 were made between trials in which
the critical speech stimulus showed the same degree of naturalness or potential unnaturalness.
In the experimental comparison, both related
and unrelated lexical decision probes always
followed contextually inappropriate assimilation such as ten buns pronounced [t#bAnz].
In the control comparison, related and unrelated
probes always followed contextually appropriate assimilation such as ten buns pronounced
[tm#bAnz]. Therefore, neither individual
priming comparison was subject to the differential effects of low-level stimulus naturalness.
As in Experiment 2, the two theoretical accounts of context sensitivity make different predictions about the outcome of Experiment 3. As
I have outlined above, the anticipatory processing account predicts that the primes following
contextually inappropriate assimilation should
produce negative priming when probed at the
offset of the prime item because of inhibition of
the lexical item whose activation is initially encouraged by anticipation. In contrast, the regressive inference account provides no basis for
predicting such a negative priming effect. An
additional processing load may be incurred during the processing of context following contextually inappropriate modification, but this cost
should be the same whether the lexical decision
probe is related or unrelated to the prime item.
Thus, the regressive inference model predicts no
differential priming effects in contextually appropriate versus inappropriate contexts. If there
is an additional processing load as predicted by
the regressive inference account, it should be reflected in slower responses to all lexical decision probes following contextually inappropriate
modification.

EXPERIMENT 3
Method
Participants. The participants were 36 people
(25 women and 11 men) drawn from the same
population as the previous experiments.
Stimuli. The auditory stimuli were constructed
around 32 sentence fragments such as ten buns;
each fragment consisted of a familiar monosyllabic word ending in /n/ in its unmodified form,
followed by a monosyllabic word beginning
with a labial stop. The words beginning with
labial stops (e.g., buns) served as the primes.
Half of the primes began with the voiced stop /b/
and half began with the unvoiced stop /p/. Primes
were limited to words that could be converted
into other familiar words if the labial place of
the initial segment were changed to velar place.
For example, buns becomes guns if the initial
segment becomes a velar.
These fragments were integrated into sentence
contexts. Two different versions of each sentence
were created in order to manipulate the relationship between words undergoing spontaneous assimilation and the subsequent context that typically controls assimilation. The two versions
were created by substituting a different word in
which the initial segment had a different place of
articulation for the second word in each fragment. For example, the fragment described
above appears in the context of the base sentence
They found ten buns in the kitchen. If the initial
sentence fragment was ten buns, then the velar
version would feature the phrase ten goats. In the
labial version upon which the other versions are
based, the final /n/ in ten assimilates the place of
the following labial to approximate [tm]. In the
velar version, the final /n/ assimilates velar place
so ten sounds something like [t]. All experimental sentences are listed in Appendix B.
These sentences were prepared in the same
manner as the stimuli used in Experiment 2,
using the same reader and equipment. All base
sentence tokens showing labial assimilation
were taken directly from the previous experiments. Each sentence token was divided into
two parts, with the division made at an ascending zero crossing just prior to the release of the
initial stop of the second word in each fragment.

150

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

For Experiment 3, two sentences were created
through cross-splicing based on each of the 32
sentence fragments. One sentence type was created by splicing the second half of a sentence
beginning with a labial segment onto the first
half of a sentence ending with a segment that
had undergone labial assimilation. This splicing
created a sentence in which the observed labial
assimilation was contextually appropriate. The
other sentence type was created by splicing together the first half of a sentence ending with a
segment that had undergone velar assimilation
with the same token of the second half of the
sentence (beginning with a labial segment) that
was used to generate the first sentence. This
splicing created a sentence in which the observed velar assimilation was contextually inappropriate. As in the previous experiments,
only sentences with no discernible splicing artifacts or discontinuities (as judged by two independent listeners) were used in the final experiment. An additional 108 filler sentences were
also recorded.
In addition to the auditory stimuli, 140 pronounceable, monosyllabic letter sequences
served as visual lexical decision probes. These
included an equal number of nonwords and real
words. All experimental sentence stimuli were
paired with real words. In one condition, the
prime word rhymed with the probe and differed
from it only in the place of articulation of its initial segment. The prime words all began with
labial segments (e.g. /b/ in buns) and the probe
words all began with the corresponding velar
segment (e.g. /g/ in guns). In a second condition
a nonrhyming, semantically unrelated probe
word was used. These unrelated probes were all
items that served as related probes for other experimental prime stimuli.
Procedure and design. Subjects were tested
using the same procedures and equipment that
were used in Experiment 1. There were four experimental conditions formed by crossing two
types of assimilation contexts (appropriate and
inappropriate) with two types of prime-probe
relationships (rhyming and unrelated). The
study had a between-subjects design necessitating the creation of four versions of the experiment. Each participant contributed equally to

all four experimental conditions, and no stimuli
were presented more than once to an individual
subject.
Results
The data were prepared using the same procedures as in the previous form priming experiment (Experiment 1). These criteria led to the
exclusion of the data of four participants who
showed unacceptably low levels of performance and to the replacement of 5% of the data
with cell means. The results are summarized in
Table 4.
The reaction time results show a pattern of
negative priming reflecting inhibition in the invalid assimilation contexts, with no priming in
the appropriate assimilation contexts. This is
borne out in the significant interaction between
phonological relatedness and assimilation context F1(1,31) = 6.1, p < .05; F2(1,31) = 5.0, p <
.05. Planned contrasts break this interaction
down, showing no priming in the appropriate assimilation contexts, t1(31) = 0.3, p > .05; t2(31) =
0.2, p > .05, but significant negative priming in
inappropriate assimilation contexts, t1(31) = 2.4,
p < .05; t2(31) = 2.2, p < .05. Given the relatively
short latencies associated with lexical decisions
for phonologically unrelated probes in the inappropriate assimilation condition, an additional
contrast was performed to determine if the appearance of negative priming in that condition
was the result of a baseline anomaly. This contrast failed to support the hypothesis. It revealed
TABLE 4
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds) for Lexical
Decisions in Experiment 3
Rhyming
probe
(GUNS)

Unrelated
probe
(KEGS)

Priming
effect

Inappropriate
modification
([t#bAnz)

757 (.98)

704 (.98)

-53 (0)

Appropriate
modification
([tm#bAnz])

713 (.96)

716 (.97)

Prime
type

Note. Accuracy rates are shown in parentheses.

-3 (-.01)

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

no significant difference in response times for
phonologically unrelated probes in contexts
showing appropriate versus inappropriate modification, t1(31) = 1.1, p > .05; t2(31) = 1.1, p >
.05. Analysis of the two main effects showed
mixed significance in subject and item analyses.
Collapsing across assimilation conditions, lexical decision responses to rhyming probes were
slower than responses to unrelated probes:
F1(1,31) = 4.72, p < .05; F2(1,31) = 1.76, p > .05.
Similarly, responses to stimuli appearing in inappropriate assimilation contexts tended to be
slower than responses to stimuli appearing in appropriate assimilation contexts, F1(1,31) = 2.1,
p > .05; F2(1,31) = 3.9, p < .05. In both cases,
these differences appear to be overwhelmingly
attributable to the responses to the rhyming
probes appearing in inappropriate assimilation
contexts. Given the high levels of accuracy observed across all conditions, error analyses revealed no significant main effects or interactions.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 show that assimilation of one segment affects the interpretation
of the next segment. Appropriate assimilation
produces a different pattern of postmodification
priming than does inappropriate assimilation. In
Experiment 2, faster detection of appropriate
postassimilation context and slower detection of
inappropriate context may reflect differences in
the processing load associated with hearing
more or less natural sounding speech. However,
the differential activation of competing lexical
candidates found in Experiment 3 cannot be
interpreted as a global processing load effect.
Instead, the current results suggest that listeners
use assimilation to anticipate context.
The results are inconsistent with the regressive inference model. The regressive inference
model may predict an increased processing load
following instances of contextually inappropriate assimilation that might slow responses on
the lexical decision task, but this effect is not
observed. Moreover, the regressive inference account provides no mechanism for selectively inhibiting items that rhyme with the probe. This
model cannot account for the fact that the contextually inappropriate assimilation conditions

151

produce priming, while the contextually appropriate assimilation conditions do not.
While these results undermine the regressive
inference account, they support the interpretation that listeners use the perception of assimilation to anticipate features of the subsequent
prime word. A number of researchers have observed negative priming in primed lexical decision tasks (Dagenbach, Carr, & Barnhardt,
1990; Dagenbacher, Carr, & Wilhelmson, 1989;
Hoffman & McMillan, 1985; Holender, 1986;
Marcel, 1980, 1983; Marslen-Wilson, 1990).
Negative priming has been associated with several factors including competition with items
with greater bottom-up support, weak perceptual encoding, or representation of prime items
and the violation of expectation. All of these
factors are present within the anticipation account of the data. The rhyme prime has lexical
competitors that receive more bottom-up activation. While velar assimilation of a segment
predicts that a velar will follow and should
affect subsequent activation, actually hearing a
labial segment should ultimately lead to greater
activation. Thus, the more strongly activated
labial candidate should inhibit the velar candidate. Finally, expectation is violated if a listener
expects to hear a velar but ultimately hears a
labial. In combination with the results of Experiment 2, the most parsimonious interpretation of these results is that negative priming is
produced by the eventual suppression of the
lexical item activated on the basis of the anticipated place of articulation of the initial segment
of the prime word. This suppression reflects
competition from the word that the listener
actually hears.
This interpretation is strengthened by the
contrast in priming effects between the two assimilation context conditions. Listeners heard
the same token of buns in the appropriate and
inappropriate assimilation conditions. That negative priming was observed in one condition but
not the other shows that lexical activation is affected by preceding phonological context. The
resemblance between guns and buns is insufficient to produce the initial activation of guns
without the additional effects of anticipation.
This result is consistent with those of Marslen-

152

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

Wilson (1993) and Marslen-Wilson, Moss, and
van Halen (1996), who also failed to find positive priming using familiar words as rhyme
primes given a 0-ms interstimulus interval.
These authors suggest that rhyme priming depends on conditions conducive to strategic responding, as well the use of nonword primes
or primes with phonetically ambiguous onsets
yielding only one lexical interpretation. When
listeners heard tokens of ten in which the final
segment had undergone labial assimilation, they
had no reason to anticipate that a velar segment
would follow. The mismatch between guns and
buns prevented guns from entering the cohort of
lexical candidates. This blocked the activation
of guns and removed it from the effects of competition with buns. Together, the results of Experiment 3 demonstrate that assimilation affects
the pattern of activation produced by subsequent
context.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Three general approaches have been proposed to explain listeners' ability to recognize
words that have undergone phonological modification through place assimilation. These approaches may be distinguished on the basis of
their claims about listeners' sensitivity to the
phonological plausibility of feature modification and the nature of the context-sensitivity of
relevant processing mechanisms. The three experiments presented here provide evidence regarding these claims and suggest new directions
in the modeling of these mechanisms.
Underspecification, Mismatch Tolerance,
and Overgeneration
The underspecification approach to the recognition of assimilated wordforms advocated by
Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (1991) rests on two
ideas. The first is that listeners maintain strict
criteria for matching features extracted from the
speech signal against features present in abstract
phonological representations in the lexicon.
This strictness provides an efficient means for
activating the correct item in the lexicon and
avoiding the activation of incorrect items. The
second key idea is that unspecified feature val-

ues provide for targeted tolerance to variations
in mutable or noncontrastive features. In principle, the value of underspecification is that it
allows listeners to tolerate phonologically plausible feature modification while showing strict
matching criteria for features that are phonologically invariant and contrastive.
The predictions of the underspecification account are clear. Lexical activation should be
blocked by mismatches in specified features, but
not by mismatches in putatively unspecified
ones. The results of Experiment 1 indicate that
listeners generally tolerate single-feature, wordfinal mismatch in the processing of continuous
speech. This tolerance extends to mismatches in
both theoretically unspecified features such as
coronal place and fully specified features such
as labial place. This result is not in accord with
the predictions of the underspecification account. As evidence against underspecification it
is consistent with other results that have been
discussed here (Gow, submitted).
The underspecification account provides an
elegant solution to the problem of listeners activating too many inappropriate lexical items due
to tolerance for feature mismatch. If we reject
this account, we must examine alternative means
to limit spurious lexical activation. I have already described the mechanism that listeners
appear to use to deactivate contextually inappropriate interpretations of homophones after
their initial activation (Onifer & Swinney,
1981). Such a mechanism provides a potential
last resort for limiting activation. Two other
factors may provide a more immediate means
for avoiding spurious lexical activation caused
by tolerance to mismatch. The first is an apparent limit on this tolerance. A wide body of research demonstrates that listeners show little
tolerance for featural mismatch in word-initial
position in the recognition of words heard in
fluent connected speech (Cole & Jakimik,
1980; Gow & Gordon, 1995; Marslen-Wilson
& Welsh, 1978; Marslen-Wilson & Zwitzerlood, 1989; Segui & Frauenfelder, 1986). Gow,
Manuel, and Melvold (1996) note that this dependence on word onsets is consistent with a
number of factors including temporal constraints

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

on speech processing, articulatory and aerodynamic constraints that make onsets particularly
robust and reliable sources of feature cues, and
a strong tendency across human languages to
insulate onsets against feature-modifying phonological processes. The other important factor is
lexical competition. A number of studies show
that the activation of one wordform may inhibit
phonologically similar items (Bard & Shillcock, 1993; Goldinger et al., 1989, 1992; Gow,
submitted; McQueen et al., 1994; Zwitserlood,
1989). Furthermore, lexical competition has
proven to be a useful mechanism in models
of spoken word recognition including TRACE
(McClelland & Elman, 1986) and Shortlist (Norris, 1994). The value of lexical competition is
that it magnifies small differences in activation
or matching. When only one item is activated
and there are no close competitors, listeners
may tolerate some minor mismatches between
features recovered from the speech signal and
features specified in representation of a word in
the lexicon. However, when several similar candidates are activated, small differences in activation reflecting the fact that one stored item resembles the input slightly more than another
does may be amplified through competition
until one candidate's activation is clearly
greater than the other's. While listeners show
tolerance for mismatch in the absence of competitors, they show exacting matching criteria
when competitors are present. This suggests
that listeners' tolerance for mismatch is modulated by competition effects.
Together, limited tolerance for word-final
feature mismatch, lexical competition, and postlexical selection based on contextual constraints
provide realistic mechanisms for limiting the
activation of spurious lexical candidates. Given
these factors, tolerance for featural mismatch
appears to provide an appealing account for the
recognition of assimilated words.
Anticipation, Regressive Inference, and Feature
Alignment
The regressive inference account advanced by
Gaskell and colleagues (Gaskell & MarslenWilson, 1996, 1998; Marslen-Wilson et al.,

153

1995) argues that postassimilation context influences the interpretation of assimilated segments
through inference at the level of the segment.
However, many of the context effects that have
been attributed to regressive inference may, in
fact, be the result of anticipatory processing.
The results of Experiments 2 and 3 are consistent with the claim that listeners use assimilatory modification to anticipate following context, but inconsistent with the predictions of the
regressive inference account.
The results of Experiments 2 and 3 suggest
that listeners use regressive place assimilation to
anticipate the place of articulation of a subsequent segment and provide a potential counterexplanation of the results that motivate the regressive inference hypothesis. The regressive
inference account is primarily motivated by a
series of results showing that lexical processing
is slowed or disrupted when modified word
forms are followed by contexts that are inconsistent with their modification (Gaskell &
Marslen-Wilson, 1996, 1998; Marslen-Wilson,
Nix, & Gaskell, 1995). In each case, slowed or
disrupted processing may instead be attributed
to violation of anticipation produced by the deliberate, contextually inappropriate modification
of underlying coronal place.
It is not surprising that listeners use assimilation to anticipate upcoming context. If reliable evidence is available to accurately anticipate upcoming information, it is reasonable to
suggest that this evidence may be used. English
word-final coronal place assimilation provides
just such a source of information, because
when assimilation modifies place of articulation it typically does so in a manner that makes
it articulatorily, acoustically and perceptually
distinguishable from unmodified places of
articulation (Barry, 1985; Gow & Hussami,
1999; Holst & Nolan, 1995; Kerswill, 1985).
Moreover, given the lawful nature of English
coronal place assimilation, following context is
always reflected in the modification it produces.
A number of studies have shown that listeners
use rhythmic or phonological information to
anticipate input or predirect direct attentional
resources in spoken word recognition (Gow

154

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

& Gordon, 1993; Marslen-Wilson & Tyler,
1980; Marslen-Wilson & Welsh, 1978; Nooteboom, 1981; Otake et al., 1996; Pitt & Samuel,
1990; Shields, McHugh, & Martin, 1974). In
short, anticipation appears to be a common
processing strategy in spoken word recognition, offering processing advantages in many
contexts.
The ability of an anticipatory process to account for the results cited in support of regressive inference does not necessarily imply that
regressive inference is uninvolved in the processing of assimilated speech. In principle, regressive inference may coexist with anticipatory processing. Gaskell et al. (1995) present a
statistical model of word recognition that simultaneously relies on regressive and progressive contextual inference. However, the regressive processes hypothesized by Gaskell
and colleagues (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson,
1996, 1998; Marslen-Wilson, Nix, & Gaskell,
1995) do not account for the current evidence
of anticipation. To the extent that a mechanism
that accounts for anticipation can account for
all relevant data, parsimony argues against a
role for an independent regressive inference
mechanism.
The strongest evidence that regressive inference plays a role in the processing of assimilated
speech that is independent of anticipation comes
from a phoneme monitoring study reported by
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson (1998). In their first
experiment, listeners monitored for word-final
coronal segments in connected speech. The critical items contained segments that were underlyingly coronal but were deliberately pronounced
as noncoronals in contextually appropriate versus inappropriate environments. Gaskell and
Marslen-Wilson found that listeners were more
likely to false alarm in contexts where the modification was consistent with contextually appropriate place assimilation. Thus, listeners hearing
freight pronounced as [freIp] in the phrase freight
bearer showed a strong tendency to report hearing a /t/. False alarm rates were significantly
lower (though still unaccountably frequent)
when the modification was contextually inappropriate as in the phrase [freIp] carrier. This effect
interacted significantly with the lexicality of the

underlying prime item.4 Gaskell and MarslenWilson suggest that listeners apply phonological
inference prelexically to determine that the labial
[p] in [freIp] is an underlyingly coronal segment
that has taken the place of articulation of the
following labial [b].
This account is problematic. It appears to follow the simple rule that when a word-final noncoronal segment is followed by a segment with
the same place of articulation, it should be reinterpreted as a coronal. A mechanism working on
this principle would sometimes fail to recognize
the appropriate word. For example, it would
lead a listener hearing the phrase ripe berries to
reinterpret the labial [p] as a coronal /t/. This
would lead the listener to reject ripe and access
right. As Gow (submitted) demonstrates, this is
not what listeners do. Listeners access ripe, not
right, when they hear the phrase ripe berries.
The regressive inference hypothesis fails to account for this result.
If the anticipatory processing account is applied to these data some insight into the nature of
the anticipatory mechanism may be gained.
Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (1991) note that in
order to recognize a segment, listeners must correctly map feature cues onto features and align
these features into timing slots. Feature alignment is a basic problem in speech processing.
Even in unmodified speech, cues signaling the
features associated with a single segment do not
occur simultaneously. They are distributed in
time and may show overlap with cues associated
with surrounding segments (Stevens, 1998a).
4
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson (1998) argue that the observed false alarms are due to prelexical inference. The primary evidence for this conclusion is the observation of significant contextual appropriateness effects on false alarming to
nonword items. While this contextual effect is significant, it is
also significantly smaller than it is when a real word is used.
Lexical effects may take place in the perception of nonwords
through a conspiracy effect when there is close correspondence with partially activated known words. Gaskell and
Marslen-Wilson attempted to avoid this effect by altering the
first segment of a real word to create each nonword. However,
all of the nonword items are monosyllabic and most have
neighbors ending in the target segment but differing in vowel
quality. Furthermore, the presentation of a small number of
nonwords in the context of a much larger body of real words
may induce a tendency to treat all items as likely real words.

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION

Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson suggest that when listeners detect a feature they have a three-segment
range over which the feature may be aligned.
Consistent with the views of Lahiri and MarslenWilson, I suggest that anticipation is achieved by
associating a feature detected during the course
of one segment with a subsequent segment.
The same process of associating a feature
with a segment may also account for Gaskell
and Marslen-Wilson's (1998) phoneme monitoring result. Consider a listener hearing the
phrase [freIp] bearer in that study. The word
freight should be accessed because it provides
the closest featural match to [freIp]. Several
studies employing mispronunciation monitoring
and shadowing suggest that single-feature mismatch may be unnoticed by listeners hearing
connected speech once a single candidate has
been identified (Cole, 1973; Cole & Jakimik,
1978; Marslen-Wilson & Welsh, 1978). If so,
detecting labiality at the end of [frep] should
not prevent the recognition of freight. However,
having detected labiality, the listener must associate it with a segment. It cannot be associated
with the coronal /t/ in freight, but it can be associated with the subsequent /b/ in bearer. As long
as the labiality can be associated with some segment, there is no processing disruption. Conversely, if [freIp] is followed by a velar as in
[freIp] carrier, this labiality cannot be associated with the next segment. When this association is disrupted, the labiality can only be associated with the final segment of [freIp], reducing
the activation of freight and leaving the listener
with no basis for falsely detecting a /t/. In this
way, the feature alignment hypothesis can account for a regressive context effect using the
mechanism that accounts for anticipation.
The feature alignment approach potentially
accounts for all of the existing evidence for context sensitivity in the recognition of assimilated
speech (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996, 1998;
Marslen-Wilson et al., 1995). Conversely, the regressive inference account fails to account for
the evidence of anticipatory processing provided
by Experiments 2 and 3. The regressive inference approach might be extended to account for
anticipation effects. However, any such elaboration would be subject to the same limits that un-

155

dermine the current regressive model. Both regressive and progressive inference operating at
the segmental level must address the fact that
there is not a unique solution to the inverse problem posed by potential assimilation. Surface
noncoronality may reflect either the underlying
place of articulation of a feature or the assimilated place of a subsequent feature. Just as listeners hearing the phrase rum drink should not
make the regressive inference that the intended
phrase was run drink, they should avoid the progressive inference that the intended phrase was
run brink. The feature alignment hypothesis addresses this problem by suggesting that assimilation typically poses a unique inverse problem
that can be resolved at the level of the mapping
between features and segments under the conditions imposed by natural language use.
The current results are inconsistent with both
underspecification and regressive inference.
More generally, they suggest that listeners do
not rely on specialized processes that uniquely
address the specific computational problems
posed by the process of English place assimilation. Instead, listeners appear to depend on the
conventional inventory of word-recognition
mechanisms, including the early activation of
lexical entries, lexical competition, feature
alignment, and the heavy reliance on the rich information provided by the speech signal.
This last item in the inventory bears some
discussion. The current results demonstrate that
listeners use assimilatory modification to anticipate subsequent context. This implies that
place assimilated segments encode the place of
subsequent segments. At the same time, the results of Gow (submitted) demonstrate that listeners rely on subtle acoustic distinctions to recover the underlying place of even strongly
assimilated segments when there is potential
lexical ambiguity. This suggests that assimilated segments may simultaneously encode two
places of articulation: the underlying place of
the current segment and the place of the subsequent segment. Further research is necessary to
explore this possibility. If it proves to be true,
this suggests that phonological modification is a
perceptually enriching process rather than a
perceptually destructive one.

156

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

APPENDIX A
Experimental Sentences Used in Experiment 1
In sentences 1-28 the bold-faced /n/ undergoes labial
assimilation to approximate the sound of [m]. In sentences
29-56 nonassimilatory modification is produced by deliberately mispronouncing the bold-faced /m/'s as [n]'s. In each
case, the canonical form of the modified word served as the
phonologically related lexical decision probe.
(1) There's a green part that seems to be missing.
(2) They're trying to ban pro hunters from the state.
(3) You should be able to make dinner with just one pan
that size.
(4) They left nine pits on the shelf.
(5) They're going to loan pegs they found to the museum.
(6) It gave the man pause to remember the situation.
(7) The two assembled a fine plan over the years.
(8) We found an old torn pouch by the side of the road.
(9) I need to get down pots for the big event.
(10) The new laws will mean pork will be harder to get.
(11) To stay warm they had to burn poles they gathered
from the abandoned site.
(12) That darn pub makes a lot of noise at night.
(13) It only has that thin peel to shield it.
(14) They let the warm rain pool in ruts in the icy surface.
(15) There was an old brown pea behind the stove.
(16) These things sometimes strain plays until they just
disintegrate.
(17) The researchers are starting to plan brain studies to
address the issue.
(18) They found ten buns in the kitchen.
(19) The operator accidentally let the crane bash the side
of the house.
(20) They watched that enormous old pine bow in the
heavy wind.
(21) She had always wanted to own boats like those.
(22) She had some fun beer on hand for her friends.
(23) He worked hard to make the horn blow like that.
(24) The court had the queen bet everything she had.
(25) He was keenly aware of the pain boasts like that can
cause.
(26) I like the way the clown blared at the camera in the
climactic scene.
(27) The specimen had a plain bill structure that's characteristic of the species.
(28) The props department warned us not to lean blue
sticks against the wet paint.
(29) She tries to blame drugs for all of her woes.
(30) The first bloom dies off with a late frost.
(31) A few shakes of the broom drive the rats away.
(32) I forgot to ask what his chum does for work.
(33) The cultists claim dark forces are at play.
(34) Its basic theme deals with the loss of love.
(35) The extra cream drips over the top of bowl.
(36) The chime draws your focus to the clock.
(37) The coverage of the terrible crime drew the wrath of
the critics.

(38) He will have his crew come dig a hole for the well.
(39) The huge frame dwarfs the rest of the pieces.
(40) They let the flame dry the pots.
(41) It was a pretty glum day at the factory.
(42) He treats the bug with a three-gram dose of the stuff.
(43) He usually has a ham dish for Easter.
(44) She bought him doves for the act.
(45) The tram door was stuck.
(46) She saw a plum drop off a tree.
(47) His latest poem dives through various styles.
(48) Its quite easy to prime deep wells with the right
set-up.
(49) The force of the stream drags boats over the falls.
(50) The spill left a slime depth of over two feet at a few
places.
(51) They set up a lattice of steam ducts to heat the offices.
(52) They will issue a press release to try to stem doubts
by the voters.
(53) His usual swim drifts past the beach across the bay.
(54) They have tame ducks that live by their garage.
(55) She chose a trim dress jacket to wear to the show.
(56) I hear the groom drove here last week.

APPENDIX B
Experimental Sentences Used in
Experiments 2 and 3
Double slashes mark the location of splices, underlining
indicates the target phoneme employed in the monitoring
task in Experiment 2, and parentheses indicate the rhyming
lexical decision probe presented in Experiment 3. In the
three versions of each sentence used, the bold-faced letter
approximates [m] in the appropriate assimilation condition, [] in the inappropriate assimilation condition, and
[n] in the no assimilation condition. Stimuli from the no
assimilation condition were used in Experiment 2, but not
in Experiment 3.
(1) There's a green // part that seems to be missing.
(CART)
(2) They're trying to ban // pro hunters from the state.
(CROW)
(3) You should be able to make dinner with just one //pan
that size. (CAN)
(4) They left nine //pits on the shelf. (KITS)
(5) They're going to loan // pegs they found to the museum. (KEGS)
(6) It gave the man // pause to remember the situation.
(CAUSE)
(7) The two assembled a fine // plan over the years.
(CLAN)
(8) We found an old torn // pouch by the side of the road.
(COUCH)
(9) I need to get down // pots for the big event. (COTS)
(10) The new laws will mean // pork will be harder to get.
(CORK)
(11) To stay warm they had to burn // poles they gathered
from the abandoned site. (COALS)

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION
(12) That darn // pub makes a lot of noise at night. (CUB)
(13) It only has that thin // peel to shield it. (KEEL)
(14) They let the warm rain // pool in ruts in the icy
surface. (COOL)
(15) There was an old brown // pea behind the stove.
(KEY)
(16) These things sometimes strain // plays until they just
disintegrate. (CLAYS)
(17) The researchers are starting to plan // brain studies
to address the issue. (GRAIN)
(18) They found ten // buns in the kitchen. (GUNS)
(19) The operator accidentally let the crane // bash the
side of the house. (GASH)
(20) They watched that enormous old pine // bow in the
heavy wind. (GO)
(21) She had always wanted to own // boats like those.
(GOATS)
(22) She had some fun // beer on hand for her friends.
(GEAR)
(23) He worked hard to make the horn // blow like that.
(GLOW)
(24) The court had the queen // bet everything she had.
(GET)
(25) He was keenly aware of the pain // boasts like that
can cause. (GHOSTS)
(26) I like the way the clown // blared at the camera in the
climactic scene. (GLARED)
(27) The specimen had a plain // bill structure that's characteristic of the species. (GILL)
(28) It was clearly a time when // brave decisions had to
be made. (GRAVE)
(29) They're trying to train // bold investors to analyze
other mineral markets. (GOLD)
(30) These patients are more interesting than // bland
cases like we see at the clinic. (GLAND)
(31) The props department warned us not to lean // blue
sticks against the wet paint. (GLUE)
(32) It's her policy to shun // buys that her friends are interested in. (GUYS)

REFERENCES
Anderson, J. R. (1978). Arguments concerning representations for mental imagery. Psychological Review, 85,
249-277.
Archangeli, D. (1988). Aspects of underspecification theory.
Phonology, 5, 183-207.
Bard, E. G., & Shillcock, R. (1993). Competitor effects during lexical access: Chasing Zipf's tail. In G. T. M. Altmann, & R. Shillcock (Eds.), Cognitive models of
speech processing: The second Sperlonga meeting (pp.
235-275), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barry, M. C. (1985). A palatographic study of connected
speech processes. Cambridge Papers in Phonetics and
Experimental Linguistics, 4, 1-16.
Beckman, J. N. (1997, May). Positional faithfulness.
Paper presented at Johns Hopkins Optimality Theory
Workshop/University of Maryland Mayfest, Baltimore, MD.

157

Brown, C. M. (1990). Spoken word processing in context.
Doctoral dissertation. University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers,
25, 257-271.
Cole, R. (1973). Listening for mispronunciations: A measure of what we hear during speech. Perception & Psychophysics, 1, 153-156.
Cole, R., & Jakimik, J. (1978). Understanding speech: How
words are heard. In G. Underwood (Ed.), Strategies of
information processing (pp. 67-116). New York: Academic Press.
Cole, R., & Jakimik, J. (1980). A model of speech perception. In R. Cole (Ed.), Perception and production of fluent speech (pp. 133-163), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Connine, C. M., Blasko, D. G., & Titone, D. (1993). Do the
beginnings of words have a special status in auditory
word recognition? Journal of Memory and Language,
56, 624-636.
Dagenbach, D., Carr, T. H., & Barnhardt, T. M. (1990). Inhibitory semantic priming of lexical decisions due to
failure to retrieve weakly activated codes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 328-340.
Dagenbach, D., Carr, T. H., & Wilhelmson, A. (1989). Taskinduced strategies and near-threshold priming: Conscious influences on unconscious perception. Journal
of Memory and Language, 28, 412-443.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gaskell, M. G. (1994). Spoken word recognition: A combined
computational and experimental approach. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Birkbeck College, University
of London.
Gaskell, M. G., Hare, M., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1995).
A connectionist model of phonological representation in speech perception. Cognitive Science, 19,
407-439.
Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1994). Inference
processes in speech perception. In A. Ram, & K. Eiselt
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th annual conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1996). Phonological variation and inference in lexical access. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 22, 144-158.
Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1998). Mechanisms of phonological inference in speech perception.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24, 380-396.
Goldinger, S. D., Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1989). Priming lexical neighbors of spoken words: Effects of competition and inhibition. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 501-518.
Goldinger, S. D., Luce, P. A., Pisoni, D. B., & Marcario, J. K.
(1992). Form-based priming in spoken word recognition: The role of competition and bias. Journal of

158

DAVID W. GOW, JR.

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 1211-1238.
Gow, D. W. (2001). Does English coronal place assimilation
create lexical ambiguity? Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Gow, D. W., & Gordon, P. C. (1993). Coming to terms with
stress: Effects of stress location in sentence processing.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 22, 545-578.
Gow, D. W., & Gordon, P. C. (1995). Lexical and prelexical
influences on word segmentation: Evidence from priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21, 344-359.
Gow, D. W., & Hussami, P. (1999, November). Acoustic
modification in English place assimilation. Paper presented at the meeting of the Acoustical Society of
America, Columbus, OH.
Gow, D. W., Manuel, S., & Melvold, J. (1996, October).
How word onsets drive lexical access and segmentation: Evidence from acoustics, phonology and processing. Paper presented at the Fourth International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
Philadelphia.
Hamburger, M., & Slowiaczek, L. M. (1996). Phonological
priming reflects lexical competition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 3, 520-525.
Hamburger, M., & Slowiaczek, L. M. (1999). On the role of
bias in dissociated priming effects: A reply to Goldinger
(1999). Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 6, 352-355.
Hoffman, J. E., & McMillan, F. W. (1985). Is semantic priming automatic? In M. I. Posner, & O. S. M. Marin
(Eds.), Attention and performance XI (pp. 585-599),
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holender, D. (1986). Semantic activation without conscious
identification in dichotic listening, parafoveal vision,
and visual masking: A survey and appraisal. The Brain
and Behavioral Sciences, 9, 1-23.
Holst, T., & Nolan, F. (1995). The influence of syntactic
structure on [s] to [] assimilation. In B. Connell, & A.
Arvanti (Eds.), Phonology and phonetic evidence: Papers in laboratory phonology IV. (pp. 315-333). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kerswill, P. E. (1985). A sociophonetic study of connected
speech processes in Cambridge English: An outline and
some results. Cambridge Papers in Phonetics and Experimental Linguistics, 4, 1-39.
Kiparsky, P. (1985). Some consequences of lexical phonology. Phonology Yearbook, 2, 85-137.
Kuijpers, C., Donselaar, W., & Cutler, A. (1996, October).
Phonological variation: Epenthesis and deletion of
schwa in Dutch. Paper presented at the Fourth International Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
Philadelphia.
Lahiri, A., & Marslen-Wion, W. D. (1991). The mental
representation of lexical form: A phonological approach to the recognition lexicon. Cognition, 38,
245-294.
Marcel, A. J. (1980). Conscious and preconscious recognition of polysemous words: Locating the selective effects of prior verbal context. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.),

Attention and performance VII (pp. 435-457), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1987). Functional parallelism in
spoken word recognition. Cognition, 25, 71-102.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1993). Issues of process and representation. In G. T. M. Altmann, & R. Shillcock (Eds.),
Cognitive models of speech processing: Psycholinguistic and computational perspectives (pp. 187-210).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Moss, H., & van Halen, S. (1996).
Perceptual distance and competition in lexical access.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 22, 1376-1392.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Nix, A., & Gaskell, M. G. (1995).
Phonological variation in lexical access: Abstractness,
inference and English place assimilation. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 10, 285-308.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The temporal
structure of spoken language understanding. Cognition,
8, 1-71.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Welsh, A. (1978). Processing interactions and lexical access during word recognition
in continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 10,
29-63.
Marslen-Wilson. W., & Zwitserlood, P. (1989). Accessing
spoken words: The importance of word onsets. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 15, 576-585.
McClelland, J., & Elman, J. (1986). The TRACE model of
speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1-86.
McQueen, J. M., Norris, D., & Cutler, A. (1994). Competition in spoken word recognition: Spotting words in
other words. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20,
621-638.
Nolan, F. (1992). The descriptive role of segments: Evidence from assimilation. In G. J. Doherty, & D. R.
Ladd (Eds.), Papers in laboratory phonology II: Gesture, segment, prosody.(pp. 261-280), Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Nooteboom, S. G. (1981). Lexical retrieval from fragments
of spoken words: Beginnings vs endings. Journal of
Phonetics, 9, 407-424.
Onifer, W., & Swinney, D. A. (1981). Accessing lexical ambiguities during sentence comprehension: Effects of
frequency of meaning and contextual bias. Memory &
Cognition, 9, 225-236.
Otake, T., Yoneyama, K., Cutler, A., & Lugt, A. (1996). The
representation of Japanese moraic nasals. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 100, 3831-3842.
Pulleyblank, D. (1988). Vocalic underspecification in
Yoruba. Linguistic Inquiry, 19, 233-270.
Pulman, S. G., & Hepple, M. R. (1993). A feature based
formalism for two-level phonology: A description and
implementation. Computer Speech and Language, 7,
333-358.
Radeau, M., Morais, J., & Segui, J. (1995). Phonological
priming between monosyllabic spoken words. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 21, 1297-1311.

ASSIMILATION AND ANTICIPATION
Segui, J., & Frauenfelder, U. (1986). The effect of lexical
constraints on speech perception. In F. Klix, & H. Hagendorf (Eds.), Human memory and cognitive abilities:
Mechanisms and performance (pp. 795-808), Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Shields, J. L., McHugh, A., & Martin, J. G. (1974). Reaction
time to phoneme targets as a function of rhythmic cues
in continuous speech. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102, 250-255.
Slowiaczek, L. M., & Hamburger, M. (1992). Prelexical facilitation and lexical inhibition in auditory word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 18, 1239-1250.
Slowiaczek, L. M., Nusbaum, H. C., & Pisoni, D. B. (1987).
Phonological priming in auditory word recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 13, 64-75.
Slowiaczek, L. M., & Pisoni, D. B. (1986). Effects of
phonological similarity on priming in auditory lexical
decision. Memory & Cognition, 14, 230-237.

159

Stevens, K. (1998a, July). Overview of landmark-feature
based system for lexical access: Feature representation
and acoustic correlates. Paper presented at the Konstanz Speech Recognition- Man and Machine Workshop, Schloss Freudental, Konstanz,
Stevens, K. (1998b). Acoustic phonetics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Zwitserlood, P. (1989). The locus of effects of sententialsemantic context in spoken-word processing. Cognition,
32, 25-64.
Zwitserlood, P. (1996). Form priming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 11, 589-596.
Zwitserlood, P., & Coenen, E. (2000, June). Consequences
of assimilation for word recognition and lexical representation. Paper presented at the SWAP workshop,
Nijmegen.
(Received May 25, 2000)
(Revision received September 18, 2000)
(Published online April 12, 2001)

