Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2001

Semantic Factors in the Production of Number
Agreement
Jason Barker1,3, Janet Nicol,1,2 and Merrill Garrett1
This paper examines the role of semantic factors in the production of subject-verb number
agreement. As an ostensibly grammatical process, number agreement provides an interesting
case for examining the flow and interaction of semantic and syntactic information through the
language-production system. Using a sentence-completion task, agreement errors can be elicited
from subjects by presenting them with sentence fragments containing a complex noun-phrase, in
which the nonhead noun is plural (e.g., The key to the cabinets . . . WERE missing.). Previous
research has demonstrated that the probability of making an error can be affected by varying the
properties of the nouns in the complex noun phrase. By investigating which variables do and do
not affect error rates, constraints on the flow of information through the production system can
be inferred. In three experiments, we investigated the possible effects of three different semantic
manipulations of the nouns in the complex NP: animacy, semantic overlap, and plausibility of
modification by the sentence predicate. We found that both animacy and semantic relatedness
had reliable effects on error rates, indicating that the mechanism involved in implementing
agreement cannot be blind to semantic information. However, the plausibility with which each
noun could serve as the subject of the sentence predicate had no effect on error rates. Taken
together, these results suggest that while semantic information is visible to the agreement mechanism, there are still constraints on when this information can affect the process. Specifically, it
may be the case that only information contained within the complex NP is considered for the purposes of implementing agreement.
KEY WORDS: language production; agreement; speech errors.

This research was supported in part by National Multipurpose Research and Training Center
Grant #DC-01409 from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders and by the Cognitive Science Program and Department of Psychology at the
University of Arizona.
1
Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tacson, Arizona 85721-0068.
2
Department of Linguistics, University of Arizona, Tuscon, Arizona 85721-0068.
3
To whom all correspondence should be addressed. e-mail: jbarker@u.arizona.edu.
91
0090-6905/01/0100-0091$19.50/0 (c) 2001 Plenum Publishing Corporation

92

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

INTRODUCTION
In the tradition of looking at the distributions of speech errors as a window
into the architecture of the language-production system (e.g. Garrett, 1975;
Cutler, 1988; Levelt, 1983), experimental investigations of subject-verb agreement errors have provided a useful paradigm for gathering production data
(e.g. Bock & Miller, 1991; Bock & Eberhard, 1993; see Bock, 1995 for a
review). Agreement is a particularly worthwhile aspect of speech production to
investigate since it is an excellent example of one of the main computational
problems the production system must tackle, namely, specifying and maintaining the structural relationships between lexical items, which may be substantially temporally separated from one another.
In a typical experiment, subjects are provided with sentence fragments
containing a complex noun phrase (e.g. The key to the cabinets . . .), which
they are then to repeat, and provide completions for (e.g., The key to the
cabinets was lost). Manipulations of the properties of the complex NP provide the independent variables, while the number of agreement errors produced provides the dependent variable. These errors are often termed
"errors of attraction," based on the view that the nonhead noun "attracts"
agreement away from the true head of the phrase.
The most basic finding in this literature is an asymmetry in the prevalence of errors: they are much more common when the head noun is singular
and the nonhead (hereafter called the "distractor" noun) is plural (e.g., The
key to the cabinets WERE missing) than in the reverse case (e.g., The keys to
the cabinet WAS missing) (Bock & Miller, 1991; Bock & Eberhard, 1993;
Eberhard 1997). The proposed explanation for this asymmetry is that nouns
are singular by default and must be specifically marked as plural by the addition of a plural feature (Bock & Miller, 1991; Bock & Eberhard, 1993;
Eberhard, 1997). Preambles in which the head noun is singular, and hence
unmarked, are vulnerable to interference from any plural feature, which may
exist on other nouns within the complex NP. Sentences in which the head
noun is plural are less prone to interference for two reasons: the head noun is
already marked, and a singular distractor noun, being in its default unmarked
state, would not possess a disagreeing "singular" feature.
The exact mechanism by which normal agreement, and by extension,
errors, occurs has not yet been fully fleshed out. Vigliocco and colleagues
(Vigliocco, Butterworth, & Semenza, 1995; Vigliocco & Nicol, 1998) have
put forward a "feature-percolation" model, which proposes that the number of
the verb is specified by a check of the features that exist at the highest node
of the complex NP. Normally, a plural subject transmits (or "percolates") its
plural feature up to the highest node, where it is then copied to the verb. In

Semantics and Agreement

93

the case of errors, the plural feature on the distractor noun is mistakenly transmitted up to highest NP node, which then leads the system to mistakenly generate a plural verb. Eberhard (1997) extended this proposal by casting the
process within an activation framework, helping to determine an explanation
of why the plural feature on the distractor noun can be mistakenly associated
with the head N-P node. Two aspects of Eberhard's proposal are important
here. First, features associated with the heads of noun phrases are assumed to
be more highly activated than those associated with nonheads. Second, any
relevant features associated with nonheads are assumed to create noise in the
system, which increases the probability that the agreement mechanism will
make an error when trying to assess the existence of activated features on the
head NP node. This leaves us with a probablistic view of the occurrence of
agreement errors, where various lexical, structural, or conceptual factors may
act to increase or decrease the amount of noise created by plural features
associated with nonheads, and thus increase or decrease error probabilities.
The exact architecture of and flow of information through the production system will dictate which kinds of information can and cannot create interference
and thus by investigating the factors which affect error rates. inferences can
be made about how the system must be organized.
Several such factors have been investigated, although not always within
the activation framework outlined above. Early work in this area (Bock &
Miller, 1991; Bock & Cutting, 1992; Beck & Eberhard, 1993) suggested
that agreement in English was almost exclusively governed by syntactic factors, with semantic and phonological factors being invisible to the process.
This was taken as evidence for quite constrained interactions between different types of information within the production system (Bock & Miller,
1991). For instance, the use of "pseudoplural" words (words ending with
an/s/ or /z/ sound) in the distractor noun position failed to elicit any agreement errors at all (e.g., The player on the course . . ., indicating that lowlevel phonological cues were not driving the agreement process (Bock &
Miller, 1991). In another experiment, Bock and Miller (1991) investigated
the possible effects of conceptual factors in agreement by comparing single
vs. distributed referent noun phrases, as in (1) and (2):
(1) Single referent
The key to the cabinets . . .
(2) Distributed referent
The label on the bottles . . .
In both (1) and (2), the head NP is syntactically singular, since the head
noun is unmarked. However, (2) is conceptually plural, in that it most plausibly refers to the same type of label on many bottles. This is in contrast to

94

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

(1), which clearly refers to one key that opens numerous cabinets. No difference in error rates was found between the two sentence types and this
was taken as evidence that semantic information was not accessible to the
agreement mechanism.
In contrast, syntactic manipulations exert a marked effect on the agreement process. For instance, Bock and Cutting (1992) found that if the distractor noun is separated from the head noun by a clause boundary (e.g., The
message that they expelled the students . . .) error rates decline substantially.
Further, Nicol and Barker (1996) demonstrated that even without crossing a
clause boundary, error rates are reduced if the distractor noun does not have
a close syntactic link with the head noun (e.g., The pilot at the airbase near
the hangars . . .). Taken together, these findings suggest that agreement in
English is primarily a syntactic process, which can be affected by syntactic
variables but is largely blind to nonsyntactic ones (e.g., conceptual number,
phonology).
However, as often happens, further research complicated the picture
and in this domain has made the case for agreement as a "syntax only"
process difficult to maintain. Bock and Cutting (1992) found that conceptual factors could indeed affect the agreement process under certain conditions. They found that error rates were higher for sentences such as (3),
which contained singular collective head nouns, than for those such as (4),
which contained singular count nouns:
(3) The jury for the trials . . .
(4) The judge for the trials . . .
This was taken as evidence that conceptual factors can indeed sometimes
govern the agreement process. Further, using the items from the Bock and
Miller's (1991) singular vs. distributed referent manipulation, Vigliocco and
colleagues were successful in demonstrating a conceptual effect in Italian
(Vigliocco, Butterworth & Semenza, 1995), Spanish (Vigliocco, Butterworth,
& Garrett, 1996), and Dutch (Vigliocco, Hartsuiker, Jamera, & Kolk, 1996b).
Eberhard (1999) was able to demonstrate the effect in English and explains
the prior difficulty in demonstrating this effect in English as being related
to the concreteness and imagibility of the distributed referent NPs (cf.
Nicol, Teller, & Greth, 2000).
What do these findings indicate about the production system? Eberhard
(1997) argues that the fact that both grammatical and conceptual number
can affect agreement places the agreement process at the functional level of
processing (Garrett, 1988; Bock & Levelt, 1994). At the functional level,
the utterance-to-be is represented as lemmas--abstract word representations
that contain semantic information and basic syntactic category information,
and markers delineating roles such as subject, object, etc. Importantly, ele-

Semantics and Agreement

95

ments at the functional level are not yet ordered in any linear sense; this
takes place at the next level of processing, the positional level.
On balance, research to date supports the proposal that agreement can be
governed both by syntactically and conceptually specified number information and this argues against claims that the interaction between syntactic and
semantic information within the production system is highly limited. Note,
however, that the type of semantic effect, which has been demonstrated, is
still critically tied to information about the plurality of the head noun phrase.
That is, the question has been whether a phrase, which is grammatically
marked as singular, can still be construed for the purposes of agreement as
plural if the phrase as a whole implies plurality (e.g., as in "The picture on
the postcards . . ." or "The jury at the trial . . .").
A separate question, and one that is of specific interest if one assumes an
activation based framework for agreement (such as that put forward by
Eberhard, 1997), is whether semantic factors not involving number per se can
attract agreement errors away from the head noun in the same way that syntactic factors can. As was discussed above, simply having a plural feature on
the distractor noun will cause a certain percentage of errors (e.g. Bock &
Miller, 1991). This percentage can be reduced if the distractor noun is placed
in a position that makes it syntactically more distant from the head (e.g. Bock
& Miller, 1991, Nicol, 1995; Nicol & Barker, 1996. However, can the semantic properties of the sentence affect error rates in this way? This is quite a separate issue from the question of "conceptually mediated agreement" as it has
typically been addressed in the relevant research, because it is not concerned
with the contributions of other sources of information about number (e.g. conceptual), but rather with what kinds of factors can cause the system to give
undue weight to number features present on the distractor noun. In other
words: what types of factors can increase the likelihood that the agreement
mechanism will select its number properties from the wrong noun in the
complex noun phrase? This is the specific question that will be addressed in
this paper.
One previous study that did address this question was Bock and Miller's
(1991) second experiment, in which they examined the role of animacy in the
agreement process. Their reasoning was as follows: animacy is highly correlated with subjecthood (Clark, 1965; MacWhinney, 1977); therefore, animacy
can be considered a good "cue" for subjecthood. If the agreement process
identifies sentence subjects, at least in part, by reference to the kinds of
"primitive" semantic features they possess, rather than solely by reference to
the role they have been assigned at the functional level of processing, then it
should be the case that distractor nouns that possess semantic features (such
as animacy) that are highly correlated with subjecthood should be more likely
to lead to agreement errors than those that do not. Bock and Miller (1991)

96

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

investigated this possibility by comparing sentences with animate head or distractor nouns, as in (5) and (6):
(5) AI: (animate head-inanimate distractor)
The author of the speeches . . .
(6) IA: (inanimate head-animate distractor)
The speech by the authors . . .
They found no difference in error rates between these two/types of preamble and concluded that the agreement process does not make reference to
semantics, but rather only operates on the basis of the syntactic role (e.g.,
subject, object) that has been specified at the functional level of processing.
However, it is possible that there are, in fact, effects of animacy that
the Bock and Miller (1991) study may have missed. This is because that study
only looked at a subset of the possible combinations of animacy (animate-
inanimate; inanimate-animate). Since animacy is so intricately linked with
subjecthood, it is possible that the baseline conditions for each of these two
conditions are different; that is, sentences in which both nouns are animate
may differ from those in which both are inanimate. This data would be necessary in order to fully interpret the animacy-mismatch conditions presented in
Bock and Miller (1991). Further, since animacy is so highly correlated with
subjecthood, it could be the case that most of its effects will be centered not
on the animacy of the distractor noun per se, but rather of the subject noun
itself. Bock and Cutting (1992) found a result somewhat similar to this when
they demonstrated that singular collective nouns did not serve well as errorinducing distractor nouns (e.g., The trial by the jury . . .), but when the same
singular collective noun was used as the subject, in conjunction with a syntactically plural distractor noun, error rates do increase relative to sentences using
a simple count noun as the subject, as in (7) and (8), respectively
(7) Collective noun subject
The jury at the trials . . .
(8) Count noun subject
The judge at the trials . . .
Our main goal in this study was to test a set of items containing a full counterbalancing of the animacy variable across the subject and distractor nouns
in the complex NP.

EXPERIMENT 1
The purpose of the first experiment was to investigate the role of animacy in agreement, by using a set of items, which consisted of all possible

Semantics and Agreement

97

combinations of animacy. There are three core predictions for these results.
First, following the logic in Bock and Miller (1991), it is possible that items
with animate distractor nouns will have higher error rates than those with
inanimate distractors. On the other hand, it could be that it is the animacy of
the subject noun that is of most importance, predicting that preambles with
animate subject nouns would be less prone to error than those with inanimate
subject nouns because, due to the correlation between animacy and subjecthood, animates make better subjects. In other words, it is not that animate
nouns prefer to be subjects, but rather that subjects prefer to be animate.
Finally, it could be that there exists an interaction between these two factors,
whereby the animacy of both nouns is relevant to error rates. For instance,
while Bock and Miller (1991) found that IA and AI items were equivalent, it
could still be the case that IA items have higher error rates than II items, and
that AI items have fewer errors than AA items.
Method
Participants
Sixty-four University of Arizona undergraduates participated in the
study for course credit.
Materials
Twenty-four sentence preamble octuplets were constructed in which
the subject noun was singular, the distractor noun was either singular or
plural, the subject noun was either animate or inanimate, and the distractor
noun was either animate or inanimate. Each octuplet was assigned two target predicate words, one for the animate-headed items and one for the inanimate-headed items. This was necessary due to the difficulty of finding
predicates that work equally well with both animate and inanimate nouns.
An example octuplet can be seen in (9). The sentence codes are as follows:
(AA) = animate subject; animate distractor; (AI) = animate subject, inanimate distractor; (II) = inanimate head, inanimate distractor, (IA) = inanimate head, animate distractor, (ss) = singular subject, singular distractor;
(sp) = singular subject, plural distractor).
(9a) AA-ss
(9b) AA-sp
(9c) AI-ss
(9d) AI-sp
(9e) II-ss
(9f) II-sp

The
The
The
The
The
The

girl behind the teacher . . .
girl behind the teachers . . .
girl behind the desk . . .
girl behind the desks . . .
blackboard behind the desk . . .
blackboard behind the desks . . .

smart
smart
smart
smart
erased
erased

98

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

(9g) IA-ss
(9h) IA-sp

The blackboard behind the teacher . . .
The blackboard behind the teachers . . .

erased
erased

These items were counterbalanced across eight presentation lists, such that
each variant appeared on a different list. Due to the large number of items
and conditions in this study, the counterbalancing was done in such a way
that head noun animacy was a between subjects variable and this allowed
us to only conduct items analyses on the data. For reasons we will discuss
below, we do not believe that this factor influenced our results. In addition
to the experimental items, there were also 64 other items that comprised a
separate experiment (not reported on herein) and a number of filler items to
equalize certain counterbalancing factors.
Procedure
All items were displayed visually in the following manner: a fixation
cross was first presented in the center of the screen for 300 msec. This was
then replaced by the target predicate word, which remained on the screen
for 600 msec. Finally, this was replaced by the sentence fragment, which
remained on the screen for 1200 msec. A blank screen was displayed for
roughly 100 msec in between each change in the visual display. Subjects were
instructed to read the target predicate word and sentence fragment silently to
themselves and to then speak aloud a complete sentence, beginning with the
sentence fragment and including the predicate word somewhere within the
completion. Subjects moved on to the next item by pressing the space bar of
an ordinary keyboard and no constraints were placed upon the length of their
responses or the speed at which they proceeded to the next item. The items
were presented on a computer-controlled display using the DMDX system
(developed by J. I. Forster & K. I. Forster at the University of Arizona).
Subject responses were recorded on audio cassette tape.
Scoring
Subject responses were transcribed by research assistants, who were
unaware of the specific manipulations involved in the study. Responses
were then scored by placement into four categories: Correct (C) the subject
repeated the sentence fragment accurately, included the target predicate in
their completion, and used a correctly inflected verb; agreement error (AG),
as above, except that the subject used a verb, which did not agree in number with the subject; uninflected (U), As above, except that the subject used
a verb, which was uninflected for number; other (Oth), this category encompassed fragment repetition errors and other miscellaneous types of errors,
which made the item uncodable within the three other categories.

Semantics and Agreement

99

Table I. Subject Responses for Experiment 1.a

AA-ss
AA-sp
AI-ss
AI-sp
II-ss
II-sp
IA-ss
IA-sp
a

The girl behind the teacher . . .
The girl behind the teachers . . .
The girl behind the desks . . .
The girl behind the desk . . .
The blackboard the desk . . .
The blackboard the desks . . .
The blackboard behind the teacher . . .
The blackboard behind the teachers . . .

AG

C

U

Oth

1
14
0
8
0
25
0
14

156
133
153
138
151
121
154
124

7
9
8
7
8
6
11
6

28
36
31
39
33
40
27
48

Scoring codes at are as follows: (C) correct; (AG) agreement error; (U) uninflected; (Oth)
other; (ss) singular subject, singular distractor; (sp) singular subject, plural distractor.

Results
The results can be seen in Table I. A two (head noun animacy, animate
vs. inanimate) by two (distractor noun animacy, animate vs. inanimate) by two
(distractor noun number, singular vs. plural) ANOVA was conducted on each
of the four response categories.
For (AG), there was a main effect of distractor noun number [F(1,46) =
59.22, p < .001], an interaction of distractor noun number and subject noun
animacy [F(1,46) = 5.33, p < .03], and an interaction of subject and distractor noun animacy [F(1,46) = 3.84, p < .05]. There was also a near significant
main effect of subject noun animacy [F(1,46) = 3.69, p < .06] and a near significant three-way interaction of all variables [F(1,46) = 3.51, p < .06].4 For
the (C) responses, there was only a main effect of distractor noun number
[F(1,46) = 37.43, p < .001]. No significant differences existed for the (U)
responses, and only a main effect of distractor noun number was found for
(Oth) responses [F(1,46) = 12.83, p < .01]. This latter effect is due mostly to
the fact that speakers are much more likely to omit a plural ending on a noun,
than they are to add one.
Discussion
The main effects in our data seem to indicate clearly that the agreement
process is sensitive to animacy variables. However, the interaction of subject
4

Due to the fact that there was only one error in the SS (singular subject noun, singular distractor noun) across the entire experiment, it is simpler to deal with the two-way interaction
that omits distractor noun number from the equation. Since the baseline in all four animacy
conditions is essentially zero, it seems unnecessary to consider the SS conditions in the interactions and therefore, these will not be dealt with further.

100

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

and distractor noun animacy is not easily explained within the predictions
we laid out for the experiment. We will take each of these findings in turn.
First, it is clear that the animacy of the distractor noun, in and of itself, does
not affect error rates. In line with Bock and Miller's (1991) original findings, animate distractor nouns were no more likely to cause errors than
inanimate ones, as evidenced by the complete lack of a main effect for
distractor noun animacy (if we collapse across conditions, we see that items
with animate distractor nouns led to 28 errors, while those with inanimates
led to 33). On the other hand, the animacy of the subject noun does appear
to play a role, as there was a marginal main effect of head noun animacy,
and a significant interaction with distractor noun animacy (collapsing across
conditions, we see that items with animate subjects led to 22 errors while
those with inanimate subjects led to 39 errors). Having an animate noun in
subject position appears to provide some insulation against the possibility of
making an error. Regarding the counterbalancing of head noun animacy, we
do not believe this affected our results for two reasons. First, there are no
effects of animacy for either the (U) or (OTH) response categories. If the
two groups of subjects were behaving differently, it is unclear why this difference would manifest itself only in the number of agreement errors made,
and not in other response categories. Second, the filler items were identical
on all lists and there were no differences in performance on these items
across the two groups of subjects.
The interaction between subject and distractor noun animacy is more
difficult to account for, since the pattern of results does not fit the kind of
interaction that we would have predicted based on our initial assumptions
about the role animacy could be playing. For instance, an interaction in
which animate distractor nouns caused more errors only for sentences with
inanimate subjects would be easily explainable, since this follows from our
predictions about the role animacy might be playing in each noun position.
The pattern of results we obtained paints a very different picture though, in
that it is the (II) condition that leads to, by far, the most errors. None of our
initial assumptions would predict that this condition should be the most
problematic for subjects and this caused us to take a second look at these
assumptions.
By using a fully counterbalanced set of animacy items, we introduced a
possibly confounding factor into the manipulation. Animacy is but one semantic feature and it is likely that pairs of animate or inanimate nouns may
have considerable overlap of other semantic features as well. Of specific
importance here is that, on average, pairs of animate or inanimate nouns will
have substantially more overlap than pairs containing one animate and one
inanimate noun. It is possible that the degree of semantic overlap between the
subject and distractor nouns may be an independent source of variance in

Semantics and Agreement

101

error rates. The argument for animacy as a potential variable in agreement
(put forward by Bock & Miller, 1991) suggests that the production system
may identify subjects, at least partly, by reference to a statistical record of
what kinds of semantic features are usually associated with subjecthood. An
additional question is whether, in any specific sentence, subject identification
can be made more difficult when the subject noun shares many semantic features with the distractor noun. This question gets at the issue of the type and
degree of interaction between lexical representations at the functional level,
rather than the issue of statistical biases in the way the system functions as a
whole. If the degree of semantic overlap between nouns in the complex noun
phrase, indeed, plays a role in the agreement process, then this factor will
likely have contributed variance to the present experiment and may help to
explain the present pattern of results. Therefore, in Experiment 2, we specifically investigate the role of semantic overlap in the agreement process.

EXPERIMENT 2
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether the degree
of semantic overlap between subject and distractor nouns in a complex NP
would have an effect on the likelihood of an agreement error during sentence production. If the agreement process is sensitive to this factor, this
will be relevant to our interpretation of the results of Experiment 1.
Method
Participants
Forty-eight University of Arizona undergraduates participated in this
study for course credit.
Materials
Thirty-two sentence fragment quadruplets were constructed in which
the subject noun was singular, the distractor noun was either singular or
plural, and the subject and distractor nouns had either high- or low-semantic
overlap. High-overlap nouns were those which had substantial overlap of
semantic features (e.g., sailboat/canoe). These ranged from synonyms to
simply superordinate or subordinate category relations. Each quadruplet was
also assigned an adjective or past-tense verb, which would serve as the target predicate for the sentence completion the subjects would be asked to
provide. An example quadruplet is shown in (10). The new sentence codes

102

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

are as follows: high = high degree of semantic overlap; low = low degree
of semantic overlap).
(10a) ss - high
(10b) sp - high
(10c) ss - low
(10d) sp - low

The
The
The
The

canoe
canoe
canoe
canoe

by
by
by
by

the
the
the
the

sailboat. . . .
sailboats . . .
cabin . . .
cabins . . .

damaged
damaged
damaged
damaged

The plausibility with which each noun could be related to the target predicate
was kept roughly equal across all the items and nearly all of the items contained nouns that were either both animate or both inanimate. These items
were counterbalanced across four presentation lists such that each variant
appeared on a different list and equal tokens of each sentence type appeared
on each list. In addition, there were 48 other items, which were part of a separate experiment (not reported herein), and 10 filler items, which were used
to equalize our counterbalancing across the entire experiment.
Procedure and Scoring
Both were equivalent to Experiment 1.
Results
The results can be seen in Table II. Two analyses of variance were conducted, one with subjects (F1) and one with items (F2) as the random variable.
A 2 (distractor noun number, singular vs. plural) x 2 (degree of semantic overlap, high vs. low) ANOVA conducted on the (AG) class of responses revealed
a significant main effect of distractor noun number [F1(1,45) = 47.57, p <.001;
F2(1,31) = 64.88, p < .001), semantic overlap [F1(1,45) = 14.03, p <.001;
F2(1,31) = 10.19, p < .003], and an interaction of the two [F1(1,45) = 9.24,
p < .004; F2(1,31) = 12.02, p < .002). A similar analysis on (C) responses
revealed essentially identical results; a significant main effect of distractor

Table II. Subject Responses for Experiment 2a

ss-high
sp-high
ss-low
sp-low
a

The canoe by the sailboat . . .
The canoe by the sailboats . . .
The canoe by the cabin . . .
The canoe by the cabins . . .

AG

C

U

Oth

11
84
10
48

326
223
328
264

1
0
1
0

46
77
45
72

Scoring codes are equivalent to Experiment 1 with the addition of: (high) = high semantic
overlap; (low) = low semantic overlap.

Semantics and Agreement

103

noun number [F1(1,45) = 63.74, p < .001; F2(1,31) = 58.9, p < .001), semantic overlap [F1(1,45) = 10.53 p < .002; F2(1,31) = 9.02, p < .005], and an interaction of the two [F1(1,45) = 5.27, p < .03; F2(1,31) = 4.89, p < .05]. There
were too few (U) responses to warrant an analysis. Analysis of the (Oth)
responses revealed only a main effect of distractor noun number [F1(1,45) =
25.31, p < 001; [F2(1,31) = 27.02, p < .001], with all other F's < 1.3. This
effect is again due simply to the fact that subjects are much more likely to omit
an existing plural feature on the distractor noun than they are to add a plural
feature, which was not present in the preamble.
Discussion
These results clearly support the notion that the degree of semantic overlap between nouns within the complex noun phrase can affect error rates.
Subjects were nearly twice as likely to make an agreement error when the
nouns had a high degree of semantic overlap than when they had a low
degree of overlap. One possible alternative explanation for this finding is that
the difference in error rates had nothing to do with the effects of semantics on
the agreement process per se, but rather was due simply to a general increase
in difficulty or memory load caused by the ease of confusability of the two
nouns. However, if this were true, one would expect that all types of errors
(e.g., repetition errors, nonsensical sentence completions) should be more
common for the high semantic overlap items, rather than being restricted to
only agreement errors. However, we found no effect of semantic overlap for
(OTH) responses. Increased difficulty was demonstrated only with regard to
(AG). The strong effect of semantic overlap demonstrated here necessitates a
reconsideration of the results of Experiment 1 and we believe that this finding, in fact, makes the results of Experiment 1 much clearer.

REEVALUATION OF EXPERIMENT 1
Recall that Experiment 1 left us with an interaction of subject and distractor noun animacy that was not easily explainable within our existing
assumptions about the possible role that animacy might play in agreement.
Most striking was the unexpected finding that the (II) condition led to the
most agreement errors (see Table I for the overall results). While the interaction was difficult to explain, we were left with two clear main effects: (1) the
animacy of the distractor noun was not, in and of itself, predictive of error
rates and (2) the animacy of the subject noun was predictive, with sentence
preambles with inanimate subjects leading to significantly more errors than
those with animate subjects. Together with the results of Experiment 2, this

104

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

suggests that our characterization of the independent variables was incorrect.
Rather than simply noting whether the subject and distractor nouns are animate or not, what is relevant is (1) whether the subject noun is animate, and
(2) whether the distractor noun matches or mismatches the subject in animacy.
Two nouns which match in animacy are on average going to have more
semantic overlap than two nouns which do not, and therefore, following from
the results of Experiment 2, we should expect preambles containing nouns,
which match in animacy (II, AA), to lead to more errors than those with nouns
that mismatch in animacy (IA, AI).
To investigate this possibility, we recategorized the conditions from
Experiment 1 as outlined above. A 2 (head noun animacy, animate vs. inanimate) by two (animacy match, head and distractor nouns match vs. mismatch
in animacy) 1 x 2 (distractor noun number, singular vs. plural) ANOVA on
the data from Experiment 1 revealed a near significant main effect of subject
noun animacy [F(1,46) = 3.68, p < .06]; a main effect of animacy match
[F(1,46) = 3.83, p < .05); and, of course, a main effect of distractor noun
number [F(1,46) = 59.27, p < 001]. There was no interaction of head noun
animacy and animacy match at all (F < .49).
Interpreted in this way, the results of Experiment 1 are much more clear.
Two additive factors appear to be at play in this experiment. First, items with
nouns that match in animacy (we call these "+ match") have higher error rates
than those that do not. Second, it is also true that items, which have inanimate
subject nouns ("+ inanimate subject") are, overall, more likely to produce
errors than those that have animate subject nouns. These two factors can additively affect error rates, such that an item with the characteristics +match and
+inanimate subject will be the most susceptible to errors, while an item which
is -match and -inanimate subject will be the least. Items which have either
characteristic will likely fall somewhere in between. This is in fact the pattern
of errors here and a recoded example of the data can be seen in Table III. Note
that the II condition has the most errors, the AI the least, while the other two
conditions fall in between. On-way analyses of variance confirmed that the II
(+, +) condition had significantly more errors than the AI (-, -) condition
[F(1,46) = 6.55, p < .02). As would be predicted, the AA and IA conditions
fell somewhere in between and did not differ significantly from either the II
or AI conditions: the II condition had marginally more errors than either the
AA (-+) condition [F(1,46) = 2.43, p < .11] or IA (+-) condition [F(1,46) =
2.52, p < .12] and the AI condition did not differ significantly from either the
IA or AA conditions (F's < 1.2)
Taken together, these results suggest that both semantic overlap and
head noun animacy additively affect agreement error rates. This argues
strongly that semantic features associated with lexical items are in compe-

Semantics and Agreement

105

Table III. Subject Responses for Experiment 1 with Alternate Item Codinga
Anim
Match

Subject
Inamin

AG

-

-

AI-ss

-

-

AI-sp

-

+

IA-ss

-

+

IA-sp

+

-

AA-ss

+

-

AA-sp

+
+

+
+

II-ss
II-sp

a

The girl behind
the blackboard. . .
The girl behind
the blackboards. . .
The blackboard behind
the teacher. . .
The blackboard behind
the teachers. . .
The girl behind
the teacher. . .
The girl behind
the teachers. . .
The blackboard the desk. . .
The blackboard the desks. . .

C

U

Oth

0

153

8

31

8

138

7

39

0

154

11

27

14

124

6

48

1

156

7

28

14

133

9

36

0
25

151
121

8
6

33
40

Additional codes are as follows: (Anim Match +) = the two nouns match in animacy; (Anim
Match -) = the two nouns mismatch in animacy; (Subject Inanim +) = sentence subject is
inanimate; (Subject Inanim -) = sentence subject is animate.

tition at the stage at which agreement is computed and that the agreement
mechanism is sensitive to this competition.
Although it seems clear that the agreement process is sensitive to lexical semantics (or at least semantic similarity of lexical items), an obvious
follow up question is whether "sentence-level" semantic information can
also affect the agreement process. What we mean by "sentence level" is the
type of semantic relationship that is expressed through the relations between
lexical items, rather than in the lexical entries themselves. Our question is
whether semantic information of this type can have an impact on processes
involved in grammatical encoding, such as agreement. One specific test of
this is whether the degree to which both nouns in the complex noun phrase
bear plausible relations to the sentence predicate may also be predictive of
errors. If so, this would indicate that the agreement mechanism can receive
input from high-level semantic representations of the entire utterance, rather
than being simply prone to interference by various lexical level semantic
factors (e.g., animacy and semantic overlap). In addition to addressing a
potentially interesting question about the production system in general, it is
possible that this very factor had an effect on the results of Experiment 1:
since we provided target predicates for each of our sentence preambles, subjects were constrained to form a sentence on the basis of that predicate. It
is possible that subjects would be more likely to make an error on items

106

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

where both nouns in the complex noun phrase could plausibly be related to
the predicate. Consider the examples in (11) and (12):
(11) Both nouns plausible
The boy near the dogs was running away.
(12) Subject only plausible
The boy near the trees was running away.
In (11), both nouns could plausibly act as subjects for the sentence predicate, while in (12) only the subject noun could. If the extent of interaction
within the production system extends beyond simple lexical level effects
and, in fact, allows the overall conceptual sentential representation to exert
control over the agreement process, then this plausibility variable should
affect agreement rates such that sentences like (11) should have higher error
rates than sentences like (12). Thornton and MacDonald (1999) have reported
preliminary data suggesting just such an effect; however, the preliminary
work on these results are difficult to interpret at present. In addition, Greenslit
and Badecker (2000) found a similar effect in comprehension, but it is not
clear whether these results would also be obtained in production. We turn to
an examination of this variable in Experiment 3.

EXPERIMENT 3
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether the agreement process is affected by the degree to which each of the nouns in the
complex noun phrase bears a plausible relation to the sentence predicate.
This is of immediate importance because this factor could have affected the
results of Experiment 1 and is of more general importance for demonstrating
that sentence level semantic representations can interact with the grammatical encoding operations such as agreement. Because we were specifically
interested in whether this variable affected the results of Experiment 1, we
chose to run this study as a posthoc examination of the items in that experiment. Although it is probably true that plausibility covaries with semantic
overlap and animacy (e.g., two nouns with a high degree of semantic overlap are more likely to be able to take the same predicate than two nouns with
strongly disparate semantic features), this covariance is not at all absolute.
High semantic overlap nouns can often differ strongly in terms of how plausibly they relate to a predicate (e.g., The woman near the girl was teaching.
and low semantic overlap nouns can often be equally plausibly related to the
predicate (e.g., The boy near the tree was tall.) Because of this, our items
from Experiment 1 afforded a wide range of items across this plausibility
scale.

Semantics and Agreement

107

In this experiment, we had independent raters judge the plausibility with
which each noun in our sentence preambles from Experiment 1 fit with the
provided target predicates and then used these ratings to reevaluate the results.
Method
Participants
Twenty-five University of Arizona undergraduates participated for
course credit.
Method
The nouns and target predicates from the items in Experiment 1 were
extracted from their sentence contexts and presented as simple word pairs on
a questionnaire sheet. The first word in the pair was always a noun and the
second was always the target predicate. Subjects were asked to rate how well
they felt the first word in the pair "went with" the second word on a fivepoint scale where (1) meant "they don't go together at all" and (5) meant
"they go perfectly well together." In order to make it clear to the subjects
what kind of judgment we were asking them to make, they were given specific examples of how we wanted them to approach the task. As an example,
they were given the word pairs "dog/hungry" and "car/hungry" and told that
they were to ask themselves, "Can a dog be hungry?", "Can a car be hungry?" and to rate how plausibly they felt they could answer YES to those
questions. For these examples, the ratings should be (5) and (1), respectively.
Ratings for each noun were then averaged across all 25 subjects.
Once all of the nouns were assigned a rating, we could then calculate
a plausibility index for each item in Experiment 1. By subtracting the average plausibility rating of the distractor noun from the average plausibility
rating of the subject noun, we arrived at a "plausibility difference" score,
which expressed the degree to which both nouns in the sentence bore plausible relations to the target predicate. An example pair of sentences with
plausibility ratings is provided in Figure 1.
This creates a plausibility difference scale, which can theoretically range
from -4 to +4, with positive scores indicating the head is most plausible and
negative scores indicating the distractor noun is most plausible. In practice,
the actual range is from about -1 to +4, since our items were, of course, all
constructed such that the predicate bore at least a moderately plausible relation to the head. Items with scores close to zero represent those in which both
nouns are plausibly related to the predicate, while items closer to +4 represent
those items in which only the subject noun bears a plausible relation to the
predicate. If this plausibility variable is relevant to agreement, then items with

108

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

Fig. 1. Sample sentences for Experiment 3 showing plausibility ratings for each noun and the
composite plausibility difference score for each sentence.

scores closer to zero should be more prone to error than items with scores
closer to +4. After assigning each item its plausibility rating, we could then
correlate this with the proportion of errors made on each item.
Results
A scatterplot of the data can be seen in Figure 2. Because there were
essentially zero errors in the ss (singular head, singular distractor noun) sentence conditions, we restricted our analysis to the sp items only. As can be
seen, our items provided a wide range of plausibility values, with a fairly
equal distribution of ratings across the scale. Overall, 10% of the items had
a score between -1 and 0; 34% fell between .1 and 1, 13% fell between 1.1
and 2, 22% fell between 2.1 and 3, and 21% fell between 3.1 and 4. As can
be seen in the figure, there was almost no relationship between the plausibility difference score and the percentage of agreement errors on a given
item. A correlation analysis revealed a near zero relationship between the
two variables (Spearman r = -.052).
Discussion
It does not appear then that "sentence-level" semantic information affects
the agreement process. While semantic features at the lexical level demonstrated an impact in both Experiments 1 and 2, the plausibility of the NPpredicate relation did not. We can certainly be confident that this variable did
not affect our positive results in Experiment 1 and, based on the near zero
correlation found here, it is likely that this type of information is simply not
available to the agreement mechanism.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
First let us recap the results of the three experiments presented here.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that animacy can, indeed, play a role in the agree-

Semantics and Agreement

109

Fig. 2. Scatterplot for data in Experiment 3. Data shown for sp condition only.

ment process in at least two ways. First, sentence preambles with animate subject nouns were less prone to agreement errors than sentences with inanimate
subjects. Second, sentence preambles in which the head and distractor nouns
match in animacy are more prone to errors than those in which the nouns do
not match in animacy. Experiment 2 demonstrated that the latter finding was
a specific example of a more general effect of semantic overlap: sentence preambles in which the subject and distractor nouns have a large amount of overlap of semantic features are more prone to error than preambles with more
semantically distinct nouns. Pairs of animate or inanimate nouns will, on
average, have more semantic overlap than pairs of nouns that mismatch in
animacy. Taken together, these results support past research which has indicated that the agreement process is sensitive to semantic factors and is not a
"syntax-only" process (e.g. Eberhard, 1997; Vigliocco et al., 1995) and places
the agreement process at the functional level of processing. Further, these
results extend past research in demonstrating that semantic factors, which do
not actually involve number per se (e.g., conceptual number), can affect the
process. The results of Experiment 3 indicate that there are constraints on the
types of semantic factors that the agreement process is sensitive to. While lexical level semantic features on and between nouns in the complex NP had
reliable effects on error rates, the degree to which each noun in the NP bore
a plausible semantic relationship to the sentence predicate did not. This could
indicate either that this type of "sentence-level" semantic information is not
visible to the agreement mechanism, or it could indicate that the time course
of the flow of information through the production system precludes this

110

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

information from affecting the agreement process. These possibilities will be
discussed in more detail below.
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 fit well within the activation framework for agreement proposed by Eberhard (1997). Recall that the two most
relevant parts of that proposal here are (1) that features associated with heads
are assumed to be more highly activated than those associated with nonheads
and (2) that any features associated with nonheads are assumed to create some
degree of noise in the system. Any factor which serves to increase the activation of features on the distractor noun and, hence, the amount of noise present
in the system, should work to increase error rates. If the head and distractor
nouns in the complex NP have substantial overlap of semantic features, it
could be the case that any number features that may be present on the distractor noun could be given undue weight. Similarly, if the head noun in the
phrase is animate, then this may help to decrease error rates because of the
increased activation of the head noun relative to the distractor noun. If heads
are typically more highly activated to begin with, the addition of a feature
such as animacy, which is highly correlated with subjecthood, may work to
boost activation rates. Note that, like the original Bock and Miller (1991)
study, we did not find an effect of distractor noun animacy per se. Having an
animate noun in the distractor position did not increase error rates, as might
be predicted if the system relies, at least in part, on correlational cues to determine subjecthood. Simply being animate does not bias a noun toward being a
subject, however, if a noun has been assigned the syntactic role of "subject"
and it is also animate, it may be more highly activated than a subject that is
inanimate. In other words, as stated in the introduction, it is not that animate
nouns prefer to be subjects, but that subject nouns prefer to be animate. This
interpretation is supported by the results of Experiment 3 in the original Bock
and Miller (1991) study. They found that in sentence preambles that contained
two actual subject nouns (e.g., The king that the islands . . .; The song that
the composers . . .), error rates were higher when the noun that should not
govern the first verb was animate, indicating that when faced with two subject
nouns, subjects were inclined to give more weight to the one that was animate.
While this interpretation fits the present data well, it is problematic
when viewed alongside certain other results in the language production
error literature. If the account offered above is correct, one might also predict that word exchange errors should be more common between nouns that
share substantial overlap of semantic features than between nouns that are
more semantically distinct. If the system can become confused as to which
noun should be governing the number-agreement process when the nouns
are semantically similar, it may also be more likely to confuse the positions
of those two nouns within the utterance. However, the data on naturally

Semantics and Agreement

111

occurring speech errors does not support this prediction. While word exchange
errors are highly constrained by syntactic category (e.g., nouns exchange with
nouns; verbs exchange with verbs) they are not constrained by semantics
(e.g., highly dissimilar nouns are as likely to exchange as highly similar
ones) (e.g., Garrett, 1975, 1984; Bock & Levelt, 1994).
There are a number of ways to possibly reconcile this discrepancy.
First, it is possible that the effects reported here are somewhat dependent on
the task involved. Experimental subjects are provided with partial sentences
and asked to complete them, rather than constructing sentences from scratch
as they would normally, and this may bias the task toward creating or exaggerating lexical effects, which may be more relevant to language comprehension than language production. It is probably important to corroborate
these results with corpus analyses or other more naturalistic methods to
determine the robustness of this effect, considering the wealth of naturally
occurring speech error data that exists for word exchanges.
Second, it is possible that word-exchange errors and agreement errors
are different enough phenomenon that they are not governed by exactly the
same factors. When implementing number agreement, the system is looking to
the subject noun of the head NP to govern the number marking on the verb.
On occasion, for a variety of reasons, the system allows the number of the verb
to be governed by the nonsubject noun (the distractor noun). It does not appear
that the system has actually misidentified the subject, since sentences in which
speakers make an agreement error are rarely completed in such a way that they
are actually treating the distractor noun as the true subject of the sentence (that
is, people rarely say things, such as "The key to the cabinets are being refinished"). In the case of exchange errors, the system is not looking to one word
to govern the properties of another, but rather, it is simply trying to order the
constituents of the sentence properly. It could be the case that the process of
juggling features between lexical items required by agreement is susceptible
to different kinds of interference than the process of ordering lexical items
within an utterance. The studies reported here do not allow us to explore this
question fully, but it will be important to reconcile this possible discrepancy
between experimentally elicited and naturally occurring speech errors.
Experiment 3 also fits well with existing research, and serves to demonstrate that there are constraints on the ways in which semantic information
can effect the agreement process. While strictly lexical semantic overlap
between nouns in the complex NP affected error rates in Experiments 1 and 2,
the degree to which both nouns bore plausible relations to the sentence predicate did not. There could be at least two possible reasons for this. First, it
could be the case that this type of "sentence-level" semantic information is
not visible to the agreement process. The type of semantic overlap involved

112

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

in Experiments 1 and 2 can be quantified solely by reference to the semantic
features of the lexical items involved. In Experiment 3, this is not the case, as
our "plausibility difference score" relied on some reference to the overall sentence, and not simply to the lexical items themselves. For example, the same
two nouns may or may not bear similar relations to the predicate in different sentence contexts, as in "The boy near the tree was tall" and "The boy
near the tree was smart." While competition or interference may arise due
to simple semantic feature overlap, predicate plausibility may require reference to information that is unavailable to the agreement mechanism.
Another possibility is that it is the time course of information through the
system that is important and not the type of semantic information involved
per se. If the flow of information through the production system is incremental, such that as soon as any given piece of an utterance has completed processing at one level it is sent on to the next (e.g., Kempen & Hoenkamp,
1987; Kempen & Vosse, 1989), and if the agreement process is begun as soon
as the subject noun reaches the functional level of processing, then it could be
the case that a factor such as plausibility simply does not typically become
available during the window of time in which agreement is computed. Studies
by Nicol (1995) and Nicol and Barker (1996) provide support for this proposal. Both studies demonstrated that the likelihood of a plural feature on a
distractor noun interfering with the correct implementation of agreement was
dependent on it being encoded closely following the head. Distractor nouns
which were distant from the head were less likely to cause errors. For instance,
Nicol and Barker (1996) found that sentence . preambles such as (13) were
significantly more prone to error than those such as (14):
(13) The pilot near the hangars . . .
(14) The pilot at the airport near the hangars . . .
By this view, any information arriving at the functional level significantly
after the head noun will be too late to interfere with the agreement process
and the plausibility manipulation of Experiment 3 may be one such type of
information. It is worth noting that, if anything, our experimental procedure
actually encouraged the use of this plausibility information, since partial
predicates were specifically provided to the subjects before they even saw
the sentence preamble. It is quite striking, then, that speakers did not appear
to make any use of this information in terms of computing agreement.

CONCLUSION
Overall, these results support previous research that has indicated that
the agreement process is sensitive to semantic factors and that agreement is

Semantics and Agreement

113

likely carried out at the functional level of processing. We extend these
results in demonstrating that even semantic information that does not involve
number information per se can affect agreement. The degree of semantic
feature overlap of nouns within the complex NP, in general, and the specific
semantic feature of animacy were both shown to affect error rates in a number agreement error elicitation task. These results also support the proposal
that sentence production occurs incrementally and that interfering information must be available in close proximity to the subject noun in order for it
to affect the agreement process, as evidenced by the lack of a plausibility
effect in Experiment 3. These studies may also highlight the need to integrate the wealth of data now available on experimentally elicited agreement
errors with the existing data on naturally occurring speech errors.

REFERENCES
Bock, K. (1995). Producing Agreement. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 56-61.
Bock, K., & Cutting, J. C. (1992). Regulating mental energy: Performance units in language
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 99-127.
Bock, K., & Eberhard, K. M. (1993) The meaning, sound, and syntax of English number agreement. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8, 57-99.
Bock, K., & Levelt, W. J. (1994). Language production: Grammatical encoding. In M. A.
Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of Psycholinguistics (pp. 945-984). San Diego, California:
Academic Press.
Bock, K., & Miller, C. A. (1991). Broken agreement. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 45-93.
Clark, H. H. (1965). Some structural properties of simple active and passive sentences. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, pp. 365-370.
Cutler, A. (1988). The perfect speech error. In L. M. Hyman & C. S. Li (Eds.), Language,
speech and mind: Studies in honor of Victoria A. Fromkin (pp. 209-223). London:
Routledge.
Eberhard, K. M. (1997). The marked effect of number on subject-verb agreement. Journal of
Memory and Language, 36, 147-164.
Eberhard, K. M. (1999). The accessibility of conceptual number to the processes of subjectverb agreement in English. Journal of Memory and Language, 41, 560-578; Journal of
Memory and Language, 88, 375-407.
Garrett, M. F. (1975). The analysis of sentence production. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 133-177). New York: Academic Press.
Garrett, M. F. (1984). Levels of processing in sentence production. In B. Butterworth (Ed.),
Language Production (Vol. 1, pp. 177-220). London: Academic Press.
Garrett, M. F. (1988). Processes in language production. In F. J. Newmeyer (Ed.), Linguistics:
The Cambridge survey, III: Language: Pyschological and biological aspects (pp. 69-96).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Greenslit, N., & Badecker, W. (2000). The role of the lexical item in the comprehension of
subject-verb agreement. Poster presented at the 13th Annual CUNY Conference on Human
Sentence Processing, San Diego, California.
Kempen, G., & Hoenkamp, E. (1987). An incremental procedural grammar for sentence formulation. Cognitive Science, 11, 201-258.

114

Barker, Nicol, and Garrett

Kempen, G., & Vosse, T. (1989). Incremental syntactic tree formation in human sentence processing: A cognitive architecture based on activation decay and simulated annealing.
Connection Science, 1, 275-292.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in speech. Cognition, 14, 41-104.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. (1977). Starting points. Language, 53, 152-168.
Nicol, J. L. (1995). Effects of clausal structure on subject-verb agreement errors. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 507-516.
Nicol, J. L., & Barker, J. (1996). Units of processing in language production. Poster Presented
at the 10th Annual CUNY conference on Human Sentence Processing. Santa Monica,
California.
Nicol, J., Teller, M., Greth, D. (2000) The production of verb agreement in monolingual, bilingual, and second language speakers. In J. Nicol (Ed.), One mind, two languages:
Language processing in the bilingual Oxford: Blackwell Press.
Thornton, R., & MacDonald, M. (1999). Plausibility effects on subject-verb agreement errors
in English. Poster presented at the 12th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, New York, NY.
Vigliocco, G., Butterworth, B., & Semenza, C. (1995). Constructing subject-verb agreement in
speech: The role of semantic and morphological factors. Journal of Memory and
Language, 34, 186-215.
Vigliocco, G., Butterworth, B., & Garrett, M. F. (1996). Subject-verb agreement in Spanish
and English: Differences in the role of conceptual constraints. Cognition, 61, 261-298.
Vigliocco, G., Hartsuiker, R. J., Jarema, G., & Kolk, H. H. J. (1996b). One or more labels on
the bottles? Notional concord in Dutch and French. Language and Cognitive Processes,
11, 407-442.
Vigliocco, G., & Nicol, J. (1998). Separating hierarchical relations and word order in language
production: Is proximity concord syntactic or linear? Cognition, 68, 13-29.

