Spectral Contributions to the
Benefit From Spatial Separation
of Speech and Noise
Judy R. Dubno
Jayne B. Ahlstrom
Amy R. Horwitz
Medical University of
South Carolina
Charleston

Speech recognition in noise improves when speech and noise sources are
separated in space. This benefit has two components whose effects are strongest
in different frequency regions: (1) interaural level differences (e.g., head shadow),
which are largest at higher frequencies, and (2) interaural time differences, which
have their greatest contribution at lower frequencies. Binaural interactions
enhance the separation of signals from noise through the use of these interaural
differences. Here, the benefit attributable to spatial separation was measured as a
function of the low- and high-pass cutoff frequency of speech and noise. Listeners
were younger adults with normal hearing, older adults with normal hearing, and
older adults with hearing loss. Binaural thresholds for narrowband noises were
measured in quiet and in a speech-shaped masker as a function of masker lowpass cutoff frequency. Speech levels corresponding to 50% correct recognition of
sentences from the Hearing in Noise Test (HINT) were measured in a 65-dB SPL
speech-shaped noise. Thresholds for narrowband noises and for speech were
measured with two loudspeaker configurations: (1) signals and speech-shaped
noise at 0 azimuth (in front of the listener) and (2) signals at 0 azimuth and
speech-shaped noise at 90 azimuth (at the listener's side). The criterion measure
was spatial separation benefit, or the difference in thresholds for the two conditions. Benefit of spatial separation for unfiltered speech averaged 6.1 dB for
younger listeners with normal hearing, 4.9 dB for older listeners with normal
hearing, and 2.7 dB for older listeners with hearing loss. Benefit was differentially
affected by low-pass and high-pass filtering, suggesting a trade-off of the
contributions of higher frequency interaural level differences and lower frequency
interaural timing cues. As expected, older listeners with hearing loss benefited
little from the improved signal-to-noise ratios in the higher frequencies resulting
from head shadow, but showed some benefit from lower frequency cues. Spatial
benefit for older listeners with normal hearing was reduced relative to benefit for
younger listeners. This result may be related to older listeners' elevated thresholds
at frequencies above 6.0 kHz.
KEY WORDS: speech recognition in noise, hearing loss, aging, binaural
hearing, spatial separation

I

n addition to reduced speech recognition in noise, individuals with
hearing loss demonstrate poorer ability to detect and localize signals
in space (e.g., Hausler, Colburn, & Marr, 1983; Lorenzi, Gatehouse,
& Lever, 1999; Noble, Byrne, & LePage, 1994) and generally benefit less
from spatial separation of speech and noise sources and binaural listening (Duquesnoy, 1983; Gelfand, Ross, & Miller, 1988). Thus, given that
effective use of the cues provided by spatial separation improves the
functional signal-to-noise ratio, deficits in the use of these cues may
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December
* (c)American
Speech-Language-Hearing
Dubno 2002
et al.: Benefit
From Spatial
Separation of Speech Association
and Noise
1092-4388/02/4506-1297

1297

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

underlie the speech recognition difficulties encountered
by many individuals with hearing loss and the limited
benefit of hearing aids (e.g., Festen & Plomp, 1986;
Hawkins & Yacullo, 1984; Leeuw & Dreschler, 1991).
It is useful to separate the contribution of spatially
separated sources and monaural versus binaural listening into two components: (1) interaural level differences
(e.g., head shadow), which are largest at higher frequencies, and (2) interaural time differences, which have their
greatest contribution at lower frequencies. Binaural interactions enhance the separation of signals from noise
through the use of these interaural differences. Using
this framework, a quantitative model was proposed and
provided a reasonable account of the effects of head
shadow and binaural advantage for listeners with normal hearing (Zurek, 1993). Another approach was taken
by Bronkhorst and Plomp (1988), who measured the independent contributions of interaural level and time differences to speech recognition in noise. Using simulations of free-field listening, these authors compared
thresholds for speech with speech and noise in front of
the listener (0 azimuth) and with speech at 0 and noise
at the listener's side (90 azimuth). With both interaural
level and interaural time differences available, the spatial separation advantage was 10.1 dB. With level differences only, the advantage was 7.8 dB; with time differences only, the advantage was 5.0 dB. Thus, interaural
level differences had a larger effect than interaural time
differences, and the two effects were not additive. Moreover, Bronkhorst and Plomp (1988) concluded that (a)
the effect of level differences could be explained by the
improved signal-to-noise ratio in the high frequencies at
one ear and, therefore, did not involve a binaural advantage or interaction and (b) the binaural advantage was
determined by interaural time differences in the lower
frequencies (similar to earlier conclusions of Schubert &
Schultz, 1962, and Levitt & Rabiner, 1967). Smaller benefit of spatial separation observed for listeners with hearing loss was attributed to an inability to take advantage
of interaural level differences rather than interaural time
differences (Bronkhorst & Plomp, 1989, 1992).
Differences in the use of interaural level differences
between listeners with normal hearing and listeners
with hearing loss may be explained as follows. Listeners with normal hearing benefit from an improvement
in signal-to-noise ratio at higher frequencies due to head
shadow associated with spatial separation of speech and
noise sources. Head shadow and other similar effects
are measurable beginning at approximately 1.5 kHz and
are largest between 2.0 and 5.0 kHz (Festen & Plomp,
1986; Nordlund, 1962; Tonning, 1971). Thus, the reduced advantage of spatial separation for individuals
with hearing loss results from the unfortunate coincidence of the frequency dependence of interaural level
differences and high-frequency hearing loss. Additional
1298

speech information that could be made audible due to
an improved signal-to-noise ratio at higher frequencies
remains inaudible due to high-frequency hearing loss.
In addition to reduced benefit from interaural level
differences, the use of interaural timing information may
be limited by age and hearing loss. For example, agerelated changes were observed in thresholds for interaural time differences measured under earphones
(Strouse, Ashmead, Ohde, & Grantham, 1998). Using
another measure of binaural processing, masking-level
differences for tones and speech were smaller in older
listeners than in younger listeners by 3-6 dB (Grose,
Poth, & Peters, 1994; Pichora-Fuller & Schneider, 1992;
Strouse et al., 1998). Cranford, Boose, & Moore (1990)
reported age-related changes in the precedence effect
measured in the sound field; further deterioration in
localization ability was observed in older listeners with
hearing loss. Abel, Giguere, Consoli, & Papsin (2000)
observed a systematic decline in horizontal plane localization with increasing age, starting as early as 30 years
of age. Performance declined with age for localization of
broadband noise, 0.5-kHz noise bands, and 4.0-kHz noise
bands, suggesting age-related changes in processing of
both interaural level differences and interaural timing
cues.
Given that interaural level and time differences
underlie the benefit of spatial separation of speech and
noise sources, reduced ability to use these interaural
difference cues by older listeners with and without hearing loss may result in reduced spatial separation advantage for speech recognition in noise for these individuals. Indeed, results of several studies have shown
reduced benefit of spatial separation for older listeners.
For example, Duquesnoy (1983) found reduced benefit
of spatial separation for sentence recognition in noise
for older listeners with hearing loss relative to younger
listeners with normal hearing. Using a similar task,
Gelfand et al. (1988) attributed these findings to effects
of hearing loss, rather than aging. These authors reported equivalent benefit of spatial separation for sentence recognition in noise for younger and older listeners with normal hearing but reduced benefit for older
listeners with hearing loss.
An objective of the current experiment was to assess
the use of interaural difference cues that underlie the
spatial separation benefit for speech recognition in noise
by younger and older adults with normal hearing and
older adults with hearing loss. Here, the benefit attributable to spatial separation of speech and noise sources
was measured as a function of low-pass and high-pass
cutoff frequency. This design takes advantage of the fact
that interaural time differences have their greatest contribution at lower frequencies, whereas interaural level
differences are largest at higher frequencies. Although

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

high-pass and low-pass filtering may not completely separate these cues, spatial separation benefit measured with
lower frequency speech and noise was designed to assess
primarily the use of interaural timing cues, whereas spatial separation benefit measured with higher frequency
speech and noise was intended to assess mainly the use
of interaural level cues.

Methods
Participants
There were three groups of participants: (1) 8
younger adults with normal hearing (mean age: 25.3
years; range: 22-30); (2) 8 older adults with normal hearing (mean age: 68.5 years; range: 66-73); and (3) 8 older
adults with mild-to-moderate sensorineural hearing loss
(mean age: 72.1 years; range: 67-78). Younger and older
listeners with normal hearing had thresholds that were
20 dB HL or less (American National Standards Institute, 1996) at octave frequencies from 0.25 to 4.0 kHz
and immittance measures within normal limits. Listeners with hearing loss were selected from among patients
with adult-onset cochlear hearing loss (specific etiology
unknown), absolute thresholds within specific ranges,
and normal immittance measures. Thresholds of participants with hearing loss were restricted to specific
ranges to ensure that stimulus levels did not exceed the
limits of the loudspeakers, and differences in participants' thresholds between right and left ears at frequencies from 0.25 to 6.0 kHz were minimal. For all participants, scores for nonsense syllable recognition in
speech-shaped noise measured monaurally under earphones were within the 95% confidence interval of the
scores predicted from their pure-tone thresholds. In addition, scores for the right and left ears differed, on average, by less than 1%. Two of the 8 listeners with hearing loss were users of binaural hearing aids; none were
monaural hearing-aid users. Participants received approximately 1 hour of practice with the various tasks.
Listeners had no prior experience with the speech materials used in the experiment. Data collection was completed in five or six 2-hour sessions. Participants were
paid an hourly wage for their participation.

Apparatus and Stimuli
Thresholds
Tonal signals were used to measure thresholds in
quiet for each ear under earphones. These were digitally generated (TDT PD1) 350-ms pure tones (including 10-ms rise/fall ramps), sampled at 50.0 kHz and
low-pass filtered (TDT FT6) at 8.5 kHz. Signal frequencies ranged from 0.2 to 6.3 kHz at 16 one-third-octave
intervals. Quiet thresholds for frequencies from 8.0 to

18.0 kHz were measured with a Demlar audiometer and
Koss headphones.
For measurement of thresholds in the sound field,
signals were digitally generated (TDT PD1) narrowband
noises, 350 ms in duration (including 10-ms rise/fall
ramps), with nominal filter slopes of 96 dB/octave or
steeper. Narrowband noises were centered at 0.25, 0.5,
1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 6.0 kHz; bandwidths were 72,
120, 170, 195, 220, 270, 320, and 480 Hz, respectively.
These bandwidths were selected as a compromise between sound field uniformity (obtained with bandwidths
wider than a pure tone) and frequency specificity for
characterizing hearing loss (obtained with narrower
bandwidths) (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 1991). For measurement of masked thresholds in the sound field, the masker was a broadband
noise shaped to match the one-third-octave band levels
of the materials used to measure speech recognition (sentences from the Hearing in Noise Test, or HINT). These
test materials include a "HINT-shaped noise" that is
time-locked to the sentences (i.e., the noise is inaudible
between sentences). For threshold measurements in this
experiment, the HINT-shaped noise must remain at a
constant level. Therefore, a steady-state broadband noise
was generated and its spectrum adjusted (Cool Edit Pro,
Version 1.2, Syntrillium Software Corp.) to match the
noise provided with the HINT materials, and the noise
was recorded onto digital audiotape (DAT). There were
two loudspeaker configurations: (1) narrowband noise
and HINT-shaped noise at 0 azimuth (in front of the
listener) and (2) narrowband noise at 0 azimuth and
HINT-shaped noise at 90 azimuth (at the listener's side).
The criterion measure was spatial separation benefit
(in dB) or the difference in narrowband noise threshold
at each frequency for the two azimuth conditions.
Masked thresholds and benefit were measured in the
unfiltered HINT-shaped noise (cutoff frequency 8.9 kHz)
and in four low-pass-filtered HINT-shaped noises (cutoff frequencies of 2.24, 1.78, 1.41, and 1.12 kHz).
The amplitudes of tonal signals were controlled individually using programmable and manual attenuators
(TDT PA4). Stimuli were delivered through one of a pair
of TDH-39 earphones mounted in supra-aural cushions.
For sound field measurements, HINT-shaped noise was
filtered (TDT PF1 and Stanford Research Dual Channel
Filter Model 650); then HINT-shaped maskers were
mixed (TDT SM3) with the narrowband noise for the 0
azimuth, otherwise both noises were separately passed
through an amplifier (Crown D-75A) and an 8-ohm attenuator (Audioplex Technology), and delivered through
one or two loudspeakers (Optimus Pro X77), depending
on the noise azimuth. With the listener seated near the
center of an Industrial Acoustics Company (IAC) Model
1205-A sound-treated room (inside dimensions: 3.05 m
width x 2.845 m length x 1.98 m height), loudspeakers
Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1299

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were positioned at 0, +90, and -90 azimuth. Each loudspeaker was 1 m from the listener's head (see sound field
calibration below).

Speech Recognition
To assess binaural speech recognition, thresholds
for sentences in noise were measured in the sound field
using 250 sentences from a DAT recording of the HINT
(Nilsson, Soli, & Sullivan, 1994).1 The HINT consists of
25 lists of 10 sentences each. Sentences are approximately
equal in length, and lists have been equated for difficulty (e.g., Hanks & Johnson, 1998). The masker was
the HINT-shaped noise provided with the HINT materials. There were two loudspeaker configurations: (1)
sentences and HINT-shaped noise at 0 azimuth and (2)
sentences at 0 azimuth and HINT-shaped noise at 90
azimuth. The criterion measure was spatial separation
benefit (in dB), or the difference in thresholds for sentences for the two azimuth conditions. Thresholds for
sentences were measured in the unfiltered HINT-shaped
noise (cutoff frequency 8.9 kHz), in four low-pass maskers
(cutoff frequencies of 2.24, 1.78, 1.41, and 1.12 kHz), and
in five high-pass maskers (cutoff frequencies of 0.56,
0.89, 1.12, 1.41, and 2.24 kHz). Cutoff frequencies were
selected from results of a pilot study with a group of
younger listeners with normal hearing and one listener
with hearing loss (none of the participants in the pilot study
participated in the main experiment). HINT sentences
and HINT-shaped noise were attenuated separately (TDT
PA4), mixed (TDT SM3) for the 0 azimuth, filtered (TDT
PF1 and Stanford Research Dual Channel Filter Model
650), amplified (Crown D-75A), attenuated (8-ohm attenuator, Audioplex Technology), and delivered through
one or two loudspeakers (Optimus Pro X77).

Procedures
Thresholds
Thresholds for pure tones were measured for each
ear under earphones. In addition, binaural thresholds
for narrowband noises were measured in the sound field.
In both cases, thresholds were measured using a singleinterval (yes-no) maximum-likelihood psychophysical
procedure, similar to that described by Green (1993) and
discussed in detail in Leek, Dubno, He, and Ahlstrom
(2000). Each threshold was determined from 24 trials, 4
of which were catch trials. A monochrome monitor displayed a large box that indicated the listen and vote
periods to provide the listeners with a simple timing
cue. Listeners responded by clicking one of two mouse
buttons corresponding to the responses "yes, I heard the
tone," and "no, I did not hear the tone." Two threshold
1

The DAT recording of the HINT materials was obtained from the House
Ear Institute, Los Angeles, CA.

1300

measurements were obtained in each condition; if they
differed by more than 5 dB, a third measurement was
obtained. Each data point was the average of the two
closest threshold measurements. Thresholds at frequencies from 8.0 to 18.0 kHz were measured using a modified method-of-limits psychophysical procedure.
Thresholds for narrowband noises were measured
in the sound field in quiet with the signals at 0 azimuth and in the HINT-shaped masker with the masker
at 0 or 90 azimuth. For the 90 azimuth condition, the
masker was presented to the loudspeaker nearest each
listener's "poorer" ear (+90 or -90), which was determined from pure-tone thresholds in quiet measured
under earphones.2 This arrangement was selected to
reflect "realistic" listening conditions; that is, individuals with hearing loss would likely position themselves
so that their better-hearing ear would be provided with
the better signal-to-noise ratio. Neither ear was plugged.
During sound field testing, listeners were instructed to
face the 0 azimuth loudspeaker and to make no head
movements; this was monitored by the examiner at all
times. The computer monitor displaying the listen and
vote periods was positioned immediately to the side of
the 0 azimuth loudspeaker; listeners responded by clicking a hand-held mouse. Within each set of measures,
loudspeaker condition was counterbalanced, and within
these conditions, the frequency of the narrowband noise
and the low-pass filter cutoff were randomized.

Speech Recognition
Thresholds for HINT sentences in HINT-shaped
noise were measured in the sound field with sentences
at 0 azimuth and the HINT-shaped masker at 0 or 90
azimuth. In the 90 azimuth condition, the masker was
presented to the loudspeaker nearest the "poorer" ear
(+90 or -90). Neither ear was plugged. Listeners were
instructed to face the 0 loudspeaker and make no head
movements. Before data collection, participants listened
to filtered sentences with various bandwidths, using sentences from the HINT practice lists. The HINT-shaped
noise was fixed at 65 dB SPL. Speech level was varied
adaptively using a one-down, one-up tracking paradigm
(Levitt, 1971) converging on 50% correct sentence recognition. Listeners were instructed to repeat the entire
sentence and to guess when necessary. Responses were
recorded as "correct" when the entire sentence was repeated accurately. The step size was 3 dB for the first
four reversals and 2 dB for the remaining eight reversals. Threshold was defined as the average of the last
2

For young listeners with normal hearing, the right ear was the poorer
ear for 4 of the 8 listeners. For older listeners with normal hearing, the
right ear was the poorer ear for 3 of the 8 listeners. For older listeners
with hearing loss, the right ear was the poorer ear for 6 of the 8 listeners.
The masker was presented to the loudspeaker nearest the "poorer" ear
(+90 or -90 azimuth).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

eight reversals. Each threshold required approximately
15 to 17 sentences. Given the number of conditions in
this experiment and the number of sentences required
for each threshold measurement, some sentences were
presented twice. When this occurred, the repeated sentences were chosen randomly from several lists. Loudspeaker condition and low-pass and high-pass filtering
were counterbalanced; within these conditions, low- or
high-pass cutoff frequency was randomized.

Sound Field Calibration
The sound field was pre-calibrated using the protocol described by Walker, Dillon, and Byrne (1984). This
procedure was used to verify that small changes in distance from the "test" position of the listener's head to
the loudspeaker did not result in large changes in level.
Seven calibration points along three axes relative to the
loudspeaker were measured for each of three loudspeakers. Each of these measurements was made with several narrowband noises. Once the "test" position was
identified, the position of the three loudspeakers, as well
as the position to be occupied by the listener, was marked
for subsequent testing.

Figure 1. Top left: Mean thresholds for 350-ms pure tones from 0.2
to 6.3 kHz measured in quiet for each ear under earphones for
younger listeners with normal hearing (filled circles), older listeners
with normal hearing (open circles), and older listeners with hearing
loss (open triangles). Error bars indicate 1 standard error of the
mean (SE). Data points connected by solid and dashed lines are
for right and left ears, respectively. Top right: Mean thresholds
(1 SE) from 8.0 to 18.0 kHz for the three listener groups. If
listeners did not respond at the maximum intensity presented (110
dB SPL), thresholds were assigned a value of 115 dB SPL. For older
listeners with normal hearing, thresholds were not measurable for
at least one ear of one listener from 14.0 to 18.0 kHz. For older
listeners with hearing loss, thresholds were not measurable for at
least one ear of one individual from 10.0 to 18.0 kHz. Lower:
Mean binaural thresholds (1 SE) for narrowband noises measured in the sound field at 0 azimuth for three listener groups.

The levels of the stimuli were measured at that point
in the sound field to be occupied by the listener's head
(substitution method). This was done for each of the
three loudspeakers individually. In addition, each loudspeaker's frequency response was measured and found
to be uniform (3 dB) between 0.1 and 10 kHz.

Results and Discussion
Thresholds
Quiet Thresholds (Earphones)
Mean pure-tone thresholds in quiet for each ear for
the three listener groups are shown in the top panels of
Figure 1 (data points connected by solid and dashed lines
are for right and left ears, respectively). Thresholds for
audiometric frequencies are in the top left panel; thresholds for extended high frequencies are in the top right
panel. Thresholds for older listeners with normal hearing
were nearly equal to those of younger listeners from 0.2
to 2.0 kHz, but thresholds were higher from 2.5 through
6.3 kHz by an average of 11.4 dB. Thresholds for the extended high frequencies were notably higher for older
listeners with normal hearing and were more similar to
those of listeners with hearing loss than to those of listeners with normal hearing. Thresholds for listeners
with hearing loss showed mild-to-moderate hearing loss
greater in the higher than lower frequencies. Mean
threshold differences between the right and left ears (right
minus left) averaged -0.4, -0.6, and 2.4 dB in the audiometric range for younger listeners with normal hearing,

older listeners with normal hearing, and older listeners
with hearing loss, respectively. The comparable values
were -0.1, 0.9, and 2.7 dB for the extended high frequencies (including only frequencies where at least half the
listeners had measurable thresholds).

Quiet Thresholds (Sound Field)
Figure 1 (bottom) displays mean binaural thresholds for narrowband noises measured in the sound field
Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1301

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(0 azimuth) for the three listener groups. As was observed for pure-tone thresholds for right and left ears
measured under earphones, thresholds for the younger
and older listeners with normal hearing were nearly equal
through 2.0 kHz, but at higher frequencies, thresholds
for older listeners were higher than those of younger listeners by an average of 11 dB. Binaural thresholds of listeners with hearing loss displayed the same pattern of
gradually sloping, high-frequency hearing loss as was
observed in their monaural pure-tone thresholds.

Figure 2. Mean binaural thresholds for narrowband noises
measured in the HINT-shaped noise (lines and symbols). The
parameter is listener group. Each panel shows thresholds for a
different low-pass masker cutoff frequency (Fc; cutoff frequency
also indicated by the arrow along the abscissa). Narrowband
noise and HINT-shaped noise were both at 0 azimuth. Mean
binaural thresholds measured in quiet for each listener group are
shown by the lines (no symbols) labeled "Quiet."

Masked Thresholds and Benefit From
Spatial Separation (Sound Field)
Figure 2 displays mean binaural thresholds for
narrowband noises for the three listener groups measured in the HINT-shaped noise. Narrowband noise (signal) and HINT-shaped noise (masker) were both at 0
azimuth. Each panel shows thresholds for a different lowpass masker cutoff frequency, starting with the narrowest low-pass masker (1.12-kHz cutoff frequency, top) and
ending with the unfiltered masker (8.9-kHz cutoff frequency, bottom). Mean binaural thresholds in quiet for
each listener group are also shown for comparison. Mean
binaural thresholds for narrowband noises are shown
in the same format in Figure 3 with the HINT-shaped
noise at 90 azimuth. Within spectral regions where the
noise level was sufficiently high relative to listeners'
quiet thresholds (i.e., in the lower frequencies), thresholds were nearly equal for the three listener groups.
Masked thresholds for younger and older listeners with
normal hearing were equivalent through 2.0 kHz for all
filtered noise conditions; thresholds for these two groups
were generally equal across frequency in the unfiltered
noise (Figures 2 and 3, bottom panels). As expected,
masked thresholds at 3.0-6.0 kHz for older listeners with
hearing loss were equivalent to their quiet thresholds. At
1.5 and 2.0 kHz, masked thresholds were slightly higher
for listeners with hearing loss than for younger and older
listeners with normal hearing and showed some evidence
of upward spread of masking in the unfiltered and lowpass-filtered maskers.
Figure 4 shows the difference in thresholds for the
two azimuth conditions (i.e., spatial benefit) as a function of signal frequency. The parameter is listener group.
Each panel includes spatial benefit for a different lowpass cutoff frequency of the HINT-shaped noise. Values
above the zero line indicate that thresholds were lower
with the noise source at the side of the listener's head
(90) than with the noise source in front of the listener
(0). In the high frequencies, large amounts of spatial
benefit were observed for younger listeners with normal hearing in the unfiltered (8.9 kHz) masker, lesser
amounts for older listeners with normal hearing, and
none for listeners with hearing loss. For the group with

1302

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 3. Same as for Figure 2 but for narrowband noise at 0
azimuth and HINT-shaped noise at 90 azimuth.

determined by the noise (i.e., their masked thresholds
were equal to their quiet thresholds). In contrast, masked
thresholds in the unfiltered noise for older listeners with
normal hearing were nearly equal to those of the younger
listeners (see Figure 2, bottom panel). However, except at
one frequency, older listeners did not benefit as much as
younger listeners from improved signal-to-noise ratios in
the higher frequencies. Similar results may be seen at 2.0
kHz in the 2.24-kHz low-pass masker. As the low-pass
cutoff frequency decreased further, little spatial benefit
was observed for higher frequencies, as noise levels in the
high-frequency region were low and masked thresholds
approached quiet thresholds.
In the unfiltered masker, spatial benefit in the lower
frequencies for older listeners with and without hearing loss was nearly as large as that observed in the high
frequencies for younger listeners (except at 1.5 kHz) and
was larger than their own benefit in the high frequencies. Indeed, at some lower frequencies, benefit was
larger for older listeners than for younger listeners. As
the low-pass cutoff frequency decreased, removing
higher frequency noise and reducing benefit in the higher
frequencies, benefit in the lower frequencies tended to
increase. This is seen more clearly in Figure 5, which
replots the data of Figure 4 and shows spatial benefit as
a function of signal frequency for the three listener
groups. The parameter in each panel is low-pass-filter
cutoff frequency. The amount of spatial benefit for lower
frequency signals tended to increase as the level of noise
(and benefit) in higher frequencies decreased, especially
for younger listeners with normal hearing. This may
explain why benefit in lower frequencies was larger for
the two older groups than for younger listeners in the
unfiltered condition. In the unfiltered condition, younger
listeners also had benefit in the higher frequencies, but
older listeners had less benefit or none.

hearing loss, individuals with elevated thresholds in the
high frequencies could not take advantage of lower noise
levels in the higher frequencies with the noise source at
the listener's side because their thresholds were not

Zurek (1993) speculated on the effects of filtering on
listeners' use of the two components of the spatial separation advantage for speech recognition, head shadow and
binaural interactions (using Zurek's terminology). The
model predicted that as low-pass-filter cutoff decreased,
which decreased high-frequency energy and the head
shadow advantage, the binaural advantage would increase. Similar interactions were observed for the use of
interaural level differences and interaural time differences
for speech recognition by Carhart, Tillman, and Johnson
(1967) and Bronkhorst and Plomp (1988). These effects
are consistent with changes in thresholds and benefit obtained here with low-pass filtering and may be related to
spatial separation benefit observed for speech recognition
in noise, to be discussed in the following sections. Relatively large benefit in lower frequencies for listeners with
hearing loss (without availability of head shadow) was
also consistent with results of Bronkhorst and Plomp
(1988), who found that the contribution of interaural time
Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1303

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 4. Mean spatial separation benefit (in dB) for narrowband
noises as a function of frequency. The parameter is listener group.
Each point is the difference in thresholds for HINT-shaped noise at
0 and 90 (from Figures 2 and 3). Values greater than zero
indicate that thresholds were lower with the noise source at the
listener's side (90) than with the noise source in front of the
listener (0). Each panel includes spatial benefit for a different lowpass cutoff frequency of the HINT-shaped noise (Fc; cutoff frequency also indicated by the arrow).

differences to the benefit from spatial separation for speech
was maintained with 20-dB attenuation of the speech and
noise presented to one ear.

Speech Recognition
Thresholds for Sentences and Benefit
From Spatial Separation (Sound Field)
Low-Pass Filtering. Figure 6 shows mean thresholds
(top and middle panels) and spatial separation benefit
(bottom panel) for HINT sentences in HINT-shaped noise
as a function of low-pass cutoff frequency of the speech
and noise. The parameter is listener group. The top panel
shows thresholds for sentences and noise at 0 azimuth;
the middle panel shows thresholds for sentences at 0
azimuth and noise at 90 azimuth. Results in the bottom
panel are differences between these two conditions, or
benefit from spatial separation of the speech and noise.
Thresholds for HINT sentences and benefit were assessed by repeated measures analyses of variance
(ANOVA) with listener group as a grouping factor and
Figure 5. Data from Figure 4 replotted to show spatial separation
benefit for the three listener groups. The parameter is low-pass
cutoff frequency of the HINT-shaped noise (Fc).

1304

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

filter cutoff frequency and azimuth as repeated measures.
For thresholds with low-pass-filtered and unfiltered
speech, significant main effects of group [F(2, 21) = 22.8,
p < .01], azimuth [F(1, 21) = 87.2, p < .01], and cutoff frequency [F(4, 84) = 243.3, p < .01] were observed, as well
as a significant group by azimuth interaction [F(2, 21) =
5.0, p < .05]. Post hoc tests revealed that sentence thresholds were significantly lower for the younger group than
for the two older groups for both 0 and 90 azimuths
[younger vs. older with normal hearing, 0: F(1, 21) = 13.7,
p < .01, 90: F(1, 21) = 12.6, p < .01; younger with normal
hearing vs. older with hearing loss, 0: F(1, 21) = 24.5, p <
.01, 90: F(1, 21) = 37.3, p < .01]. Thresholds for the older
group with normal hearing were significantly lower than
those for the older group with hearing loss for the 90
azimuth only [0: F(1, 21) = 1.6, p > .05, 90: F(1, 21) = 6.5,
p < .05]. For spatial benefit with low-pass-filtered and
unfiltered speech, a significant main effect of group was
observed [F(2, 21) = 5.0, p < .05]. Post hoc tests revealed
significantly larger spatial benefit for the younger group
than for the two older listener groups except for the 1.41kHz cutoff frequency [younger vs. older with normal hearing, F(1, 21) = 3.9, p < .05; younger with normal hearing
vs. older with hearing loss, F(1, 21) = 9.9, p < .01]. For this
cutoff frequency, benefit was equivalent for the younger
and older listeners with normal hearing but larger than
for the older listeners with hearing loss. In addition, benefit was larger for the older listeners with normal hearing than for the older listeners with hearing loss except
for the 1.78-kHz cutoff frequency [F(1, 21) = 4.4, p < .05].

dB at 0 and 90, respectively) and the smallest benefit
(2.7 dB). Thus, with speech and noise unfiltered, nearly
all listeners, even those with hearing loss, benefited to
some degree from the spatial separation of speech and
noise. The benefit values were generally consistent with
those of Gelfand et al. (1988), who used different sentence materials. However, for listening conditions comparable to those in the current experiment, these authors did not find statistically significant differences
in benefit among three groups of listeners with normal
hearing, ages 39 years or less, 40-54 years, and 55-70
years. Differences between results of the two studies
may be attributable to differences in the age range of
older listeners with normal hearing (here, 66-73 years),
absolute thresholds of these listeners, or procedures.
The average difference in benefit between the
younger group with normal hearing and the older group
with hearing loss was only 3.4 dB. However, scores for
the HINT sentences increase rapidly with level, with
Figure 6. Mean thresholds (1 SE) for HINT sentences in HINTshaped noise as a function of low-pass filter cutoff frequency of the
speech and noise for sentences and noise at 0 azimuth (top panel)
and for sentences at 0 azimuth and noise at 90 azimuth (middle
panel). The parameter is listener group. Mean differences between
these two conditions, or benefit from spatial separation of the
speech and noise, are shown in the bottom panel.

Referring to Figure 6, for unfiltered speech and
noise (8.9-kHz cutoff, right-most data points), mean
threshold for sentences with speech and noise presented
at 0 was 62.0 dB for the younger listeners with normal hearing, corresponding to a signal-to-noise ratio at
threshold of -3.0 dB. This was nearly equivalent to the
-2.92 dB reported by Nilsson et al. (1994) in their initial description of the HINT materials, using a noise
level of 72 dB(A) and speech presented diotically under
earphones. Thresholds for the younger listeners improved to 55.9 dB with the noise-source azimuth at 90,
for a spatial separation benefit of 6.1 dB, again comparable to values reported for the HINT (e.g., Nilsson,
1996). The magnitude of the spatial separation benefit
was also consistent with predictions of the model of
Zurek (1993, Figure 15.4, p. 262) for "high-context"
speech and "speech-spectrum noise," and with results
for similar speech and noise reported by Plomp (1976).
Compared to younger listeners, older listeners with
normal hearing had slightly higher thresholds with the
speech and noise at 0 (63.7 dB) and with the noise at
90 (58.8 dB), and benefited less from spatial separation (4.9 dB). Older listeners with hearing loss had the
highest thresholds in both configurations (65.3 and 62.5

Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1305

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

slopes of psychometric functions ranging from 8.9%/dB
(Nilsson, McCaw, & Soli, 1997) to 11.8%/dB (Eisenberg,
Dirks, Takayanagi, & Martinez, 1998). Taking the average of these two slopes as an estimate, even a small
change in benefit of 3.4 dB corresponds to approximately
35% change in sentence-recognition score.
In Figure 6, the remaining thresholds for sentences
are for conditions where speech and noise were low-pass
filtered. For all listeners, thresholds increased gradually and then substantially, as speech information was
systematically removed. A similar increase in thresholds was observed for noise at 0 and 90 azimuth, and
listener groups generally maintained their rankings. A
notable exception was for the older listeners with normal hearing. With more speech information in higher
frequencies, their thresholds for speech fell between the
other two groups, but were closer to those of the younger
listeners. However, as more speech information was removed, thresholds for older listeners with normal hearing increased and approached those of older listeners
with hearing loss. Reasons for this were not obvious from
narrowband noise thresholds or benefit (Figures 2-4),
although they may relate to reduced spatial benefit for
lower frequencies observed in some conditions for older
listeners with normal hearing.

from improved signal-to-noise ratios in the higher frequencies as the noise source was moved from the front
of the listener to the listener's side because no speech
information would be available in the higher frequencies. As expected, a decline in benefit was seen between
the unfiltered condition and low-pass filtering at 2.24
kHz, but the change in benefit was small. The relatively
small decline in spatial benefit with loss of higher frequency information was consistent with an increase in
lower frequency benefit. This trade-off may be seen in
the spatial benefit measured for narrowband noises in
the top panel of Figure 5 (compare benefit for lower
frequency and higher frequency signals for low-pass filtering at 8.9 kHz and 2.24 kHz).
Older listeners with hearing loss may have benefited
less than younger listeners in the unfiltered condition
because, with less audible high-frequency speech information, improvement in signal-to-noise ratio provided
by head shadow was limited. Nevertheless, these listeners achieved some spatial separation benefit, perhaps
due to the use of interaural timing information, which
may have been available given the large spatial benefit
in lower frequencies (Figure 5, lower panel).

Benefit from spatial separation (Figure 6, bottom
panel) for younger and older listeners with normal hearing decreased slightly as high-frequency information
from 8.9 to 2.0 kHz was removed, but then reached a
plateau with additional filtering. This may reflect the
trade-off of the contributions of interaural time and level
difference cues, given that their largest effects occur in
different frequency regions and their effects may not be
independent (see also Bronkhorst & Plomp, 1988;
Carhart et al., 1967, and discussion in Bronkhorst, 2000,
pp. 121-122). As high-frequency speech information was
removed, sentence recognition was fully dependent on
information in the lower frequencies; thus, the use of
the level difference (head shadow) component declined,
and listeners relied more on the time difference component (more prominent in the lower frequencies). Perhaps
as a result, overall benefit for younger listeners remained
about the same. Somewhat similar results were observed
for older listeners with normal hearing. However, spatial benefit for listeners with hearing loss declined
slightly less than for listeners with normal hearing as
high-frequency information was removed, and then declined to zero with additional filtering.

With regard to older listeners with normal hearing,
as seen in Figure 1, binaural thresholds in quiet for these
individuals were equivalent to those for younger listeners through 2.0 kHz, but were higher than those of younger
listeners at higher frequencies. As might be predicted,
mean benefit for younger listeners with normal hearing
with speech and noise low-pass filtered at 2.24 kHz was
identical to mean benefit for older listeners with normal
hearing in the unfiltered condition (4.9 dB). Other results
for older listeners with normal hearing were not as
straightforward. Indeed, if the small reduction in benefit
was entirely attributable to these listeners' slightly elevated thresholds above 2.0 kHz, spatial separation benefit for speech and noise low-pass filtered at 2.0 kHz and
at lower frequencies should be equal to that of younger
listeners. However, except for one condition, these older
listeners derived less benefit from spatial separation than
younger listeners. Reduced benefit may be related to these
listeners' hearing at frequencies greater than 3.0 kHz, and
especially greater than 6.0 kHz. Consistent with other
studies of individuals with high-frequency hearing loss,
these results suggest functional changes in the base of
the cochlea that may alter the use of lower frequency cues
for segregating sound sources, such as timing information (Horwitz, Dubno, & Ahlstrom, 2002).

If spectral cues underlying the head shadow component of spatial separation were in the region above 2.0
kHz, the benefit attributable to head shadow effects for
speech and noise low-pass filtered to 2.0 kHz would be
expected to be nearly equivalent for all listeners. Even
younger listeners with normal hearing would not benefit

High-Pass Filtering. Figure 7 includes thresholds
for sentences and benefit for high-pass-filtered speech
and noise, in the same format as Figure 6. For thresholds with high-pass-filtered speech, ANOVA revealed significant main effects of group [F(2, 21) = 34.2, p < .01],
azimuth [F(1, 21) = 119.2, p < .01], and cutoff frequency

1306

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 7. Same as for Figure 6 but for high-pass filtered speech and
noise. Data points were marked with a caret (^) when thresholds for
some or all listeners could not be measured. For the two older
groups, thresholds in the 2.24-kHz high-pass masker could not be
measured for any listener. These listeners were assigned a threshold
value of 86 dB (the maximum output of the equipment).

< .01; younger with normal hearing vs. older with hearing loss, F(1, 21) = 43.9, p < .01]; at these two cutoff
frequencies, benefit was equivalent for the younger and
older listeners with normal hearing but larger than for
the older listeners with hearing loss. In addition, benefit
was larger for the older listeners with normal hearing
than for the older listeners with hearing loss, except for
the 1.12-kHz cutoff frequency [F(1, 21) = 20.1, p < .01].
Overall, thresholds for high-pass-filtered speech and
noise were lower and benefit was greater than for lowpass-filtered speech and noise, at least for younger and
older listeners with normal hearing. This was likely due
to the availability of high-frequency speech information
in these high-pass-filtered conditions. Accordingly, the
relatively large advantage due to interaural level differences, operational at higher frequencies, was available. Moreover, given the contribution of high-frequency
information to thresholds for speech, especially with the
noise-source azimuth at 90, and the large variance
among listeners' thresholds in the higher frequencies,
larger differences in thresholds and benefit were observed
among the three listener groups for high-pass-filtered
speech and noise than for low-pass-filtered conditions.

[F(3, 63) = 102.0, p < .01], as well as a significant group
by azimuth interaction [F(2, 21) = 16.9, p < .01]. Thresholds for the 2.24-kHz cutoff frequency were excluded
from this analysis because thresholds were measurable
for younger listeners only. Post hoc tests revealed that
sentence thresholds for the three groups significantly
differed from one another for both 0 and 90 azimuths
[younger vs. older with normal hearing, 0: F(1, 21) =
6.23, p < .05, 90: F(1, 21) = 8.3, p < .01; younger with
normal hearing vs. older with hearing loss, 0: F(1, 21)
= 45.7, p < .01, 90: F(1, 21) = 69.7, p < .01; older with
normal hearing vs. older with hearing loss, 0: F(1, 21)
= 18.2, p < .01, 90: F(1, 21) = 29.9, p < .01]. For spatial
benefit with high-pass-filtered speech, significant main
effects of group [F(2, 21) = 16.9, p < .01] and cutoff frequency [F(3, 63) = 3.8, p < .05] were observed. Post hoc
tests revealed significantly larger spatial benefit for the
younger group than for the two older listener groups
except for the 1.12-kHz and 1.41-kHz cutoff frequencies
[younger vs. older with normal hearing, F(1, 21) = 9.4, p

The left-most data points in Figure 7 are for unfiltered speech and noise, replotted from Figure 6. With
speech and noise at 0, thresholds for speech increased
for younger listeners with normal hearing as low- to midfrequency speech information was systematically removed. Thresholds increased substantially when only
information above 2.24 kHz remained. With the noise
source at 90, thresholds for speech were initially lower
and, thus, benefit of spatial separation was greater. However, as mid-frequency information was removed (between 0.89 and 1.12 kHz), benefit of spatial separation
first declined and then increased for conditions where
sentence recognition was fully dependent on information in the higher frequencies. This may represent a
trade-off point between the contributions of interaural
timing and level cues, although high- and low-pass filtering may not completely separate these cues and benefit may not be additive (Bronkhorst & Plomp, 1988).
Results for older listeners with normal hearing followed the general patterns of those for younger listeners, but thresholds were higher and benefit of spatial
separation was smaller for most conditions. Indeed,
thresholds for speech could not be measured for any older
listener with 2.24-kHz high-pass filtering for noisesource azimuths of 0 or 90. That is, the speech level
corresponding to 50% correct recognition of sentences
exceeded 86 dB (>21 dB signal-to-noise ratio), which was
the maximum output for the equipment. Of course, for
these conditions, speech and noise spectra were limited
to the higher frequencies; thresholds for speech for
younger listeners with normal hearing were also quite
high, with thresholds for 2 of 8 younger listeners also
Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1307

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

exceeding 86 dB (see Figure 7). Nevertheless, those
younger listeners with measurable thresholds did achieve
substantial benefit from spatial separation in this condition. Note that with increasing mid-frequency information (in a region where younger and older listeners with
normal hearing have equivalent binaural thresholds in
quiet), thresholds for speech were higher for older than
younger listeners, but spatial benefit was equivalent.
However, as additional lower frequency information was
added, benefit for older listeners increased, but not to
the extent observed for younger listeners. If benefit of
spatial separation for filtered speech and noise in this
region was attributable to interaural time differences,
these results provide evidence of age-related deficits in
the use of these cues for recognition of speech in noise. As
noted previously, reduced benefit for these listeners may
Figure 8. Mean thresholds for the three listener groups for HINT
sentences in HINT-shaped noise as a function low-pass-filter cutoff
frequency (circles) and high-pass-filter cutoff frequency (triangles)
for sentences and noise at 0 azimuth (open symbols) and for
sentences at 0 azimuth and noise at 90 azimuth (filled symbols).
Data points were marked with a caret (^) when thresholds for
some or all listeners could not be measured. For the two older
groups, thresholds in the 2.24-kHz high-pass masker could not be
measured for any listener. These listeners were assigned a
threshold value of 86 dB (the maximum output of the equipment).

be related to functional changes in the base of the cochlea that may alter the use of lower frequency cues for
segregating sound sources, such as timing information.
As expected, thresholds for speech were highest and
benefit of spatial separation smallest in high-pass conditions for older listeners with hearing loss, which was
likely attributed to their high-frequency hearing loss.
As was the case for older listeners with normal hearing,
thresholds for speech could not be measured for any of
the listeners with hearing loss with 2.24-kHz high-pass
filtering. Some benefit was observed when speech information was available in low- and mid-frequency regions,
suggesting some use of interaural time differences; however, benefit was small when speech and noise were limited to the high frequencies.
Figure 8 shows thresholds for sentences measured
in low-pass and high-pass filtering with noise-source azimuths of 0 and 90. The frequency at which these functions intersect (the "crossover frequency") represents the
point that divides the spectrum into two equally contributing bands (equivalent to an articulation index of
0.5). That is, the portions of the speech spectrum below
and above the crossover frequency contribute equally to
sentence recognition. Thus, the crossover frequency provides some information on the relative importance of
lower and higher regions of the spectrum to sentence
recognition in speech-shaped noise. To estimate crossover frequencies, linear regression functions were fit to
2-3 data points (in log frequency) near where the threshold functions intersected for each listener group and each
azimuth condition.
For younger listeners with normal hearing, the crossover frequency for 0 azimuth was 1459 Hz. This value
was slightly lower than the 1550 Hz estimated by
Eisenberg et al. (1998) for HINT sentence recognition reported in percent correct and measured under earphones.
Thus, although crossover frequencies were estimated here
from thresholds for HINT sentences measured in the
soundfield, these procedural differences did not result
in substantially different crossover values for the same
speech materials.3 With the noise-source azimuth at 90,
3

By way of comparison, the crossover frequency for sentences from the
Speech Perception in Noise test (Kalikow, Stevens, & Elliott, 1977) is
1380 Hz and the value for "average speech" is 1374 Hz, estimated from
frequency importance functions reported in the ANSI standard (1997).
For nonsense syllables, the crossover frequency is 1972 Hz, estimated
from the frequency importance function for these materials. Thus,
crossover frequencies estimated here for HINT sentences were comparable to crossover values for similar speech (sentences and average
speech) and were positioned appropriately within the continuum of values
for a variety of speech materials. Most important, for the current
experiment, the measure of interest was not the absolute crossover
frequency for HINT sentences. Rather, the measure of interest was the
difference in crossover frequencies between the two azimuth conditions
for the three listener groups. For these comparisons, all listeners were
tested under identical conditions, and crossover frequencies were
estimated using identical methods.

1308

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

the crossover frequency increased to 1510 Hz, suggesting an increased contribution for higher frequency speech
information, consistent with improved high-frequency
signal-to-noise ratios provided by interaural level differences. Crossover frequencies estimated for older listeners with normal hearing were somewhat lower than for
younger listeners (1432 Hz for 0, 1472 Hz for 90), consistent with reduced use of higher frequency information. The increase in crossover frequency as noise-source
azimuth changed from 0 to 90 was also somewhat
smaller for older than for younger listeners with normal
hearing. Crossover frequencies for older listeners with
hearing loss were substantially lower than for listeners
with normal hearing and equal for the two azimuth conditions (1242 Hz for 0, 1242 Hz for 90). These values
suggested that higher frequency information contributed
less to sentence recognition in noise for older listeners
with and without hearing loss and that they derived less
benefit from the improved signal-to-noise ratios in the
higher frequencies with spatially separated noise sources.

Summary and Conclusions
The benefit attributable to spatial separation was
measured as a function of low- and high-pass cutoff frequency of speech and noise. Speech levels corresponding
to 50% correct recognition of HINT sentences were measured in a 65-dB SPL speech-shaped noise. Thresholds
for sentences were measured with speech and speechshaped noise at 0 azimuth (in front of the listener) and
with speech at 0 azimuth and speech-shaped noise at
90 azimuth (at the listener's side). Binaural thresholds
for narrowband noises were also measured in these two
conditions as a function of masker low-pass cutoff frequency. The criterion measure was spatial separation
benefit for narrowband noises or speech, defined as the
difference in thresholds for the two azimuth conditions.
Results may be summarized as follows.
1.

For narrowband noises, 5-7 dB of spatial benefit
was observed for higher frequency signals for
younger listeners with normal hearing, less for older
listeners with normal hearing, and none for older
listeners with hearing loss. Reduced benefit was attributable to high-frequency hearing loss for older
listeners with hearing loss but was unexplained for
older listeners with normal hearing.

2.

Spatial benefit for lower frequency signals was robust for all listeners and tended to increase as noise
level (and benefit) in higher frequencies decreased
with low-pass filtering.

3.

Benefit of spatial separation for unfiltered sentences in noise averaged 6.1 dB for younger listeners with normal hearing, 4.9 dB for older listeners
with normal hearing, and 2.7 dB for older listeners

with hearing loss. Thus, even listeners with hearing loss benefited to some degree from spatial separation. However, small reductions in benefit have
substantial effects on sentence recognition in noise,
given a relatively steep psychometric function for
these speech materials.
4.

Older listeners with hearing loss benefited little
from improved signal-to-noise ratios in higher frequencies resulting from head shadow, but showed
some benefit from lower frequency cues for speech
recognition in noise.

5.

Spatial benefit for older listeners with normal hearing was reduced relative to benefit for younger listeners, suggesting an age-related reduction in use of
interaural difference cues that may be related to older
listeners' hearing at frequencies greater than 6.0 kHz.

6.

Benefit from spatial separation was differentially
affected by low-pass and high-pass filtering, suggesting a possible trade-off of the contributions of
higher frequency interaural level differences and
lower frequency interaural time cues.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported (in part) by grants P50
DC00422 and R01 DC00184 from NIH/NIDCD and from the
MUSC General Clinical Research Center (M01 RR 01070).
The authors thank Chris Ahlstrom for computer and signalprocessing support, Johanna Larsen for assistance with data
collection, and John H. Mills for editorial comments.

References
Abel, S. M., Giguere, C., Consoli, A., & Papsin, B. C.
(2000). The effect of aging on horizontal plane localization.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 108, 743-752.
American National Standards Institute. (1996).
American National Standard specifications for audiometers (ANSI S3-1996). New York: ANSI.
American National Standards Institute. (1997).
American National Standard methods for calculation of
the Speech Intelligibility Index (ANSI S3.5-1997). New
York: ANSI.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(1991). Sound field measurement tutorial. Asha, 33(Suppl.
3), 25-37.
Bronkhorst, A. W. (2000). The cocktail party phenomenon:
A review of research on speech intelligibility in multipletalker conditions. Acustica, 86, 117-128.
Bronkhorst, A. W., & Plomp, R. (1988). The effect of headinduced interaural time and level differences on speech
intelligibility in noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 83, 1508-1516.
Bronkhorst, A. W., & Plomp, R. (1989). Binaural speech
intelligibility in noise for hearing-impaired listeners.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 86, 1374-1383.
Bronkhorst, A. W., & Plomp R. (1992). Effect of multiple
Dubno et al.: Benefit From Spatial Separation of Speech and Noise

1309

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

speechlike maskers on binaural speech recognition in
normal and impaired hearing. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 92, 3132-3139.

Levitt, H., & Rabiner, L. R. (1967). Binaural release from
masking for speech and gain in intelligibility. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 42, 601-608.

Carhart, R., Tillman, T. W., & Johnson, K. R. (1967).
Release from masking for speech through interaural time
delay. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 42,
124-138.

Lorenzi, C., Gatehouse, S., & Lever, C. (1999). Sound
localization in noise in hearing-impaired listeners.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 105,
3454-3463.

Cranford, J. L., Boose, M., & Moore, C. A. (1990). Effects
of aging on the precedence effect in sound localization.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 33, 654-659.

Nilsson, M. J. (1996). A history and review of the HINT.
Paper presented at the American Speech-LanguageHearing Association Annual Convention, Seattle, WA.

Duquesnoy, A. J. (1983). Effect of a single interfering noise
or speech source upon the binaural sentence intelligibility
of aged persons. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 74, 739-743.

Nilsson, M. J., McCaw, V. M., & Soli, S. D. (1997).
Comparison of percent intelligibility and adaptive thresholds in noise for listeners with normal and impaired
intelligibility. Paper presented at the Second Biennial
Hearing Aid Research and Development Conference,
Bethesda, MD.

Eisenberg, L. S., Dirks, D. D., Takayanagi, S., &
Martinez, A. S. (1998). Subjective judgments of clarity
and intelligibility for filtered stimuli with equivalent
speech intelligibility index predictions. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 327-339.
Festen, J. M., & Plomp, R. (1986). Speech-reception
threshold in noise with one and two hearing aids. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 79, 465-471.
Gelfand, S. A., Ross, L., & Miller, S. (1988). Sentence
recognition in noise from one versus two sources: Effects of
aging and hearing loss. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 83, 248-257.
Green, D. M. (1993). A maximum-likelihood method for
estimating thresholds in a yes-no task. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 93, 2096-2105.
Grose, J. H., Poth, E. A., & Peters, R. W. (1994). Masking
level differences for tones and speech in elderly listeners
with relatively normal audiograms. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 37, 422-428.
Hanks, W. D., & Johnson, G. D. (1998). HINT list equivalency using older listeners. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 41, 1335-1340.
Hausler, R., Colburn, S., & Marr, E. (1983). Sound
localization in subjects with impaired hearing. Acta OtoLaryngologica Supplement, 400, 1-62.
Hawkins, D. B., & Yacullo, W. S. (1984). Signal-to-noise
ratio advantage of binaural hearing aids and directional
microphones under different levels of reverberation.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 49, 278-286.
Horwitz, A. R., Dubno, J. R., & Ahlstrom, J. B. (2002).
Recognition of low-pass-filtered consonants in noise with
normal and impaired high-frequency hearing. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 111, 409-416.
Kalikow, D. N., Stevens, K. N., & Elliott, L. L. (1977).
Development of a test of speech intelligibility in noise
using sentence materials with controlled word predictability. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61,
1337-1351.
Leek, M. R., Dubno, J. R., He, N.-j., & Ahlstrom, J. B.
(2000). Experience with a yes-no single-interval maximum-likelihood procedure. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 107, 2674-2684.
Leeuw, A. R., & Dreschler, W. A. (1991). Advantages of
directional hearing aid microphones related to room
acoustics. Audiology, 30, 330-344.
Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed up-down methods in
psychoacoustics. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 49, 467-477.

1310

Nilsson, M. J., Soli, S. D., & Sullivan, J. A. (1994).
Development of the Hearing In Noise Test for the measurement of speech reception thresholds in quiet and in
noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 95,
1085-1099.
Noble, W., Byrne, D., & LePage, B. (1994). Effects on
sound localization of configuration and type of hearing
loss. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 95,
992-1005.
Nordlund, B. (1962). Physical factors in angular localization. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 54, 75-93.
Pichora-Fuller, M. K., & Schneider, B. A. (1992). The
effect of interaural delay of the masker on masking-level
differences in young and old adults. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 91, 2129-2135.
Plomp, R. (1976). Binaural and monaural speech intelligibility of connected discourse in reverberation as a function
of azimuth of a single competing sound source (speech or
noise). Acustica, 31, 200-211.
Schubert, E. D., & Schultz, M. C. (1962). Some aspects of
binaural signal selection. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 34, 844-849.
Strouse, A., Ashmead, D. H., Ohde, R. N., & Grantham,
D. W. (1998). Temporal processing in the aging auditory
system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 104,
2385-2399.
Tonning, F. M. (1971). Directional audiometry II. The
influence of azimuth on the perception of speech. Acta OtoLaryngologica, 72, 352-357.
Walker, G., Dillon, H., & Byrne, D. (1984). Sound field
audiometry: Recommended stimuli and procedures. Ear
and Hearing, 5, 13-21.
Zurek, P. M. (1993). Binaural advantages and directional
effects in speech intelligibility. In G. Studebaker & I.
Hochberg (Eds.), Acoustical factors affecting hearing aid
performance (2nd ed., pp. 255-276). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Received May 1, 2001
Accepted April 16, 2002
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2002/104)
Contact author: Judy R. Dubno, PhD, Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina, 135 Rutledge Avenue, P.O. Box
250550, Charleston, SC 29425. E-mail: dubnojr@musc.edu

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 45 * 1297-1310 * December 2002

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/14/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

