JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002
Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS
WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS
A Linguistic Category
Model Approach
BERNADETTE WATSON
CYNTHIA GALLOIS
University of Queensland

Two studies investigated interactions between health providers and patients, using
Semin and Fiedler's linguistic category model. In Study 1 the linguistic category model
was used to examine perceptions of the levels of linguistic intergroup bias in descriptions
of conversations with health professionals in hospitals. Results indicated a favourable
linguistic bias toward health professionals in satisfactory conversations but low levels of
linguistic intergroup bias in unsatisfactory conversations. In Study 2, the language of
patients and health professionals in videotaped interactions was examined for levels of
linguistic intergroup bias. Interpersonally salient interactions showed less linguistic
intergroup bias than did intergroup ones. Results also indicate that health professionals
have high levels of control in all types of medical encounters with patients. Nevertheless,
the extent to which patients are able to interact with health professionals as individuals,
rather than only as professionals, is a key determinant of satisfaction with the interaction.

Much of the literature on health provider-patient communication
has been centered on health professionals (often doctors) rather than
patients (e.g., Street, 1991; Thompson, 1994). This emphasis on doctors
has led to the role of the doctor and patient being understood through
biomedical and, later, biopsychosocial models (Pettegrew & Logan,
1987). Recently, researchers have recognized that more patientcentered research is needed (Sharf & Street, 1997). Communication
between health providers and patients has usually been studied as an
interpersonal encounter, although face-to-face interactions can shift
between high and low levels of intergroup and interpersonal salience
(see Gallois & Giles, 1998). The lack of theory in the area of health
communication has meant that little attention has been paid to the
interindividual and intergroup dynamics of interactions.
Interactions in the health context are inherently intergroup, and
the intergroup perspective can provide a rich source of understanding
of the communication process (see Gardner, Paulsen, Gallois, Callan, &
Monaghan, 2001). Street (1991) observed that some interactions are
JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY,
Vol. 21 No. 1, March 2002 32-52
 2002 Sage Publications

32

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

33

characterized by role, power, or other social differences and that the
doctor-patient interaction is one of these; other research has shown
that health professionals possess higher status and more control than
patients in medical interactions (e.g., Coulthard & Ashby, 1975;
Dryden & Giles, 1987; Fisher, 1983). Status and control differentials
are important group markers in intergroup situations (Tajfel, 1975,
1982). Although patients may discuss personal and even intimate matters, the encounter is still a professional one. The overarching assumption of this project is that communication between health professionals
and patients can best be understood as an intergroup process. Thus, we
have drawn on Tajfel's (1978) social identity theory (SIT) as our theoretical framework.
SIT (e.g., Hogg & Abrams, 1988; Tajfel, 1978; Tajfel & Turner, 1986)
proposes that individuals identify as members of one or more social
groups and these memberships contribute to the extent to which individuals evaluate themselves negatively or positively. How much we
perceive and respond to a person as stereotypical of his or her group,
rather than as an individual, influences how likely we are to communicate at an intergroup or interpersonal level (Hogg & Abrams, 1988;
Oakes, Haslam, & Turner, 1994; Tajfel, 1978). Related, Semin and
Fiedler's (1988) linguistic category model (LCM) examines the salience
of group identity through an individual's choice of words to describe
others. The theoretical focus of their research has been the linguistic
properties of interpersonal words (see also Au, 1986; Brown & Fish,
1983) and the association of word choice with constructions of social
reality.
Studies have found systematic differences in individuals' choices of
word types when they describe out-group members (e.g., Arcuri,
Maass, & Portelli, 1993; Fiedler, Semin, & Finkenauer, 1993; Maass &
Arcuri, 1992; Maass, Ceccarelli, & Rudin, 1996; Maass, Milesi, Zabbini, &
Stahlberg, 1995; Maass, Salvi, Arcuri, & Semin, 1989; Ng & Chan,
1996; Schmid & Fiedler, 1996). Maass et al. (1995, 1996) used SIT to
propose a motivational explanation for why positive in-group and negative out-group behaviors are described in more abstract than concrete
terms. They used the LCM to examine linguistic intergroup bias and
proposed that positive in-group behaviors are viewed as stable over
time. Any infringements of positive behavior by the in-group are
regarded as temporary occurrences and described in concrete terms.
Similarly, members of rival out-groups are regarded as enduringly
negative, and positive behaviors performed by out-groups are regarded
as one-off, situation-specific events. These findings have important
potential implications for health care interactions, as they involve
interpersonal encounters by members of different groups, who may
view each other positively or negatively. In this project, we used the
LCM as a linguistic tool to pick up subtle distinctions in patients' word

34

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

choices and thence to infer their perceptions of and attributions about
health professionals.
The LCM includes a taxonomy of verbs and adjectives, categorized
according to the specific linguistic properties they possess (Semin &
Fiedler, 1991). One property that is important for these studies is an
individual's use of interpersonal language as an indicator of the constancy or stability of another's behavior across time and situations. At
the most concrete end of the constancy continuum are words that refer
only to behaviors in their situational context. For example, in the sentence "The woman sat down," the description "sat down" does not generalize to any other situations about this woman. Conversely, at the
most abstract end of the scale, the sentence "The woman was friendly"
attributes a trait of friendliness that denotes an enduring aspect of the
woman, which generalizes to other situations. Of interest here are the
ways in which patients use interpersonal language to describe their
encounters with health professionals and their use of language to
ascribe a health professional's behaviors as enduring or situation
specific.
In Semin and Fiedler's (1988) model, there are three categories of
verbs and one adjective category: descriptive action verb (DAV), interpretive action verb (IAV), state verb (SV), and adjective (ADJ). These
four categories move sequentially from the most concrete (DAV) to the
most abstract (ADJ) level. A DAV describes a behavior that occurs in a
specific context, such as kick, hit, touch, dance, and wave at. The behavior is observable and is a specific activity that has a physically invariant feature. An IAV also describes a behavior constrained by a beginning and end, such as cheat, help, defy, persuade, and hurt, but the
action can be performed in different ways. Unlike a DAV, there is no
physically invariant feature, and IAVs are actions that could be interpreted differently by two observers. An SV does not have an associated
observable action but refers to states or emotions, such as admire, love,
envy, dread, and trust. Finally, an ADJ is not related to contexts or
actions but to descriptions of a person. ADJs such as honest, impulsive,
and helpful describe a person's attributes and suggest more enduring
qualities that are not bound to a particular situation.
Semin and Fiedler (1988) found that when individuals were presented with a list of sentences constructed in a subject-verb-object format, they chose the locus of causality as the sentence subject when the
verb type was an IAV (implicit verb causality). Conversely, when the
verb type was an SV, they placed the locus of causality with the sentence object. Studies of implicit verb causality (Schmid & Fiedler, 1996;
Semin & Fiedler, 1991) have shown that this finding is consistent only
for these two verb types, with IAVs judged as under the control of the
individual (intentional) and SVs judged as non-intentional. Thus, level
of intentionality (relative presence of IAVs and SVs) can be used to

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

35

measure the relative control of health professionals and patients, and
it was used this way in these studies.

STUDY 1: DESCRIPTIONS OF INTERACTIONS
In Study 1, we asked patients to recall satisfactory and unsatisfactory interactions with health professionals. Based on the literature, we
expected clear differences in the ways in which patients described
health professionals' behaviors. First, it was expected that whether the
conversation was perceived as satisfactory would be reflected in the
overall affective tone or valence of the description:
Hypothesesis 1: Descriptions of satisfactory conversations would contain
more positively valenced units than would unsatisfactory conversations,
whereas descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations would contain
more negatively valenced units.

Second, the valence and the agent of each unit in the descriptions
were examined, in terms of their association with word type and conversational description type. It was expected that when participants
described health professionals in positive terms, they would use enduring word types (SVs and ADJs), indicating low intergroup bias. In turn,
participants would describe negative behaviors by health professionals in enduring terms, signaling high intergroup bias.
Hypothesis 2: (a) Participants would attribute more positively valenced abstract words than concrete words to health professionals in satisfactory
conversations, (b) but they would attribute more negatively valenced abstract words than concrete words to health professionals in unsatisfactory conversations.

No predictions were made for participants' self-descriptions. In this
study, patients (who represent the actors in the descriptions) were not
asked to focus on their own group identity as patients when describing
their experiences. If group identity is not salient, respondents may
have been more likely to respond from a personal perspective and thus
attribute concrete word types to themselves (Fiedler, Semin,
Finkenauer, & Berkel, 1995; Fiedler, Semin, & Koppetsch, 1991; Semin &
Fiedler, 1989, 1992). For this reason, a general research question investigating the word categories that participants used to describe their
own behaviors was included:
Research Question 1: Do patients use different patterns of word types to
describe themselves in their reports of satisfactory and unsatisfactory
conversations?

36

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

A final hypothesis addressed the status and control differentials between health professionals and patients. It was expected that compared to themselves, patients would perceive health professionals as
exerting more control in the interactions and thus describe them as exercising more intentionality (IAVs). Because of the patients' relative
lack of status and control, it was expected also that they would use
more SVs to describe themselves.
Hypothesis 3: Participants would attribute more IAVs and fewer SVs to
health professionals than to themselves.
METHOD

Participants and Procedure
The descriptions of conversations used in this study were written by
83 undergraduate psychology students (23 males and 60 females),
whose average age was 22 (SD = 5.6) and who were involved in a larger
questionnaire study of impressions of health professionals and hospitals. In return for extra course credit, each participant provided
detailed written retrospective descriptions of both a satisfactory and
an unsatisfactory conversation he or she had encountered while in the
hospital. The only criterion for participation was that the participant
had spent a minimum of 1 night as a hospital inpatient within the previous 10 months.
Data Coding
In this study, the coding procedure used was similar to that followed
by other researchers using the LCM (e.g., Fiedler et al., 1993; Schmid &
Fiedler, 1996), with some additional stages included. There were seven
stages in coding the text for statistical analysis.
Identification of grammatical units. Units were identified through
the use of grammatically based rules. Sentences were divided into subjects (or implied subjects) and their predicates coded as independent or
subordinate clauses. Each unit contained one and only one conjugated
verb. The only exception to this rule was for units containing more than
one predicate adjective. For example, in the sentence "He was happy,
miserable, and angry," the three predicate adjectives were coded as
three units (he was happy) (implied he was miserable) and (implied he
was angry), in which each adjective provided distinct information
(Schmid, Fiedler, Semin, & Englich, 1994). As there was no predetermined number of units, only percentage agreement between coders
could be calculated. Interrater agreement for unit coding was 88%. The

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

37

descriptions of satisfactory and unsatisfactory conversations contained a total of 2,118 units (1,135 and 983 units, respectively).
Excluding units from analysis. Units were included only when the
logical subject was either the target health professional or the target
patient (or both). However, units where the subject was the noun conversation, a word that implies a highly interpersonal action, were
retained. Interrater reliability produced kappas of .89 (satisfactory
conversations) and .83 (unsatisfactory conversations), respectively.
Identifying the focal word in each unit. Auxiliary verbs were never
coded as focal. When there was more than one main verb in a unit (i.e.,
one or more infinitives), the focal word coded always represented the
main feeling, trait, or behavior of the unit subject (Schmid & Fiedler,
1996). In line with Schmid and Fiedler's (1996) coding rules, a predicate adjective was always coded as the focal word in preference to any
accompanying verbs. Percentage agreement was 91% (satisfactory)
and 92% (unsatisfactory), respectively.
Ascribing a logical agent to each unit. In previous research using the
LCM, texts have been written or selected with the sentence subject
(agent) specified in advance (e.g., Fiedler et al., 1993; Maass et al.,
1989; Schmid & Fiedler, 1996). In such texts, the grammatical subject
also represents the logical subject. In the present study, however, the
grammatical and logical subjects did not always match. When participants described their conversations with hospital staff, they could
write about how they felt about themselves, how they perceived a
health professional's actions, and how they thought a health professional perceived them. These different ways of describing the
interactants differ in whether the grammatical and logical subject
match.
As the focus of interest was on the agent of the action or trait (the
logical agent), both the grammatical and logical subject in each unit
were identified. This procedure also distinguished between participants' descriptions of themselves and their reports of health professionals' descriptions of them (from an LCM perspective, the description of the patient should be attributed to the person doing the
describing). For the logical subject of a unit, descriptions of the health
professional's actions and feelings were ascribed to the health professional (e.g., "The nurse was not very caring"). This rule included joint
behaviors and actions of the target health professionals with other
health professionals (e.g., "They left the room"). Descriptions of the
patient's actions and feelings were ascribed to the patient (e.g., "I
asked for a painkiller"). Finally, units in which participants described
how they thought the health professionals described them (e.g., "The
nurse said, `You look sad'") were put into a third category of agent. This

38

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

is because the health professional was the logical agent, but the unit
represented part of the patient's self-description. For grammatical
subjects, kappas were .99 for descriptions of satisfactory conversations
and .98 for unsatisfactory ones. For agent (logical subject), kappas
were .88 for the descriptions of satisfactory conversations and .92 for
unsatisfactory conversations.
Formulating thought units. Because of their brevity, many of the
grammatical units did not by themselves possess a clear valence. The
coders structured the descriptions into larger chunks called thought
units (see Feeney & Noller, 1991). A thought unit was defined as the
expression of a sequence of actions that represents a single idea, which
identified the semantic structure in the descriptions. Each thought
unit contained a single piece of information about the sentence subject.
Both coders discussed the structure of the thought units, and each unit
was mutually agreed on.
Ascribing valence to the thought units. This stage of the coding was
concerned with the pragmatics of the thought units. A unit was coded
as negative if the meaning of the described action, speech, or emotional
state was negative for the patient. Thus, descriptions of encounters
with a health professional who caused pain, spoke harshly or rudely, or
ignored the patient were coded as negatively valenced. A description
could also be negatively valenced because it reflected the pain or situation the patient was in. Conversely, a unit was coded as positive if the
meaning of the described action, speech, or emotional state was positive for the patient. Once the thought units were ascribed a valence, the
valence was transferred to each grammatical unit identified at the first
stage. The kappas obtained for coding of valence were .73 (satisfactory)
and .72 (unsatisfactory).
Linguistic categorization of focal word in each unit. The final stage
of coding involved the categorization of the focal word in each grammatical unit, according to their linguistic properties (DAV, IAV, etc.).
The kappas obtained were .77 for satisfactory conversations and .87 for
unsatisfactory conversations.
RESULTS

Overview
The first two hypotheses, which concerned the abstractness and
valence of word types used to describe the health professionals, and the
research question were addressed using log-linear analysis. Chi-square

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

39

analyses were conducted separately to test Hypothesis 3, concerning
intentionality.
Of the 83 participants, 79 wrote descriptions of a satisfactory conversation, and 69 wrote about an unsatisfactory conversation (not all
participants provided both descriptions). After the selection of interpersonal units and ascription of logical subjects and focal words, there
were a total of 697 satisfactory and 663 unsatisfactory units for analysis. Table 1 presents the numbers of word types for both conversation
types and for the logical agents, health professional, patient, and
health professional describing the patient.
Log-Linear Analysis
Using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences program
HILOGLINEAR, a four-way frequency (hierarchical log-linear) analysis was conducted separately for descriptions of satisfactory and unsatisfactory conversations. Independent variables were gender of participant, unit valence, logical agent, and word type. The dependent
variable was frequency of word type.
The power of multiway frequency analysis is reduced if cell frequencies fall below five (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). Descriptive statistics
revealed that there were proportionately very few negatively valenced
units in the descriptions of satisfactory conversations and few positive
units in unsatisfactory conversations. For this reason, valence was collapsed from the three codes of negative, neutral, and positive into two
codes: congruent or incongruent valence. Congruent valence represented positive valence for the descriptions of satisfactory conversations and negative valence for the unsatisfactory conversations. Incongruent valence was defined as negative and neutral for the reports of
satisfactory conversations and positive and neutral for the unsatisfactory conversations.
HILOGLINEAR reported many sampling zeros and a mixture of
large and small observed counts, which resulted in unreliable parameter estimates. To rectify this problem, the four word types were collapsed into two categories representing concrete and abstract words
(DAV and IAV = concrete, and SV and ADJ = abstract). This
recategorization was problematic for the test of Hypothesis 3. Thus, to
assess the effect of IAVs and SVs, chi-square analyses were also conducted on the word types.
Descriptions of satisfactory conversations. To summarize, the independent variable of word type had two levels (concrete and abstract),
logical agent had three levels (patient as agent, health professional as
agent, and health professional describing patient), and gender of participant and valence (congruent and incongruent) had two levels each.
Results of the hierarchical log-linear analysis revealed that the

40

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Table 1
Word Type Frequencies for Satisfactory and Unsatisfactory Conversations
Satisfactory
Conversations (697 units)

Unsatisfactory
Conversations (663 units)

Logical Agent of Unit

DAV

IAV

SV

ADJ

DAV

IAV

SV

ADJ

Patient
Health professional
Health professionals'
descriptions of patients
Total

84
203

23
80

44
31

35
45

159
147

25
39

80
26

57
19

48
335

23
126

51
126

30
110

56
362

15
79

23
129

17
93

Note. DAV = descriptive action verb; IAV = interpretative action verb; SV = state verb;
ADJ = adjective. DAV plus IAV were combined for analyses as concrete words. SV plus
ADJ were combined as abstract words.

four-way effect (p = .23) was not required to explain the data, but the
combination of three-way effects was significant (p < .01), indicating
that at least one of the three-way effects was required. A further analysis using backward elimination without the four-way effect resulted in
a model including three of the three-way effects and produced a likelihood ratio chi-square of 2(3) = 5.28, p = .152, indicating that the
reduced model did not differ significantly from the full model. The final
model, produced through log-linear analysis (Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences) to provide parameter estimates, showed that three
of the three-way effects revealed some strong parameters (z > 2, where
a z score greater than 1.96 indicates a significant effect at p < .05).
Table 2 provides the raw frequencies for valence by logical agent by
abstractness of word type separately for males and females.
Results indicated that male participants attributed significantly
more congruently valenced units to health professionals and significantly fewer congruently valenced units to health professionals'
descriptions of patients than would be expected by chance. This result
suggested that male participants, compared to their female counterparts, viewed health professionals more positively but felt that health
professionals perceived them more negatively as patients. The interaction between gender of participant, logical agent, and word type indicated that male participants, compared to female participants,
described themselves with significantly more concrete word types and
characterized the health professionals' descriptions of them as
patients with fewer concrete word types. There were no significant
effects of health professional as logical agent.
The final significant three-way interaction was between valence,
word type, and agent. This interaction revealed that participants
attributed more congruently valenced concrete word types to patients
as logical agents and fewer congruently valenced concrete word types
to health professionals' descriptions of patients than would be
expected by chance.

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

41

Table 2
Frequencies of Valence, Word Type, and Logical Agent in Descriptions of Satisfactory
Conversations for Males and Females

Logical Agent
Males
Descriptions of patients
Descriptions of health
professionals
Health professionals'
descriptions of patients
Females
Descriptions of patients
Descriptions of health
professionals
Health professionals'
descriptions of patients

Concrete Word Type

Abstract Word Type

Congruent Incongruent
Valence
Valence

Congruent Incongruent
Valence
Valence

25

10

10

10

42

10

17

0

3

7

14

4

51

21

46

13

195

36

56

3

44

17

61

2

Note. Concrete = descriptive action verb plus interpretive action verb; abstract = state
verb plus adjective; congruent = positively valenced units; incongruent = negatively and
neutrally valenced units.

Descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations. The same four-way
hierarchical log-linear analysis was conducted for descriptions of
unsatisfactory conversations. The analysis revealed that the four-way
effect was not significant (p = .12). Backward elimination without the
four-way effect produced a more parsimonious model, which included
one three-way and four two-way effects. The likelihood ratio chi-square
of this model was 2(9) = 14.94, p = .09, indicating that the simpler
model did not differ significantly from the full model. To produce the
parameter estimates, log-linear analysis was then conducted. Table 3
presents frequencies by gender of participant, valence, and agent.
The two-way effect of logical agent by gender of participant indicated that males ascribed significantly fewer units to health professionals than did females; the genders did not differ for the other two
agents. The logical-agent-by-word-type effect revealed that there were
significantly fewer concrete word type units attributed to patients
than would be expected by chance, but significantly more concrete
word type units than expected by chance were attributed to health professionals. The logical-agent-by-valence effect revealed that there
were more congruently valenced units attributed to health professionals than would be expected by chance. The word-type-by-valence effect
indicated that there were more incongruently valenced concrete words
than expected. Finally, the three-way effect of valence by word type by
agent indicated that there were significantly more congruently
valenced concrete units attributed to the health professionals' descriptions of patients than would be expected by chance.

42

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Table 3
Frequencies of Valence, Word Type, and Logical Agent in the Unsatisfactory
Conversations

Logical Agent

Concrete Word Type

Abstract Word Type

Congruent Incongruent
Valence
Valence

Congruent Incongruent
Valence
Valence

Males
Descriptions of patients
Descriptions of health
professionals
Health professionals'
descriptions of patients
Females
Descriptions of patients
Descriptions of health
professionals
Health professionals'
descriptions of patients

13

29

26

12

20

13

11

2

16

8

4

6

77

65

72

27

98

55

25

7

28

19

20

10

Note. Concrete = descriptive action verb plus interpretive action verb; abstract = state
verb plus adjective; congruent = positively valenced units; incongruent = negatively and
neutrally valenced units.

Analysis of Intentionality
The final set of analyses investigated the level of intentionality. Of
particular interest was whether participants described themselves
using fewer IAVs and more SVs than they used to describe health professionals. Although the focus was primarily on IAVs and SVs (Hypothesis 3), all word types were included so that other patterns of association could be detected.
Satisfactory conversations. Chi-square analysis was conducted on
the frequencies of the four word types (DAV, IAV, SV, ADJ) and two levels of logical agent (patient and health professional). Word type was
strongly associated with logical agent, 2(3) = 32.78, p < .001. An examination of the adjusted residuals indicated that the strongest effects
were for IAVs (-2.8) and SVs (4.8). Fewer IAVs but more SVs were
attributed to patients than to health professionals.
Chi-square analyses were also conducted to assess the association
between valence and logical agent separately for each of the four word
types. These analyses revealed that for DAVs there was a significant
association between valence and logical agent, 2(1) = 5.1, p < .05:
There were more congruent (positively valenced) units for health professionals than for patients. For IAVs, there was no significant association between valence and logical agent, 2(1) = 2.51, ns. For SVs, there
was a significant association, 2(1) = 12.1, p < .001, with more

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

43

incongruent (negative and neutral) units for patients than for health
professionals. Finally, when ADJs were examined, there was a significant association, 2(1) = 5.60, p < .05, with more incongruent units for
patients than for health professionals.
Unsatisfactory conversations. The same analyses as for satisfactory
conversations were conducted on the reports of unsatisfactory ones.
Results again indicated a significant relationship between word type
and logical agent, 2(3) = 36.33, p < .001. An examination of the
adjusted residuals indicated that there were strong effects for IAVs
(-3.3) and SVs (4.0), as well as for DAVs and ADJs. Fewer IAVs but
more SVs were attributed to patients than to health professionals. In
addition, fewer DAVs and more ADJs were attributed to patients.
Finally, for DAVs, there was no association between valence and logical agent, 2(1) = 2.61, ns. IAVs revealed a strong relationship between
valence and logical agent, 2(1) = 8.01, p < .01, with more negatively
valenced IAVs for health professionals than for patients. There was no
significant effect for SVs, 2(1) = 0.94, ns). Finally, for ADJs, there was a
significant association, 2(1) = 3.80, p < .05, with fewer negative ADJs
for patients than for health professionals.
Summary
There was support for Hypothesis 1, in that satisfactory conversations were described in overwhelmingly positive terms, whereas
unsatisfactory conversations were described negatively. There was
partial support for Hypothesis 2, which also bears on Research Question 1. Patients who wrote descriptions of satisfactory conversations
tended to use more positively valenced concrete word types to describe
their own actions than would be expected by chance. Patients were also
more likely to use positively valenced abstract word types when they
wrote about the health professionals' descriptions of them as patients.
In addition, in their descriptions of satisfactory conversations, males
were more likely than females to describe health professionals positively. When participants wrote descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations, they described health professionals using concrete, albeit negative, words. They also described health professionals' words about
patients in terms of situation-specific negative behaviors, rather than
in enduring terms. This finding is in direct contrast to descriptions of
satisfactory conversations, where health professionals were described
as more likely to focus on the abstract characteristics of patients.
With respect to Hypothesis 3 (addressing levels of intentionality),
participants were more likely to describe health professionals in both
satisfactory and unsatisfactory conversations using word types that
indicated intentional and voluntary behavior (IAVs) and to describe
themselves with word types that suggested involuntary states (SVs).

44

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Overall, results point to a perception by patients that health professionals were out-group members. Nevertheless, linguistic intergroup bias was low, and patients tended toward more positive (or
less enduringly negative) descriptions even of unsatisfactory
conversations.

STUDY 2: CONVERSATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Study 2 examined a selection of real-time interactions between
health providers (usually doctors) and hospital inpatients. We wished
to build on and clarify the findings from Study 1 but this time examine
interactions using dialogue rather than the more familiar method of
written text. The interactions came from an Australian television documentary about a large public hospital in a major city, which was
entirely made up of ongoing interactions in this hospital. Only extracts
showing interactions with a focus on one health professional and one
fully conscious adult patient were examined: There were 25 of these
(ranging from 0.41 to 2.36 minutes in length).
Semin and Fiedler's (1988, 1991) LCM has not been tested before on
dyadic interactions. Thus, it was not clear whether the evidence of linguistic intergroup bias that has been found in written text would also
appear in conversational behavior. The procedure used for selecting
the intergroup and interpersonal interactions is outlined briefly here
because the focus of Study 2 was on the interactions actually selected
(see Watson & Gallois, 1998, for more details of the selection process).
SELECTION OF EXTRACTS FOR ANALYSIS

In total, 106 1st-year psychology students (mean age = 19.5, SD =
4.5) rated the videotaped extracts on 27 items. Participants rated the
health professional's and patient's behavior on 16 semantic differential-type items (e.g., the health professional respected the patient, the
patient liked the health professional). The items were derived from
communication accommodation theory (Gallois, Giles, Jones, Cargile, &
Ota, 1995; Giles, Coupland, & Coupland, 1991). Participants used a
further 11 items to rate their overall impressions of the interaction
(e.g., I would rather see a health professional with a more caring manner). From the 25 videotaped segments, two sets of 7 segments received
ratings that indicated high (top quartile) or low (bottom quartile) interpersonal salience, respectively. It was anticipated that the 7 segments
with lower scores on interpersonal salience would demonstrate higher
levels of linguistic intergroup bias than the 7 segments with higher
scores on interpersonal salience.

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

45

RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESIS

Research questions were drawn from Study 1 and from previous
research investigating the LCM. There were two research questions
addressing conversational behavior:
Research Question 1: What word types do patients and health professionals
use in conversations in the hospital?
Research Question 2: How do the words interactants use differ between the
segments rated as interpersonal and intergroup?

SIT and related theories such as communication accommodation
theory propose that positivity is a feature of interpersonal interactions
and negativity characterizes more intergroup interactions. Similarly,
in another study in this project (Watson & Gallois, 1999), a subset of
the satisfactory conversations in Study 1 were rated by outside judges
as containing more interpersonal communication markers, whereas
the unsatisfactory conversations contained more intergroup markers.
Thus, in Study 2, the following was expected:
Hypothesis 1: Segments rated as interpersonal would contain more positive
units than negative or neutral ones, whereas segments rated as intergroup would contain more negative units than positive or neutral ones.
CODING

The first author, as the primary coder, transcribed the 14 selected
segments. A similar coding procedure to that used in Study 1 was followed in Study 2. In Study 2, the logical subject (agent) of the unit was
the speaker, so the step of attributing a logical subject to a unit was
omitted, and units were categorized instead by speaker. Kappas for
interrater reliability ranged from .78 to .89.
There were a total of 552 grammatical units (312 were in the videotaped segments rated as interpersonal, and 240 were in the segments
rated as intergroup). Only 4 units were uncodeable in terms of valence,
which probably reflects that the coders were able to use the nonverbal
as well as verbal behavior to gauge valence. Only 8% (48 units) were
excluded from the analysis because they did not meet the criteria set
for Study 1. Table 4 presents a breakdown of the 552 units across
speaker, valence, and word type.

RESULTS
A chi-square analysis revealed that the interpersonal segments had
significantly more positively valenced units than the intergroup

46

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Table 4
Frequencies for Segments Rated as Interpersonal and Intergroup
Number of Units

Interpersonal

Total units
Valence
Positive
Negative
Neutral
Uncodeable
Speaker
Health professional
Patient
Excluded units
Word type
DAV
IAV
SV
ADJ

Intergroup

All

312

240

552

236
16
56
4

26
151
63
0

262
167
119
4

206
74
32

144
82
16

350
156
48

76
47
99
58

85
41
50
48

161
88
149
106

Note. DAV = descriptive action verb; IAV = interpretative action verb; SV = state verb;
ADJ = adjective.

segments, whereas the intergroup segments had more negatively
valenced units, 2(1) = 246.6, p < .001. As Table 4 shows, neutrally
valenced units were evenly distributed between the interpersonal and
intergroup segments. Owing to the low number of negatively valenced
units in the interpersonal segments and the low number of positively
valenced units in the intergroup segments, valence was again recoded
as congruent or incongruent, as in Study 1.
Log-Linear Analysis of
Segments Rated as Interpersonal
The three independent variables were word type, valence of unit,
and speaker. The dependent variable was frequency of word type. Hierarchical log-linear analysis was again conducted. An examination of
the saturated model revealed that the three-way interaction was not
significant (p = .53). Backward elimination produced a model that
included all the two-way effects but not the three-way effect; the likelihood ratio chi-square for this model was 2(3) = 3.50, p = .32. Therefore,
log-linear analyses were conducted with only the first-order and secondorder effects.
The two-way effect of word type by valence indicated that although
there were fewer incongruent SVs than congruent ones, there were significantly more than would be expected by chance (z = 2.51). In addition, there were significantly more congruently valenced ADJs than
would be expected by chance (z = 3.02). There was also a speaker-by-

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

47

word-type effect, which indicated that compared to health professionals, patients used significantly fewer DAVs and significantly more
IAVs than would be expected by chance (z = -2.80 and 2.42, respectively). Finally, the valence-by-speaker effect revealed that patients'
units were more likely than would be expected by chance to be positively valenced than health professionals' units (z = 3.22).
Log-Linear Analysis of
Segments Rated as Intergroup
Similar analytic procedures were applied to the intergroup segments. An examination of the saturated model revealed that the
three-way effect was not significant, 2(3) = 6.94, p = .07. Backward
elimination produced a model that included all two-way effects. The
likelihood ratio chi-square of this model was 2(3) = 8.77, p < .05, which
was an adequate fit (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). A log-linear analysis
was conducted retaining all two-way effects. Although there were more
congruently valenced DAV units overall, there were more incongruently valenced DAV units than would be expected by chance (z = 2.51).
The speaker-by-valence effect indicated that units with patients as
speakers were more likely to be negatively valenced than units with
health professionals as speakers (z = 3.18).
Summary
There was support for Hypothesis 1. Segments rated as interpersonal had more positively valenced units than negative and neutral
ones, and those rated as intergroup contained more negatively
valenced units than positive and neutral ones. The results also bear on
the two research questions. In the segments rated as interpersonal,
patients were more likely than health professionals to use positively
valenced units. Patients were also more likely than health professionals to use fewer DAVs and more IAVs (addressing levels of
intentionality). In addition, speakers used positively valenced ADJs
and negatively and neutrally valenced SVs. In the intergroup segments, results showed that compared to heath professionals, patients
tended to use more negatively valenced units. In addition, speakers
used DAVs that were more likely to be negatively and neutrally
valenced than positively valenced.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
The goal of this project was to understand the dynamics of health
care interactions from an intergroup perspective of communication.

48

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Because the LCM concerns the words that individuals choose in their
interactions, it provides a complex and subtle tool for understanding
their underlying cognitions. Thus, our findings add to the development
of cohesive explanations about the communication process between
health professionals and patients.
In Study 1, we asked participants to write about their perceptions of
satisfactory and unsatisfactory encounters with hospital staff. The
LCM focuses on an interactant's perceptions and the social reality for
that individual. Although behavior cannot be objectively measured in
retrospective descriptions, these descriptions provide useful data
about perceptions of the behavior of self and speech partner. In Study 2,
the data were real-time televised interactions. A television series
intended for a wide public audience could be expected to portray interactions between patients and health professionals that are, in the
main, positive and that demonstrate good communication. Thus, it is
notable that although all the segments were seen as fairly positive, differences on the ratings of health professionals' communication strategies and behaviors were obtained. In addition, although the program
was subject to editing, the episodes we analyzed were real for the
patient and health professional in the interaction. These data, thus,
were a valuable source of ongoing interactions on which the LCM could
be used to examine medical encounters.
Studies 1 and 2 addressed the factors that influence intergroup and
interpersonal salience. Both analyses investigated differences in the
choices of verbs and adjectives made in patients' descriptions (Study 1)
and by speakers (Study 2). Patients who wrote descriptions of satisfactory conversations described health professionals in positively
valenced terms and perceived that health professionals viewed them,
the patients, in abstract, positive terms. These results suggest low levels of intergroup bias. Likewise, in the videotaped segments rated as
interpersonal, speakers used positively valenced enduring adjectives,
and patients used more positively valenced word types than did health
professionals. These results add to the literature, indicating that positive interactions tend to be perceived in more interpersonal terms even
when interactants come from different groups.
Findings from the descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations and
videotaped segments rated as intergroup were more mixed. In their
descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations, patients used negatively
valenced words to describe health professionals. Given the unsatisfactory nature of the reported conversations, this was expected, but the
words were not strongly abstract. Furthermore, patients perceived
that health professionals viewed them in concrete rather than abstract
terms, although these perceptions were negatively valenced. These
results suggest two things: that intergroup bias was not high and that
health professionals were perceived by patients as responding only to
the negative immediate context of the patients. This second result may

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

49

reflect the emotional needs of the patients for reassurance and a positive self-image.
The only clear finding to emerge from the videotaped segments
rated as intergroup was that patients contributed more negatively
valenced units than did health professionals, a result that directly contrasts with the interpersonal segments. SVs across both types of interactions tended to be negatively (intergroup segments) or negatively
and neutrally (interpersonal segments) valenced, which suggests that
patients' states and feelings were not positive in any of the interactions. These mixed findings concerning the reports of unsatisfactory
conversations and the intergroup segments support the work of others
(Maass et al., 1989, 1995; Ng & Chan, 1996) who found that it was difficult to form a clear understanding of results from interactions that
were not positive in tone.
The perceived intentionality of patients' and health professionals'
behaviors was measured in Studies 1 and 2 using IAVs (indicating
intentionality) attributed to the logical agents (cf. Schmid & Fiedler,
1996; Semin & Fiedler, 1991). Participants in Study 1 attributed higher
levels of control to health professionals (more IAVs) than they attributed to themselves. In addition, participants indicated their low levels
of control by focusing on their own states and feelings (more SVs).
Importantly, participants perceived the use of control by the health
professionals in the descriptions of unsatisfactory conversations as
negative (i.e., negatively valenced IAVs).
In Study 2, patients in the segments rated as interpersonal used
more IAVs (indicating their higher sense of control) than did patients
in the intergroup segments. Nevertheless, the patients in these latter
segments had more units overall than their counterparts in the segments rated as interpersonal. This last finding suggests that patients
in the intergroup segments exhibited some degree of control by holding
the floor more than their counterparts in the segments rated as interpersonal. Across both types of segments, however, health professionals
spoke more than patients, suggesting that they possessed high levels of
control. These results support earlier findings that health professionals have high levels of control in all types of medical encounters with
patients (e.g., Coulthard & Ashby, 1975; Shuy, 1977; Street & Buller,
1987).
We used SIT to understand communication between patients and
health professionals. We have argued in this article that researchers in
the area of health communication need to focus on theory to explain
satisfactory and unsatisfactory interactions. The results of both studies show clear differences between these interactions. Thus, SIT adds
value to research in this area by theorizing more subtle dynamics than
simply positive or negative tone. SIT is a vital component in understanding why health professionals who focus only on their professional
role and seek to control health care interactions risk less satisfactory

50

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

interactions with their patients than those who recognize the individuality of each patient.
The LCM played a focal role in these studies as an index of intergroup communication to investigate linguistic intergroup bias. Patterns of linguistic intergroup bias and intentional behavior were found
across the two data sets. Satisfactory and interpersonal interactions
showed low levels of intergroup bias. Even in unsatisfactory and more
intergroup interactions, patients appeared to strive for the most positive construction of health professionals as a group. The LCM provides
the means for in-depth analysis through the language of individuals'
constructions of social reality.
This research represents a small foray into a vital area of communication. Although descriptions of conversations and short television
interactions do not provide a full picture of the medical encounter, the
two data sets inform our understanding of health communication. The
use of different data sets to test similar propositions in this article
increases its value to the health communication literature. Future
research should use general practitioners and other health professionals to broaden the field of inquiry. Researchers should extend their
stimuli to include written and spoken material from both health professionals and patients.
These results have clear relevance to the applied aspect of health
communication. Health professionals need to be aware that they must
incorporate varying communication strategies to ensure an optimal
interaction with a patient. Every health professional should try to
assess a patient's health understanding and identity through carefully
phrased comments that encourage the patient to interact with the
health professional as an individual person. Health professionals
should allow the patient an opportunity to help manage the interaction. Furthermore, they should see the patient as both a patient and an
individual. Thus, although interactions between health professionals
and patients are best understood in intergroup terms, the most positive interactions are those that allow each interactant to move between
his or her individual and social identity.

REFERENCES
Arcuri, L., Maass, A., & Portelli, G. (1993). Linguistic intergroup bias and implicit attributions. British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 277-285.
Au, T. K. (1986). A verb is worth a thousand words: The causes and consequences of interpersonal events implicit in language. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 104-122.
Brown, R., & Fish, D. (1983). The psychological causality implicit in language. Cognition,
14, 237-273.
Coulthard, M., & Ashby, M. (1975). Talking with the doctor, 1. Journal of Communication,
25, 140-147.

Watson, Gallois / PATIENTS' INTERACTIONS WITH HEALTH PROVIDERS

51

Dryden, C., & Giles, H. (1987). Language, social identity and health. In H. Beloff & A. M.
Coleman (Eds.), Psychology Survey 6 (pp. 115-139). Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.
Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (1991). Attachment style and verbal descriptions of romantic
partners. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 8, 187-215.
Fiedler, K., Semin, G. R., & Finkenauer, C. (1993). The battle of words between gender
groups: A language-based approach to intergroup processes. Human Communication
Research, 19, 409-441.
Fiedler, K., Semin, G. R., Finkenauer, C., & Berkel, I. (1995). Actor-observer bias in close
relationships: The role of self-knowledge and self-related language. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 525-538.
Fiedler, K., Semin, G. R., & Koppetsch, C. (1991). Language use and attributional biases
in close personal relationships. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17,
147-155.
Fisher, S. (1983). Doctor talk/patient talk: How treatment decisions are negotiated in
doctor-patient communication. In S. Fisher & A. D. Todd (Eds.), The social organization of doctor-patient communication (pp. 35-157). Washington, DC: Center for
Applied Linguistics.
Gallois, C., & Giles, H. (1998). Accommodating mutual influence in intergroup encounters. In M. T. Palmer & G. A. Barnett (Eds.), Mutual influence in interpersonal communication: Theory and research in cognition, affect and behavior (pp. 130-162). New
York: Ablex.
Gallois, C., Giles, H., Jones, E., Cargile, A., & Ota, H. (1995). Accommodating
intercultural encounters: Elaborations and extensions. In R. Wiseman (Ed.),
Intercultural and international communication annual: Intercultural communication theory (pp. 115-147). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gardner, M. J., Paulsen, N., Gallois, C., Callan, V. J., & Monaghan, P. (2001). Communication in organizations: An intergroup perspective. In W. P. Robinson & H. Giles (Eds.),
The new handbook of language and social psychology (pp. 561-584). London: Wiley.
Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (1991). Accommodation theory: Communication,
context, and consequence. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland (Eds.), Contexts of
accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 1-68). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Hogg, M. A., & Abrams, D. (1988). Social identifications. London: Routledge.
Maass, A., & Arcuri, L. (1992). The role of language in the persistence of stereotypes. In
G. R. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language, interaction and social cognition (pp. 129143). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Maass, A., Ceccarelli, R., & Rudin, S. (1996). Linguistic intergroup bias: Evidence for
in-group-protective motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
512-526.
Maass, A., Milesi, A., Zabbini, S., & Stahlberg, D. (1995). Linguistic intergroup bias: Differential expectancies or in-group protection. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 116-126.
Maass, A., Salvi, D., Arcuri, L., & Semin, G. (1989). Language use in intergroup contexts:
The linguistic intergroup bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57,
981-993.
Ng, S. K., & Chan, K. K. (1996). Biases in the description of various age groups: A linguistic category model analysis. Bulletin of the Hong Kong Psychological Society, 36/37,
5-20.
Oakes, P. J., Haslam, A., & Turner, J. C. (1994). Stereotyping and social reality. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell.
Pettegrew, L. S., & Logan, R. (1987). The health care context. In C. Berger & S. Chaffee
(Eds.), Handbook of communication science (pp. 675-710). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Schmid, J., & Fiedler, K. (1996). Language and implicit attributions in the Nuremberg
trials. Human Communication Research, 22, 371-398.

52

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY / March 2002

Schmid, J., Fielder, K., Semin, G. R., & Englich, B. (1994). Measuring implicit causality:
The linguistic category model. Unpublished manuscript.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (1988). The cognitive functions of linguistic categories in
describing persons: Social cognition and language. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 558-568.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K., (1989). Relocating attributional phenomena within a languagecognition interface: The case of actors' and observers' perspectives. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 19, 491-508.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (1991). The linguistic category model, its bases, applications,
and range. European Review of Social Psychology, 2, 1-30.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (1992). Properties of interpersonal language and attribution.
In G. R. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language, interaction and social cognition (pp. 5877). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sharf, B. F., & Street, R. L., Jr. (1997). The patient as a central construct: Shifting the
emphasis. Health Communication, 9, 1-11.
Shuy, R. W. (1977). The patient's right to clear communication in health and mental
health delivery service. ITL Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 1-25.
Street, R. L., Jr. (1991). Accommodation in medical consultations. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, &
N. Coupland (Eds.), Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 131-156). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Street, R. L., Jr., & Buller, D. B. (1987). Nonverbal response patterns in physician-patient
interactions: A functional analysis. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 11, 234-253.
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (1996). Using multivariate statistics. New York:
HarperCollins.
Tajfel, H. (1975). The exit of social mobility and the voice of social change: Notes on the
social psychology of intergroup relations. Social Science Information, 14, 101-118.
Tajfel, H. (1978). Differentiation between social groups: Studies in the social psychology
of intergroup relations. In H. Tajfel (Ed.), European monographs in social psychology
(Vol. 14, pp. 61-67). London: Academic Press.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psychology,
33, 1-39.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S.
Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology and intergroup relations (pp. 7-24). Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Thompson, T. L. (1994). Interpersonal communication and health care. In M. L. Knapp &
G. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication (2nd ed., pp. 696-725).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Watson, B., & Gallois, C. (1998). Nurturing communication by health professionals
toward patients: A communication accommodation theory approach. Health Communication, 10, 343-355.
Watson, B., & Gallois, C. (1999). Communication accommodation between patients and
health professionals: Themes and strategies in satisfying and unsatisfying encounters. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 9, 167-184.

