Applied Psycholinguistics 23 (2002), 23-41
PriF(1,19) = 1.539, p < .05nted in the United States of America
DOI: 10.1017.S0142716402000024

Morphology in incipient bilingual
Spanish-speaking preschool children
with specific language impairment
PEGGY F. JACOBSON and RICHARD G. SCHWARTZ
City University of New York
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Peggy F. Jacobson, Ph.D., Department of Speech, Communication Sciences and Theatre,
St. John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway, Jamaica, NY 11439.
ABSTRACT
This study examined the use of clitic pronouns by incipient bilingual Spanish-speaking 4- and 5year-old children with and without language impairments. Incipient bilingualism refers to the initial
stages of contact between two languages, when an individual still has only passive knowledge of a
second language. The participants included 10 children with typical language development and 10
children with specific language impairment (SLI). The experimental task elicited clitic pronouns
serving as direct objects with finite verbs (lo, la, los, and las). The children who had SLI used clitic
pronouns less frequently than their age-matched peers and were less accurate in their use of gender
agreement for clitics. No group differences were found for third person singular and plural verb
inflections in the preterite tense. These results were compared to previous studies of Spanish- and
Italian-speaking children with SLI.

Despite the growing numbers of non-English speakers in the United States, there
are few accounts of specific language impairment (SLI) in children exposed to
more than one language during the acquisition period. Incipient bilingualism
refers to the initial stages of contact between two languages and reflects the
interdependency of linguistic and sociological factors in bilingual development
(Diebold, 1964). Minimally defined, incipient bilingualism refers to the earliest
stage of bilingual development when only passive knowledge of the second
language may exist (Romaine, 1995). Many children born to Spanish-speaking
parents in the New York metropolitan area continue to use Spanish at home but
are exposed to varying amounts of English from television and through increased contact with English-speaking teachers and peers in school settings.
Still, little is known about the acquisition patterns and potential areas of morphological difficulty for these children relative to English speakers. Although
the term bilingual is frequently reserved for individuals who demonstrate verbal
proficiency in two languages, grouping incipient bilinguals into the same category as monolinguals for research purposes may mask potential differences and
minimizes the generalizability of the findings. Acknowledging the potential in 2002 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/02 $9.50

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

24

teraction between incipient bilingualism and the natural language acquisition
process may be consequential to an understanding of the use of morphology
among developing Spanish-English bilinguals.
Limited data are available for the acquisition of Spanish. Individual diaries
(Hernandez-Pina, 1984; Lopez-Ornat, Fernandez, Gallo, & Mariscal, 1994) and
small group studies offer some insight into the patterns of acquisition (Aguado,
1997; Anderson, 1995; Merino, 1992; Perez-Leroux & Glass, 1997; Perez-Pereira,
1999; Shum, Conde, & Diaz, 1992). However, because of individual variation
and methodological differences, including natural language sampling versus experimental tasks and longitudinal versus cross-sectional studies, there is no
agreement concerning ages of mastery for specific features (Merino, 1992). The
variety of Spanish being acquired (e.g., Caribbean, Peninsula, or American) may
also contribute to the lack of agreement among studies, given that morphological
variations exist among speakers from these areas. Furthermore, acquisition data
from Spanish-speaking children who are simultaneously exposed to varying
amounts of English are scarce (Kayser, 1995; Langdon & Cheng, 1992), except
for several small samples at discreet developmental stages (Cohen, 1980;
Garcia, 1983; Pueyo, 1992). A similar situation exists for children with language
impairment. Specific morphological deficits in English-speaking children with
SLI are well known (Leonard, 1998). However, the clinically relevant morphological identifiers for young incipient bilingual children with SLI remain largely
undetermined, despite a growing data base (Anderson, 1995; Bosch & Serra,
1997; Merino, 1983; Restrepo, Chasteen, Bustelo, & Matute, 1996; Restrepo,
1998; Restrepo & Kruth, 1998).
Many accounts of SLI in English-speaking children have focused on the use
of the 14 morphemes identified by Brown (1973). Earlier work on Spanish
morphology mirrored this approach, despite major inflectional differences (Aguado, 1997; Kvaal, Shipstead-Cox, Nevitt, Hodson, & Kauner, 1988). Spanish
and Italian share many inflectional similarities. The extensive data regarding
morphological deficits in Italian-speaking children with SLI (Bortolini, Caselli, & Leonard, 1997; Leonard, Bortolini, Casselli, McGregor, & Sabbadini,
1992; Leonard, Sabbadini, Leonard, & Volterra, 1989; Leonard, Sabbadini,
Volterra, & Leonard, 1988) motivate the present research. Specifically, incipient
bilingual Spanish speakers with SLI may experience comparable difficulty with
direct object clitic pronouns and third person plural verb inflections. The present
study examined morphological deficits in incipient bilingual Spanish-speaking
children with SLI and expands our present knowledge base regarding SLI in
minority language populations.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SPANISH AND ENGLISH MORPHOLOGY

Spanish differs from English in numerous ways. It is more richly inflected, and
overt subjects are optional. Verb inflections are used to encode information
relating to person, number, and a greater variety of types of tense information.
Spanish has more inflectional categories and verb forms relative to English:
verb inflections mark finiteness, tense aspect, mood, person, and number. In
English only the tense, person, and number are marked. Spanish also requires

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

25

gender and number agreement for determiners, articles, adjectives, past participles, and clitics serving as direct and indirect objects (Anderson, 1995; Merino,
1992).
Despite the wide ranges reported for the mastery of specific morphological
items (Merino, 1992), monolingual Spanish-speaking children acquire gender
agreement for articles (Perez-Pereira, 1991) and verbal inflections before 3 years
of age (Lopez-Ornat, 1997). Moreover, most complex morphological operations
are established by age 4 (Anderson, 1995). Pronoun acquisition is complicated
by the extensive use of clitics in addition to full pronouns (e.g., yo, tu, el, ella).
Full pronouns are acquired sooner and are not subject to the same extended
period of acquisition as are clitics (Anderson, 1998; Shum, Conde, & Diaz,
1992). The occasional reversal errors on full pronouns in typical and atypically
developing populations are attributed to the young child's developing sense of
perspective taking (Perez-Pereira, 1999). In contrast, accuracy in the use of clitic
pronouns requires a gradual and extended period before full knowledge regarding both the function of these forms and the grammatical rules for their use
becomes established (Shum et al., 1992).
Clitic pronouns occur as indirect objects (le, les, lo/la), reflexives (me, se, te,
nos), and direct objects (lo, la, los, las). Clitics serving as direct objects are of
special interest in Romance languages because of their protracted developmental
course and the exceptional challenge they pose for speakers with SLI. A direct
object clitic takes the place of a full noun phrase in situations where the referent
is understood by the speaker and listener, and it must agree in number and
gender. Although these forms appear early in development, accuracy in their
use is developed only gradually.
Shum et al. (1992) cite examples of the developmental errors children between 2 and 3 years that offer insight to this acquisition process. These include
omission (te quito/te lo quito), substitution of gender or number marking (esto
lo tengo sanita, la boca), and, addition or redundancy (no lo veo el bicho).
Potential delay in the emergence and use of these forms by a child being raised
in an institution was also reported (Shum et al., 1992). In a cross-sectional study
that combined language samples with an experimental task, Anderson (1998)
found that the omission of clitic pronouns was the most frequent error type
among Puerto Rican Spanish-speaking 2- and 3-year-olds. Thirteen (11 2-yearolds) of the 40 children had incomplete systems, four did not use any clitic
pronouns with finite verbs, and two did not use the direct object clitics targeted.
Reflecting individual variation and the earlier emergence documented for diary
studies, several instances of accurate gender and number markings on direct
object clitics were reported between 32 and 36 months of age (Hernandez-Pina,
1984).
The influence of bilingualism on morphological acquisition is also of interest.
In two bilingual Basque-Spanish (Euskera/Castellano) children from the ages
of 1 to 4 years, the subject clitics me, te, and le were acquired prior to the direct
object clitics lo, la, los, and las (Ezeizabarrena & Unibertstitatea, 1997). For
both children, the lo form was the first to be produced. The first appearance of
object clitics occurred at 2;2 for one child and at 2;7 for the other. However,
the age of productive mastery for such clitics was not specific. Early child

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

26

speech also differed from adult speech in that third person singular verb inflections were occasionally substituted for the third person plural form (e.g., esta
for estan and es for son). In other Spanish bilinguals, direct object clitics in the
imperative form (e.g., no lo hagas) emerged at 2;6 among Spanish-English
bilinguals; however, the age of acquisition was reported as 4;5 (Merino, 1992).
Clitic pronouns typically occur in preverbal position with finite verbs (e.g.,
lo come). With gerunds, placement may be either before or after the verb (e.g.,
lo esta comiendo/esta comiendolo), though preverbal placement is still most
common when the verb estar is used in the present progressive tense (SilvaCorvalan, 1994). Postverbal placement occurs following gerunds (e.g., comiendolo), infinitives (e.g., comerlo), or imperative forms (cometelo).
Characteristics of Italian-speaking children with SLI

The morphological deficits of Italian-speaking children with SLI include omissions of articles and clitic pronouns and substitutions of third person singular
for the third person plural verb inflection (Bortolini et al., 1997; Leonard et al.,
1988, 1989, 1992). Because unstressed morphemes were found to pose greater
difficulty for individuals with SLI and were more likely to result in errors, an
explanation based upon the perceptual surface characteristics of the morphemes
was proposed (Leonard et al., 1988; Leonard & Bortolini, 1998). Thus, the
particular difficulty posed by third person plural verb inflections for Italianspeaking children with SLI was attributed to the fact that the two-syllable inflection (ano or ono) occurs in an unstressed position of the word. Examples include
vedono "they see" and portono "they carry," in which both words are composed
of STRONG-WEAK-WEAK syllable stress patterns, with the inflection falling outside of the STRONG-WEAK template. Additional support for this claim comes
from the fact that the same children produced fewer errors when the third person
plural form consisted of a two-syllable stem and inflection that fit the STRONG-
WEAK template, as in danno "they give." Further evidence that surface features
may contribute to processing difficulty comes from the comparison of Italianspeaking children's use of direct object clitic pronouns that differed according
to position within the phrase. Clitic pronouns consisting of weak monosyllables
that did not permit lengthening were used with lower frequency than those appearing in phrase final position, resulting in significant differences between children with SLI and MLU controls only on the omission of morphemes in the
preverbal context, but not the postverbal phrase final context (Leonard & Bortolini, 1998). The facilitated production of lo postverbally was attributed to phrase
final syllable lengthening.
Characteristics of Spanish speakers with SLI

The reports thus far offer conflicting profiles of morphological difficulty for
bilingual children with SLI. Just as variability across subject populations and
differing methods of collecting and analyzing data characterize the acquisition
literature, the same holds true for SLI. The morphological problems of Spanishspeaking children with SLI (Leonard, 1998) include decreased use of function

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

27

words, such as articles and clitics, and difficulty with third person plural verb
inflections (Bosch & Serra, 1997; Merino, 1983) and noun plural inflections
(Merino, 1983). Five- to seven-year-old Spanish-speaking children residing in
the United States and exhibiting moderate to severe language impairment exhibited greater omission of articles and reduced gender agreement for articles in
noun phrases than age-matched controls (Restrepo et al., 1996). Although reduced gender agreement on articles and lack of accurate number agreement on
verb inflections were reported, no deficits in tense marking or increased use of
infinitive forms were found (Restrepo et al., 1996). The lack of general consensus on the profile of atypical morphological acquisition underscores the need
for further research.
The present study examined the use of direct object clitic pronouns, gender
agreement on these pronouns, and third person singular and plural verb inflections by predominantly Spanish-speaking 4- and 5-year-olds with and without
SLI. The incipient bilinguals with SLI were expected to perform similarly to
the Italian speakers with SLI (Leonard et al., 1987, 1988, 1992) with respect to
clitic pronoun omission and in the accuracy of gender agreement for the clitics
produced. However, no differences in third person singular and third person
plural verb inflection contrasts were expected for the Spanish speakers when
both inflections were stressed. A parallel pattern of clitic pronoun omission was
proposed for Spanish-speaking children (Anderson, 1995) and later documented
for school-aged children in Spain with SLI (Bosch & Serra, 1997). Although
Spanish-speaking children should be expected to perform similarly, the effects
of acquiring Spanish when children are simultaneously exposed to varying amounts
of English are not fully known. Specifically, Spanish speakers exposed to English might shift from preverbal to postverbal placement of the clitic, which is
consistent with English. Because morphemes occurring in phrase final position
create the least obstacle for learning (Peters, 1997), a shift in placement might
reduce the difficulty inherent in clitic production for speakers of Spanish with SLI.
METHOD
Participants

The participants included 10 typically developing (TD) children and 10 children
with specific language impairment (SLI). The ages ranged from 4;1 to 5;0 for
the TD group (M = 4;7, SD = 4 mo.) and from 4;2 to 5;4 (M = 4;8; SD = 4
mo.) for the SLI group. All children came from low-income families. The national origins of the participants were varied and included children with parents
from El Salvador, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Mexico,
Ecuador, and Guatemala. The groups were relatively balanced regarding family
origin. All children had resided in the United States for at least 1 year prior to
the study.
All participants spoke a Latin American dialect of Spanish. The omission of
direct object clitics as a form of dialectal variation is not characteristic of standard Latin American Spanish, which is a well-defined norm that spans North
and South America and is characterized by an avoidance of unusual morphologi-

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

28

cal and grammatical elements (Lipski, 1994). Although indefinite objects may
sometimes be dropped, direct object clitics must appear with finite verbs (Campos, 1986). This does not preclude the possibility that some regional variations
may occur as a result of contact with other languages, but reports of such phenomenon are relatively rare (Camacho, Paredes, & Sanchez, 1997; Ezeizabarrena & Unifertsitaten, 1997). Moreover, none of the children in the present study
came from any of these backgrounds. Moreover, prolonged contact with English
has not resulted in omission of direct object clitics in the Spanish spoken by
three generations of bilingual speakers in Los Angeles, including those identifying themselves as English dominant (Silva-Corvalan, 1994). Another aspect of
dialectal variation was consequential to our analysis. Because of the variability
of final /s/ and final nasal consonant production among some speakers of Caribbean dialect (Schnitzer, 1997), plural marking errors on clitic pronouns and third
person present tense endings were not analyzed.
A rigorous screening and evaluation process was employed for identifying
children with SLI. The primary criterion for selection was a determination of
language impairment and qualification for remedial speech-language services
by the Committee on Preschool Special Education (CPSE), which bases its determination on observed communication behaviors across several evaluation settings, in conjunction with parent and teacher reports. Given the lack of standardized tests for linguistically and culturally diverse children, the committee relies
heavily on behavioral observations, clinical interpretations, and consistency of
reports across evaluators. All speech-language evaluations were performed by
American Speech and Hearing Association (ASHA) certified Bilingual Speech-
Language Pathologists. Suggested practices for evaluating speakers of languages
other than standard English (Butler, 1994) were employed, including nonstandardized procedures, various probes to elicit language in a variety of contexts
(Bernstein, 1994; Leonard & Weiss, 1994), and adapted translations of formal
tests. Although standardized tests, and translations in particular, have some limitations, they systematize the assessment. Neither of the present authors participated in the initial evaluations or the CPSE reviews.
Additional restrictions were imposed to exclude children who may have been
misidentified as SLI. Clinical reports of difficulties with syntax, morphology, or
grammatical complexity were required for inclusion in the SLI group. The children with SLI scored at least 1.3 SD below the mean on the expressive portion
of the Preschool Language Scale-3 (PLS-3), Spanish version (1993) and within
normal limits for Performance IQ and hearing acuity. Because PLS-3 scores
were available in most of the children's records or could be readily computed
by the clinicians, they were used to define the characteristics of the study population. Normal Performance IQ was determined by a bilingual New York State-
certified school psychologist using tests that included the Stanford Binet Intelligence Scales-Fourth Edition (1986) and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales
(1984). Although scores were not consistently provided, all reported performance was within normal limits on at least one measure of nonverbal cognitive
functioning. The MLUs (in words) ranged from 2.9 to 4.5 (M = 3.7, SD =
.563) for the children in the SLI group. Children with substantial phonological
impairments were excluded.

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

29

All children in the TD group passed developmental screenings (Brigance Preschool Screen for Three- and Four-Year-Old Children, Curriculum Associates,
1985) and were attending, or about to attend, a Head Start center. Their MLUs
ranged from 3.4 to 4.8 (M = 3.9, SD = .581).
Language use

By parental report, all children spoke Spanish as a first language and continued
to use Spanish at least 75% of the time at home. According to teacher reports,
the children with SLI continued to use Spanish at least 75% of the time at the
school or during speech-language therapy sessions, but several of the TD children were beginning to use more English at school. Typical language use and
the extent of the child's exposure to Spanish and English were obtained via a
parent questionnaire. All parents reported that the children spoke Spanish almost
exclusively at home, using only occasional English, heard mostly from television. All children reportedly watched English language television programs on
a regular basis, at least 15 hours weekly.
Materials

The commercially produced Verb Tense Color Cards (1994) were employed to
elicit target forms. These materials were chosen because of their similarity to
those described by Leonard and colleagues (Leonard et al., 1987, 1988, 1992)
to elicit direct object clitic pronouns in Italian-speaking children with SLI. Each
verb is illustrated pictorially to show the action before, during, and after its
occurrence, corresponding to the future, present, and past tenses. Although specific verbs were targeted, attempts to direct children to use specific verbs introduced a degree of artificiality and unnaturalness. Consequently, we employed
pictures for which the children were likely to possess sufficient vocabulary to
describe the actions depicted and considered any verb produced to be acceptable.
The stimuli were piloted on several adult speakers from a variety of dialectal
backgrounds, and modified accordingly. Provisions were made for the few lexical items that varied: for example, "balloons" (e.g., globos, vejigas, chiras, balones), "dog" (e.g., chucho, perro), and "cake" (e.g., pastel, bizcocho, queque).
For these items, the examiner established the child's preferred use with the
prompt, "What do you call this?" while pointing to the picture. The stimuli were
presented to three adults and three typically developing children to ensure that
the intended responses were elicited. Following the practice trials, the participants were presented with 29 verbal prompts to elicit 29 instances of clitic use:
8 for lo, 7 for los, 7 for la, and 7 for las. Eighteen of the photos referred to
singular subjects and eleven referred to plural subjects in order to contrast the
use of third person singular and third person plural inflections. The photo stimuli
were administered according to the arrangement of the Verb Tense Color Cards.
Because photographs depicting singular subjects appeared prior to those with
plural subjects, the participants viewed the picture sequences in a counterbalanced order.

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

30

Procedure

Each child participated in two or three sessions (30-45 min each). In the first
session, the children interacted informally with the investigator and listened to
a story presented in Spanish. The purpose of this activity was to establish the
investigator, who was an unfamiliar adult up until that point, as a Spanish speaker.
In the next session, the investigator presented the color photographs described
previously. Three cards were presented simultaneously. The first card on the
child's left was presented with a description of the action about to take place.
The examiner informally talked about the photos, providing labels for the intended agents and recipients of the action. The children were encouraged to talk
freely about the pictures to maintain a natural dialogue about the pictured sequence. The examiner's script, including non-targeted probes, was printed on
the back of the photo cards.
Direct object clitics and verb inflections were elicited with a single prompt
(e.g., "Que hace el senor con las salchichas?" "What is the man doing with the
hotdogs?") for the intended response (e.g., "Las esta cocinando" or "cocinandolas" "He is cooking them"). Each child received two practice trials for each of
the following: present tense singular, past tense singular, present tense plural,
past tense plural, and direct object clitics. If the child provided the shortened
form ("cocinandolas" instead of "esta cocinandolas") during the practice trials,
the examiner attempted to elicit the entire form by asking the child to repeat the
intended response.
In other items, the child was shown a photo depicting a past tense action and
given the following prompt: "Que hizo el senor con las salchichas?" "What did
the man do with the hotdogs?" to elicit the following clitic and past tense form:
"Las cocino" "He cooked them" or "Las puso en el plato" "He put them on a
plate." If the child failed to produce the intended response in practice, then he
or she was asked to repeat the target phrase after the examiner. One child was
excluded for failing to produce the target imitatively; another was excluded
because /la/ could not be distinguished from /ya/ in his responses. All children
produced the target response during the practice trials. If the child gave an
irrelevant response (e.g., commenting on some other aspect of the photo) or the
response was unintelligible, the prompt was repeated once.
Scoring

A response was considered accurate if the child responded with any one of the
targeted clitics. Thus, if a child substituted lo for la or los, it was counted as
correct for the main analysis on clitic production. Clitic omissions constituted
most errors. Differences in gender agreement were noted and were analyzed
separately. Plural marking errors were not included in the analyses due to the
variability of final /s/ production across the dialects sampled (Schnitzer, 1997).
Similarly, verb inflections were counted as accurate regardless of the specific
verb employed. Present tense inflections were excluded from analysis given the
dialectal variation reported for final nasal consonants (Schnitzer, 1997). The

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

31

substitution of le for lo, la, los or las was counted as a case error because all
participants came from regions where the use of "le" for direct object clitics
was not part of the dialect (Lipski, 1994).
Language samples

Language samples were obtained from all children in an informal setting following the administration of the picture task. A standard collection of toys was
made available for each language sampling session, and included items such as
play dough, toy food, animal and people figures, and eating and cooking utensils. Samples were taken as children interacted freely with one or two peers or
a familiar adult. A mean length of utterance (MLU) in words was computed for
each participant. Orthography dictated word status, so that, both poniendoselo
and poner were counted as single words (Gutierrez-Clellen, Restrepo, Bedore,
Pena, & Anderson, 2000). Although MLU scores are not comparable across
languages and norms for Spanish-speaking children are not available, these
scores were computed because we felt they might prove useful for distinguishing the SLI and TD groups. A third play session was added for children who
failed to produce at least 50 utterances during the first sampling session. The
number of utterances ranged from 58 to 100 (M = 80) for the SLI group, and
from 76 to 100 (M = 88) for the TD group.
Reliability

Native and nonnative experimenters might have elicited different responses.
Consequently, the first author, a nonnative speaker of Spanish, administered the
picture task to two children with SLI in one session and a native Spanish-speaking bilingual speech-language pathologist who was familiar to the children administered the task in another session. The order was counterbalanced. There
were negligible differences in the children's performance, though both children
produced one or two more clitics with the nonnative speaker. The interscorer
reliability of these two experimenters was also examined. The responses from
the first two participants in the SLI group were scored separately by the raters
from the tapes. The item by item agreement was 95% for use of the clitic
pronoun, 95% for gender agreement, and 91% for verb inflections.
Reliability measurements for the language samples were obtained as follows.
The first author, a nonnative speaker of Spanish, transcribed all sessions in
person and supplemented the transcriptions with audiotaped recordings. Similar
to the previous reliability measures, the same native Spanish-speaking bilingual
clinician transcribed the first 100 audiotaped utterances from two of the children
in the SLI group. This individual was also present and interacted with the children at the time of the language sampling. Single words consisting of acknowledgments and expressions were excluded from the word count analysis (e.g.,
yea, si, mira, ya, and no). Utterances that contained a word unintelligible to
either listener were included in the MLU analysis, as this did not affect the
computation of the word count. After deleting the specified single words and
adult repetitions, agreement for MLU using a word count was 90%, based upon

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

32

159 utterances. After deleting utterances with words that were unintelligible to
either listener, adult repetitions, and single words consisting of acknowledgments and expressions, item by item agreement was 76% for 123 utterances.
Examples of disagreements were as follows: y no salia for ya no salia; mira
dos bizcocho for mira los bizcocho; un estufa for en la estufa; and ahora ella
necesita pagarlo for ahora necesita pegarlo.
RESULTS
Group comparisons

The children with SLI used clitic pronouns less frequently than children with
TD language in the picture elicitation task. The mean proportions of clitic use
for the SLI and TD groups were .65 (SD = .14) and .84 (SD = .14), respectively.
Individual subject data are summarized in Table 1. Using arc-sine transformations of the proportion data, two separate analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were
performed for the use of clitics. The first between-groups comparison yielded
significant differences, F(1, 19) = p < .05 for pronoun expression, with an effect
size of 1.325 (Cohen, 1977). A second ANOVA using a repeated measures
design, which revealed no significant differences (p > .05) according to clitic
type, F(3, 54) = 1.123, and no interaction by group, F(1, 18) = 2.85. The means
and standard deviations for each clitic pronoun appear in Table 2. A third, separate ANOVA revealed no significant differences (p > .05) between groups in
their use of third person singular, F(1, 19) = .025, and plural inflections F(1,
19) = .235 for the preterite tense. Third person singular and plural inflections
were examined only for the simple past (preterite) tense because present tense
contrasts (e.g., corta/cortan) were susceptible to final consonant omission or the
substitution of a nasalized vowel as a dialectal variation. Furthermore, for present tense verbs, children from both groups sometimes used gerunds in place of
finite constructions, (e.g., "poniendosela" for "se la estan poniendo"). A shift
from preverbal to postverbal clitic placement did not result from the children's
exposure to English. Except for one child with SLI, preverbal placement of the
clitic was most common in both groups.
Nontarget responses

Though not counted as errors, the difference in gender marking of clitics by
group was noteworthy. Children in the SLI group had a higher rate of gender
substitutions and tended to revert to the unmarked form (lo) more often (see
Table 2). A separate ANOVA revealed significant group differences for gender
agreement on la and las, F(1, 19) = 10.483, p < .05, but not for lo or los, F(1,
19) = 1.539, p < .05. Although all children in the TD group used accurate gender
agreement most of the time (93%, for lo and los and 82% for la and las),
variation was greater among the children in the LI group. Four children in the
LI group did not use la or las in any of their clitic responses, despite the use of
correct gender marking on articles (e.g., "la casa") in their language samples.
However, three children in the LI group were 100% accurate in their marking

33

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

Table 1. Subject characteristics and pronoun use
CA
(months)

MLU
(words)

PLS-3
(Rec.)

PLS-3
(Exp.)

Pronoun
(%)

Specific language impairment
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
M (SD)

58
59
64
58
59
50
51
53
57
57
56.6 (4.19)

4.54
3.29
4.40
3.71
2.90
3.71
3.76
3.57
2.94
4.20
3.70 (0.562)

62
62
58
62
70
69
76
80
82
79
70 (8.8)

75
63
54
63
67
75
79
75
64
78
69.3 (8.26)

48.1
65.5
88.8
72.4
51.7
72.4
55.1
75.8
75.8
48.2
65.4 (13.9)

Typically developing
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
M (SD)

50
57
52
58
49
57
60
60
56
53
55.2 (3.96)

4.41
3.34
3.50
4.0
4.54
4.79
4.14
3.87
3.35
3.4
3.93 (0.531)

75.0
96.5
93.1
86.2
86.2
96.5
82.7
48.2
86.2
89.6
84.0 (14.1)

Note: PLS-3 (Rec/Exp) This refers to the standard scores obtained on the receptive and
expressive portions of adaptations of the translated Spanish version of the Preschool
Language Scale.

of gender for la and las. Mean percentages correct for gender agreement by
children with SLI were 88 (SD = 9) for lo and los and 37 (SD = 3.9) for la and
las. The means and standard deviations for both groups appear in Table 3.
Although the children generally produced the person and tense form that was
elicited with the verbal prompt, this was not always the case. At times, children
used nontense verbs in the form of gerunds and infinitives. Occasionally, invalid
responses containing no verbs were produced, though this was relatively rare
(3% for the SLI group and 1% for the TD group). The percentages for targeted
and nontargeted responses by group are summarized in Table 4. Although children in the SLI group used more infinitives when tense marking was obligatory
and used fewer of the more complex reflexive gerunds, these differences were
not significantly different.
During the elicited production task, a unique cluster of response patterns dis-

34

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

Table 2. Mean percentages and standard
deviations for the use of individual clitics
by group
Specific language
impairment

Typical
development

Clitic

M

(SD)

n

M

(SD)

n

Lo
La
Los
Las
Total

65.0
59.9
68.0
67.6
65.4

(22.7)
(18.8)
(17.5)
(19.3)
(13.9)

8
7
7
7
29

77.5
87.1
84.0
91.4
84.0

(16.5)
(17.1)
(26.5)
(9.9)
(14.1)

8
7
7
7
29

Table 3. Means and standard deviations for the
percentage of correct gender agreement by group
Specific
language
impairment

Typical
development

Gender

M (SD)

n

M (SD)

n

Masc. (lo/los)
Fem. (la/las)

.88 (.09)
.37 (.39)

15
14

.85 (.09)
.83 (.17)

15
14

Table 4. Total numbers and percentages of types of verb responses
produced in the elicited production task by group
Targeted 3rd person verb inflections

SLI
TD

Present 3rd
sing.
("corta")

Pres. 3rd
plur.
("cortan")

Past 3rd
sing.
("corto")

Past 3rd
plur.
("cortaron")

63 (22%)
54 (19%)

5 (2%)
30 (10%)

82 (28%)
81 (28%)

52 (18%)
53 (18%)

Non-finite verb constructions by group

SLI
TD

Simple
gerunds
("poniendo[lo]")

Reflexive
gerunds
("poniendose[lo]")

Infinitives
("poner[lo]")

37 (13%)
42 (14%)

7 (2%)
22 (8%)

36 (12%)
7 (2%)

Individual
responses
8 (3%)
1 (1%)

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

35

tinguished individuals in the SLI group from their SLI and TD peers. Specifically, one child did not use plural inflections in any of his responses. Another
child used postverbal clitics attached only to infinitives in almost all responses.
Moreover, the use of infinitive forms (e.g., "comer") without clitics or other
inflected verbs was noted only among children in the SLI group. An even more
unusual pattern than omission or substitution involved the use of clitic reduplication by one child from the SLI group (e.g., "se lo esta poniendolo").
Data from the language samples suggest that both groups did not perform
similarly in clitic pronoun use, gender agreement, and grammatical complexity.
The mean proportions of direct object clitics used in the language samples
ranged from .01 to .16 for the children in the SLI group (M = .085, SD = .049)
and from .03 to .22 for children in the TD group (M = .123, SD = .061). Although the results of an ANOVA revealed no statistical group differences, F(1,
19) = 2.228, p = .153, it was not always possible to determine whether the
context was obligatory. Clitic pronoun use is discourse driven. However, the
utterance that preceded a child's utterance was not always audible. The microphone was placed closest to the child targeted for sampling, and the examiner
transcribed only one child's utterances at a time. For similar reasons, the noun
referent for direct object clitics was not always apparent. Consequently, the
accuracy of gender marking for each clitic could not be calculated from the
language samples. Notably, among those four children in the SLI group who
failed to use either la or las during the elicited production task, only one used
la as a clitic pronoun in the sample. The remaining three were consistent in the
exclusive use of lo. Although both groups were comparable in their use of early
developing tenses (e.g., present indicative, preterite, simple future, imperfect),
the verb repertoires of children in the TD group included greater variety and
more instances of later developing tense forms (e.g., progressive, present and
past subjunctive). Examples of the verb tenses that were used appear in Table
5. Although children in both groups produced overregularized forms (e.g., "yo
sabo leer" for "yo se leer"), children in the SLI group also produced verbs with
vowel stem change errors (e.g., "yo tieno" for "yo tengo").
DISCUSSION

Incipient bilingual Spanish-speaking preschool children with and without language impairment were measured using an elicited production task for clitic
pronouns serving as direct objects. These data provide converging evidence for
the challenging nature of clitic pronoun production among speakers of highly
inflected languages with SLI, despite differing linguistic environments (i.e., Italian speakers in Italy; Leonard et al., 1992; Spanish speakers in Spain, Bosch &
Serra, 1997; and Spanish speakers exposed to English in the United States).
Consistent with the findings from other languages, the omission of clitics was
the most common error type, though the rates varied across populations. Additionally, gender agreement turned out to be more problematic. Although not the
primary focus of this investigation, there were no group differences in the use
of third person singular and plural verb inflections for the simple past tense
when both inflections were stressed.

36

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

Table 5. Verb tenses exhibited in language sample data by group
Specific language impairment
Present indicative
Simple past (preterite)
Simple future (ir + infinitive)
Progressive (estar + gerund)
Imperfect (-aba, -ia)
Pluperfect (haber + participle)
Present subjunctive
Past subjunctive
Typical development
Present indicative
Simple past (preterite)
Simple future (ir + infinitive)
Progressive (estar + gerund)
Imperfect (-aba, -ia)
Pluperfect (haber + participle)
Present subjunctive
Past subjunctive

++++++++++
++++++++++
++++++++
+++++
+++++
+
+
0
++++++++++
+++++++++
++++++++++
+++++++++
+++++
+
+++++
+

Similar to reports for Spanish (Bosch & Serra, 1997) and for Italian-speaking
children with SLI (Leonard et al., 1992), the incipient bilingual Spanish speakers
with SLI in the present study omitted clitic pronouns at a higher rate (36%) than
their age-matched peers (15%). However, the reported rates of omission were
lower (i.e., 26%) for the Spanish speakers (Bosch & Serra, 1997) and higher (i.e.,
75%) for the Italian speakers (Leonard et al., 1992). Several factors may account
for these discrepancies, including the ages of the children, the severity of the
language impairment, their phonological disorder status, and the tasks employed.
Bosch and Serra (1997) tested children (mean age = 7;6, mean MLU = 4.7)
in Spain. The experimental task involved scripted conversational prompts (e.g.,
family, school, holidays, TV, cartoons, etc.) designed to elicit clitic pronouns in
obligatory contexts. The lower rates of omission for these Spanish speakers may
be attributed to their advanced age, their phonological impairments, and the
opportunity for avoiding difficult verb-clitic pronoun combinations in unstructured conversation. The rates of omission were higher for the Italian children.
These children were even older and were more severely impaired. Their MLUs
ranged from 1.9 to 4.3 (M = 2.85, SD = 1.69) compared to 2.9 to 4.5 (M = 3.7,
SD = .563) for the present group. Moreover, all children with SLI in the present
study produced clitic pronouns in speech samples and in practice trials.
Similar to the Italian data, there were no differences according to clitic type.
The children's difficulty with gender agreement was more noteworthy. Leonard
et al. (1988) found that when Italian-speaking children produced clitics, gender
and number markings were usually accurate. However, the present group of
children with SLI had great difficulty with gender agreement for la and las.
Difficulties with number and gender marking for direct object clitics were also
reported for the school-aged children with SLI in Spain (Bosch & Serra, 1997)

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

37

when compared to an age-matched group, but not when compared to younger,
MLU-matched controls.
The present data suggest that incipient bilingual Spanish speakers with SLI
do not experience difficulty with third person singular versus plural verb inflections in instances where both inflections are stressed. The Italian-speaking children with SLI had little difficulty with noun plural inflections, but they substituted third person singular inflections for third person plural inflections. Because
third person plural inflections occurred in syllables of relatively weaker stress,
Leonard et al. (1992) concluded that this accounted for the children's difficulties. The results from the present study support their conclusions. However, one
limitation of the present analysis is the exclusion of present tense contrasts,
despite good reasons for using them. Present tense forms appear earliest, and
the use of the third person singular precedes that of the plural. Primary word
stress falls on the verb stem (e.g., "habla"/"hablan"), leaving both inflections
unstressed. The contrast between -a and -an may be more difficult for young
children, particularly children with SLI.
One possible explanation for the present findings may stem from language
loss; however, this is not viable. If language loss were responsible for increased
clitic omissions and reduced gender marking on clitics, then children who were
using more English should have exhibited higher rates of omission and gender
substitution; just the opposite occurred. In the language samples, the proportion
of English words used ranged from 0 to .03 (M = .01, SD = .009) among individual children in the SLI group and from 0 to .11 (M = .05, SD = .049) among
individual children in the TD group. Moreover, the type of clitic omission associated with increased contact with English involved other clitic types, specifically, the impersonal (e.g., "ahi se come bien") and reflexive (e.g., "se corto el
dedo") clitics (Silva-Corvalan, 1994). Although increased gender-marking errors
are reported in the Spanish of bilinguals as a result of increased contact with
English (Restrepo & Gutierrez-McClellan, 2001), these errors have been linked
to gender marking on articles used as noun modifiers. However, in the present
study, gender-marking errors for articles modifying nouns were extremely rare
(only one instance was noted) among all children in the language samples. A
more plausible explanation for gender-marking errors derives from the acquisition data and processing limitations. Because use of the pronoun lo precedes the
use of los, la, and las in acquisition, children who have SLI may remain at this
earlier stage of development for a protracted period. Moreover, this would be
consistent with the reported lack of difference between Spanish speakers in
Spain with SLI and younger MLU controls for gender marking on clitics
(Bosch & Serra, 1997).
A language sample collected during the course of the investigation revealed
no significant group differences in the mean length of responses. Although other
investigators have reported differences, the obtained contrasts were likely the
result of using older and more severely impaired children. In previous reports
of younger typically developing Spanish-speaking children, a steady pattern of
increase in MLU from ages 2;0 to 3;11 was not demonstrated (Anderson, 1998).
Moreover, MLU comparisons of other minority language groups have failed to
obtain significant differences between preschool children with and without SLI

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

38

(Seymour, Bland-Stewart, & Green, 1998). Additional reasons for failing to
find group differences for MLU are attributed to the sampling procedures. For
pragmatic reasons, children at the Head Start centers were recorded as they
interacted informally with their peers, using techniques similar to those employed by Craig and Washington (1994). This method was chosen because there
were concerns that the children might not respond as equal communication partners with an unfamiliar adult, especially one from another linguistic/cultural
background. However, it was apparent that some children were less verbal in
the presence of more outgoing peers.
In the present task, children produced direct object clitics that required accurate case selection, gender, and number marking for a noun produced in an
antecedent clause by another speaker. In addition to requiring complex morphological operations, the use of direct object clitics is a discourse driven phenomenon, requiring attention to spoken language, memory for the noun referent, and
use of the morpheme in a verb phrase. Because direct object clitic pronouns are
typically realized as weak syllables in prosodically challenging positions within
the phrase, the retrieval of such information in the initial position of an utterance
is especially compromised. As a result, children omit direct object clitic pronouns in languages such as Italian and Spanish, and no group differences exist
between children with SLI and MLU matched controls on the omission of postverbal clitics among Italian speakers (Leonard & Bortolini, 1998) or the omission of direct object pronouns by English speakers with SLI (Leonard et al.,
1987). Although such an assumption appears to be quite reasonable, on-line data
are critical to verify such proposals.
All children in the present study produced clitic pronouns variably. Historically, variable production has been interpreted as a limitation of performance
rather than competence (Bishop, 1994). Variable performance has been further
interpreted as evidence of an intact underlying representation (Valian, Hoefner,
& Aubry, 1996). Accurate production may be constrained by lexical, phonetic,
or prosodic factors. However, variable production may reflect a less than fully
specified representation that leads to a default form. An alternative view of
competence and representation involves varying constraint hierarchies leading
to different outputs. To better understand the representation of clitic pronouns,
children with SLI who do not produce clitic pronouns in elicited imitation need
to be studied and compared to children with variable production. Given that
prosody provides an organizing framework for production (Peters, 1997) and
that children's syllable omissions are often accompanied by a lengthening of the
preceding segment (Carter, 1998), acoustic analyses might illuminate production
differences that reflect differences in underlying representations.
The present results add to the description of morphological deficits of incipient bilingual children with SLI. We chose to match on chronological age rather
than language level because we were asking whether 4-year-old incipient bilingual children differed from typically developing peers on the use of clitic pronouns. However, there is a need for additional normative data that would permit
the identification of language-matched controls. Preliminary evidence suggests
that clitic omission and a shift from preverbal to postverbal placement do not
occur in the speech of young Spanish/English bilinguals, at least during the

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

39

incipient stage. However, the later effects of acquiring English on the development of Spanish morphology in young children are largely unknown. Although
children might perform similarly to adults learning English as a second language
(Silva-Corvalan, 1994), their acquisition of Spanish as a first language is incomplete. Ultimately, the differentiation of Spanish-speaking children with language
disorders and those experiencing language attrition is crucial. The patterns of
first language attrition among typically developing children may not approximate an earlier developmental level. Answers to these questions will yield important information concerning typical bilingual language acquisition and will
be crucial to the identification of young incipient bilingual children with SLI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge Ricardo Otheguy, for providing helpful comments
concerning the stimuli and David Rindskopf for his assistance in the data analysis. We
are grateful for the assistance of the many bilingual clinicians involved in the piloting of
the stimuli and recruitment of participants, and thank Sandra Mosquera, who also performed the reliability measurements. A number of agencies (e.g., Bilinguals Inc., Village
Child Development Center, and Long Island Head Start) provided invaluable support.
We particularly extend our appreciation to Maria Morales, Family Advocate at the Central Islip Head Start Center, who served as liaison between the first author and the parents
of the participants. Finally, we extend our deepest gratitude to the children and families
for their participation. Support was provided by a PSC-CUNY Research Grant awarded
to the second author (663455, Prosodic Factors in Lexical Learning, 1992).

REFERENCES
Aguado, G. (1997). El desarrollo de la morfosintaxis en el nino. Manual de evaluacion del T.S.A.
Madrid: CEPE.
Anderson, R. T. (1995). Spanish morphological and syntactic development. In H. Kayser (Ed.),
Bilingual speech-language pathology. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing.
Anderson, R. T. (1998). The development of grammatical case distinctions in the use of personal
pronouns by Spanish-speaking preschoolers. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 394-406.
Bernstein, D. K. (1994). Assessing children with limited English proficiency: Current perspectives.
In K. G. Butler (Ed.), Cross-cultural perspectives in language assessment and intervention
(pp. 87-92). Gaithersberg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1994). Grammatical errors in specific language impairment: Competence or
performance limitations? Applied Psycholinguistics, 15, 507-550.
Bortolini, U., Caselli, C., & Leonard, L. (1997). Grammatical deficits in Italian-speaking children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40, 809-820.
Bosch, L., & Serra, M. (1997). Grammatical morphology deficits of Spanish-speaking children with
specific language impairment. Amsterdam Series in Child Language Development, 6, 33-46.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Butler, K. G. (Ed.). (1994). Cross-cultural perspectives in language assessment and intervention.
Gaithersberg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Camacho, J., Paredes, L., & Sanchez, L. (1997). Null objects in bilingual Andean Spanish. Proceedings, Boston University Conference on Language Development, 1, 56-66.
Campos, H. (1986). Indefinite object drop. Linguistic Inquiry, 17, 354-359.
Carter, A. (1998). More than meets the ear: Rethinking weak syllable omissions. Paper presented at
the Boston University Conference on Language Development, Boston.

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

40

Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Cohen, S. W. (1980). Spanish verb tenses in the speech repertoire of Spanish-speaking children.
Bilingual education publications. Oakland, CA: B.A.B.E.L.
Craig, H., & Washington, J. (1994). The complex syntax skills of poor, urban, African-American
preschoolers at school entry. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, 25,
181-190.
Curriculum Associates. (1985). Brigance Screening for Three- and Four-Year-Old Preschoolers.
North Billerica, MA: Author.
Diebold, A. R. (1964). Incipient bilingualism. In D. Hymes (Ed.), Language in culture and society:
A reader in linguistics and anthropology. New York: Harper & Row.
Ezeizabarrena, M. J., & Unibertsitatea, E. H. (1997). Morfemas de concordancia con el sujeto y con
los objetos en el castellano infantil. In A. T. Perez-Leroux & W. R. Glass (Eds.) Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition of Spanish: Vol. 1. Developing grammars. Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla Press.
Garcia, E. E. (1983). Early childhood bilingualism with special reference to the Mexican American
child. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V., Restrepo, A., Bedore, L., Pena, E., & Anderson, R. (2000). Language sample
analysis in Spanish-speaking children: Methodological considerations. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in the Schools, 31, 88-89.
Hernandez-Pina, F. (1984). Teorias Psico-sociolinguisticas y su aplicacion a la adquisicion del
espanol como lengua materna. Madrid: Siglo XXI Editores.
Kayser, H. G. (1995). Bilingual speech-language pathology. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing.
Kvaal, J., Shipstead-Cox, N., Nevitt, S., Hodson, B., & Kauner, P. (1988). The acquisition of ten
Spanish morphemes by Spanish-speaking children. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services
in the Schools, 24, 2-9.
Langdon, H. W., with Cheng, L. I. (1992). Hispanic children and adults with communication disorders: Assessment and intervention. Gaithersberg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L. B., & Bortolini, U. (1998). Grammatical morphology and the role of weak syllables in
the speech of Italian-speaking children with specific language impairment. Journal of SpeechLanguage and Hearing Research, 41, 1363-1374.
Leonard, L. B., Bortolini, U., Caselli, M. C., McGregor, K. K., & Sabbadini, L. (1992). Morphological deficits in children with specific language impairment: The status of features in the
underlying grammar. Language Acquisition, 2, 151-179.
Leonard, L. B., Sabbadini, L., Leonard, J. S., & Volterra, V. (1987). Specific language impairment
in children: A cross-linguistic study. Brain and Language, 32, 233-252.
Leonard, L. B., Sabbadini, L., Volterra, V., & Leonard, J. S. (1988). Some influences on the grammar
of English- and Italian-speaking children with specific language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics, 9, 39-57.
Leonard, L., & Weiss, A. (1994). Application of non-standard assessment procedures to diverse
linguistic populations. In K. G. Butler (Ed.), Cross-cultural perspectives in language assessment and intervention (pp. 120-130). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Lipski, J. M. (1994). Latin American Spanish. New York: Longman.
Lopez-Ornat, S. (1997). What lies in between a pre-grammatical and grammatical representation?
Evidence on nominal and verbal verb form-function mappings in Spanish from 1;7 to 2;1.
In A. T. Perez-Leroux & W. R. Glass (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition
of Spanish: Vol 1. Developing grammars. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Lopez-Ornat, S., Fernandez, A., Gallo, P., & Mariscal, S. (1994). La adquisicion de la lengua
espanola. Madrid: Siglo XXI Editores.
Merino, B. (1983). Language development in normal and language handicapped Spanish-speaking
children. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 5, 379-400.
Merino, B. (1992). Acquisition of syntactic and phonological features in Spanish. In H. Langdon,
with L. R. Cheng (Eds.), Hispanic children and adults with communication disorders. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Perez-Leroux, A. T., & Glass, W. R. (Eds.). (1997). Comtemporary perspectives on the acquisition
of Spanish: Vol. 1. Developing grammars. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Applied Psycholinguistics 23:1
Jacobson & Schwartz: Morphology in bilingual children with SLI

41

Perez-Pereira, M. (1991). The acquisition of gender: What Spanish children tell us. Journal of Child
Language, 18, 571-590.
Perez-Pereira, M. (1999). Deixis, personal reference, and the use of pronouns by blind children.
Journal of Child Language, 26, 655-680.
Peters, A. (1997). Language typology, prosody, and the acquisition of morphemes. In D. Slobin
(Ed.), The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition: Vol. 5. Expanding the contexts.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Preschool Language Scale-3, Spanish edition. (1993). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Pueyo, F. (1992). El sistema de cliticos en ninos bilingues de Los Angeles: transferencia linguistica
y motivacion social. In H. Urrutia Cardenas & C. Silva-Corvalan (Eds.), Bilinguismo y adquisicion del espanol. Bilbao, Spain: Instituto Horizonte, SL.
Restrepo, M. (1998). Identifiers of predominantly Spanish-speaking children with language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1398-1411.
Restrepo, M. A., Chasteen, A., Bustelo, W., & Matute, C. (1996). Article use in Spanish-speaking
children with NL and LI. Paper presented at the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association Convention, Seattle, WA.
Restrepo, M. A., & Gutierrez-McClellan, V. F. (2001). Article use in Spanish-speaking children
with SLI. Journal of Child Language, 28, 433-452.
Restrepo, M. A., & Kruth, K. (1998). Grammatical characteristics of a Spanish/English child with
specific language impairment. Paper presented at the Symposium on Child Language Disorders, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Romaine, S. (1995). Bilingualism (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Schnitzer, M. L. (1997). Fonologia contrastiva: Espanol-ingles/Spanish-English contrastive phonology. San Juan, PR: Piedras Press.
Seymour, H. N., Bland-Stewart, L., & Green, L. J. (1998). Difference versus deficit in child African
American English. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, 29, 96-108.
Shum, G., Conde, A., & Diaz, C. (1992). Pautas de adquisicion y uso del pronombre personal en
la lengua espanola. Un estudio longitudinal. Estudios de Psicologia, 48, 67-86.
Silva-Corvalan, C. (1994). Language contact and change: Spanish in Los Angeles. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Stanford Binet Intelligence Scales. (1986). Itasca, IL: The Riverside Publishing Company.
Valian, V., Hoeffner, J., & Aubry, S. (1996). Young children's imitation of sentence subjects: evidence of processing limitations. Developmental Psychology, 32, 153-164.
Verb Tense Color Cards. (1994). Oxon, UK: Winslow Press.
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales. (1984). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

