LAN GUAGE AND SPEECH, 2002, 45 (3), 207 - 228

207

Constraints of Lexical Stress
on Lexical A ccess in English:
Evidence from Native
and Non-native Listeners*
Nicole Cooper1, Anne Cutler1,
and Roger Wales2
1Max

Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
University

2LaTrobe

Key words

Abstract

Four cross-modal priming experiments and two forced-choice identification
experiments investigated the use of suprasegmental cues to stress in the
recognition of spoken English words, by native (English-speaking) and nonL2 listening
native (D utch) listeners. Previous results had indicated that suprasegmental
information was exploited in lexical access by D utch but not by English
lexical access
listeners. For both listener groups, recognition of visually presented target
words was faster, in comparison to a control condition, after stress-matching
stress
spoken primes, either monosyllabic (mus- from MUsic / muSEum) or bisyllabic (admi- from ADmiral / admiRAtion). For native listeners, the effect of
word recognition
stress-mismatching bisyllabic primes was not different from that of control
primes, but mismatching monosyllabic primes produced partial facilitation. For non-native
listeners, both bisyllabic and monosyllabic stress-mismatching primes produced partial facilitation. N ative English listeners thus can exploit suprasegmental information in spoken-word
recognition, but information from two syllables is used more effectively than information from
one syllable. Dutch listeners are less proficient at using suprasegmental information in English than
in their native language, but, as in their native language, use mono- and bisyllabic information to
an equal extent. In forced-choice identification, D utch listeners outperformed native listeners at
correctly assigning a monosyllabic fragment (e.g., mus-) to one of two words differing in stress.
English

* Acknowledgments: This research was supported by a research studentship from the Max Planck
Society to the first author, support from the D epartment of Psychology, U niversity of
M elbourne, and the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, LaTrobe University, to the
second author, and a visiting stipend from the M ax Planck Society to the third author. We
are grateful to Sabine Zerbian for assistance with the materials construction and pretest for
Experiments 1a and 1b, to M ichael D unn for recording the materials, to Peter K remer and
Ben Williams for assistance with Experiment 2a, to Alex Wearing and Chris Davis for hospitality at M elbourne U niversity during the testing for Experiment 1a, and to Sally Andrews
for hospitality at the University of N ew South Wales during testing for Experiments 2a
and 3a. We further thank Peter Kremer for statistical advice, and James M cQueen, Vincent
van H euven and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on the text.
Address for correspondence: Anne Cutler, M ax Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
P.O. Box 310, 6500 AH N ijmegen, The N etherlands; phone: + 31 24 3521377;
Fax: + 31 24 3521213; e-mail: < anne.cutler@mpi.nl> .
Language and Speech

208

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

1 Introduction
An English octopus is weaker in the middle than a D utch octopus. The creature's name
is spelled identically in the two languages, and in citation form is pronounced similarly
in that in both languages stress falls on the initial syllable; however, in English the vowel
in the middle syllable is the reduced vowel schwa, while in D utch the vowel in the middle
syllable is full.
This is one of the many manifestations of a systematic prosodic difference between
English and D utch. An unstressed syllable directly adjacent to a stressed syllable nearly
always contains a reduced vowel in English, but quite often contains a full vowel in
D utch. There are many cognates of the octopus type; English cigar and D utch sigaar
[ siaar], English cobra and D utch cobra [ kobra], English banana and D utch banaan
[ banan]-- the list could be extended for several pages.
Formally, there are few other differences in the word prosody of the two languages.
Both languages have stress rhythm; in both there is an opposition between strong syllables (with full vowels) and weak syllables (with reduced vowels); in both languages stress
placement is not in a fixed position within the word but is in large part determined by
syllable weight (Booij, 1995; Trommelen & Zonneveld, 1999). The most common pattern
within the vocabulary of both languages is that stress tends to fall on initial syllables
(Cutler & Carter, 1987; Schreuder & Baayen, 1994). The rules for stress placement listed
by Trommelen and Zonneveld (1999) for the two languages are identical except for a
single detail of what counts as a heavy syllable (in D utch a heavy syllable is any closed
syllable, in English it is a closed syllable or a syllable with a long vowel).
In any language with variable lexical stress, cues to stress are potentially available
for use in spoken-word recognition. The process of recognizing words in speech involves
simultaneous activation of multiple word candidates (Connine, Blasko, & Wang, 1994;
Connine, Titone, D eelman, & Blasko, 1997; M arslen-Wilson, 1990; Zwitserlood, 1989)
and subsequent competition between the concurrently active candidates (G oldinger,
Luce, & Pisoni, 1989; M cQueen, N orris, & Cutler, 1994). Incoming information is
exploited to distinguish between the competitors as rapidly as possible (M arslen-Wilson
& Warren, 1994; M cQueen, N orris, & Cutler, 1999; Soto-Faraco, Sebastian-G alles, &
Cutler, 2001). This incoming information potentially includes information about stress
pattern. Thus in D utch, the words octopus and oktober ( `October') each begin with the
same first four phonemes, but in OCtopus stress falls on the first syllable while in okTOber
it falls on the second (henceforth, upper case signals stress placement). This means that
the first syllable of octopus will be somewhat longer, may be somewhat louder, and will
exhibit greater pitch movement than the first syllable of oktober (with the reverse being
the case for the second syllables). If listeners can use these aspects of suprasegmental
structure to distinguish one word fro m another, then they could tell the difference
between octopus and oktober before the arrival of distinctive segmental information
(the fifth phoneme).
Recent investigations of the use of stress in lexical activation and recognition have
shown that listeners can indeed use such suprasegmental cues. Soto-Faraco et al. (2001)
presented listeners, who were native speakers of Castilian Spanish, with spoken sentences
(of a non-constraining type such as He did not know how to write the word ... ) ending
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

209

with a word fragment which fully matched one of two potential words and differed from
the other in just a single phoneme or in stress pattern. For instance, the fragment prinCI(stressed on the second syllable) matches the first two syllables of the Spanish word
prinCIpio `beginning'and differs only in stress from the first two syllables of the Spanish
word PRINcipe `prince'. Likewise, the fragment sardi- matches sardina `sardine' but
mismatches sardana (a type of dance) in a single vowel, and the fragment bofe- fully
matches bofeton `smack' but mismatches boletin `bulletin' in a single consonant.
At the offset of the word fragment listeners saw a string of letters on a screen and
were asked to make a lexical decision about this visually presented string (see Zwitserlood,
1996, for a review of this kind of cross-modal priming task). Listeners' responses were
significantly faster after fragments which matched the visually presented word (e.g., to
SAR D IN A after sardi-, to PRIN CIPIO after prinCI-, etc.) than after control fragments
(e.g., manti-); responses after fragments which minimally mismatched and favored
another word (e.g., to SAR D IN A after sarda-, to PR IN CIPIO after PRINci-, etc.)
were, crucially, significantly slower than responses after the same control fragments.
This inhibition by mismatching information indicated, Soto-Faraco et al. argued, that
the listeners had exploited the distinctive information rapidly to favor the matched
competitor, which was thus enabled to compete more effectively and actually cause
significant reduction in activation of its mismatched rival.
Soto-Faraco et al. found that suprasegmental cues to stress and segmental (vocalic
or consonantal) information were used in exactly the same way: the pattern of results
in the cross-modal fragment priming task was the same irrespective of the type of
mismatching information which served to distinguish between two words.
Stress in Castilian Spanish does not involve an opposition between strong syllables with full vowels and weak syllables with reduced vowels; there is no vowel reduction
in this language. The only correlates of stress are the suprasegmental features of relative duration, amplitude and pitch movement. In languages which allow vowel reduction,
like English and D utch, stress contrasts however often also involve segmental differences
in that vowels in unstressed syllables tend to be reduced. Segmental information is
arguably available earlier than suprasegmental information -- it is known that cues
within a vowel to the nature of the following consonant can, for instance, be effectively
exploited in lexical recognition (M arslen-Wilson & Warren, 1994; M cQueen et al., 1999;
Whalen, 1991). Likewise, transitional information in a consonant can provide information about a following vowel (Strange, 1989). Where segmental information --whether
or not correlated with stress differences -- distinguishes words more rapidly than suprasegmental infor mation, there may be little incentive for listeners to attend to the
suprasegmental features.
In D utch, nevertheless, listeners do make use of suprasegmental cues to stress in
the word recognition process. For example, Cutler and Van D onselaar (2001) showed
that stress information can remove competition from a word which it mismatches. Their
experiment used the word-spotting task, in which listeners monitor short nonsense
strings for the presence of an embedded real word. M cQueen, N orris, and Cutler (1994)
had shown that this task could reveal competition effects; the English word mess was
detected more rapidly in the nonsense context nemes (which activates no strong competitor)
than in domes (which activates domestic, competition from which slows the recognition
Language and Speech

210

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

of mess). Cutler and Van D onselaar replicated this result in Dutch: zee `sea' was detected
more rapidly in luzee (activating no dominant competitor) than in muzee (which activates the D utch word museum; note that the fricative is not voiced in either zee or
museum). H owever, when muzee was pronounced with stress on the first syllable MUzee,
it no longer matched muSEum and there was no significant inhibition of the detection
of zee.
In a subsequent experiment using the cross-modal fragment priming task, Cutler
and Van D onselaar found that fragments like muZEE did indeed facilitate recognition
of MUSEUM more effectively than stress-mismatching fragments (MUzee). But note that
there is no D utch word beginning MUzee-. Thus the experiment of Cutler and Van
D onselaar could not show the competition-induced inhibition which Soto-Faraco et al.
had produced by manipulating a minimal mismatch which could decide between two
otherwise identical competitors. Van D onselaar, Koster, and Cutler (under revision )
therefore replicated the Soto-Faraco et al. stress experiment in D utch, presenting fragments like octo- which matched one of either OCtopus or okTOber and mismatched the
other only in stress placement. They found the same result as Soto-Faraco et al. had
observed: Compared with the case when the visual lexical decision was preceded by a control
prime, responses preceded by a matching prime were significantly facilitated while responses
preceded by a mismatching prime were slowed. Again, listeners were able to use the stress
information to speed the victory of one of two competitors for lexical recognition.
Supporting evidence has also been provided by experiments in D utch with other
tasks, not involving on-line inter-word competition. In a study by Van H euven (1988),
truncated words were presented in sentence context and listeners were given a forced
choice between two alternatives; their success rate at correctly assigning a syllable to one
of two words in which it was respectively stressed versus unstressed (e.g., si- to SIlo vs.
siGAAR) was high. In the same study, reconstruction of partially masked words in
shadowing produced an even higher success rate. Experiments on the perception of
mis-stressed words (using gating: van H euven, 1985; van Leyden & van H euven, 1996;
or a semantic judgment task: Cutler & Koster, 2000; Koster & Cutler, 1997) have shown
that mis-stressing harms word recognition in D utch, and at least in Koster and Cutler's
(1997) study the effects of mis-stressing were of similar magnitude to the effects of
segmental mispronunciation.
As we observed above, D utch and English are prosodically very similar. In marked
contrast to the case with D utch, however, it has proved very difficult to find any evidence
that English listeners make use of suprasegmental cues to stress in word recognition. For
instance, mis-stressing in English has little effect on word recognition: Small, Simon,
and G oldberg (1988) found that mis-stressing did not inhibit word recognition if it effectively created the target word's stress pair (e.g., INsert pronounced as inSERT or vice versa),
though recognition was significantly inhibited if the mis-stressing created a nonword
(e.g., chemist pronounced cheMIST, or polite pronounced POlite). Similarly, Bond and
Small (1983) found that word recognition in shadowing was achieved despite mis-stressing
as long as the mis-stressing did not result in an alteration of vowel quality; Slowiaczek
(1990) found the same for word identification in noise. Cutler and Clifton (1984) found
that shifting stress without altering vowel quality had a much smaller adverse effect on
recognition than stress shifts which changed full vowels to reduced or vice versa.
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

211

All these results suggest that segmental information outweighs suprasegmental
information in lexical activation in English. Other evidence strengthens this conclusion. For instance, Slowiaczek (1991) presented listeners with a sentence context and a
stress pattern (in the form of a noise-modulated transformation of a word's waveform,
which preserved the word's amplitude envelope but obliterated formant and other spectral information), and asked them to judge a target word for acceptability; she found
that the stress pattern information was often ignored, in that listeners responded yes to
words which were semantically acceptable in the context but did not have the target stress
pattern. A cross-splicing study by Fear, Cutler, and Butterfield (1995) confirmed that
listeners pay more attention to the distinction between full and reduced vowels than to
stress distinctions among full syllables. Listeners in this study heard tokens of words such
as audience, auditorium, audition, addition, in which the initial vowels had been exchanged
between words; they rated cross-splicings among any of the first three of these as
insignificantly different from the original, unspliced tokens. Lower ratings were received
only by cross-splicings involving an exchange between the initial vowel of addition
(which is reduced) and the initial vowel of any of the other three words. Especially the
vowels in stressed syllables seem to be important to listeners. Bond (1981) compared the
disruptive effects on word recognition of several types of segmental distortion; most disruptive was distortion of vowels in stressed syllables. Likewise, M attys and Samuel (1997)
showed that mispronunciations in stressed syllables inhibited recognition of phantom
words resulting from combination of dichotically presented input; a target word generator was likely to be erroneously detected where generutor in one ear was paired with
plimozakor in the other, but not with ginerator and plemozukor.
The only priming study addressing stress effects in English involved not fragment
priming but associate priming, and in minimal stress pairs: for example FORbear versus
forBEAR, or trusty versus trustee. Such pairs are rare (in nearly all stress languages in
fact) but a few do exist in English. Cutler (1986) found, using cross-modal associate
priming, that presentation of either of the two members of such a pair activated words
associated to both of them. Listeners heard sentences which were neutral prior to the
occurrence of the critical pair, for example: The person that she was hurrying to see was
the trusty / trustee ... , and made lexical decisions about words presented visually coincident with offset of the critical word, that is, the member of the minimal stress pair,
in the sentence. Cutler found that whichever member of the stress pair had been heard,
listeners'responses to associates of both members of the pair were facilitated in comparison to controls. Cutler argued that the undoubted suprasegmental differences between,
for instance, FORbear and forBEAR were ineffective in constraining lexical activation,
so that for English listeners forbear was effectively a homophone.
This aggregate body of evidence could mean that English listeners make very little
or no use of suprasegmental stress cues in lexical access, while D utch listeners do make
use of such cues; in other words, despite the strong prosodic similarities between the two
languages, their listeners process them differently. Alternatively, it could be that the
D utch evidence from priming techniques which tap activation and show competition,
facilitation and inhibition effects is simply not paralleled by evidence fro m English
because most of the experiments in English have used less sensitive tasks. For instance,
Cutler's (1986) experiment with minimal stress pairs was of very limited power due to
the fact that so few such pairs exist. An attempted replication of that experiment in
Language and Speech

212

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

D utch (Jongenburger, 1996) failed to produce any priming effects at all, despite the
clear evidence from other studies of facilitatory effects of stress match in that language.
Van Donselaar et al. (under revision) reported, besides their identity-priming experiments
with fragment primes (e.g., octo- -OCTOPU S), a further study using fragment primes
for associates of the truncated words (e.g., para- from paradijs, `paradise' as a prime for
H EM EL `heaven'). The effects that they observed in associate priming were much
weaker than the effects in identity priming, and they argued that while identity priming
can provide a window on the initial stages of lexical activation and competition, associate priming effects may be limited to associates of word forms which have proven
successful in the competition process.
A direct comparison of data for English with the findings of Soto-Faraco et al.
for Spanish or of Van D onselaar et al. for D utch cannot be made, since fragment
priming experiments of the sort they conducted have not been undertaken in English.
There is very good reason for this: D irectly analogous experiments in English are impossible. This is because of the strong tendency in English for unstressed syllables adjacent
to stressed syllables to contain reduced vowels. Thus there are effectively no such pairs
in English as octopus/ oktober in D utch.
This does not however rule out partially comparable experiments. For instance,
what is possible in English is to contrast pairs in which the stress placement contrast
does not involve primary stress on the first syllable versus primary stress on the second
syllable, but another placement contrast. In fact Soto-Faraco et al.'s stress experiment
included some pairs contrasting primary stress on second versus third syllables (e.g.,
coMEdia `comedy' vs. comeDOR `dining room'), and so did Van Donselaar et al.'s Dutch
fragment priming experiments (e.g., paRAde `parade' vs. paraDIJS `paradise'). These
are again not possible to match exactly with English examples, since both the first and
second syllables of the Spanish and D utch pairs contain full vowels, and adjacent syllables with full vowels hardly occur in such words in English. H owever, a first- versus
third-syllable contrast in primary stress can be achieved, if the requirement to use only
syllables with full vowels is abandoned. There are in fact many English pairs in which
the second syllable is reduced in both words, but primary stress on the first syllable in
one member of the pair contrasts with primary stress on the third syllable in the other --
for example, admiral versus admiration. In such pairs a fragment comprising only the
first two syllables (e.g., admi-) would have primary stress plus a weak syllable in one case,
and secondary stress plus a weak syllable in the other.
In the current study we use such pairs in a fragment priming study in English. We
present native English-speaking listeners with non-constraining sentences ending with
a truncated portion of a word (e.g., admi-) and measure their lexical decision responses
to visually presented words (e.g., AD MIR AL ) as a function of whether the stress pattern
of the prime fragment matches the target word or its competitor.
We also present the same English materials to D utch listeners. D utch undergraduates are skilled users of English and, as many previous experiments from our laboratory
have demonstrated, they are easily capable of carrying out laboratory listening experiments in that language. (It is unnecessary to carry out a pretest for English proficiency
with this population, since such proficiency is a prerequisite for university entrance in
the N etherlands.) By testing the two language groups with identical materials we can
directly compare the relative use they make of stress information in lexical activation.
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

213

2 Experiments 1a and 1b
2.1
Method
2.1.1
Participants

Forty-eight native speakers of Australian English, members of the U niversity of
M elbourne community, took part in Experiment 1a. Because this experiment wa s
conducted in the summer vacation, the participants -- all teenagers or young adults --
were nonacademic staff members, graduate students and relatives of staff members; only
a minority of the participants had previously taken part in similar experiments. F iftysix native speakers of D utch, undergraduate members of the N ijmegen U niversity
community from the M ax Planck Institute subject pool, took part in Experiment 1b.
A further 24 D utch speakers from the same population took part in the pretest. All
participants had normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision; all received
a small payment for their participation.
2.1.2
Materials

A search of the CELEX database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Van R ijn, 1993) produced 57
pairs of English words of the admiral-admiration type: one member with primary stress
on the first syllable and an unstressed second syllable, the other with primary stress on
the third (or in some cases fourth) syllable, secondary stress on the first syllable and an
unstressed second syllable. Apart from the primary versus secondary stress difference
on the first syllable, the first two syllables of the two words did not differ (i.e., segmentally they were the same; in this case, admi-). Each word had a frequency of occurrence
of at least one per million.
A further selection among these pairs was then made via a pretest in which the 114
words were presented together with 26 other English words (some with high, some with
low frequency of occurrence) to native speakers of D utch. These participants read the
words and, for each word, recorded whether or not they knew the word; if they did, they
were asked (a ) to give a D utch translation, and (b) to rate how familiar they were with
the English word, on a 7-point scale with 7 signaling high familiarity. F rom the results
of this pretest 24 pairs were selected for use in the experiment; all chosen words were
known by all participants and had received a mean familiarity rating of 4 or above.
Twenty-three pairs were like admiral-admiration, that is, involved a first versus third
syllable stress contrast; in one pair (manicure-manifestation) the contrast involved stress
on the first versus fourth syllable. The 24 pairs are listed in the Appendix.
N inety-six further control prime words and 10 filler prime words were chosen,
matched to the experimental prime set in length and frequency. 154 short non-constraining
sentences were constructed, of the type They both approved of the ... , or We were sure
the word was ... These were used to make 10 practice prime strings (e.g., Due to a printing
error it said proposition), 48 filler prime strings (e.g., I think she'll like the explanation)
and 144 experimental prime strings. The latter formed 24 sets of six, in which for each
Language and Speech

214

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

of the 24 experimental pairs each of two sentences was completed with each member
of the experimental prime pair and a control prime word. Thus for admiral and admiration the two sentences were The speech therapist said...and Hank asked his wife to say...,
and each of these was constructed ending with admiral, ending with admiration, and
ending with a control prime.
The materials were recorded onto Digital Audio Tape in a sound-attenuated cubicle
by a male native speaker of Australian English. They were resampled to 16kHz and stored
on computer. The final word of each sentence was truncated such that for the experimental pairs only the segmentally overlapping but suprasegmentally differentiated
portion remained (e.g., The speech therapist said admi-). All control, practice and filler
primes were also truncated in the same manner (e.g., Hank asked his wife to say immer-;
Due to a printing error it said propo-; I think she'll like the expla-).
Eight presentation orders were constructed, each containing all filler items and 48
experimental sentences. Each of the 48 words was presented as visual target once in each
presentation order, with (a ) assignment to preceding sentence, (b) experimental versus
control fragment prime, and, within experimental primes, (c) matching versus mismatching
stress in the fragment, counterbalanced across presentation order. Thus, for instance,
in presentation orders one to four AD M IR AL was preceded by a control fragment
prime and AD M IR ATION by an experimental prime, in two orders with matching
and in two with mismatching stress, once of each with each potential sentence; in presentation orders five to eight ADMIRATION occurred in the control trials and ADMIRAL
in the experimental trials.
2.1.3
Procedure

In Experiment 1a, the native listeners were tested individually in a sound-attenuated room.
Six listeners heard each of the eight presentation orders. The materials were played
from a DAT player over closed headphones; the lexical decision strings were presented
in upper case, centered on the screen of a notebook computer. The listeners were given
written instructions to listen to the auditory materials and to decide for each string
appearing on the screen whether or not it was a real English word. Response keys labeled
YES and N O were provided; YES responses were given with the dominant hand. Timing
for each trial was initiated upon appearance of the visual string, and timing and response
measurement were controlled by the computer via the N ESU experimental control
program.
In Experiment 1b, the non-native listeners were tested individually or in pairs in
sound-attenuated booths. Seven listeners heard each presentation order. Written instructions were given in both English and D utch. The materials were presented from disc by
a personal computer running N ESU. In all other respects the procedure was as in
Experiment 1a.

Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

215

2.2
Results and Discussion

Analyses of variance were conducted on the correct YES responses, separately across
participants and across items. RTs below 100 ms were discarded. The error rate was
quite high, at 11.4% for the native and 11.9% for the non-native participants, but an analysis
of the missed responses, directly analogous to the RT analyses, produced no significant effects at all. M ean RTs for each group for the three priming conditions are shown
in F igure 1.

Figure 1
M ean lexical decision
response times (RT) in
ms, with standard error
bars, to targets preceded
by bisyllabic stressmatching, stress-mismatching and control
primes in Experiment 1,
separately for native
(English-speaking:
Experiment 1a) and nonnative (D utch-speaking:
Experiment 1b) listeners

Combined analyses of both the native and non-native groups showed no RT differences between the two (but recall that a native group inexperienced in psychological
experiments is here compared with a non-native group with considerable experimental
practice). There was a significant difference between prime conditions, F1 (2,204)= 22.82,
p < .001, F2 (2,92)= 8.23, p < .001, and a significant main effect of stress placement,
words with primary stress on first syllable being recognized more rapidly than words
Language and Speech

216

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

with stress on the third syllable, F1 (1,102)= 45.92, p < .001, F2 (1,46)= 13.32, p < .001.
Separate t-tests for each group revealed that for both native and non-native listeners,
RTs were significantly faster to targets after fully matching primes (English 647 ms.
D u tch 634 ms) th an after either con trol primes, En glish 672 m s,
t 1 (47) = 3.54, p < .001, t 2 (47) = 2.22, p < .04; D utch 671 ms, t1 (55) = 4.79, p < .001,
t2 (47) = 4.49, p < .001, or stress-mismatching primes, English 677 ms, t1 (47) = 4.41,
p < .001, t2 (47)= 2.39, p < .03; D utch 656 ms, t1 (55)= 3.01, p < .005, t2 (47)= 2.35, p < .03.
RTs in the stress-mismatch condition did not differ significantly from those in the control
condition for the native English-speaking group (both ts < 1), but were significantly
fa st er th an the contro l fo r the n on-n at ive D utch listeners, t 1 (55) = 2.62, p < .02,
t2 (47)= 2.12, p < .04.
The results of this study show that suprasegmental cues to the stress pattern of
spoken English words can selectively constrain lexical activation for both native and nonnative listeners. But note that the pattern of results differs from what was observed in
otherwise analogous experiments in Spanish and D utch; Soto-Faraco et al. (2001) and
Van D onselaar et al. (under revision) found not only that target words were accepted
significantly more rapidly after a stress-matching prime than after a control prime, but
also that recognition after a stress-mismatching prime favoring a competitor word was
significantly slower than after a control prime. This latter result has not been replicated
in the present study with English.
The main effect of stress placement is presumably merely an artifact of word length
and frequency, both of which play a strong role in visual lexical decision latency. Since
the comparison of interest in the current study is between different primes for the same
word, matching target words on these dimensions was not necessary -- quite apart from
the fact that it would in any case not have been possible with pairs such as we required.
The words with initial stress were both shorter (mean length 8.333 letters) and higher
in frequency (mean log frequency 2.31) than the words with stress on the third syllable
(mean length 9.875 letters; mean log frequency 1.87).
A noteworthy result is also the parallelism of the pattern of results with the native
and the non-native listeners. It might have been expected that the prime and target words
would not be as easy for the D utch listeners to process as for the native listeners; the
words are overall relatively long and relatively low in frequency. Indeed, as noted above,
the error rates were higher than, for example, in the study by Soto-Faraco et al. (2001),
and this is plausibly due to the relatively lower frequency of the present target word set
in comparison to the targets used in that earlier study. N evertheless, it is clear that the
non-native listeners were able to make very good use of the prime and to process the target
words with great efficiency.
In our second set of experiments, we present listeners with still less of the prime
word: a single syllable. Van D onselaar et al. (under revision ) observed that D utch
listeners could effectively exploit stress information in monosyllabic fragments: responses
were faster after stress-matching fragments than after control primes, just as was observed
with bisyllabic fragments. With the monosyllabic fragments, however, Van D onselaar
et al. observed no inhibition by stress-mismatching primes -- these did not pattern
differently from control primes.
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

217

The materials for the next experiment differ from those in the preceding one. The
pairs used in Experiment 1 never involved a contrast between stress on the first versus
second syllable, because English pairs of this type cannot, as explained, be found without
accompanying segmental differences. The words with stress on the third syllable (e.g.,
admiration) all had secondary stress on the initial syllable. If, in our next experiment,
we were to present only the first syllable of such pairs, listeners would be confronted
with a contrast between primary versus secondary stress on the fragments, a distinction
which is much harder to make than that between primary stressed and unstressed syllables (Lieberman, 1965). H owever, the use of monosyllabic fragments allows selection
of words which differ from the second syllable onwards, and this in turn means that the
unstressed fragments can be taken from words with stress on the second syllable -- for
example, muSEum contrasting with MUsic.

3 Experiments 2a and 2b
3.1
Method
3.1.1
Participants

Sixty-one native speakers o f Australian English, und ergraduate members of the
U niversity of M elbourne and U niversity of N ew South Wales communities, took part
in Experiment 2a; 56 native speakers of D utch, fro m the same population as for
Experiment 1b, took part in Experiment 2b. A further 12 native D utch speakers from
the same population took part in the pretest. All participants had normal hearing and
normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and none had taken part in Experiment 1; all
received a small payment for their participation.
3.1.2
Materials

A further search of the CELEX English database produced 30 potential pairs with
segmentally identical first syllables but with respectively primary stress on the first
syllable (e.g., music) or on the second but with no reduction in the first syllable (e.g.,
museum). These were pretested in the same manner as for Experiment 1, leading to
selection of 21 pairs meeting the same criteria as used for Experiment 1. These 21 pairs
are listed in the Appendix. Eight presentation orders were constructed, with all 42 target
words occurring in each order, counterbalanced as in Experiment 1. The 42 preceding
sentences had also been used in Experiment 1. Forty-two monosyllabic control fragments
were used and 42 filler sentences, the latter again from Experiment 1.
3.1.3
Procedure

The procedure for Experiment 2a was as for Experiment 1a for listeners at the U niversity
of N ew South Wales, except that testing took place in a small quiet room; at the
U niversity of M elbourne listeners were tested in groups of up to seven in a quiet
Language and Speech

218

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

experimental room and the materials were presented from the hard disc of a computer
running the Psyscope control program. In Experiment 2a six or seven listeners heard
each presentation order. The procedure for Experiment 2b was as for Experiment 1b.
3.2
Results and Discussion

The results were analyzed in the same manner as for Experiment 1. M ean RTs for each
group for the three priming conditions are shown in F igure 2. The miss rate was again
high, at 16% for the native and 14% for the non-native listeners (but again this difference was nonsignificant, when analyzed in the same manner as the RTs).
In this experiment (in which comparable undergraduate populations were compared)
there was a main effect of listener group on RTs: the D utch responses, with mean
of 660 ms, were slower than those of the native speakers: 601 ms, F1 (1,115)= 15.78,
p < .001; F2 (1,40)= 95.17, p < .001. There was again a significant overall effect of prime
condition, F1 (2,230)= 67.74, p < .001; F 2 (2,80)= 52.42, p < .001, and of stress placement, F1 (1,115)= 14.87, p < .001; F2 (1,40)= 6.23, p < .02. Again the latter is presumably
to be ascribed to length and frequency differences (initial stress words: mean length in
letters 6.24, mean log frequency 2.18; second-syllable stress words: mean length in
letters 6.76, mean log frequency 1.88).
T-tests comparing the prime conditions showed the same pattern for each listener
group: RTs for targets preceded by fully matching primes (English 576ms.; D utch 625ms)
were significantly faster than RTs for targets preceded by stress-mismatching primes,
English 602ms, t1 (60)= 4.16, p < .001; t2 (41)= 2.88, p < .005; D utch 658 ms, t1 (55)= 2.9,
p < .005; t2 (41)= 3.73, p < .001, and RTs to targets after stress-mismatching primes were
significantly faster than RTs to targets after control primes, English 631ms, t1 (60)= 6.01,
p < .001; t 2 (41) = 4.57, p < .001; D utch 698 ms, t 1 (55) = 5.96, p < .001; t 2 (41) = 4.46,
p < .001.
Together the experiments so fa r present an interesting pattern. English native
speakers clearly show that they use the stress information in two syllables more effectively than the infor mation in a single syllable: In Experiment 1a their RTs after
stress-mismatching primes and after control primes did not differ, while in Experiment 2a
the stress-mismatching primes produced facilitation in comparison to the control primes
(albeit not as much as the stress-matching primes produced).
This asymmetry is reminiscent of the attenuation of the effects of stress observed
by Van D onselaar et al. (under revision) in their experiments with D utch native speakers
listening to D utch: there too the effects were stronger with two syllables of information.
Overall, however, Van D onselaar et al. observed stronger effects with D utch than the
present native-listening experiments have produced for English: for D utch, two syllables of infor mation produced facilitation by stress match but inhibition by stress
mismatch, while one syllable of information produced facilitation by stress match only.
The latter pattern is in fact exactly the same pattern as our English native speakers
showed with two syllables of information.
N o such attenuation was observed, however, in the non-native D utch listeners'
performance across the present experiments. Their pattern of results in Experiment 1b
and in Experiment 2b was effectively the same. The net effect is that they used the stress
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

219

Figure 2
M ean lexical decision
response times (RT) in
ms, with standard error
bars, to targets preceded
by monosyllabic
stress-matching, stressmismatching and control
primes in Experiment 2,
separately for native
(English-speaking:
Experiment 2a) and nonnative (D utch-speaking:
Experiment 2b) listeners

information a little less than the native listeners did in Experiment 1, but as effectively
as the native listeners did in Experiment 2. This is impressive performance for nonnative listeners, who might be expected to perform even less well than native listeners
when less information is provided.
Besides Van D onselaar et al.'s (under revision) demonstration that D utch listeners
can make effective use of a single syllable's worth of stress information in their native
language, Cutler and Van D onselaar (2001) also showed that D utch listeners in an
offline forced-choice identification task were extremely successful at judging the source
of a single syllable given the choice between two words differing only in stress (e.g.,
VOORnaam-voorNAAM). In Experiment 3 we give our non-native listeners the opportunity to demonstrate this same facility with single syllables extracted from English
words, again in comparison with native performance on the same task.
Language and Speech

220

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

4 Experiments 3a and 3b
4.1
Method
4.1.1
Participants

Twenty-two native speakers of Austra lian English, undergraduate members of the
U niversity of N ew South Wales community, took part in Experiment 3a; 26 native
speakers of D utch, from the same population as for Experiments 1b and 2b, took part
in Experiment 3b. All participants had normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. N one had participated in either of the two preceding experiments. They all
received a small payment for their participation.
4.1.2
Materials

The materials were all the truncated words used in Experiments 2a and 2b, removed from
their sentence contexts: 84 fragments in all (21 pairs  2 source words  2 sentence
contexts). A tape was prepared with two occurrences of each fragment (168 tokens in
all), in pseudo-random order (no successive occurrences of the same response pair),
with 4.5 s of silence between tokens.
4.1.3
Procedure

Participants heard the tape over closed headphones in a quiet room. On each trial they
circled on a response sheet the word of the response pair (e.g., MUSIC-M U SEUM ) which
they judged to be the source of the current fragment. For one presentation of each
fragment the correct response was the left word of the pair, and for the other presentation the right word.
4.2
Results and Discussion

The results of both experiments are shown in F igure 3. As can be clearly seen, both listener
groups achieved a higher degree of correct performance with the first-syllable-stress
items (e.g., music). G reat weight should not be attached to this result, given that it may
reflect a bias to choose the higher-frequency response, or, alternatively, a bias to respond
with a statistically more probable pattern (as we pointed out in the introduction, primary
stress on the first syllable is the commonest pattern in the English vocabulary). There
was no overall difference between the two listener groups in number of first-syllable-stress
judgments (the English-speaking group made 62.5% first-syllable-stress judgments
overall, the D utch 57.5%, a nonsignificant difference).
What is more remarkable is that the overall percentage of correct assignments
was higher for the non-native D utch listeners (72.34% correct overall) than for the native
English-speaking listeners (59.17% correct overall). This difference was indeed significant,
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

221

Figure 3
M ean percentage correct
assignments of fragments
from words with first- and
second-syllable stress in
Experiment 3, separately
for native (Englishspeaking: Experiment 3a)
and non-native
(D utch-speaking:
Experiment 3b) listeners

t1 (46)= 4.66, p < .001. With fragments from initially-stressed words, the response bias
makes interpretation of the scores difficult. H owever, the bias acted against the secondsyllable-stress words, so analysis of the results for these items is particularly interesting;
as F igure 3 shows, native listeners here actually scored below 50% correct. Binomial tests
showed that the choice frequencies for each group differed significantly from chance with
this subset of the items, but in different directions, the native listeners performing significantly worse than chance (z = 3.19, p < .001) and the non-native listeners significantly
better than chance (z = 12.9, p < .001). Of the 22 native listeners, 10 listeners made more
correct than incorrect judgments with these fragments and 12 listeners made more
incorrect than correct judgments (z < 1). Of the 26 non-native D utch listeners, 21 made
more correct than incorrect judgments (z = 2.94, p < .005).
The results of this study certainly suggest that the task of making a forced choice
identification of a syllable fragment as belonging to one of two potential source words
may to a considerable extent be subject to response bias. H owever, response bias is not
the only determinant of the result pattern: Listeners can also exploit suprasegmental
information within the syllable in making their judgments. Remarkably, it appears that
D utch listeners are rather more skilled than native English listeners at exploiting this
information in English fragments.

5 General Discussion
In six experiments we have examined the use of suprasegmental cues to stress in lexical
a ctivation an d recognition in English, comp aring the p erfor m ance of native
English-speaking listeners (for whom previous results had indicated that suprasegmental
information was not easily exploited) with that of proficient listeners with D utch as native
language (for whom previous results had indicated that suprasegmental information was
efficiently used in native listening). We have learned that the situation for the listening
populations of the two languages differs less than previous results had led us to believe.
English listeners can make use of suprasegmental information in recognizing
Language and Speech

222

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

spoken words: admi- with initial primary stress activates AD M IR AL to a greater extent
than AD MIRATION, while admi- with initial secondary stress activates ADM IR ATION
to a greater extent than AD M IR AL. Similarly, mus- with primary stress activates
M U SIC more than M U SEU M , and mus- without primary stress activates M U SEU M
more than M U SIC.
These results may be compared with findings from other languages in which studies
with the same cross-modal fragment priming task have revealed that suprasegmental
cues to stress pattern are exploited in the recognition of spoken words. In Spanish, a
language with no vowel reduction, so that only suprasegmental information cues word
stress, listeners can effectively use these suprasegmental cues to select among word
candidates for recognition (Soto-Faraco et al., 2001). Experiments in D utch, a language
with vowel reduction and thus, as in English, with both segmental and suprasegmental
correlates of stress, showed the same pattern (Van D onselaar et al., under revision).
Other experiments on D utch confirmed listeners' effective use of stress cues in lexical
access (Cutler & Van D onselaar, 2001; Cutler & Koster, 2000; Jongenburger & Van
H euven, 1995; Koster & Cutler, 1997; Van H euven, 1988), and similar cues can be used
in the recognition of Indonesian (Van Zanten & Van H euven, 1998).
The results are also comparable with evidence that listeners make use of other
suprasegmental information which signals the prosodic structure of words. Thus in
Japanese, listeners exploit pitch-accent information at an early stage of word recognition, as evidenced both by cross-modal fragment priming studies analogous to those
performed here (Sekiguchi & N akajima, 1999) and by gating studies in which only part
of a syllable suffices to constrain listeners' word guesses to words with matching pitch
accent patterns (Cutler & Otake, 1999).
Our first conclusion is thus that English does not appear to be the anomaly that
previous failures to find effective exploitation of suprasegmental infor mation (e.g.,
Cutler, 1986; Slowiaczek, 1991) might have led us to expect. N ative English listeners can
indeed exploit suprasegmental information in spoken-word recognition. H owever, the
difference between Experiments 1a and 2a is evidence that information from two syllables is used more effectively than information from one syllable: only with bisyllabic
fragments was there no residual facilitation in the stress-mismatch condition.
This is not to suggest that those earlier studies were inadequate; there is little
doubt that replication would produce exactly the same result again. H owever, the power
of an experiment like Cutler's (1986) study, using minimal stress pairs of the trusty-trustee
type, is necessarily limited due to the very small number of such pairs in any stress
language. M oreover, associate priming, as used by Cutler (1986), may offer less insight
into the initial availability of multiple word candidates than identity priming, as used
in Experiments 1 and 2 above. Van D onselaar et al. (under revision) found strong effects
of stress pattern information in their identity priming experiments with D utch, but in
associate priming they found much weaker effects, which were arguably only of words
which had already triumphed in the wordform competition process. Similarly, we have
here shown with identity priming that, in English as in D utch, stress information does
constrain lexical activation.
Our second conclusion, however, in some sense modifies the first. The present
results do differ in certain respects from the recent findings with other languages. In
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

223

particular, the present study did not replicate the consistent finding from Spanish and
D utch fragment-priming Experiments (Soto-Faraco et al., 2001; Van D onselaar et al.,
under revision) that RTs to target words preceded by stress-mismatching primes were
slower than RTs given control primes. N either native nor non-native listeners of English
produced this inhibition effect, with either monosyllabic or bisyllabic prime fragments.
Instead, for the non-native listeners with both types of prime, and for native listeners
with monosyllabic primes, the stress mismatch condition produced partial facilitation.
We consider that the most likely explanation of this pattern is that in English -- as much
previous work has indicated--there is a difference in the strength of segmental versus suprasegmental information. Segmental information weighs more strongly in lexical activation.
This is exactly the conclusion that was reached by other authors who found, for instance,
that mis-stressing English words has little effect on recognition unless a segmental alteration also results (Bond & Small, 1983; Cutler & Clifton, 1984; Small et al., 1988).
Even the performance of the native listeners in Experiment 1a, with bisyllabic
fragments, is consistent with this claim. Although there was no residual priming in the
stress-mismatch condition in this case, there was also no inhibition. This is again consistent with use of suprasegmental information which does not quite equal the speed and
effectivity achieved by listeners in other languages.
Why should this be so? We suggest that English simply does not supply its listeners
(whether native or proficient non-native) with as much opportunity for suprasegmental
processing in word recognition as some other languages do. Recall that it was impossible to construct English fragment primes of the kind used in the earlier experiments
with Spanish and D utch -- such as D utch OCto- versus okTO- from OCtopus versus
okTOber. In English the first two syllables of pairs like octopus/ October differ segmentally as well as suprasegmentally. Words of more than two syllables commonly have
full vowels in both the first and the second syllable in Dutch, and always do so in Spanish
(which has no vowel reduction); but such sequences are extremely rare in English.
In addition, although both English and D utch exhibit predominance of stress
placement on word-initial syllables (Cutler & Carter, 1987; Schreuder & Baayen, 1994),
the tendency is stronger in English, and in that language particularly marked in the
words of Latinate origin. These form a good part of both vocabularies, but their stress
pattern has been fitted to the native norm more thoroughly in English. In fact, such words
furnished most of the pairs for the fragment priming studies in both languages, and it
is notable that two-thirds of all the pairs in Van D onselaar et al.'s D utch experiments
involved words with non-initial stress which would have initial stress in their English
cognates (often both members of the pair, e.g., D utch dyNAmo / dynaMIET, English
DYnamo / DYnamite; D utch kaBIne / kabiNET, En glish CAbin / CAbinet; D utch
koLOnie / koloNEL, English COlony / COlonel).
These facts highlight how rarely English listeners will come across a segmentally
ambiguous but suprasegmentally disambiguated fragment of speech. Such an experience will be more common for Spanish or D utch listeners, who will thus be encouraged
to exploit the suprasegmental information in the interests of listening efficiency. English
listeners experience less such encouragement, and, as our results indicate, although they
can use the suprasegmental cues they appear to use them less effectively than Spanish
or D utch listeners.
Language and Speech

224

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

The performance of the non-native D utch listeners with English in the two online experiments showed that they, too, did not use suprasegmental information in
English as proficiently as they are able to in their native language. Their parallel performance in Experiments 1b and 2b did suggest that, as in their native language, they use
mono- and bisyllabic information equally effectively. However, perhaps the most remarkable finding from the current study is that the perfor mance of the D utch listeners
actually outstripped that of the native listeners in Experiment 3, the offline task in
which subjects had full opportunity to process suprasegmental information without
time pressure. U nder these conditions, the D utch listeners were able to apply abilities
from their apparently superior native-language skills in suprasegmental processing to
listening in their second language, English.
Previous research has of course shown repeatedly that native-language listening
procedures are applied to foreign-language input. Work over the past several decades,
for instance, has shown that segmentation of non-native speech input into its component words is often subjected to processing more appropriate to the native than to the
non-native language; thus French listeners apply syllabic segmentation when they are
listening to English (Cutler, M ehler, N orris & Segui, 1986) or to Japanese (Otake,
H atano, Cutler, & M ehler, 1993), although syllabic segmentation is appropriate for
neither of these languages, as is clear fro m the fact that it is not applied by native
listeners of either. Similarly, Japanese listeners apply moraic segmentation not only to
their own language (Otake et al., 1993) but also to English (Cutler & Otake, 1994),
French and Spanish (Otake, H atano, & Yoneyama, 1996).
Language-specific cues to syllable boundaries are likewise applied inappropriately
in non-native listening. English listeners find words like lunch easy to spot in nonsense
sequences such as moyshlunch (because no native English words begin or end with a
sequence shl, so that shl must have an internal boundary) but harder to spot in sequences
such as moyslunch (because sl could be a word onset and thus has no necessary internal
boundary). Yet proficient G erman listeners to English do not show this pattern -- in fact
their responses are somewhat slower to lunch in moyshlunch than moyslunch (Weber,
2001), presumably reflecting influence from G erman sequence constraints (in G erman,
shl is a common word onset so has no internal boundary, whereas sl is not a possible
syllable-initial or -final sequence, forcing an internal boundary of the same sort as for
shl in English).
N ative phonetic categories likewise override non-native categorical distinctions,
making it difficult to discriminate phonetic contrasts which are necessary for correct perception of a non-native language, but which are irrelevant in the native language (Strange,
1995). This could in turn lead to word recognition false alarms, for instance of English
stem as an embedded form within stamp, for D utch listeners whose language contains
no analog of this English vowel distinction (Broersma, 2002). M oreover, the native
language vocabulary itself can be active during non-native listening; in eyetracking
studies, listeners instructed to look at an object in their second language (e.g., desk) can
erroneously look first at an object whose name in the native language only is confusable with the name of the target (e.g., lid, D utch deksel; examples from Weber, 2001,
see also Spivey & M arian, 1999).
These examples make it clear that carryover from the native language in secondLanguage and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

225

language listening is usually not helpful at all, but rather harmful to efficient processing.
Our current finding is thus remarkable because it produces a case in which native-language
procedures applied in non-native English listening can actually produce better exploitation of available information than occurs in native English listening. We suspect that
this situation may also occur with other types of speech information and other language
pairs; for instance, non-native listeners may be more sensitive to allophonic distinctions
in their second language if these map onto distinctions which are phonemic in their first
language. H owever, we are not aware of experimental demonstrations of this type of
performance, and our third and final conclusion from this study is thus that non-native
listening can under certain circumstances achieve more effective exploitation of speech
information than native listening.
The English octopus is weak in the middle. English listeners' use of what suprasegmental cues to word identity they encounter can also be termed weak. The D utch
octopus is stronger in the middle; and D utch listeners are stronger at exploiting suprasegmental information in word recognition; even, given the opportunity, in English.
Received: March 18, 2002; revised manuscript received: August 23, 2002;
accepted: October 04, 2002

References
BAAYEN, R . H ., PIEPEN BROCK , R ., & R IJN, H ., van (1993). The CELEX lexical database
(CD -ROM ). Linguistic D ata Consortium, U niversity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
BON D, Z. S. (1981). Listening to elliptic speech: Pay attention to stressed vowels. Journal of
Phonetics, 9, 89 - 96.
BON D, Z. S., & SM ALL, L. H . (1983). Voicing, vowel and stress mispronunciations in continuous speech. Perception & Psychophysics, 34, 470 - 474.
BOOIJ, G. (1995). The phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Oxford U niversity Press.
BROER SM A, M . (2002). Comprehension of non-native speech: Inaccurate phoneme processing
and activation of lexical competitors. Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing (pp. 261- 264), D enver.
CON NINE, C. M ., BLASKO, D. G., & WANG, J. (1994). Vertical similarity in spoken word recognition: M ultiple lexical activation, individual differences, and the role of sentence context.
Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 624- 636.
CON N IN E, C. M ., TITON E, D., D EELM AN, T., & BLASKO, D. (1997). Similarity mapping
in spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 463- 480.
CU TLER , A. (1986). Forbear is a homophone: Lexical prosody does not constrain lexical access.
Language and Speech, 29, 201- 220.
CU TLER , A., & BU TTER F IELD, S. (1992). R hythmic cues to speech segmentation: Evidence
from juncture misperception. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 218- 236.
CU TLER , A., & CARTER , D. M . (1987). The predominance of strong initial syllables in the
English vocabulary. Computer Speech and Language, 2, 133- 142.
CU TLER , A., & CLIF TON, C. E. (1984). The use of prosodic information in word recognition.
In H . Bouma & D. G. Bouwh uis (Eds.), Attention and performance X (pp. 183 - 196).
H illsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
CU TLER , A., DAH AN, D., & DON SELAAR , W. Van (1997). Prosody in the comprehension
of spoken language: A literature review. Language and Speech, 40, 141 - 201.
Language and Speech

226

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

CU TLER , A., & DONSELAAR , W., Van (2001). Voornaam is not a homophone: Lexical prosody
and lexical access in D utch. Language and Speech, 44, 171 - 195.
CU TLER , A., & KOSTER , M . (2000). Stress and lexical activation in D utch. Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Beijing, October; Vol. 1,
pp. 593- 596.
CU TLER , A., M EHLER , J., NOR R IS, D. G., & SEG UI, J. (1986). The syllable's differing role
in the segmentation of French and English. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 385- 400.
CUTLER , A., & N OR R IS, D. G. (1988). The role of strong syllables in segmentation for lexical
access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 14, 113-121.
CU TLER , A., & OTAK E, T. (1994). M ora or phoneme? F urther evidence for language-specific
listening. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 824- 844.
CUTLER , A., & OTAK E, T. (1999). Pitch accent in spoken-word recognition in Japanese. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 105, 1877 - 1888.
D ON SELAAR , W., Van, KOSTER , M ., & CU TLER , A. (under revision). Exploring the role of
lexical stress in lexical recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
F EAR , B. D., CU TLER , A., & BU TTER F IELD, S. (1995). The strong / weak syllable distinction in English. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97, 1893 - 1904.
GOLD IN GER , S. D., LU CE, P. A., & PISON I, D. B. (1989). Priming lexical neighbors of spoken
words: Effects of competition and inhibition. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 501-518.
H EU VEN, V. J., Van (1985). Perception of stress pattern and word recognition: Recognition of
Dutch words with incorrect stress position. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
78, s21.
H EU VEN, V. J., Van (1988). Effects of stress and accent on the human recognition of word fragments in spoken context: G ating and shadowing, Proceedings of Speech '88, 7th FASE
symposium, Edinburgh, pp. 811- 818.
JON G EN BU RG ER , W. (1996). The role of lexical stress during spoken-word processing. Ph.D.
dissertation, U niversity of Leiden. The H ague: H olland Academic G raphics.
JON G EN BU RG ER , W., & H EU VEN, V. J., Van (1995). The role of lexical stress in the recognition of spoken words: Prelexical or postlexical?, Proceedings of the 13th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, pp. 368- 371.
KOSTER , M ., & CUTLER, A. (1997). Segmental and suprasegmental contributions to spoken-word
recognition in Dutch. Proceedings of EUROSPEECH 97, R hodes; pp. 2167 - 2170.
LEYD EN, K ., Van, & HEU VEN, V. J., Van (1996). Lexical stress and spoken word recognition:
Dutch versus English. In C. Cremers & M . den Dikken (Eds.), Linguistics in the Netherlands,
1996. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
LIEBER M AN, P. (1965). On the acoustic basis of the perception of intonation by linguists.
Word, 21, 40 - 54.
M AR SLEN -WILSON, W. D. (1990). Activation, competition, and frequency in lexical access.
In G. T. M . Altmann (Ed.), Cognitive models of speech processing: Psycholinguistic and
computational perspectives (pp. 148- 172). Cambridge, M A: M IT Press.
MAR SLEN -WILSON, W., & WARREN, P. (1994). Levels of perceptual representation and process
in lexical access: Words, phonemes, and features. Psychological Review, 101, 653- 675.
M ATTYS, S. L., & SAM U EL, A. G. (1997). H ow lexical stress affects speech segmentation and
interactivity: Evidence from the migration paradigm. Journal of Memory and Language,
36, 87 - 116.
M cQU EEN, J. M ., NOR R IS, D. G., & CU TLER , A. (1994). Competition in spoken word recognition: Spotting words in other words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 20, 621- 638.
M cQUEEN, J. M ., N OR R IS, D. G., & CU TLER , A. (1999). Lexical influence in phonetic decision-making: Evidence from subcategorical mismatches. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 25, 1363 - 1389.
Language and Speech

N. Cooper, A. Cutler, and R. Wales

227

OTAK E, T., & CU TLER , A. (1999). Perception of suprasegmental structure in a non-native
dialect. Journal of Phonetics, 27, 229- 253.
OTAK E, T., HATAN O, G., CUTLER , A., & MEHLER , J. (1993). Mora or syllable?Speech segmentation in Japanese. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 358- 378.
OTA K E, T., H ATA N O, G., & YON EYAM A, K . (1996). Speech segmentation by Japanese
listeners. In T. Otake & A. Cutler (Eds.), Phonological structure and language processing:
cross-linguistic studies (pp. 183 - 201). Berlin: M outon de Gruyter.
SCH R EU D ER , R ., & BAAYEN, R . H . (1994). Prefix stripping re-revisited. Journal of Memory
and Language, 33, 357- 375.
SEK IG U CH I, T., & NAK AJIM A, Y. (1999). The use of lexical prosody for lexical access of the
Japanese language. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 439- 454.
SLOWI ACEK , L. M . (1990). Effects of lexical stress in auditory word recognition. Language and
Speech, 33, 47 - 68.
SLOW IACZ EK , L. M . (1991). St ress and context in auditory wo rd recognition. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 20, 465- 481.
SM ALL, L. H ., SIM ON, S. D., & G OLD BERG, J. S. (1988). Lexical stress and lexical access:
H omographs versus nonhomographs. Perception & Psychophysics, 44, 272 - 280.
SOTO-FAR ACO, S., SEBASTIA N -GALLES, N., & CU TLER , A. (2001). Segmental and suprasegmental mismatch in lexical access. Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 412- 432.
SPIVEY, M., & M ARIAN, V. (1999). Crosstalk between native and second languages: Partial activation of an irrelevant lexicon. Psychological Science, 10, 281- 284.
STR AN GE, W. (1989). D ynamic specification of coarticulated vowels spoken in sentence context.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 85, 2135 - 2153.
STR AN G E, W. (Ed.). (1995). Speech perception and linguistic experience. Baltimore: York Press.
STR EETER , L. A., & N IG RO, G. N. (1979). The role of medial consonant transitions in word
perception. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 65, 1533 - 1541.
TROM M ELEN, M ., & ZON N EVELD, W. (1999). Word stress in West G ermanic languages. In
H . van der H ulst (Ed.), Word prosodic systems in the languages of Europe (pp. 478 - 515).
Berlin: M outon de G ruyter.
VROOM EN, J., ZON, M . Van, & G ELD ER , B. de (1996). Cues to speech segmentation, Evidence
from juncture misperceptions and word spotting. Memory & Cognition, 24, 744 - 755.
WEBER , A. (2001). Language-specific listening: The case of phonetic sequences. Ph.D. D issertation,
U niversity of Nijmegen; M PI Series in Psycholinguistics 16.
WHALEN, D. H . (1991). Subcategorical phonetic mismatches and lexical access. Perception &
Psychophysics, 50, 351- 360.
ZAN TEN, E. A. Van, & H EU VEN, V. J. Van (1998). Word stress in Indonesian: Its communicative relevance. Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia and
Oceania [Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde], 154, 129-147.
ZWITSER LOOD, P. (1989). The locus of the effects of sentential-semantic context in spoken-word
processing. Cognition, 32, 25-64.
ZWITSER LOOD, P. (1996). Form priming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 11, 589 - 596.

Language and Speech

228

Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English

Appendix
Word pairs used in the experiments. The first member of each pair has primary stress
on the first syllable; the second member has primary stress on the third or fourth syllable
(Experiment 1) or on the second syllable (Experiments 2 and 3).
Experiment 1:

admiral, admiration; analog, analytic; animal, anniversary; arrogant, aromatic; ceremony, cerebellum; compromise, comprehend; conference, confirmation; consequence,
conservation; corridor, correspond; diagram, diabetes; enterprise, entertain; etiquette,
etymology; exercise, exhibition; horrible, horizontal; immigrant, immature; impotent,
impolite; interval, interfere; manicure, manifestation; metaphor, metamorphosis; motorbike, motivation; opera, opposition; prominent, promenade; property, propaganda;
repertoire, repetition.
Experiments 2 and 3:

booking, bouquet; campus, campaign; carton, cartoon; cashew, cashier; convent, convex;
distance, distinct; district, distress; diver, divert; harpist, harpoon; humid, humane;
impact, impress; influence, inform; liquid, liqueur; massive, masseur; motive, motel;
music, museum; mystic, mistake; robot, robust; ruler, roulette; typhus, typhoon; union,
unique.

Language and Speech

