Phonological Priming in Picture
Naming of Young Children Who
Stutter
Kenneth S. Melnick
University of North Texas,
Denton, TX

Edward G. Conture
Ralph N. Ohde
Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN

The purpose of this study was to assess the influence of phonological priming on
the speech reaction time (SRT) of children who do (CWS) and who do not (CWNS)
stutter during a picture-naming task. Participants were eighteen 3-5-year-old
CWS (M = 50.67 months, SD = 11.83 months), matched in age and gender with
18 CWNS (M = 49.44 months, SD = 10.22 months). The picture-naming task
required each child to name, one at a time, computer-presented, white-on-black
line drawings of common, age-appropriate objects "as quickly as you can"
during 3 different conditions: (a) no prime, (b) related prime, and (c) unrelated
prime, with naming latency (alternatively referred to as SRT; in milliseconds) as
the main dependent variable. Results indicated that all children exhibited faster or
shorter SRTs during the related condition compared to the no prime condition.
Similarly, SRT was influenced with advancing age for all children, with 5-yearolds exhibiting faster SRTs than 3-year-olds. Furthermore, CWNS, but not CWS,
demonstrated a negative correlation between articulatory mastery and SRT.
Findings were taken to suggest that phonological priming is a feasible procedure
for studying the speech-language planning and production of 3-5-year-old children
and that preschool children who stutter, as a group, may have somewhat less well
developed articulatory systems than preschool children who do not stutter.
KEY WORDS: stuttering, phonology, priming, children

A

considerable amount of research (e.g., Bloodstein, 1995; Cantwell
& Baker, 1985; Paden & Yairi, 1996; Paden, Yairi, & Ambrose,
1999; St. Louis & Hinzman, 1988; Throneburg, Yairi, & Paden,
1994; Watkins, Yairi, & Ambrose, 1999; Wolk, Edwards, & Conture, 1990)
has indicated that both disordered phonology and stuttering frequently
co-occur in young children (cf. Nippold, 2002). For example, Louko,
Conture, and Edwards' (1999) review of this literature suggested that
an average of 30-40% of children who stutter (CWS) exhibit articulation difficulties, a percentage considerably higher (i.e., 2-6.4%) than that
reported for children exhibiting only articulation difficulties (Beitchman,
Nair, Clegg, & Patel, 1986). Typically, the severity level of speech sound
articulation difficulties among CWS, as determined by performance on
tests of articulation such as the Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation
(GFTA; Goldman & Fristoe, 1986), has been described as being mild to
moderate (St. Louis & Hinzman, 1988), with some CWS exhibiting a
"severe"--although few, if any, have been reported as having a profound--
articulation disorder (Throneburg et al., 1994).
One recent theory that has been used (e.g., Yaruss & Conture, 1996)
to help explain the relation between stuttering and disordered phonology

1428

Journal
JournalofofSpeech,
Speech,Language,
Language,and
andHearing
HearingResearch
Research* *Vol.
Vol.46
46* *1428-1443
1428-1443* *December
December2003
2003* (c)American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/03/4606-1428

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

is the covert repair hypothesis (CRH; Kolk & Postma,
1997; Postma & Kolk, 1993). Although the CRH does
not directly address disordered phonology, it does stress
the importance of phonological encoding to the occurrence of instances of stuttering. In brief, this theory suggests that instances of stuttering are the by-products of
self-repairs and that a slower than normal ability to phonologically encode, (i.e., the ability to build or retrieve an
articulatory or phonetic plan) may be central to stuttering. Based on the assumption that sound units of people
who stutter (PWS) are slow to be activated, the theory
posits that PWS experience a longer period of time during which their intended phonemes are apt to remain in
competition (for being selected) with unintended phonemes, thus increasing chances for misselection. As a
result of the increased probability of making misselections of sound units, PWS are thought to have a greater
need to repair or correct such errors in selection. These
repairs, according to CRH tenet, create disruptions in
speech fluency, that is, disfluencies and/or stutterings.
Furthermore, as the child increases his or her rate of
selection, initiation, or maintenance of speech production, his or her chances for misselecting are thought to
increase; in other words, the child may be selecting sounds
at a rate faster than his or her phonological encoding
system's ability to activate intended sounds.
To date, experimental attempts to assess the phonological encoding abilities of PWS have focused mainly
on adults (e.g., Burger & Wijnen, 1999; Wijnen & Boers,
1994), with only one being reported with CWS (LaSalle
& Carpenter, 1994). In their study, LaSalle and Carpenter reported significantly fewer overall speech disfluencies and sound prolongations during an experimental
storytelling situation in which the complexity of phonological encoding was reduced relative to a control storytelling situation (i.e., in the less complex, experimental
condition, words endings were loaded with /N /, whereas
in the control condition, word endings were allowed to
normally vary). Although LaSalle and Carpenter's results are quite intriguing, other experimental procedures
would seem to provide a more controlled means for initially studying phonological encoding in young children.
For example, a picture-word interference task (e.g.,
Meyer & Schriefers, 1991) permits control over seemingly pertinent variables such as phonetic environment,
time between an interfering stimulus (IS; alternatively
referred to as a prime), and presentation of the picture
to be named (with the time between an IS and a target
or picture onset typically referred to as stimulus onset
asynchrony [SOA]). In essence, with a picture-word interference task, participants see pictures of common
objects (i.e., targets), with or without an IS (or prime).
The prime is typically presented, auditorily or visually,
just before, simultaneously with, or even after presentation of the picture to be named. The participant is

asked to name the target picture as soon as he or she
sees it, with the time between onset of picture presentation and onset of naming response (typically called
speech reaction time [SRT] or reaction time) being one
of the usual dependent measures. Different types of
primes in picture naming have been used by researchers to address various theoretically driven research questions. For example, Brooks and MacWhinney (2000) reported that younger children, when compared to older
children and adults, were more apt to "speed up" or
shorten their SRT when primed by the whole word rather
than the word's onset, findings that address development of holistic versus incremental processing (see
Walley, 1988, for further discussion of holistic vs. incremental processing).
One means of using phonological priming during a
picture-naming task to study phonological encoding in
young children would be to prime the speaker just prior
to the process of phonological encoding (e.g., hearing [bO]
[i.e., the prime] just before seeing/naming a picture of a
ball). This procedure is based on the notion that hearing the acoustic representation of a word-initial CV or
CCV of a picture to be named just prior (e.g., 150 to 500
ms prior) to the presentation of that picture results in
an activation of its phonological representation within
the participant's mental lexicon. Thus, if the CV/CCV
onset-related prime and word-initial aspects of the target are related in form, some of the target segments are
already activated at the time the person attempts to
name the target. This supposedly facilitates the phonological encoding of the target so that a shorter naming
latency (to be measured and hereafter described in this
study as SRT) occurs than when an unrelated prime is
presented. Based on the principle that the "highest activated units get selected first" (Levelt, 1989), when the
participant attempts to name the actual word that has
been primed, he or she is more likely to quickly and accurately select the primed word than competing words.
Furthermore, it seems reasonable to suggest that
children who demonstrate shorter naming latencies may
also demonstrate better speech articulation ability (hereafter referred to as articulatory mastery). These children
should, therefore, show a negative correlation between
SRT and a standardized measure of articulation mastery such as the GFTA. Conversely, those children with
longer naming latencies may show poorer articulatory
mastery and possibly demonstrate no or even positive
correlation between SRT and speech articulation. Thus,
participants' articulatory mastery, which undoubtedly
influences the overall accuracy of the response mode (i.e.,
overt articulation) of this study's main dependent variable (i.e., SRT), was assessed by means of a standardized test of articulation (i.e., the GFTA), with results
being related to participants' SRTs. In general, such
assessment of the relationship between the dependent
Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1429

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

variables of articulatory mastery and SRT was thought
to provide further insights into these preschoolers' articulatory systems. Specifically, this assessment should
help determine whether participants' passing of a standardized test of articulatory mastery was sufficient to
ensure, for all participants, similar levels of development,
efficiency, and organization of their articulatory systems.
To date, however, to our knowledge, phonological
priming during a picture-naming task has not been
used to study the phonological encoding of young CWS.
Thus, although such a task appears to be one possible
means for assessing the phonological encoding skills
of 3-6-year-old CWS--the time period when children
usually receive their initial clinical assessment for
known or suspected stuttering (e.g., Yaruss, LaSalle,
& Conture, 1998)--numerous procedural, data collection, and analytical details need to be adjusted relative to the skills and abilities of children of this age.
That such adjustments are possible is shown by the
recent findings of Brooks and MacWhinney (2000), who
used phonological priming in typically developing 5-8year-old children's picture naming.
To initially explore whether phonological priming
during a picture-naming task appreciably changes the
SRTs of children who do not stutter (CWNS) and CWS,
we used this methodology with 3-6-year-old CWS and
CWNS. Specifically, it was the purpose of the present
study to assess whether there was a significant difference in SRT between CWNS and CWS among three
different presentation conditions: (a) no prime (i.e., no
auditory stimulus is presented prior to picture presentation), (b) related prime (i.e., the initial CV or CCV related to the picture [prime] is presented auditorily in
free field just prior [i.e., 500 ms] to picture presentation), and (c) unrelated prime (i.e., the initial CV or CCV
not related to the picture is presented auditorily just
prior [i.e., 500 ms] to picture presentation). Furthermore,
we wanted to assess how articulatory mastery, as measured by a standardized test of speech sound articulation (e.g., the GFTA), relates to young participants' SRTs
during the above-mentioned task. Such assessment, it
was thought, would provide procedural guidance for
similar future experiments as well as a better understanding of how level of articulatory mastery may impact the speed of picture naming in young children.

Method
Participants were 18 monolingual, Standard American English speaking boys and girls who exhibit stuttering, and 18 monolingual, Standard American English speaking age- and gender-matched boys and girls
who exhibit neither stuttering nor any other speech or
language problem. These 36 participants (13 boys and 5
1430

girls in each talker group) involved 18 three-year-olds
(CWS: M = 40.89 months, SD = 3.44 months; CWNS: M
= 41.9 months, SD = 2.88 months), 8 four-year-olds
(CWS: M = 53 months, SD = 4.08 months; CWNS: M =
51.33 months, SD = 2.31 months), and 10 five-year-olds
(CWS: M = 66.4 months, SD = 5.32 months; CWNS: M =
63.4 months, SD = 5.86 months) [all CWS: M = 50.67
months, SD = 11.83 months; all CWNS: M = 49.44
months, SD = 10.22 months]. The 18 CWS participated
in this study before receiving any prescribed speech-
language treatment.
Participants were paid volunteers who were naive
to the purposes and methods of the study and were referred to the investigators by their parents, other
speech-language pathologists, or daycare, preschool, or
school personnel. Participants had no known or reported
hearing, neurological, developmental, academic, intellectual, or emotional problems. Besides stuttering exhibited by the CWS, no participant, either CWS or
CWNS, exhibited any other known or reported speech
and language problems, with criteria for each behavior
as well as participant classification described below.

Classification and Inclusion Criteria
CWS
For inclusion in the CWS group, the participant had
to (a) exhibit three or more within-word disfluencies
(sound/syllable repetitions, sound prolongations, or
within-word pauses) and/or monosyllabic whole-word
repetitions per 100 words of conversational speech
(Bloodstein, 1995), based on a 300-word sample of parent-child conversation (conducted after experimental
testing for all 18 CWS), and (b) score at least a "mild"
(i.e., total overall score = 11 or above) on the Stuttering
Severity Instrument-Third Edition (SSI-3; Riley, 1994).
The mean time since onset for the CWS was 20.22
months (SD = 8.89), based on a "bracketing" procedure
(Yairi & Ambrose, 1992, p. 783) similar to that used by
Yaruss et al. (1998).

CWNS
For inclusion in the CWNS group, the participant
had to (a) exhibit two or fewer within-word disfluencies
per 100 words of conversational speech based on a 300word sample of parent-child conversation (conducted after experimental testing for all CWNS), and (b) score below "mild" (total overall score = 10 or below) on the SSI-3.

Speech, Language, and Hearing
Abilities
Before experimental testing, all participants were
administered, during a visit to the child's home, the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Third Edition (PPVTIII; Dunn & Dunn, 1997), the Test of Early Language
Development-Second Edition (TELD-2; Hresko, Reid,
& Hamill, 1991), and the GFTA (Goldman & Fristoe,
1986) to assess receptive vocabulary, receptive and expressive language skills, and articulation abilities, respectively. Requirements for inclusion in the present
study were that children score at or above the 20th percentile rank (approximately 1 SD below the mean) for
their age group. In addition, all participants were administered the Selected Neuromotor Test Battery
(SNTB; Wolk, 1990) to assess basic gross and fine motor
skills and had to pass pure-tone and tympanometric
screening (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 1990).

Collection of Data for Phonological
Priming
Instrumentation
Approximately 1-2 weeks after testing in the child's
home, the child participated in experimental testing.
Situated in a quiet room, the child was instructed to sit
in front of a standard (Pentium 200 MHz) computer with
a 20-in. Sony Trinitron monitor and was told to name
the pictures displayed on the screen ("as fast as you
can...as soon as you see it"). For purposes of reassurance and cooperation, some children were allowed to sit
on a parent's lap and the parent was instructed to neither talk for nor coach/instruct his or her child in any
way during experimental testing. In total, there were
three different conditions of 30 pictures each (90 pictures total) that were responded to by each child in one
sitting, with a brief (1-2 min) break between conditions
to permit the preparation of the next condition.

Recording and Segmentation
Procedures for Stimulus Primes
A young adult woman (22 years old) with no known
speech or hearing problems served as the speaker for
the priming stimuli. The speaker was judged to speak
in a General American English dialect on the basis of
informal observation. The priming stimuli were recorded
in a sound-treated IAC booth with a high-quality recorder (Model B 77 MKII, Revox GmbH, Villingen, Germany) and microphone (Model TLMil70, Neumann USA,
Old Lyme, CT), placed approximately 10 in. from the
participant's mouth. The frequency response of the microphone was flat out to about 20 kHz. Five repetitions
of each prime stimulus were produced in a random order.
The speaker read the syllables from a list. One production of each prime judged by the researchers to be a highquality stimulus was digitized at a sampling rate of 40
kHz and a 16-bit quantization using the Kay Elemetrics

Computerized Speech Lab (Version 5.0). Each of the prime
stimuli was then segmented at zero crossings so as to
retain the entire initial consonant and a portion of the
vowel. An attempt was made to keep the vowel durations
across stimuli similar. The mean vowel duration was 410
ms (SD = 18 ms). This segmentation procedure produced
the typical onset-related prime in which the end of the
vowel and the final consonant of each prime were deleted.

No Prime, Related Prime, and
Unrelated Prime Conditions
All 36 children, regardless of group, were presented
with the no prime condition first, the related prime condition second, and the unrelated prime condition third.
Such ordering of conditions was based on a pilot study
that suggested that it was most feasible to begin, for all
3-5-year-old participants, with what appeared to be the
easiest to complete (i.e., the no prime condition), followed
by the next most difficult (i.e., the related prime condition), and finally, the most difficult condition (i.e., the
unrelated prime condition) (see Ohde & Haley, 1997, for
a similar rationale for their experimental paradigm with
young children).
In the first (no prime) condition, children were
shown pictures of common objects and asked to name
the pictures as quickly as possible ("as soon as you see
it"). Pictures were shown one at a time, with onset of
subsequent pictures determined by the child's voice-activated microphone attached to a co-processor. The coprocessor was interfaced, synchronized, and run simultaneously with the Pentium computer.
In the second (related prime) and third (unrelated
prime) conditions, children were shown the same (30)
pictures as in the first condition (i.e., the same 30 pictures for the related prime condition followed by the
same 30 pictures for the unrelated prime condition).
However, instead of simply displaying each picture, just
prior to picture presentation (500 ms), the children were
presented, in free field, from a pair of computer speakers, with either a related or unrelated auditory stimulus (i.e., either the same first [related prime] or different first [unrelated prime] CV or CCV of the picture to
follow).

SOA
The aforementioned duration of 500 ms between
onset of auditorily presented prime and onset of target
or picture, or SOA, was based on results of a pilot study
of phonological priming in picture naming (involving no
prime, related prime, and unrelated prime conditions)
using 5 CWS and 5 age- and gender-matched CWNS
between the ages of 3 and 6 years of age. Such pilot work
indicated that brief SOAs (e.g., 250 ms or shorter) were

Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1431

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

fairly distracting or confusing to 3-4-year-old participants, but that longer SOAs were seemingly less distracting or confusing. Thus, an SOA of 500 ms was selected for use in the present study's related and unrelated
priming conditions.

Definition/Description of Dependent
Measures
SRT
During each of three experimental conditions (no
prime, related prime, and unrelated prime), using an SOA
of 500 ms (based on the aforementioned pilot research)
for the related and unrelated conditions, the computer
controlled the presentation of targets and primes and
recorded (in milliseconds) the naming latencies (SRTs)
measured (in milliseconds) from target onset to the triggering of the voice key by the onset of the participant's
verbal or oral speech response. The time between the
end of the acoustic signal (prime) and beginning of the
target (picture) was, on average, 90 ms and the average
prime duration was 410 ms (SD = 17 ms). The SRT data
were collected and analyzed using New Experimental
Stimulus Unit hardware and software, a data collection/
analysis system for chronometric data (i.e., reaction
time) developed by the Max Planck Institute, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Articulatory Mastery
Articulatory mastery was defined as the participant's percentile rank score on the aforementioned standardized test of speech sound articulation. Reliable information regarding GFTA performance was not
available for 2 CWS; however, for these 2 children (as
well as for all 34 other participants), reliable information regarding phonological performance/abilities was
available based on a picture-naming task that tests all
English consonants three times in each word position
(word-initial, word-intervocalic, and word-final; see Wolk
et al., 1990, for details of such testing). This information made apparent that the number and nature of phonological processes for these 2 children and the other 34
participants were well within normal limits for their
chronological ages. Based on this information and the
fact that children of this age, whether they stutter or
not, exhibit a strong relationship between phonological
and articulatory performance (Pellowski, Anderson, &
Conture, 2001), data from these 2 CWS were included
in the final data corpus.

Stuttering
An instance of stuttering was defined as occurring
if the following was observed: (a) sound/syllable repetitions, (b) monosyllabic whole-word repetitions, (c) sound
1432

prolongations, or (d) within-word pauses. The latter was
usually detected as inappropriate pauses or stoppages
occurring somewhere after the word-initial sound but
before the beginning of the word-final sound (e.g.,
Conture, 1990; Conture & Kelly, 1991; Schwartz &
Conture, 1988; Schwartz, Zebrowski, & Conture, 1990).

Nonstuttered Speech Disfluencies
A nonstuttered speech disfluency was defined as
occurring if the following was observed: (a) interjections,
(b) polysyllabic whole-word repetitions, or (c) phrase
repetitions consisting entirely of whole words or containing a cutoff word (e.g., "He tell--is telling...") (e.g.,
Ambrose & Yairi, 1999; Berg, 1986; Blackmer & Mitton,
1991; Bredart, 1991; Evans, 1985; LaSalle & Conture,
1995; Levelt, 1983).

Errors
Errors observed during children's picture naming
responses were divided into two types: "child" and
"other." In essence, errors resulted when some event other
than a participant's accurate picture or target stimulus
response triggered the voice key in the computer. "Child"
errors resulted when the child triggered the voice key
but the child's naming response deviated from the target
production (e.g., the child said the word house when seeing a picture of a dog). "Other" errors resulted from an
extraneous noise triggering the voice key. It should be
noted that a few (i.e., 49 out of a potential 3,240 picture
responses) of these "child" (n = 12) or "other" (n = 37)
errors contained extremely short SRTs (i.e., less than
100 ms). These brief responses were excluded because
they were not thought to reflect or be part of the distribution of the real processes associated with phonological encoding that we were attempting to study. Such
errors or decision rules--similar to those described by
Snodgrass and Yuditsky (1996)--permitted us to discard
suspect data (discussed below) from the final pool.

Pre-Analysis Data Preparation
Exclusion of Participants
Of the participants initially tested (n = 54), data
from approximately 33% of them (n = 18) were excluded
from the final data analysis. This was largely due to
various maturational, attentional, and behavioral variables exhibited by 3-5-year-old children. In general,
these children were unable to successfully complete (in
whole or in part) the experimental picture-naming task.
Specifically, if 33.3% or more (i.e., 10 out of 30 pictures) of a child's picture-naming responses, in any of
the three conditions, were in error, missing, or otherwise unusable (e.g., the child's voice was so low or soft
that it failed to trigger the voice key), the child's data

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were excluded from the final data corpus. For the remaining 66.7% of children (n = 36) whose data, on the
whole, seemed reliable, there were occasional aspects of
some of their picture-naming responses that rendered
them unusable (such is the case, of course, for adult picture-naming responses [e.g., Meyer & Schriefers, 1991],
produced during the same experimental paradigm). To
deal with such concerns, we used a series of decision
rules similar to those used by Snodgrass and Yuditsky
(1996) that permitted them to discard data, which are
discussed immediately below.

disfluencies. The second model evaluated the relationship between the GFTA and average SRT for CWS and
CWNS and involved an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
in which the average reaction time was treated as a function of talker group, GFTA, and their interaction. Subsequently, regression analyses were conducted to determine the nature of the GFTA x Talker Group interaction.
Furthermore, a general linear model (GLM) ANOVA was
used to assess whether apparent between-group differences in the relationship of GFTA to SRT were statistically significant. Where appropriate, Bonferroni-corrected alpha values were used to control for Type I errors.

Exclusion of Unusable Data
Based on the picture-naming response of those 36
participants whose data appeared to be reliable, on the
whole, a total of 3,240 (36 children x 3 conditions x 30
pictures per condition) picture-naming responses were
potentially available for data analysis. However, for
various reasons described below, not all such 3,240 picture-naming responses were considered appropriate for
further data analysis. Thus, based on reiterative assessment of audio-video tape recordings of each child's picture-naming responses in each of the three conditions,
the first author examined each of these 3,240 responses
to determine whether they were suitable for inclusion
in the final data corpus.
First, 185 (5.7%) of the picture-naming responses
were excluded because children did not respond and/or
their attention wandered, resulting in an SRT that was
above the third quartile by 1.5 times the interquartile
range (i.e., an "outlier"; Tukey, 1977). Second, any picture-naming responses that contained instances of stuttering (n = 33 [1%]) were excluded from further analysis. Third, any picture-naming responses that contained
instances of "child" (n = 398 [12%]) errors (defined above)
were also excluded. Finally, any remaining "other" (n =
429 [13%]) errors (defined above) were excluded from
further data analysis.
As a result of the above pre-analysis assessment of
3,240 potential picture-naming responses of the 36 participants, 1,045 picture-naming responses were excluded
from further analysis. This left a total of 2,195 picturenaming responses considered usable for the purpose of
data analysis.

Data Analysis: Between- and
Within-Group Comparisons
Inferential statistical analyses were conducted
using two main models. The first analyses involved
mixed-model (between- and within-group) analyses of
variance (ANOVAs) with follow-up comparisons to assess differences among means of each of the three priming conditions for CWS and CWNS for reaction times
(including SRT data errors) and nonstuttered speech

Intrajudge and Interjudge
Measurement Reliability
Interjudge and intrajudge measurement reliability
for percentage of SRT errors ("child" and "other") was
accomplished by the first author and a certified speech-
language pathologist independently rejudging the picture-naming responses of 3 randomly chosen CWS (one
3-, one 4-, and one 5-year-old) and their gender-matched
CWNS controls. This sample, therefore, consisted of a
total of 540 picture-naming responses (6 children x 3
conditions x 30 pictures). Results indicated intrajudge/
interjudge measurement reliability of 86%/80% for
"child" errors and 85%/80% for "other" errors.
As might be expected, the total number of stutterings for all 18 CWS in all three conditions was extremely
low (N = 33 out of 3,240 opportunities to stutter, or less
than 1%) and appeared insufficient for the purposes of
assessing intrajudge/interjudge measurement reliability testing. Therefore, measurement reliability testing
for stuttering was accomplished by rejudging the entire
300-word conversational sample between each of the 3
randomly selected CWS and their parents, resulting in
intrajudge/interjudge measurement reliability of 92%/
93% for instances of stuttering.

Results
SRT: Effects of Talker Group, Age,
and Priming Condition
As noted above, all calculations of SRT during the
three experimental conditions (no prime, related prime,
and unrelated prime) were based on picture-naming
responses that contained no instances of outliers, stuttering, "child," or "other" errors.
A mixed-model ANOVA was used to evaluate differences in SRT between group (CWS and CWNS) and age
(3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds) across the three presentation conditions (see Figure 1a). Results indicated a main effect of
age, F(2, 30) = 4.818, p = .015 (see Figure 1b). Post hoc
Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1433

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Mean and standard deviation speech reaction times (SRTs; in milliseconds) for (a) children who
stutter (CWS; N = 18) and children who do not stutter (CWNS; N = 18) across the three priming conditions
(no prime, related prime, and unrelated prime), (b) all children across age (3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds) and (c)
all children across conditions (no prime, related prime, and unrelated prime).

repeated-measures ANOVAs comparing all possible
pairs of the between-subjects factor (i.e., 3-year-olds
vs. 4-year-olds, 3-year-olds vs. 5-year-olds, and 4-yearolds vs. 5-year-olds) were used to determine which between-subjects factors were significantly different, with
a Bonferroni-corrected alpha (.017) used to control Type
I error. SRTs for the 3-year-olds (M = 1,328.23 ms) were
significantly slower than those for 5-year-olds (M =
1,068.07 ms), F(2, 48) = 4.434, p = .017 (see Figure 1b).

1434

There was also a significant effect for condition, F(2,
29) = 3.88, p < .05 (see Figure 1c). Post hoc repeatedmeasures ANOVAs comparing all possible pairs of the
within-subjects factor (i.e., no prime vs. related prime,
no prime vs. unrelated prime, related prime vs. unrelated
prime) were used to determine which within-subjects
factors were significantly different, with a Bonferronicorrected alpha (.017) used to control Type I error. SRTs
in the related prime condition (M = 1,147.74 ms) were

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

significantly faster than those in the no prime condition
(M = 1,304.36 ms), F(1, 30) = 7.33, p = .011, but the comparison between related prime and unrelated prime was
marginally significant (M = 1,266.84 ms), F(1, 30) = 3.44,
p = .07 (see Figure 1c).

SRT: Effects of Group and Age
on SRT Difference Scores
A univariate ANOVA was used to compute difference scores (i.e., related prime minus no prime condition and unrelated prime minus no prime condition) in
SRT between group (CWS: mean age = 51.79 months;
CWNS: mean age = 50.79 months) and age (3-, 4-, and
5-year-olds) (see Figure 2). Results indicated a nonsignificant difference between the related prime minus
no prime condition for group, F(1, 30) = 0.879, p = .356,
and age, F(2, 30) = 0.057, p = .944, and also for the unrelated prime minus the no prime condition for group,
F(1, 30) = 0.0474, p = .496, and age, F(2, 30) = 0.032, p
= .968.

SRT: Number of Children Who
Decreased Versus Increased SRTs
The above analysis does not, however, indicate how
many of the 36 children decreased (i.e., sped up) their
SRT during the related prime relative to the no prime
condition, or how many increased (i.e., slowed down)
their SRT during the unrelated prime relative to the no
prime condition. In absolute numbers, more CWNS
(89%; N = 16 of 18) than CWS (61%; N = 11 of 18) decreased their SRTs during the related prime relative to
the no prime condition; however, the association between
Figure 2. SRT differences (in milliseconds) and standard deviations
for differences between the related prime minus no prime condition
and unrelated prime minus no prime condition for CWS (N = 18)
and CWNS (N = 18). Negative values = SRT values during the
related or unrelated conditions that were less or faster than SRTs
during the no prime condition.

type of SRT effect (i.e., related prime < no prime and
unrelated prime > no prime) and talker group (i.e., CWS
and CWNS) was statistically nonsignificant, 2(1, N =
36) = 0.636, p = .425.

SRT: Effects of Possible Temporal
Cueing
Although not formally accounted for in the present
study, some might argue that the priming effect for all
participants noted above may be related to temporal
cueing. Temporal cueing, in this context, refers to the
possibility that the auditory speech stimulus (i.e., prime)
chiefly served to prepare the participant for the picture
about to be presented, much like a nonspeech auditory
stimulus might. Thus, in an attempt to disambiguate
condition (i.e., priming effect) from temporal cueing effect, a mixed-model ANOVA was used to compute differences between only the related prime and unrelated
prime conditions (conditions that both contained comparable amounts and types of temporal cueing). Results
indicated a significant main effect for condition, F(1, 30)
= 7.178, p = .012, revealing that the related prime condition (M = 1,147.74 ms) was faster than the unrelated
prime condition (M = 1,266.84 ms). In addition, there
was a significant main effect for age, F(2, 30) = 4.814, p
= .015, indicating that 3-year-olds (M = 1,294.0 ms) were
slower than 5-year-olds (M = 1,043.0 ms). Thus, with or
without comparison to the no prime condition, the related
prime condition was faster than the unrelated prime
condition and 5-year-olds were faster than 3-year-olds.
If temporal cueing rather than priming occurred, one
might have suspected little or no difference in SRT between the two conditions of apparently comparable temporal cueing, a possibility our findings did not support.

SRT: Effects of Ordering
As mentioned in the Method section, all 36 participants received the three experimental conditions in the
same sequence and order (i.e., first: no prime; second:
related prime; third: unrelated prime). In short, based
on our pilot work, with 3-5-year-old children, it appeared
most possible to obtain "usable" SRT data (i.e., data
meeting aforementioned inclusionary criteria) when the
three conditions were presented in the following order:
no prime first, related prime second, and unrelated prime
third. Interestingly, one would expect, based on experimental studies of phonological priming with adults (e.g.,
Meyer & Schriefers, 1991), that the last condition (in
this case, the unrelated prime condition) would yield
the fastest reaction times. However, our findings were
just the opposite. Reaction times during the last or unrelated prime (M = 1,266.84 ms, SD = 247.79 ms) condition were nearly identical to those during the first or no
Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1435

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

prime (M = 1,304.6 ms, SD = 321.19 ms) condition, with
the second or related prime condition being faster (M
= 1,147.74 ms, SD = 244.8 ms) than either of the two
other conditions. Further, current findings that the related prime, when compared to the no prime condition,
was associated with a faster SRT are consistent with
findings from studies of phonological facilitation/priming with adults (e.g., Meyer & Schriefers, 1991).

Nonstuttered Disfluencies: Effects of
Talker Group, Age, and Priming
Condition
Across all three conditions, a mixed-model ANOVA
was used to evaluate differences in the number of nonstuttered speech disfluencies between group (CWS and
CWNS) and age (3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds) across the three
presentation conditions, and it indicated a significant
main effect for condition, F(2, 60) = 4.577, p = .014. Follow-up repeated-measures ANOVAs revealed a significant decrease in nonstuttered disfluency between the
no prime and related prime conditions, F(1, 30) = 7.701,
p = .009, and a significant decrease in nonstuttered
disfluency between the unrelated prime and related
prime conditions, F(1, 30) = 8.182, p = .008. In brief,
both the no prime (M = 1.61, SD = 2.57) and unrelated
prime (M = 1.92, SD = 3.47) conditions, for both talker
groups, were associated with more nonstuttered speech
disfluencies than the related prime (M = 0.47, SD = 1.23)
condition.

Errors: Effects of Talker Group,
Age, and Priming Condition
"Child" Errors
Across the three presentation conditions, a mixedmodel ANOVA was used to evaluate differences in the
percentage of "child" errors between group (CWS and
CWNS) and age (3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds). Results indicated a significant effect for age, F(2, 30) = 3.476, p =
.044. As might be expected, a follow-up repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significantly more "child" errors for 3-year-olds than for 5-year-olds, F(1, 24) =
9.155, p = .006.

"Other" Errors
Across all three presentation conditions, a mixedmodel ANOVA was used to evaluate differences in the
percentage of "other" errors between group (CWS and
CWNS) and age (3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds). Results indicated a main effect for condition, F(2, 58) = 11.729, p <
.001, and a main effect for age, F(2, 30) = 6.127, p =
.006. Follow-up related-samples t tests for condition revealed significantly more "other" errors in the no prime
1436

than in the related prime condition, t(35) = 4.021, p <
.001, and significantly more "other" errors in the no
prime than in the unrelated prime condition, t(35) =
4.079, p < .001. A follow-up repeated-measures ANOVA
revealed more "other" errors for 3-year-olds than for 5year-olds, F(1, 24) = 9.503, p = .005.
In summary, there were more errors of all types
for 3- than 5-year-old children. This finding indicates,
as would be expected, that the speech-language and
overall performance during a picture-naming task is
more error prone in younger than in older preschool
children.

Relationship Between Articulatory
Mastery and SRT
Talker Group and GFTA Effect
To assess the influence of articulatory mastery on
the response mode (i.e., overt articulation) of the main
dependent measure (i.e., SRT), an ANCOVA was run in
which the average reaction time was treated as a function of talker group, GFTA, and their interaction. Results indicated a significant main effect for talker group,
F(1, 30) = 10.28, p < .05, and GFTA, F(1, 30) = 7.30, p <
.05, but were qualified by a significant GFTA x Talker
Group interaction, F(1, 30) = 10.27, p < .05.
Two post hoc regression analyses were performed
to determine the nature of the GFTA x Talker Group
interaction, with a Bonferroni-corrected alpha (.025).
Because there was no interaction of prime condition with
group or GFTA, average reaction time across all prime
conditions was used as the dependent variable, with
GFTA as the independent variable. This analysis was
performed for each talker group.
For all prime conditions combined, GFTA was a significant predictor of SRT for CWNS, F(1, 16) = 27.52, p
< .01 (R2 = .63), but not for CWS (F < 1.0; R2 = .01). In
essence, those CWNS with higher GFTA scores exhibited faster reaction times, whereas CWS exhibited no
apparent relationship between GFTA and reaction
times.
As might be expected from the lack of a significant
prime condition and GFTA interaction, results of regression analyses for each prime condition (i.e., no, related,
and unrelated) for each of the two talker groups were
similar to results for all conditions (see Figure 3). That
is, CWNS with higher GFTA (i.e., articulation mastery)
scores had faster reaction time during the no prime
(R2 = .53), related prime (R2 = .36), and unrelated prime
(R2 = .42) conditions; however, no such relationship was
apparent for CWS during the no prime (R2 < .01), related prime (R2 = .07), and unrelated prime (R2 < .01)
conditions.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

To further assess whether the visually apparent between-group differences in the relationship between
GFTA and SRT (see Figure 3) were statistically significant, a GLM ANOVA was used for each of the three

conditions (no prime, related prime, and unrelated prime).
This ANOVA included an interaction term (i.e., talker
group interacting with the GFTA correlation with SRT)
that allowed us to determine whether the correlations of

Figure 3. Scattergrams depicting, during the no, related, and unrelated prime conditions, the relationship between SRT (in milliseconds) and
Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation (GFTA) scores for CWNS and CWS; R2 = index of determination or what percentage of variation of SRT
is accounted for by GFTA score.

Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1437

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

GFTA to SRT were significantly different between the
talker groups. Results indicated that this interaction was
significant (p values ranging from .01 to .02), that is, no
prime: t(1) = 2.72, p = .011; related prime: t(1) = 2.58, p
= .015; and unrelated prime: t(1) = 2.4, p = .023. In other
words, the visually apparent (see Figure 3) betweengroup (CWS vs. CWNS) differences in the relationship
between GFTA and SRT are statistically significant.

Age Influence on the Correlation
Between GFTA and SRT
To assess the effect of age moderating or influencing the relation between GFTA and SRT, we again used
a GLM ANOVA containing an interaction term (i.e., age
interacting with SRT x GFTA relationship) that permitted assessment of whether age had any appreciable
influence on the relationship between SRT and GFTA.
Six such analyses were completed (i.e., for each of the
two groups for each of three priming conditions). Five
of these six interaction terms were nonsignificant (i.e.,
p > .05); however, for CWS, for the no prime condition,
age appeared to significantly moderate the correlation
between GFTA and SRT, t(1) = -2.65, p < .05, indicating that as age advanced, in combination with better
GFTA scores, SRT decreased. However, power analysis, using the guidelines of Cohen (1992), for these Age
x GFTA x SRT interaction analyses, indicated that a
larger sample than 18 participants per group would be
needed to truly test this issue, given the very subtle,
weak effect size of the age interaction with the correlation between GFTA and SRT.

Discussion
SRT
Changes in SRT Associated
With Phonological Priming
As mentioned in the introduction, we hypothesized
that although both groups of children may benefit from
phonological priming, CWS may not benefit as much as
CWNS (i.e., exhibit less priming effect). We reasoned
that if CWS do, in fact, have an impaired ability to
quickly phonologically encode as the CRH suggests, then
their ability to benefit from phonological priming may
not be as apparent or as great as that of CWNS.
Accordingly, group differences should have been
observed, with CWNS benefiting more than CWS during the related prime condition. However, although informal assessment suggested some difference in SRT
between CWS and CWNS as a result of phonological
priming, it should be noted that there were no statistically significant between-group (CWS and CWNS) effects (see Figures 1b and 1c). One possible reason why
1438

this occurred was the apparently large amount of variation in SRT, both within and between participants.

Variation in SRT
Both talker groups exhibited rather large standard
deviations in their SRT (as shown in Figure 1a, CWS
ranging from 235 ms to 320 ms and CWNS ranging from
225 ms to 331 ms). It seems plausible, therefore, that
between- as well as within-group variation may have
obscured possibly significant between-group differences
in the central tendency in terms of priming effects. In
fact, it is of some interest to speculate on what may have
caused these large standard deviations to occur.
With the younger children (both CWS and CWNS),
one possible reason relates to developmental issues. In
other words, it seems reasonable to suggest that young
children are not as able to efficiently and rapidly provide naming responses as consistently as older children
(i.e., younger children's attention and cooperation is relatively poor compared to older children's). Although this
hypothesis may account for differences between 3- and
5-year-old CWNS, it seems less applicable for the CWS
who exhibited relatively similar variability in SRT between 3 and 5 years of age (i.e., CWS's average standard deviations ranged between 235 ms and 320 ms).
Perhaps subtle impairments in the overall ability of CWS
to phonologically encode (Pellowski et al., 2001) changes
little between 3 and 5 years of age. Hence, the ability of
CWS to respond more rapidly as they age, at least during preschool years, may also be minimized.
It is not unreasonable to speculate, therefore, that
variations in SRT, at least for CWS at 3 years of age,
may be due to a combination of developmental and phonological encoding difficulties, whereas the continued,
seemingly unchanged variation in rapidity of selection
at 5 years of age may be more related to difficulties with
phonological encoding, children whose stuttering is probably more apt to be persistent. That is to say, variation
in SRT of 3-year-old CWS, who probably represent a mix
of future recovering as well as persistent stuttering, may
be influenced by a mix of developmental as well as impaired factors. In contrast, 5-year-old CWS, more of
whom are presumed to exhibit persistent stuttering, may
exhibit SRT performance primarily influenced by phonological encoding problems. Such speculation seems
consistent with Yairi and Ambrose's (1999) finding that
phonological difficulties were most apt to be present for
children whose stuttering persisted.

Child Versus Adult SRT
It is important to reiterate that the methodology
for measuring SRT (i.e., via a picture-word interference
task where naming latency is automatically measured
by computer) has, to our knowledge, never been used with

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

3-5-year-old children, particularly those who stutter.
Consequently, the procedure used with adults by Meyer
and Schriefers (1991) had to be modified so that young
children could accomplish the task. In addition to adapting procedures from Meyer and Schriefers, we assumed
that naming latency for children during this modified picture-word interference task would also be considerably
slower (i.e., longer) across all three presentation conditions when compared to adults, a hunch borne out in fact.
In Meyer and Schriefers (1991), participants were
typically university undergraduate students (who did
not stutter). Reaction times reported in their experiments (e.g., using an SOA of -300 ms for monosyllabic
targets) for no prime, begin-related prime, and beginunrelated prime conditions were 603 ms, 617 ms, and
612 ms, respectively. Begin here refers to the initial
sound or sounds in the target picture when prime and
word-initial sounds were similar. For example, a "begin-related" condition may include the prime /dO/ combined with the target dog.
In the present study (SOA of -500 ms), SRT for all
(averaged across 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old) CWNS for similar conditions (no prime, [begin-] related prime, and [begin-] unrelated prime) resulted in reaction times of
1,304.36 ms, 1,147.74 ms, and 1,266.84 ms, respectively
(again, see Figure 1a). Thus, the average SRT for CWNS
across all ages appears to be almost twice that of adults
who do not stutter.
Although an SOA of -500 ms was chosen so that the
largest number possible of 3-5-year-old children would
be able to complete the related and unrelated prime
conditions, it remains an open question whether a sufficient number--for purposes of generalizability--of
children at this age might be able to complete these conditions with different (e.g., shorter) SOAs. If CWNS do,
in fact, have better developed articulatory/phonological
encoding skills than CWS, it may be particularly interesting to see if shorter SOAs might better reveal between-group differences.

SRT Errors
Results indicated that all participants (i.e., CWS and
CWNS combined) produced more "other" SRT errors
during the no prime condition than during either the
related or unrelated prime condition. Perhaps this occurred because the no prime condition was the first condition and the participants were adjusting to or learning
how to complete the experimental task, with 3-year-olds
being the largest contributor because of their apparently
greater difficulties making such adjustments. Although
every attempt should be made, in future studies, to help
minimize such errors, it seems reasonable to suggest it
may not be possible to eliminate all of them, particularly with 3-year-olds.

Articulatory Mastery
The present results indicate that articulatory mastery relates to SRT for CWNS differently than it does
for CWS. Such relationships have also been studied with
4-9-year-old children exhibiting various severities of
specific language impairment (SLI), with findings indicating no significant relation between SRTs during a
picture-naming task and scores on standardized tests
of language (Lahey, Edwards, & Munson, 2001). Whether
typical or non-SLI children differ in their relationships
between these variables from their peers with SLI is an
open empirical question; however, given current findings and those of Lahey et al., continued study of this
relationship, in children with and without various communication disorders, seems both warranted and a possibly fruitful source of future investigations.
Although chronological age, with one exception (for
CWS in the no prime condition), had no significant moderating influence on the correlation between GFTA and
SRT, such analyses/results must be viewed with caution. This is because the GFTA, like most such standardized tests of speech-language, is age corrected. That
is, GFTA percentile ranks for each of the participants
were relative to their chronological age cohort, rather
than some absolute standard. Thus, further research
will be needed, using different indexes of articulatory
mastery, to better resolve the issue of whether chronological age moderates the relationship between articulatory mastery and SRT, for both talker groups.
Returning to the present findings, at least three
major inferences may be drawn from the observation that
CWNS and CWS differ in the relationship of articulatory
mastery and SRT during picture naming. First, even after removing children with apparent and/or clinically significant articulatory difficulties, it would appear that the
articulatory systems of CWS are less well developed or
organized than those of their normally fluent peers. Second, CWNS, when compared to CWS, appear to exhibit
a relationship between the overall mastery of speech
sound articulation and SRT during a picture-naming
task, a relationship that appears minimally influenced
by phonological priming. Third, temporal as well as accuracy aspects of production need to be considered when
attempting a comprehensive view of the articulatory
abilities of children, whether they stutter or not. Following is an elaboration of each of these conclusions.

Less Well-Developed/Organized
Articulatory Systems
As reflected in the scattergrams (see Figure 3) for
both talker groups, CWNS with the highest articulatory mastery scores had the fastest (shortest) SRTs.
However, no such relationship was noted for CWS. What
Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1439

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

seemingly makes these between-group differences even
more interesting is that all CWS and CWNS in this study
exhibited, on the basis of a standardized test, articulatory skills within normal limits (i.e., no child, in either
talker group, scored beyond 1 SD below the mean). Thus,
although the present findings indicated no significant
mean differences between the two talker groups in terms
of the overall mastery of their speech sound articulation, they also indicated that the two talker groups significantly differed in terms of the relationship between
mastery and speed of articulatory performance.
It is probably the case, however, that noted differences between CWNS and CWS in terms of articulatory
mastery are relative rather than absolute. That is, these
two groups of children differed in the degree to which
they exhibited accurate, relatively rapid articulatory/
phonological production, not in terms of whether one
group always and the other group never exhibited accurate, rapid articulatory/phonological production. In brief,
it would seem that the articulatory system of CWS is
less well organized than that of CWNS, with any such
differences most likely relative rather than absolute.
However, what might "lack of organization, inefficiency"
specifically mean?

Longer Time Period of Categorization/
Evaluation of Stimuli
Perhaps, CWNS, when compared to CWS, show a
stronger relationship between articulatory mastery and
speed of accurate, fluent picture naming because they
take a shorter period of time to evaluate pictures, or at
least more consistently exhibit a briefer time period of
stimulus evaluation than CWS. That is, the entirety of
the process, from evaluation of the stimulus-to-name to
the selection and then execution of response may operate faster and more accurately for CWNS than CWS.
For example, studies of human information processing
(e.g., Coles, Gratton, Bashore, Eriksen, & Donchin, 1985;
Coles, Smid, Scheffers, & Otten, 1995) suggest that when
the evaluation of a stimulus to be produced occurs
quickly, there should be more information available to
direct the speaker's final response and, therefore, the
response should be more accurate. Or as Coles et al.
(1995) suggested, "...the accuracy of responses must
depend on the availability of sufficient information about
the stimulus" (p. 96) to be produced. If these observations and speculations are applicable to children, one
might assume that those children whose evaluative processes of pictures are fairly rapid should have an increased chance of producing accurate responses.
Therefore, CWNS, when compared to CWS, may
more consistently evaluate pictures quickly. This more
rapid evaluation process should provide them with more

1440

available information when they subsequently select and
execute their articulatory responses and result in an
inverse relationship between their accuracy and speed
of response. Conversely, children whose speed of evaluation of similar pictures is slower should more often have
less information to guide their responses. Why such children would have less information is, of course, open to
speculation. However, one might conjecture that these
children may have, for various reasons, stored less or
perhaps less complete information in that part of their
mental lexicon that stores phonological code and/or
mental syllabary that stores gestural scores (see Indefrey
& Levelt, 2000; Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999; Levelt
& Wheeldon, 1994, for further discussion of the role of
the mental lexicon and syllabary in speech-language
planning and production). Whatever the case, such children should exhibit less of a relationship between their
overall articulatory mastery and the latency of their picture-naming response. However, even for children with
higher articulation scores, the inherently less than linear development of children would suggest that any such
relationship is probably variable in nature rather than
always present or always absent.

Interaction Between Period of
Evaluation, Time to Respond, and
Accuracy of Responding
The relationship between speed and accuracy of responding has long been recognized (e.g., Woodworth, 1899)
and often has been described as the speed-accuracy
tradeoff (e.g., individuals in a reaction time experiment
who "trade off" or reduce response accuracy to achieve
greater response speed). However, in most clinical situations, measurement of time of responding is, at best,
cursorily noted or reported. It is interesting to speculate,
given the aforementioned discussion about the time period of stimulus evaluation, that a three-way interaction
might exist between the speaker's (a) length of stimulus
evaluation, (b) rapidity, and (c) accuracy of response. For
CWS, there may be a mismatch (see Conture, 2001, for
further discussion of possible speech-language planning
and production mismatches and their association to
childhood stuttering; cf. Bernstein Ratner, 2000; Siegel,
2000) between the child's inherent time for stimulus
evaluation and subsequent attempt to select and execute
a response. Therefore, the child who stutters may frequently find himself or herself attempting oral responses
before having sufficient information about the stimulus
to which he or she is responding. Of course, such mismatches probably do not occur each and every time the
child attempts verbal communication. For example,
sometimes the length of time for evaluation would be
completed prior to responding and, in such situations,

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

responding should be more apt to be accurate and/or
fluent. In other situations, onset of the child's responding may be delayed, for whatever reason, allowing an
inherently longer period of evaluation to catch up to and
then provide sufficient information about the stimulus
for more accurate responding (see similar speculations
about mismatches between time of selection and rate of
activation of speech units in Kolk & Postma, 1997;
Yaruss & Conture, 1996; and described in some detail
by Conture, 2001, chap. 1).
It is also possible that some children impulsively
react, respond, or attempt to produce speech-language
prior to having sufficient information about that which
they are trying to respond to, describe, or explain. Thus,
communicative circumstances (internal and/or external
to the child) that would either (a) allow for the period of
stimulus evaluation to be complete or (b) slow down or
delay the rate of response selection and execution, or (c)
both should lead to fewer errors and, hence, fewer speech
disfluencies. For example, such circumstances as having the child delay his or her responding for perhaps 1 s
or so or decreasing the duration or frequency of overlap
between the child's and the child's parents' utterances
may help increase the accuracy as well as fluency of the
child's utterances (see Conture, 2001, p. 47, for examples
of such variables).

Conclusion
As might be predicted, young children's SRT decreased (i.e., got faster) with advancing age, with 5year-old children exhibiting faster SRT than 3-year-old
children. Less readily predictable was the finding that
3-5-year-old children exhibited faster SRT during the
related priming condition, regardless of whether they
stuttered or not. Although this latter finding suggests
that pre-activation of some of the sound segments of a
picture to be named may, in fact, facilitate the phonological encoding for all 3-5-year-old children, it does not
appear to support the hypothesis based on the CRH that
CWS and CWNS would differ in their response to a phonological priming experiment.
There was, however, indirect evidence consistent with
CRH speculation; that is, it was found that CWNS significantly differed from CWS in terms of the relationship
in articulatory mastery to the speed of picture naming.
This difference was taken to suggest that the articulatory/phonological systems of CWNS are somewhat more
developed (better organized) than that of CWS. As computer hardware and software develops, making it more
possible for clinicians to reliably assess the speed of picture-naming responses, it will be interesting to see
whether the time taken to initiate a picture-naming response in relation to articulatory mastery contributes

to clinicians' abilities to clinically differentiate between
CWS and CWNS. Until such time, however, the present
findings lend credence to the notion that the development, organization, and usage of the articulation/phonological system is probably among the assembly of variables that need to be considered when empirically
investigating the causal mosaic of childhood stuttering.

Acknowledgments
This research was completed as part of the first author's
doctoral dissertation and was supported, in part, by National
Institutes of Health Grant DC00523 to Vanderbilt University. We would like to thank Mark Pellowski for his help
with interjudge reliability measures and Daniel Ashmead,
Timothy McNamara, and Terry Wertz for advice on and/or
reviews of previous drafts. We would like to particularly
thank Herman Kolk for his early encouragement, guidance,
and support to pursue this line of investigation. In addition,
we also express our appreciation to Warren Lambert for his
help with statistical analysis. Finally, we are very much in
debt as well as grateful to the parents and children who
participated in this study.

References
Ambrose, N. G., & Yairi, E. (1999). Normative disfluency
data for early childhood stuttering. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 895-909.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(1990, April). Guidelines for screening for hearing
impairment and middle-ear disorders. ASHA, 32(Suppl.
2), 17-24.
Beitchman, J. H., Nair, R., Clegg, M., & Patel, P. C.
(1986). Prevalence of speech and language disorders in
5-year-old kindergarten children in the Ottawa-Carleton
region. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51,
98-110.
Berg, T. (1986). The aftermath of error occurrence: Psycholinguistic evidence from cut-offs. Language and Communication, 6, 195-213.
Bernstein Ratner, N. (2000). Performance or capacity, the
model still requires definitions and boundaries it doesn't
have. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 25, 337-346.
Blackmer, E. R., & Mitton, J. L. (1991). Theories of
monitoring and the timing of repairs in spontaneous
speech. Cognition, 39, 173-194.
Bloodstein, O. (1995). A handbook on stuttering. San Diego,
CA: Singular.
Bredart, S. (1991). Word interruption in self-repairing.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 20, 123-138.
Brooks, P., & MacWhinney, B. (2000). Phonological
priming in children's picture naming. Journal of Child
Language, 27, 335-366.
Burger, R., & Wijnen, F. (1999). Phonological encoding and
word stress in stuttering and nonstuttering subjects.
Journal of Fluency Disorders, 24, 91-106.
Cantwell, D., & Baker, L. (1985). Psychiatric and learning

Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1441

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

disorders in children with speech and language disorders:
A descriptive analysis. Advances in Learning and Behavioral Disabilities, 4, 29-47.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin,
112, 155-159.
Coles, M., Gratton, G., Bashore, T., Eriksen, C., &
Donchin, E. (1985). A psychophysiological investigation of
the continuous flow model of human information processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 11, 529-553.
Coles, M., Smid, H., Scheffers, M., & Otten, L. (1995).
Mental chronometry and the study of human information
processing. In M. Rugg & M. Coles (Eds.), Electrophysiology of mind: Event-related brain potentials and cognition
(pp. 85-131). Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Conture, E. G. (1990). Stuttering (2nd ed.). Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Conture, E. G. (2001). Stuttering: Its nature, diagnosis, and
treatment. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Conture, E. G., & Kelly, E. M. (1991). Young stutterers'
nonspeech behavior during stuttering. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 34, 1041-1056.
Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test-Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.
Evans, M. A. (1985). Self-initiated speech repairs: A
reflection of communicative monitoring in young children.
Developmental Psychology, 21, 365-371.
Goldman, R., & Fristoe, M. (1986). Goldman-Fristoe Test
of Articulation. Circle Pines, MN. American Guidance
Service.
Hresko, W., Reid, D., & Hamill, D. (1991). Test of Early
Language Development-Third Edition. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Indefrey, P., & Levelt, W. (2000). The neural correlates of
language production. In M. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The new
cognitive neurosciences (2nd ed., pp. 845-865). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kolk, H., & Postma, A. (1997). Stuttering as a covert repair
phenomenon. In R. Curlee & G. Siegel (Eds.), Nature and
treatment of stuttering: New directions (2nd ed., pp. 182-
203). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Lahey, M., Edwards, J., & Munson, B. (2001). Is processing speed related to severity of language impairment?
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44,
1354-1361.
LaSalle, L., & Carpenter, L. (1994, November). The effect
of phonological simplification on children's speech fluency.
Paper presented at the annual convention of the American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association, New Orleans, LA.
LaSalle, L. R., & Conture, E. G. (1995). Disfluency
clusters of children who stutter: Relation of stutterings to
self-repairs. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38,
965-977.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in
speech. Cognition, 14, 41-104.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to
articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levelt, W., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. (1999). A theory of

1442

lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Levelt, W., & Wheeldon, L. (1994). The time course of
lexical access in speech production: A study of picture
naming. Psychological Review, 98, 122-142.
Louko, L., Conture, E., & Edwards, M. L. (1999). Treating
children who exhibit co-occurring stuttering and disordered
phonology. In R. Curlee (Ed.), Stuttering and related
disorders of fluency (pp. 124-138). New York: Thieme.
Meyer, A. S., & Schriefers, H. (1991). Phonological
facilitation in picture-word interference experiments:
Effects of stimulus onset asynchrony and types of interfering stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 1146-1160.
Nippold, M. A. (2002). Stuttering and phonology: Is there
an interaction? American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 11, 99-110.
Ohde, R. N., & Haley, K. L. (1997). Stop-consonant and
vowel perception in three- and four-year-old children.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102, 711-722.
Paden, E. P., & Yairi, E. (1996). Phonological characteristics of children whose stuttering persisted or recovered.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 981-990.
Paden, E. P., Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early
childhood stuttering II: Initial status of phonological
abilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1113-1124.
Pellowski, M., Anderson, J., & Conture, E. (2001).
Articulatory and phonological assessment of children who
stutter. In H. G. Bosshardt, J. S. Yaruss, & H. F. M. Peters
(Eds.), Fluency disorders: Theory, research, treatment and
self-help (pp. 248-252). Nijmegen, The Netherlands:
Nijmegen University.
Postma, A., & Kolk, H. (1993). The covert repair hypothesis: Prearticulatory repair processes in normal and
stuttered disfluencies. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 36, 472-487.
Riley, G. D. (1994). Stuttering Severity Instrument for
Children and Adults-Third Edition. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Schwartz, H. D., & Conture, E. G. (1988). Subgrouping
young stutterers: Preliminary behavioral perspectives.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 31, 62-71.
Schwartz, H. D., Zebrowski, P. M., & Conture, E. G.
(1990). Behaviors at the onset of stuttering. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 15, 77-86.
Siegel, G. (2000). Demands and capacities or demands and
performance? Journal of Fluency Disorders, 25, 321-327.
Snodgrass, J., & Yuditsky, T. (1996). Naming times for the
Snodgrass and Vanderwart pictures. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments and Computers, 28, 516-536.
St. Louis, K., & Hinzman, A. (1988). A descriptive study of
speech, language, and hearing characteristics of schoolaged stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 13, 331-355.
Throneburg, R. N., Yairi, E., & Paden, E. (1994). Relation
between phonologic difficulty and the occurrence of
disfluencies in the early stage of stuttering. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 504-509.
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 46 * 1428-1443 * December 2003

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Walley, A. C. (1988). Spoken word recognition by young
children and adults. Cognitive Development, 3, 137-165.
Watkins, R. V., Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early
childhood stuttering III: Initial status of expressive
language abilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 1125-1135.
Wijnen, F., & Boers, I. (1994). Phonological priming effects
in stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 19, 1-20.
Wolk, L. (1990). An investigation of stuttering and phonologic difficulties in young children. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York.
Wolk, L., Edwards, M. L., & Conture, E. G. (1990).
Coexistence of stuttering and disordered phonology in
young children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
36, 906-917.
Woodworth, R. (1899). The accuracy of voluntary movement. Psychological Review, 2(Whole No. 13).
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (1992). Onset of stuttering in
preschool children: Selected factors. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 35, 782-788.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (1999). Early childhood stuttering
I: Persistence and recovery rates. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1097-1112.
Yaruss, J. S., & Conture, E. G. (1996). Stuttering and
phonological disorders in children: Examination of the
covert repair hypothesis. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 349-364.
Yaruss, J. S., LaSalle, L., & Conture, E. G. (1998).
Evaluating young children who stutter: Diagnostic data.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 7(4),
62-76.
Received October 28, 2002
Accepted May 12, 2003
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2003/111)
Contact author: Kenneth S. Melnick, PhD, Department of
Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of North Texas,
P.O. Box 305010, Denton, TX 76203-5010. E-mail:
kmelnick@unt.edu

Melnick et al.: Phonological Priming: Speech Reaction Time

1443

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

