J. Child Lang. 30 (2003), 27-45. f 2003 Cambridge University Press
DOI: 10.1017/S0305000902005524 Printed in the United Kingdom

The role of modelling and request type on
symbolic comprehension of objects and gestures
in young children*
TRICIA STRIANO
Max Planck Institute, Leipzig
PHILIPPE ROCHAT
Emory University
MARIA LEGERSTEE
York University

(Received 30 May 2001. Revised 16 July 2002)

ABSTRACT

In a first study, we considered whether modelling and the type of an
adult's request influenced children's ability at 1 ;8 and 2;2 to comprehend
gestures and replica objects as symbols for familiar objects. In a second
study, we evaluated whether modelling and type of request influenced
children's ability at 1; 8 (N=24) to understand unfamiliar (i.e. unconventional) objects as symbols. Results of Study 1 indicated that children
at 2; 2 comprehended a gesture as a symbol in the absence of any previous
model demonstration. All children comprehended a replica as standing
for another object, although modelling marginally improved children's
performance at 2; 2 and decreased performance at 1 ;8. In general, the
type of request did not influence children's comprehension of gestures or
replicas as symbols. Results of Study 2 showed that modelling and request type did not influence children's understanding of objects that are
unconventional and novel, as symbols. The studies converge to suggest
that symbolic comprehension is a highly context-dependent ability that
continues to develop over the second year.

[*] This research was supported by grant SBR-9507773 from the National Science Foundation
to P. Rochat and by the Max Plank Institute to Tricia Striano. We thank Amanda Kaye and
Yafit Tako for help in conducting this experiment. We also thank Laura Namy and Aimee
Campbell for helpful comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. Address for
correspondence : Tricia Striano, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
Cultural Ontogeny, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany. e-mail : striano@eva.mpg.de

27

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E
INTRODUCTION

Children are commonly thought to engage in symbolic play by the middle of
the second year (Bretherton, 1984 ; Harris & Kavanaugh, 1993). At around this
age they participate in play activities like putting their baby dolls into beds,
talking to their friends on toy telephones, and pushing and crashing their
plastic racecars. Such activities are considered as symbolic in nature because
it is assumed that children are using toys to stand for other real objects in
the world.
Despite much observational data suggesting young children's penchant for
pretend-play (i.e. Nicholich, 1977 ; Fenson, 1984 ; Shore, 1986 ; Fiese, 1990),
the existence of young children's ability to use an object to stand for another is
debatable. For instance, children's performance in symbolic comprehension
tasks is often determined by the type of objects used - e.g. whether the object
that is symbolized looks like the object used in play (i.e. Jackowitz & Watson,
1980), or whether the object has clearly defined functions that make the
elicitation of particular actions more likely (i.e. Pederson, Rook-Green &
Elder, 1981). In fact, research seems to show that until nearly three years of age
children may find it difficult to engage in symbolic types of behaviour. For
example, they have difficulty using a scale model room as a symbol for an
identical looking real room (i.e. DeLoache, 1995).
It has been proposed that difficulty in using one object to stand for another is
due to a problem of DUAL REPRESENTATION (DeLoache, 1995). According to
such proposal, children have difficulty appreciating that objects are physical
entities that can be explored and manipulated and that at the same time objects
can be used symbolically to stand for something else (dual representation).
Interestingly, many experimental findings that seem to support the idea of
dual representation do not fit with more naturalistic observations of children's
pretend-play. Such discrepancies have led to research addressing such questions more systematically. It was hypothesized that researchers have used tasks
that require fundamentally different information processing abilities from
children. For example, traditional scale model tasks include many objects and
may require more complex spatial skills than natural pretend play does.
To control for this problem, recent investigators have kept spatial complexity to a minimum, asking instead whether young children can comprehend
objects as symbols when they are presented one at a time. In such situations,
children at 2 ; 0 are better able to comprehend a replica as a symbol for another
single object when it is placed behind a plexiglass window. Similarly, when
given the opportunity to manipulate a scale object before a test phase, children
at 3; 0 have difficulty to later perceive the object as a symbol. These findings
provide strong support for the dual representation problem (DeLoache,
2000).
Other research has considered whether early pretend-play might actually
not be symbolic at all, but rather is an expression of imitative learning and a
28

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

perception of what objects afford for action. Testing groups of children at 2; 0,
2; 6 and 3; 0, Striano, Tomasello & Rochat (2001) showed that at all ages,
children engaged in significantly more pretend-play activities when these
activities were previously modelled by an experimenter compared to when
there was no model demonstration. Furthermore, children manifested a
marked increase in pretend-play with toy objects that were replicas of real
objects specifically designed to stand for other objects. For instance, children
increased their pretend play when they had a doll represent a person compared
to having a rock or a pencil represent a person. These results suggest that
symbolic functioning in early pretend games is in part imitative, and determined by cultural affordances (objects with well known functions) attached to
objects (Tomasello, 1999).
Recent findings also point to interesting differences in apparent symbolic
comprehension depending on the form of the symbol used. For instance, at
1; 6, children are reported to understand both new words and new gestures
as representing specific objects. In contrast, at 2 ;2 infants appear capable
of readily mapping new words, but not new gestures to objects (Namy &
Waxman, 1998). These results point to an early developmental trend from
general to more linguistically focused symbolic functioning.
In an experimental situation where objects were referred to only via gestures
or miniature 3-D replicas, Tomasello, Striano, & Rochat (1999) found that for
children of 1 ; 6, 2; 2 and 2; 11, performance in understanding requests for an
object tended to be significantly better when gestures were used. It appears
that DeLoache's dual representation problem is exacerbated in the context of
the use of an object as symbol. Tomasello et al. (1999) found, for example, that
when the replica is presented to request another object children tend to reach
for the replica, but rather than treating it as a symbol, they treated it as an
object to be manipulated and explored.
Considering that young children appear more prone to understand gestures,
rather than replicas as symbols, questions, remain whether this difference
is exclusively a result of the dual representation problem as proposed by
Tomasello et al. (1999), or whether gestures provide more information to
children.
In the research by Tomasello et al. (1999), the experimenter first modelled
how to use the particular target objects that the replica object or gesture would
represent. During testing, the replica was always presented to the child in a
STATIC way. The gesture request, on the other hand, provided DYNAMIC information. These task differences between the replica and gesture requests
made it difficult to determine whether gestures are easier for children to
understand as symbols, or whether the presentation of the gestures provided
infants with more information. That is, children might not understand the
gestural request as symbolic per se, but may be better able to associate such
requests to objects because of the additional dynamic information that is
29

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E

provided. If this interpretation is correct, one might expect to link young
children's early referential understanding to the degree of resemblance between gesture and its referent, whether based on static or dynamic information.
In support of this idea, O'Reilly (1995) showed that children of 3;0 comprehend symbolic gestures that involve body parts resembling objects (extended index finger to represent a toothbrush) more readily than gestures in
which the action alone is represented (i.e. closed fist pretending to hold a
toothbrush). Such difference is less marked in four- and five-year-olds' performance. Similarly, Mandler & McDonough (1996) provide evidence that
even by 1; 2, infants may not be constrained by perceptual information when
generalizing across object categories (however, see Rakinson & Butterworth,
1998 ; Rakinson, 2000). This developing independence away from perceptual
similarity would correspond to what Werner & Kaplan (1963) coined the
progressive perceptual ` distancing ' of symbols from referents. Such trends
are also observed in language development, as children become more
linguistically focused with age and actually start to have difficulty using more
perceptually salient gestures to label novel objects in the world (i.e. Namy
& Waxman, 1998).
In the present research, the nature and determinants of early symbolic
comprehension were investigated. In a first study, we considered the role of
modelling and request type on children's comprehension of gestures and
objects as symbols. We assessed the role of modelling by providing half of
the children with a demonstration on how the objects that would later be
requested in the test phase worked. We assessed the role of request type by
asking for the target objects in a way that was highly conventional (i.e. familiar), such as asking for a pair of scissors using either the closing motion of
index and middle fingers or by requesting these objects in a manner that was
less conventional (i.e. novel), such as movements of opening and closing
forearms. In a second study, we considered how prior modelling and type of
request influenced children's ability at 1; 8 to comprehend unconventional
and novel objects as symbols.
There were 3 general working hypotheses guiding the two studies. First,
children at 2; 2 may rely less on modelling of symbolic activities compared to
children at 1; 8. Second, children at 2; 2 will be less sensitive to the type of
symbolic request compared to those at 1; 8. Third, the effect of modelling and
request type will depend upon the conventional use attached to objects.
The rationale for these hypotheses was that the developmental decalage in
favour of gestures over replicas (i.e. Tomasello et al., 1999) might rest on the
fact that gestures, in comparison to static replica presentations, add dynamic
information and resemblance between symbols and their referents. Furthermore, considering that symbolic comprehension might develop first in a
social context through imitating others (i.e. Tomasello et al., 1999 ; Striano
30

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

et al., 2001), we construed that the influence of previous modelling would
become less of a factor in determining symbolic comprehension as a function
of age.
To examine these hypotheses, children were introduced to two object sets.
In the first study, we used one set of objects to address children's comprehension of gestures as symbols and another set to address their comprehension
of replicas as symbols. Following the general procedure of Tomasello et al.
(1999), children played a game where the task was to pick one of four objects
requested by the experimenter. To establish whether children comprehended
gestures and replicas as symbolic, we first modelled for half of the children
at each age how to use the target objects (i.e. banging with a hammer). No
demonstration was provided for the other half of the children.
According to our first hypothesis, if children's competence in understanding gestures is due to a learned association between a gesture (e.g.
pounding fist on floor to request a hammer), and a previously observed action
demonstration (hammer hitting floor), only children who observed the action
demonstration would comprehend the experimenter's gesture during testing.
To test our second hypothesis, we examined whether children's comprehension of a gesture and object request was enhanced when the symbolic
request was most conventional resembling the target object it was standing for.
We expected that, with developing symbolic abilities, children at 2;2 would
be less influenced by the conventionality of the request and previous modelling
than children at 1 ;8.
In the second study, we further investigated the role of conventional action
that could be attached to an object, and how such conventional action might
impact young children's understanding of symbols. In relation to this hypothesis, we expected that early symbolic functioning depended on the intentional affordances and conventional design of objects.

STUDY 1
The relative resemblance between symbol and their referents, and the influence of previous model of action afforded by the referent were considered as
potential factors of early symbolic comprehension. The resemblance factor
was assessed in a gesture and object as symbol context. Children were presented with gestures or replicas that were more or less conventional to the
referred object. For example, children were requested to put scissors down a
slide based on a gesture using either the closing motion of index and middle
fingers, or the less conventional body movements of opening and closing
forearms. In the replica condition, children responded to a request based
either on the mere static presentation of the replica, as in the Tomasello et al.
(1999) study, or in the more conventional presentation of a replica with appropriate motion (e.g. replica hammer in appropriate hammering motion).
31

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E

In addition, to control for the potential role of modelling as a factor, in both
gesture and replica request conditions, children were either previously exposed or not exposed to modelled affordances of the object of the experimenter.

METHOD

Participants
Sixty-four participants were recruited from a list of parents who had volunteered to participate in studies on child development. There were 32
children at 1; 8 (15 females, M=1 ; 8.02) and 32 children at 2;2 (15 females,
M=2; 2.16). Ninety percent of participants were white middle-class and
10 % were African-American middle-class. Children received a small gift for
participating. Ten additional children were tested (6 at 1;8 and 4 at 2;2), but
were excluded from the study because they refused to participate (N=8) or
because of experimental error (N=2).
Materials
The apparatus was a colourful slide with a 10 in. by 16 in. aperture at both
ends, inclined to about 25x. The higher end, the child's end, was about 18 in.
above the floor and had next to it a small platform on which the objects could be
placed. The lower end, the experimenter's end, led to a plastic tray on the floor.
The child's task in all phases of the experiment was to assess which one of four
target objects on the platform the experimenter wanted, and then to throw it
down the slide or chute (see Tomasello et al. 1999 for similar procedure and
apparatus).
Three object sets were used in the game. For the purpose of clarity, we used
TARGET OBJECTS to refer to the objects that the child chose, during the warm-up
and test phases, and use REPLICA OBJECTS to refer to those replica objects used
by the experimenter to request objects from the child. For the warm-up phase,
four target objects were used : keys, spoon, block, and sock. For the gesture
phase, four target objects were used : toy hammer, plastic brush, plastic
scissors, and a baby bottle. The target objects were approximately 6 in. tall.
For the object phase there were four target objects : baseball hat, plastic fork,
toothbrush, and a plastic cup. The target objects were 4 to 6 in. in dimension.
There were also four corresponding replica objects : hat, fork, toothbrush, and
cup. The replica objects were 1-2 in. tall, and were analogous to the corresponding target objects, but about two-thirds smaller, differing slightly in
colour and material.
Procedure
Each child was videotaped and tested individually. The child sat on the
floor and the accompanying parent sat behind the child who was facing the
32

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION
TABLE

1. Actions performed on target objects for the gesture and object phase
Object

Action

Gesture phase
hammer
brush
scissors
bottle

bang on floor
brush hair
cut (no substrate)
drink

Object phase
hat
fork
toothbrush
cup

hat on head
fork to mouth
brush teeth
drink

apparatus and the experimenter. Parents were told they could encourage their
child to play the game, but otherwise not to help them. The testing sessions
consisted of a warm-up task, followed by two test phases. For all trials, the
location of the target object was randomly determined, never appearing in the
same location more than twice in a row. The phase (gesture phase or object
phase) and type of request was counterbalanced within children of each age
group.
Following a warm-up session, testing began. Children were randomly assigned to one of two model conditions. For children in the no-model condition, the experimenter introduced the objects by placing the tray in front of
the child and then enhanced each object by touching it successively for 4-5 s
while saying, ` Look at this '. For children in the model condition, the experimenter placed the tray of objects in front of the child and then used each in
its conventional fashion (e.g. hammering with the hammer, see Table 1). After
the experimenter touched the object or modelled an action, she placed it back
on the tray in front of the child.
For each trial, the experimenter, who was naive regarding the predictions of
the study, requested an object to be put down the chute, by asking the child,
` Can I have your _ down the slide ? ' Children were given a maximum of 60 s
to respond to the experimenter's request, with the verbal request repeated 3-4
times during the trial if necessary. The trial was repeated once if the child did
not respond by throwing any object down the slide after the first request.
Warm-up phase
In the warm-up phase, the experimenter introduced the child to the slide,
calling it a ` slide game'. The experimenter first showed the child how objects
could be thrown down the slide. The child was then instructed how to play the
game, and asked to throw only the object requested by the experimenter down
the slide. The child was then presented with four objects on a tray. The
33

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E

experimenter would ask for each one in turn by name : keys, block, spoon, and
sock. Mothers could assist their children during this warm-up phase, and help
them understand that they could put only one object at a time down the slide.
Children passed the warm-up phase if they responded correctly for three
requests in a row without help from their mother. The warm-up phase continued until children met this criterion.
Gesture phase
In the gesture phase, the experimenter requested the target object by performing a high-conventional or a low-conventional gesture. For the highconventional gesture, the experimenter used one hand to stand for the object
(see O'Reilly, 1995). For the low-conventional gesture she held her hand open
and used one arm as the object - for requesting the brush she used one arm to
brush her hair, for the scissors she moved both arms to represent the blades of
the scissors (with her elbows as a hinge), for the hammer she used one elbow to
bang on the floor like a hammer, and for the bottle she brought an arm with
opened hand to her mouth (no thumb pointing toward the mouth). Note that a
random sample of 10 naive adults systematically ranked the high-conventional
request as more conventional for all gestures. For a given child, the experimenter asked for each of the four target objects using one type of request
(high-conventional or low-conventional), then asked for each of the four
objects a second time using the other type of request. On each trial and for both
request types, the experimenter asked the child, `Can I have your _ down the
slide ? ' as she performed the corresponding gesture.
Object phase
In the object-phase, the experimenter requested the child's target object by
holding up either a static or a dynamic replica object. For instance, when
requesting the target hat, the experimenter held up a replica plastic hat, for the
fork she held up a replica plastic fork, for the toothbrush she held up a replica
toothbrush, and for the cup she held up a replica cup. The experimenter would
ask for each of the four target objects using one type of request, then asked for
each of the four objects a second time using the other request type. On each
trial and for both request types, the experimenter asked the child, `Can I have
your _ down the slide ?' as she either statically held up the replica object or
performed an action with it. The experimenter asked for each of the four target
objects using one type of request (static or dynamic), then asked for each of the
four objects a second time using the other type of request.
Dependent measures and coding
For each trial, the experimenter recorded the child's response. The response
was operationally defined as the first object the child sent down the chute. The
34

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

response was coded as incorrect if the child threw an incorrect object down the
chute. If the child did not respond within 60 s of the given trial, it was also
considered as incorrect. If the child pushed more than one object down the
slide at a given time, the trial was repeated. Failure to respond on a given trial
and pushing down more than one object were relatively rare (less than 5 % of
all trials). The repeated trial was scored and used in the final analysis. For
reliability, an independent observer coded again all video records. For discrepancies between the live coding and video records, the observer viewed the
video records a second time (a discrepancy occurred for 0.007 % of all trials) to
determine which object the child tossed down the chute. For reliability, two
independent observers also measured the number of reaching attempts for
each trial. Reaching was coded from video records and defined as one or both
of the child's arms coming forward toward the experimenter's hand as she
performed a gesture (gesture phase) or toward the object the experimenter was
holding (object phase). Children received a score of 0 to 4 for each phase of the
study, 0 if they never reached and 4 if they reached for all 4 objects. Based on
20% of the tested children, inter-observer reliability was 99.2%.

RESULTS

Overall performance
To assess whether children comprehended the experimenter's request, we
compared their performance to chance of 0.25 (given that there were 4 objects
to choose from) using a series of one-sample t-tests. Analyses were performed
separately for each phase (gesture or object), age group (1;8 and 2;2), request
type (high-conventional and low-conventional for gesture, dynamic and static
for object), and demonstration type (model or no-model). As indicated in
Table 2, children at both ages performed above chance for all phases regardless
of demonstration type. The only exception was for the group of 1;8 children in
the no-model condition when the experimenter requested the target objects
in the gesture condition. To ensure that these null findings were not due to
chance, we performed a retrospective power analysis (Tomas & Juanas, 1996).
The analysis revealed that power was high: 0.77 for the high-conventional
group and 0.99 for the low-conventional group. Therefore, it is unlikely due
to lack of power, rather this reflects special difficulty in the comprehension
of objects as symbols for children at 1 ; 8 when no model demonstration is
provided.
Comparison of performance by age, perceptual similarity, and modelling
conditions
To assess the role of age, request type, and model demonstration on children's
symbolic comprehension, we performed a (2) age : 1; 8 vs. 2 ; 2 r(2) request
35

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E
TABLE

2. Children's performance by age, model demonstration, phase, and
request type

Request type
Model type

Age

M (S.D.)

t

p

Gesture high-conventional
model
model
no-model
no-model

1; 8
2; 2
1; 8
2; 2

1.68 (0.87)
2.00 (1.10)
1.25 (0.25)
1.37 (0.71)

3.15
3.46
1.00
2.08

0.007*
0.003*
0.333
0.054*

Gesture low-conventional
model
model
no-model
no-model

1; 8
2; 2
1; 8
2; 2

1.62 (0.71)
1.56 (0.96)
1.06 (0.57)
1.75 (1.10)

3.48
2.33
0.436
2.53

0.003*
0.034*
0.669
0.023*

Object static
model
model
no-model
no-model

1; 8
2; 2
1; 8
2; 2

1.62 (0.71)
2.56 (1.30)
2.50 (1.30)
2.06 (1.20)

2.30
4.75
4.39
3.78

0.036*
0.000*
0.001*
0.002*

Object dynamic
model
model
no-model
no-model

1; 8
2; 2
1; 8
2; 2

1.43 (0.81)
2.75 (1.20)
1.87 (1.10)
2.12 (0.95)

2.15
5.91
3.05
4.70

0.048*
0.000*
0.008*
0.000*

* p<0.05.
N=16 for each cell.

type : high-conventional vs. low-conventional for gesture or dynamic vs. static
for object r(2) model demonstration : no-model vs. model mixed design
analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the number of correct responses. Overall
analysis of variance treating order as a variable (gesture phase first or object
phase first, conventional first or dynamic first) yielded no significant main
effect of order ( p>0.20 in all cases). This variable was not considered in
further analyses. Below are the results obtained in relation to gesture and
object.
Gesture
The analysis on the number of children's correct responses in the gesture
phase yielded a significant main effect of model, F(1, 60)=4.65, p<0.035, with
children performing better when they saw a model (M=1.72) compared to
the no-model demonstration (M=1.36). This finding indicates that, overall,
modelling facilitated children's comprehension of the experimenter's gesture.
There were no other significant main effects, nor any significant interactions
for the gesture phase.
36

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

4
object model

Number of correct responses

object no model
3

2

1

0
1;8

2;2

Fig. 1. Mean number of correct responses as a function of age and condition.

Object
The analysis on the number of children's correct responses in the object
phase yielded a significant main effect of age F(1, 60)=0.03, p=0.03, with
the children at 2; 2 (M=2.37) performing reliably better than those at
1;8 (M=1.85). There was also a significant agermodel interaction,
F(1, 60)=6.90, p=0.01. This interaction rests on the fact that the performance children at 2; 6 was marginally enhanced (F(1, 30)=2.98, p=0.095) in the
model condition compared to the no-model condition whereas the performance of children at 1 ; 8 was hindered (F(1, 30)=3.94, p=0.056) in the model
compared to the no-model condition (see Figure 1). There were no significant
main effects or interactions in relation to the request type variable.
Object phase : reaching
We performed a (2) age : 1; 8 vs. 2 ; 2 r(2) model type : no-model vs. model
r(2) request type : static vs. dynamic mixed design ANOVA on the number of
times children reached for the replica object. Note that we did not analyse
reaching for the gesture phase because children never reached when the experimenter was not holding an object. The ANOVA yielded a significant main
effect of request type F(1, 60)=19.26, p<0.0001), with children reaching
more when the replica object was requested statically (M=1.62) compared to
when it was requested dynamically (M=0.844). There was also a significant
main effect of age, F(1, 60)=4.43, p=0.04, indicating that children at 1; 8
37

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E

reached more often (M=1.53) than those at 2;2 (M=0.98). There were no
other significant main effects or interactions.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Results pertaining to children's understanding of GESTURES indicate that when
children saw the experimenter model, they comprehended her use of a gesture
to stand for a target object. When they did not see her model, only the children
at 2 ; 2 comprehended the experimenter's gesture. This finding suggests that
children's comprehension of gestures at 1; 8 might rest on an association
between a model and the gesture used in the request. In contrast, because
children at 2; 2 did not show any influence of previous modelling, the results
suggest that they did comprehend the gestures as symbolic. Learning the
association between model and request gesture cannot account for the performance of children at 2 ; 2 as they performed above chance regardless of
modelling.
Furthermore, the degree of conventionality of the gesture did not appear
to play a significant role in children's performance at either age. Rather than
conventionality per se, and, in light of the model demonstration effect, it is
probable that the actual action or vitality of the gesture (e.g. speed and rhythm)
associated with the object is the information picked up by children in either
their learned association of gesture and object (children at 1 ;8), or in their
mapping of symbol to referent (children at 2 ; 2).
In relation to children's comprehension of replicas as standing for other
objects, regardless of model demonstration, or whether the replica was presented statically or dynamically, children at both ages were above chance in
their performance. In comparing conditions, however, we found a significant
age by model demonstration interaction. This interaction rests on the fact that
at 2; 2 those children who saw the experimenter's model prior to testing tended
to perform significantly better compared to those children who did not see a
model demonstration. The reverse trend was found for children at 1;8.
It appeared that for the younger children, previous modelling is a source
of confusion, somehow impeding them from identifying the object as symbol.
To examine this interpretation, we conducted Study 2. We tested children's
(mean age of 1 ; 8) comprehension that objects stand for other objects that have
no prescribed cultural functions (e.g. stones and sticks rather than cars or
scissors).
The rationale for this second study was the following. We considered that
there could be at least two possible explanations for why modelling did not
improve the performance of children at 1 ; 8. One is that young children have
difficulty comprehending ANY object associated with an action as a symbol due
to a general lack of dual representation ability (DeLoache, 1995, see Introduction). An alternative interpretation is that children's performance is linked
38

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

to the pre-existing knowledge they have about objects, and in particular, their
understanding that certain objects are used in certain conventional ways (e.g.
scissors to cut, cars to roll). These conventional ways correspond to what is
sometimes called ` cultural ' or ` intentional ' affordances of objects (Tomasello
et al., 1999 ; Tomasello, 1999). In the first experiment, children were asked to
comprehend replicas as symbols for objects, all having well-known functions
and specific actions tied to them (e.g. brushing for toothbrushes, drinking for
cups, head covering for hats). It is thus possible that the children at 1;8 in the
object condition of the previous study might have expressed particular difficulties in comprehending objects as symbols because the objects were always
associated with a conventional function or so-called intentional affordance.
The second study was meant to test this conclusion.

STUDY 2
In Study 2, we tested children's comprehension of unconventional replicas
as standing for objects that had no well-known functions. Half of the children
saw a prior demonstration with each of the target objects; the other half did not
(see Method of Experiment 1). If conventional actions associated with familiar
objects play a role in young children's symbolic comprehension, then we
expected that children would not show the model demonstration effect found
in Experiment 1. In other words, if children do not pick up any conventional
ways in which a particular object might be used, they might be less subject to
distraction by previous modelling. As a working hypothesis, we expected no
modelling effects in the context of non-conventional objects used as symbols
for other objects.

METHOD

Participants
Twenty-four participants were recruited from a list of parents and children
who had volunteered for studies of child development. Children were aged 1; 8
(6 females and 18 males, M=1; 7.30, range=1; 6.19-1;9.08). All characteristics of the sample were the same as in Study 1. One participant was excluded
due to experimental error.
Materials
The aperture and warm-up phase was the same as in Study 1. For the testing
phase, there were four unconventional target objects and four replica objects : a
4 in.r3 in.r1 in. green block with a 0.5 in. piece of black tape placed vertically around it, a 7 in. tree branch with two pieces of colourful 1 in. construction paper wrapped around the centre, a 3 in. rock painted red, a 5 in.
39

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E
TABLE

3. Actions performed on non-conventional target objects

Object

Action

block
stick
rock
sponge

back and forth tipping motion 90x on floor, to upright position
side to side flipping motion on the floor, 90x side to side
clockwise motion, 180x around 12 in. imaginary circumference
clapping motion, side to side motion, moving sponge toward empty
hand then back away

jagged piece of yellow sponge. All replicas were approximately 1 in. in size but
were otherwise similar in colour, shape, and material.
Procedure
The general method and procedure were the same as in Study 1. There was
a warm-up phase, followed by one testing phase. Children were randomly
assigned to one of two model conditions. For children in the no-model
condition, the experimenter introduced children to their objects by placing
the tray of objects in front of them and then enhancing each object successively
by touching it and saying, ` Look at this '. For children in the model condition,
the experimenter placed the tray of objects in front of children and then
performed a novel action with each object before placing it back on the tray (see
Table 3). During testing, the experimenter requested the child's object by
holding up a small replica that the child had never seen before in either a static
or dynamic way.
When requesting the replica in a static way, the experimenter simply held
the object in her hand at the child's eye level. When requesting the replica in a
dynamic way, the experimenter repeatedly performed the same actions with
each replica object as in the model condition demonstration (see Table 3). The
experimenter asked for each of the four target objects using one type of
request, then asked for each of the four objects a second time using the other
request type. For each trial and for both request types, experimenter asked the
child, ` Can I have your _ down the slide ? ' while requesting the objects. If
necessary, the experimenter repeated the verbal request 3 to 4 times for a given
trial. The experimenter asked for each of the four target objects using one type
of request (static or dynamic) then asked for each of the four objects a second
time using the other type of request. Order of request type was counterbalanced among children.
RESULTS

Overall performance
To assess whether children comprehended the experimenter's request, we
compared their performance to chance of 0.25 (given that there were four
40

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION
TABLE

4. Children's performance by model demonstration and request type

Request type
Model type

Age

N

M (S.D.)

t

p

object static
model
no-model

1; 8
1; 8

12
12

1.66 (0.77)
1.83 (1.1)

2.96
2.59

0.013*
0.025*

object dynamic
model
no-model

1; 8
1; 8

12
12

1.83 (0.93)
1.41 (0.79)

3.08
1.82

0.010*
0.096

* p<0.05, N=12 for each cell.

objects to choose from), using a series of one-sample t-tests. Analyses
were performed separately for each request type (static or dynamic) and
demonstration type (model or no-model). As indicated in Table 4, children's
performance was above chance in all conditions, although marginally so in the
no-model condition when the experimenter requested the object dynamically.
Reaching
We performed a (2) model type : no-model vs. modelr(2) request type : static
vs. dynamic mixed design ANOVA on the number of times children reached
for the replicas. The analysis revealed a significant main effect of request type,
F(1, 22)=9.14, p=0.006 with children reaching more for the static compared
to the dynamic object (M=1.75 and 0.875 respectively). There were no other
significant main effects or interactions.
Comparison of performance by request type and modelling conditions
We performed a (2) model type : no-model vs. modelr(2) request type : static
or dynamic mixed design ANOVA on the number of correct responses.
Overall ANOVA treating order as a variable (static first or dynamic first)
yielded no significant main effect of order. This variable was not considered in
further analyses. The analysis yielded no significant main effects or any significant interactions ( p>0.22 in all cases).
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Results of Study 2 indicated that when using non-conventional objects as
symbols, children at 1; 8 do not show a significant model demonstration effect.
This result supports the idea that the modelling effect found with children of
the same age in Study 1 depended on the functional familiarity of the object.
That is, children may have had difficulty to overcome the knowledge they
already had about a particular object. Again, as in Study 1, for the object
condition, we did not find a significant effect of static vs. dynamic request.
41

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E
GENERAL DISCUSSION

The aim of the present research was to explore the nature and determinants of
early symbolic comprehension. In the first study, we considered the potential
role of modelling and request type on young children's comprehension of
gestures and replicas as symbols. The first working hypothesis was that if
modelling plays a role in early symbolic functioning, then this role should
decrease with age. Consequently, we expected that for older children, previous
modelling of symbolic activities performed by an adult would become less
important as a determinant of early symbolic comprehension. Results regarding the comprehension of gestures as symbols by children at 1;8 and 2 ;2
provide some support for this hypothesis. However, it does not hold for the
comprehension of objects as symbols.
In the gesture condition, the younger children were only above chance in
their symbolic performance following modelling. In contrast, the older group
of children was above chance regardless of previous modelling. This developmental trend was not confirmed in the condition where children had to
comprehend that replicas could be symbols. In this condition, both groups
were above chance regardless of modelling. One possible interpretation for
these divergent results across conditions is that the replicas, unlike gestures,
provide strong perceptual similarities with the referent, and therefore young
children would be less dependent on modelling to engage in symbolic functioning. However, this interpretation needs to take into consideration the fact
that young children's performance deteriorated significantly when a model
demonstration was provided prior to testing. Thus, modelling may have interfered with younger children's performance perhaps by making them focus
on the modelled action to the exclusion of the object itself. The reverse was
true for the older children who appeared to get better following such demonstration as was shown by the significant age-by-model demonstration interaction found in the first study.
We hypothesized that such interaction was probably due to the fact that for
younger children, the gesture associated with the target object during modelling added information that hindered their performance in comprehending
the replica as symbol during testing. Accordingly, younger children might
have been distracted by the experimenter's action while demonstrating the
conventional use of each target object. The results on children's reaching
provide further support for this idea. In particular, children at 1;8 were more
likely to reach for the experimenter's replica compared to those at 2 ;2. These
younger children may have difficulty to inhibit reaching during the task, and
reaching may have been similarly evoked when the experimenter's model
demonstration was seen.
Results of Study 1 suggested that older children are not distracted by
previous demonstrations of an object's conventional use, but rather are helped
by it. Therefore, modelling appears to have different meanings for children at
42

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

1; 8 and 2; 2 : an extra informational load to handle for the younger, and
supplemental dynamic information for the older which helps matching the
referent object to its symbolic replica.
The results of Study 2 confirm that the demonstrated conventional use
associated with an object probably creates a ` sticky ' obstacle for younger
children in their comprehension of objects as symbols. When using target
objects that have no specific conventional use, we did not find any evidence
of a detrimental effect from previous model demonstrations on symbolic comprehension among children at 1 ; 8. This result confirms that the modelling of
a conventional use of a familiar object confuses rather than scaffolds younger
children's symbolic ability to comprehend a replica object as standing for the
target object. We interpret this confusion as originating from the powerful
attentional pull toward the conventional action on the object (putting a hat on
one's head, brushing one's hair) rather than the object itself (hat or brush) that
the replica is referring to. The previous conventional action modelled on
the object somehow takes precedence over the object itself. The difficulties
children encountered in our task are analogous to the `dual representation
problem ' (i.e. DeLoache, 1995) they manifest when considering the use of an
object and its physical appearance as two aspects of the same thing ; the thing
that the replica stands for (i.e. the object that has a particular conventional use
or intentional affordance and, at the same time, has a specific appearance).
This is in contrast to language, in which the child does not have to overcome
the affordances of an object. The comprehension of objects as symbols provides children additional information that is specified not only in the object
itself but also in the way in which it is used and manipulated by others. The
underlying reason behind using symbols, whether in the form of language
or objects seems to be the same - namely to communicate and interact with
others (i.e. Tomasello, 1999).
Previous research suggests that children's symbolic comprehension and
production is influenced by the nature of the symbol itself. For instance,
infants tend to use gestures before they use linguistic symbols to communicate
with others (i.e. Goodwyn & Acredolo, 1993). This developmental lag,
however, is generally a small one of less than two months. It is likely that
advances in cognitive growth similarly underlie the comprehension and use
of both language and gesture (see also Namy & Waxman, 1998). The results of
the current study complement prior research on the influence of the type or
nature of symbol in symbolic functioning more generally. While the underlying function of symbolic forms to communicate and share experience may be
the same across modalities, children's comprehension of these various symbolic forms appear mediated by a variety of factors.
The fact that in the gesture condition the symbolic comprehension of the
children at 1 ; 8 was significantly better following a model demonstration with
the target object confirms that the absence of the object in the symbolic request
43

S T R I A N O, R O C H A T & L E G E R S T E E

phase reduces the cognitive load of the symbolic task, thereby decreasing the
potential for confusion between action and object, and allowing younger
children to benefit from the modelling in their symbolic comprehension. It
also provides evidence that younger children might respond accurately to the
symbolic request during testing on the mere basis of a mapping of analogous
action linked to the demonstrated action on the object (conventional use) and
the gesture standing for the object. Because no model demonstration effect
in the gesture condition was found with the children at 2;2, this older group
of children did not appear to benefit from such modelling in their symbolic
comprehension. The absence of reliance on modelling suggests that in contrast
to the younger group, older children understand that the gesture can refer to
the object per se and not simply to the conventional action associated with it.
This can be construed as an expression of the developing decontextualization
or distancing of a symbol from its referent described by Werner & Kaplan
(1963).
Our second hypothesis was that, as a function of age, young children's
symbolic comprehension becomes less sensitive to the type of request or the
perceptual similarity between symbol and referent. We did not find any
evidence supporting this prediction. Our data yielded no effect of conventionality in the gesture condition, nor any effects of static vs. dynamic presentation of the replica in the object condition, or any significant interactions of
these effects with age. We conclude that during the request phase, the dynamic
profile of the gesture, in particular its vitality contour (i.e. the motion and
rhythm of the request) rather than the perceptual resemblance of the body part
used by the experimenter to signify the target object, is the information picked
up by children at all ages, and on which early symbolic comprehension is
based. In contrast, when replicas are involved, it is their physical appearance
rather than the relative vitality attached to them that is picked up by children
in their symbolic comprehension, at both ages.
Finally, our third working hypothesis was that the impact of modelling in
symbolic comprehension depends on the learned conventional use attached
to an object. As discussed above, this prediction is confirmed by both studies
when considering the performance of children at 1 ;8. For this young age
group, it appears that the model demonstration of the conventional use associated with an object interferes with symbolic comprehension of the replica
during testing. Results of the second study show that this interference vanishes
when non-conventional objects with no clear intentional affordances are involved.
In all, these results demonstrate that the ability of young children to take
a symbolic stance, to refer to objects on the basis of multiple perceptual
indices, is a highly context-dependent ability requiring much cognitive
flexibility. Modelling does seem to play a role in children's early symbolic
comprehension. The effect of modelling, however, depends on the type of
44

SYMBOLIC COMPREHENSION

object symbolized, whether it is associated with familiar (conventional) or
unfamiliar (unconventional) use.

REFERENCES
Bretherton, I. (1984). Representing the symbolic world in symbolic play : reality and fantasy.
In I. Bretherton (ed.), Symbolic play : the development of social understanding. New York :
Academic Press.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995). Early symbol understanding and use. In D. Medin (ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, Vol. 33. New York : Academic Press.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual representation and young children's use of scale models. Child
Development 71, 329-38.
Fenson, L. (1984). Developmental trends for action and speech in pretend play. In I. Bretherton
(ed.), Symbolic play : the development of social understanding. New York : Academic Press.
Fiese, B. (1990). Playful relations : a contextual analysis of mother-toddler interaction and
symbolic play. Child Development 61, 1648-56.
Goodwyn, S. W. & Acredolo, L. P. (1993). Symbolic gesture versus word : is there a modality
advantage for onset of symbol use? Child Development 64, 688-701.
Harris, P. L. & Kavanaugh, R. D. (1993). Young children's understanding of pretense.
Monograph of the Society for Research in Child Development 58, (1, Serial No. 231).
Jackowitz, E. R. & Watson, M. W. (1980). Development of object transformations in early
pretend play. Developmental Psychology 16, 543-49.
Mandler, J. & McDonough, L. (1996). Drinking and driving don't mix : inductive generalization in infancy. Cognition 59, 307-35.
Namy, L. & Waxman, S. (1998). Words and gestures : infants' interpretations of different forms
of symbolic reference. Child Development 69, 295-308.
Nicholich, L. M. (1977). Beyond sensorimotor intelligence : analysis of symbolic maturity
through analysis of pretend play. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 23, 89-99.
O'Reilly, J. (1995). Using representations : comprehension and production of actions with
imagined objects. Child Development 66, 999-1010.
Pederson, D., Rook-Green, A. & Elder, J. (1981). The role of action in the development of
pretend play in young children. Developmental Psychology 17, 756-95.
Rakinson, D. (2000). Illusion of taxonomies. Infancy 1, 77-89.
Rakinson, D. & Butterworth, G. (1998). Infant attention to object structure in early categorization. Developmental Psychology 34, 49-62.
Shore, C. (1986). Combinatorial play, conceptual development, and early multiword speech.
Developmental Psychology 22, 184-90.
Striano, T., Tomasello, M. & Rochat, P. (2001). Social and object support for early symbolic
play. Developmental Science 4, 442-55.
Tomas, L. & Juanas, F. (1996). The importance or statistical power analysis : an example from
animal behavior. Animal Behavior 52, 856-59.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge : Harvard University
Press.
Tomasello, M., Striano, T. & Rochat, P. (1999). Do young children use objects as symbols?
British Journal of Developmental Psychology 17, 563-84.
Werner, H. & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation. New York : Wiley.

45

