Applied Psycholinguistics 24 (2003), 561-579
Printed in the United States of America
DOI: 10.1017.S0142716403000286

Taboo words and reprimands elicit
greater autonomic reactivity in a first
language than in a second language
CATHERINE L. HARRIS
Boston University
AYSE AYCICEGI
Istanbul University
JEAN BERKO GLEASON
Boston University
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Catherine L. Harris, Psychology Department, Boston University, 64 Cummington St., Boston, MA
02215. E-mail: charris@bu.edu
ABSTRACT
Second language speakers commonly acknowledge that taboo terms can be uttered with greater ease
in their second language (L2) than in their first language (L1). To investigate this phenomenon
psychophysiologically, 32 Turkish-English bilinguals rated a variety of stimuli for pleasantness in
Turkish (L1) and English (L2) while skin conductance was monitored via fingertip electrodes. Participants demonstrated greater autonomic arousal to taboo words and childhood reprimands ("Shame
on you!") in their L1 compared to their L2. This finding provides quantifiable support for the
subjective experiences of L2 speakers.

Bilingual speakers have reported that it is easier to say some kinds of emotionally charged words or expressions in a language that is not their native language.
In this study, we explored the possibility that this difference between a first
language (L1) and a second language (L2) has psychophysiological components.
In particular, we hypothesized that taboo words in a native language would elicit
stronger skin conductance responses than similar taboo words learned later in
life in an L2. We also hypothesized that emotional expressions learned early in
life in an L1 (such as the kinds of reprimands young children hear) would evoke
greater physiological responses, whether the individuals experiencing these responses were fully aware of them or not.
A number of authors have remarked that taboo words appear to generate less
anxiety when spoken in a foreign language (Ferenczi, 1916; Greenson, 1950;
Javier, 1989). Bilingual speakers also feel freer to discuss embarrassing topics
 2003 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/03 $12.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

562

in their L2 (Bond & Lai, 1986; Sechrest, Flores, & Arellano, 1968). Anooshian
and Hertel (1994) noted that age of acquisition of a language appears to be more
important than proficiency for at least some cases of how the emotional resonance of a language is experienced. They cite the example of a woman who
grew up in a Spanish-speaking home and learned English after 8 years of age.
Although as an adult she was most proficient in English, she prayed in Spanish,
because praying in English never "felt right." Studies of code-switching report
that the L2 is often used to increase emotional distance (Altarriba & Rivera-
Santiago, 1994; Bond & Lai, 1986; Gonzalez-Reigosa, 1976; Gumperz & Hernandez, 1971; Javier & Marcos, 1989). In contrast, the native language is more
often the language of emotional expressiveness (Dewaele & Pavlenko, 2002).
For example, Sechrest et al. (1968) reported that married Filipinos used Tagalog for intimate expression, even though English was habitually spoken at
home.
One way to measure the emotional impact of words is through their effect on
autonomic reactivity. Electrodermal monitoring (the psychophysiological technique that records skin conductance responses, formerly referred to as galvanic
skin response) has long been used to measure differential responsiveness to
words. Studies have shown that among monolinguals, emotion and taboo words
elicit greater skin conductance responses compared to neutral words (Gray,
Hughes, & Schneider, 1982; Dinn & Harris, 2000; McGinnies, 1949). Electrodermal recording has not been previously used to study differential reactivity in
the languages spoken by bilingual individuals.
The goal of the current study was to determine if electrodermal recording
would demonstrate that words with equivalent semantic content in an L1 and L2
generate different degrees of autonomic reactivity. Relevant research literature
includes studies of taboo words and emotion terms in monolinguals and bilinguals. Taboo words are known to be the most emotionally evocative of language
stimuli (Gray, Hughes, & Schneider, 1982; Jay, 1992; Matthews & MacLeod,
1985; McGinnies, 1949; Nothman, 1962; Van Lancker & Cummings, 1999).
Researchers have used taboo-word presentation to study the working of the
brain's emotional systems, because processing of taboo words is believed to
activate the amygdala, a structure in the limbic system involved in emotion
processing and emotion-mediated learning (Labar & Phelps, 1998). MacKay et
al. (2002) used taboo words in a Stroop task. Taboo words were displayed in a
salient color, the task being to name the ink color and ignore the word. Participants were slower to name the color of the taboo words compared to the color
of the neutral words. This "Stroop interference effect" presumably occurs because the anxiety associated with taboo words (or people's understanding of
their status as socially stigmatized words) interferes with attending to the colornaming task. The Stroop interference effect was much stronger than the interference effect found for neutral words, and it persisted for over 100 trials.
Aversive words (such as cancer, death, stabbed) resemble taboo words in that
they produce orienting and attentional effects (Hill & Kemp-Wheeler, 1989;
Wischner & Gladis, 1969), although the magnitude is typically less than that of
taboo words or words of strong personal significance (Crane, Dieker, & Brown,
1970). Compared to neutral words, aversive words are easier to identify as

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

563

words in a lexical decision task (Hill & Kemp-Wheeler, 1989). Both clinical
and nonclinical subjects were better able to form associations to aversive words
than to neutral words (Wischner & Gladis, 1969).
Comparing emotional responsiveness to words in an L1 versus an L2 has
been examined in relatively few laboratory studies, and only one used taboo
words. Gonzalez-Regiosa (1976) asked Spanish-English bilinguals to read lists
of 10 Spanish taboo words and 10 English taboo words. Following the reading
of each list, they rated themselves on their degree of anxiety using a questionnaire sensitive to "state anxiety" (a transient state). Participants also completed
a questionnaire designed to assess their level of "trait anxiety" (i.e., whether
they had an anxiety-prone personality). Participants rated themselves as more
anxious after reading the taboo words in their L1. This result held for both highand low-anxiety participants.
Anooshian and Hertel (1994) examined differential emotional connotations in
an L1 versus an L2 using a recall test. Recall of words is known to be influenced
by emotionality (Rubin & Friendly, 1986). Anooshian and Hertel (1994) hypothesized that emotion words in the L2 would lack the emotional connotations that
render words easy to recall. Participants first rated blocks of words for emotional
intensity, pronounceability, and how much activity was inherent in the meaning
of the word. After the rating task, participants received a surprise recall task.
Emotionality effects were strongest for words when they had been rated for
emotionality. More emotion words than neutral words were recalled in the L1,
and an equivalent number of emotion and neutral words were recalled in the
L2. This supports the authors' hypothesis that only words in the L1 would show
an emotionality effect. This supports the thesis of the current paper, which is
that words in an L1 have greater emotional resonance than words in an L2.
However, in an extension and replication of Anooshian and Hertel's (1994)
paradigm, two of the current authors found greater recall for emotion words in
both the L1 and L2 (Aycicegi & Harris, in press). Indeed, a goal of the current
paper was to determine if a psychophysiological measure would be a useful
methodology for quantifying intuitions about the greater emotionality of words
heard or read in the L1.
Although no prior study has employed electrodermal recording to gauge emotional responsiveness, one study used event-related potentials (ERPs). In this
psychophysiological technique, electrodes fixed to the scalp measure brain wave
activity corresponding to stimulus presentation. It was interesting that the underlying rationale and design for this study was similar to our own: would emotional responsiveness vary for words in an L1 and an L2? Kim (1993) used
P300 amplitude as her dependent measure, following the literature that this ERP
component is sensitive to the incentive or emotional value of a stimulus. Kim
recorded ERPs to neutral, positive, and negative English words from monolingual English speakers and Korean speakers who had varying degrees of Englishlanguage competency. However, no differences were found in P300 amplitude
as a function of words' emotional valence or participants' English proficiency.
Kim concluded that her emotion words (words with negative connotations such
as steal and positive connotations such as truth) had probably been insufficiently
arousing, because prior studies documenting the sensitivity of the P300 ampli-

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

564

tude to emotional stimuli used highly evocative stimuli such as pictures and
slang expressions (Vanderploeg, Brown, & Marsh, 1987).
Kim's (1993) study motivates the current project by describing an area in
which electrodermal monitoring may be a superior psychophysiological technology in comparison to ERPs. ERPs are sensitive to millisecond changes in brain
electrical activity and change predictability in response to both lexical and grammatical factors (Weber-Fox & Neville, 1999). However, Kim (1993) found that
ERP waveforms did not vary by emotional valence for monolingual or bilingual
participants and so concluded that ERPs are not sensitive to the emotional valences of words. Skin conductance responses are known to be sensitive to differences in the same types of words Kim used in her ERP study (e.g., Dinn &
Harris, 2000). Words' emotionality may be a case where electrodermal recording is preferred to ERPs, despite the latter's superior temporal resolution.
Recent research has begun to elucidate hypotheses for why emotional resonance may differ between two languages (Bond & Lai, 1986; Dewaele & Pavlenko, 2002; Dewaele & Regan, 2001; Durst, 2001; Pavlenko, 1999, 2002;
Schrauf, 2000; Wierzbicka, 1999). An L1 and L2 are frequently learned in different contexts. The L1 is learned in the context of family life and thus generally
includes emotional extremes and usually also an individual's earliest encounters
with the gamut of human emotions (Schrauf, 2000). An L2 is frequently the
language of schooling, work, and professional achievement and thus comes to
be associated with emotional control, autonomy, and achievement (Bond & Lai,
1986; Dewaele & Pavlenko, 2002; Ervin, 1964). Bond and Lai (1986) reasoned
that, because the L2 is usually mastered in more emotionally neutral settings
than the L1, less arousal would be conditioned to L2 words. These authors
predicted that bilingual interviewees would be more comfortable discussing embarrassing topics in their L2. Indeed, it was found that the interviewees spoke
at greater length about embarrassing topics (but not neutral topics) when they
were instructed to respond in their L2.
Differential emotional context of language acquisition appears to be a sufficient explanation for greater emotionality of words and expressions in the L1.
However, the implications for taboo words are not obvious. Historically, the
anxiety-arousing effect of taboo words has been attributed to punishment from
parents for saying these words during childhood (Ferenczi, 1916). This seems
an overly simplistic view from a contemporary standpoint. In some households
and some cultures, children acquire taboo words outside the home and learn
their stigmatized status from peers. The broader concept of societal disapproval
may be more important than punishment by parents. Taboo words learned in an
L2 may actually be learned in a similar environment to taboo words in an L1
(i.e., both learned from peer or street culture) and thus may have similar emotional associations.
According to this view, elecrodermal recording could reveal high reactivity
for taboo words in both an L1 and an L2, given that reasonably proficient L2
learners will be aware of the stigmatized nature of these words. It thus seemed
reasonable to identify emotional expressions that resemble taboo words in being
associated with personal threat but are unambiguously acquired in early childhood as part of daily family life. Inspired by prior work on language routines

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

565

and childhood language socialization (Gleason, 1985), we selected the category
of childhood reprimands, including expressions like Go to your room! and
Shame on you!
The current study is the first attempt to examine autonomic reactivity to emotional expressions in the L1 and L2. We thus felt it was acceptable to include
an exploratory variable, the variable of presentation modality. Comparing visual
versus auditory presentation can be useful for future research for two reasons.
Greater skin conductance responses might occur for auditory stimuli because
the spoken language likely has more diverse and more numerous emotional
associations than written language. Spoken words and phrases may activate specific memories. Spoken language is acquired before visual language (for L1
acquisition). To the extent that linguistic representations that are learned early
become connected with emotional regulation systems (Bloom & Beckwith,
1989), auditory language may be more closely tied to emotional arousal than
visual language. We also varied the modality of presentation for exploratory
methodological purposes. For investigating languages that do not use the Latin
alphabet, it could be convenient to restrict data collection to the auditory realm.
For languages that use the Latin alphabet, typing in a list of words for visual
presentation is less labor intensive than recording and digitizing auditory stimuli, thus reducing time to pilot and test a hypothesis.
METHOD

Bilingual speakers of quite dissimilar languages (English and Turkish) were
recruited for this study. The reactivity to comparable words and phrases in their
L1 (Turkish) and their L2 (English) was monitored for each participant.
Participants

Turkish-English bilinguals were chosen for this study for several reasons. Although the largest bilingual population residing in Boston undoubtedly consists
of Spanish speakers, Spanish-English bilinguals have very varied languagelearning histories, including being born in the United States or immigrating at
diverse ages. Turks residing in Boston most typically arrived in their 20s to
pursue graduate school or professional work. They thus have a good command
of English but relatively late acquisition and late immersion in an English-speaking country. This allows us to study a relatively homogenous sample of late
learners of English. A second reason was our assumption that Turkish would
share few cognates with English. Electrodermal results could vary if words in
English activate cognates in Turkish.
The participants were 32 native Turkish speakers (15 males, 17 females) who
were students or professionals working in the Boston area. All were late learners
of English, having acquired English after 12 years of age. The average age of
arrival in the United States was 24 (range = 16-31 years), and the mean length
of residence was 4 years. The first in-depth exposure to English for most participants was enrollment in an English-language high school in Turkey at age 12
(13 participants) or enrollment at an English-language university in Turkey at

566

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

Table 1. Participants' demographic variables and fluency
Mean and Range
Mean (Range) of
Demographic Variables
Age
Years education
Age of immersion
Age of arrival in
United States
Years of residence

Fluency Test
and Self-Ratings

Turkish

28 (20-47) Word fluency test
37 (17-56)
(total words produced)
18 (12-20) Spoken (conversation)
5
16 (12-31) Understanding
5
Reading
5
24 (16-31) Writing
5
4 (1-15)

English
29 (17-43)
3.15 (2-4)
3.35 (2-4)
3.6 (2-4)
2.55 (1-4)

Note: The age of immersion indicates enrollment in English-language high school, university or arrival in the United States. The word fluency test is the sum of the words
produced to letters F, A, and S; 1 min was provided for each letter. Self-ratings on the
1-5 scale indicate poor, fair, good, very good, or native-speaker ability.

age 18 (16 participants). For the remaining three participants, immersion in
English began with their arrival in the United States at age 17, 20, or 31, with
prior exposure to English consisting of formal classroom instruction in high
school or university in Istanbul. The average years of education was 18, which
indicates that most participants had completed their undergraduate degree and
had 1 or more years of graduate school. Participants rated their own English
ability in conversational fluency, reading, understanding, and writing on a 1-5
scale. Numbers on the scale correspond to poor, fair, good, very good, or native
ability. Most respondents judged their comprehension of English to be good.
Consistent with the preponderance of students and professionals in our sample,
average self-rated reading ability was slightly higher than conversational ability.
Following Anooshian and Hertel (1994), we also assessed fluency by administering a word fluency task. Participants were given 1 min to produce as many
words as possible beginning with a specific letter. Three trials were conducted,
using the letters F, A, and S. The score for the word fluency task is the sum of
words produced across the three trials (Goodglass & Kaplan, 1972). The number
of words generated in English was 29 (range = 17-43) and in Turkish it was 37
(range = 17-56), a statistically significant difference, t (31) = 5.4, p < .001. This
difference supports bilinguals' reports that they were more fluent in Turkish than
English. Means and ranges for demographic variables appear in Table 1.
Design and materials

Participants read on a computer screen or heard via the computer loudspeaker a
variety of word types in Turkish (L1) and English (L2) while their skin conductance response was monitored via fingertip electrodes. A 2 x 2 x 5 withinsubjects design was used with a Latin-squares crossing: two levels of language,
two levels of modality (auditory vs. visual presentation), and five categories of

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

567

stimuli: 16 neutral (door), 16 positive (bride, joy), 16 aversive (disease, kill), 9
taboo (asshole, breast), and 7 reprimands of the type commonly spoken to children (Don't do that! and Go to your room!). All factors were counterbalanced
across participants. Although participants encountered stimuli in all conditions
of the design, they did not see (or hear) the same word in both languages. All
stimuli appear in Appendix A.
The positive, aversive, and neutral words were selected and coded from the
Handbook of Semantic Word Norms (Toglia & Battig, 1978) using the pleasantness scale, which ranges from 1 to 5. Positive words had pleasantness ratings
of 3.5 or higher, aversive words had ratings of 2.0 or lower, and neutral words
had ratings from 2.5 to 3.4. These three categories of items were selected to
have comparable familiarity, as measured by Toglia and Battig's ratings. These
items had been used in a previous electrodermal study (Dinn & Harris, 2000,
2003). To select taboo words, we modified the list used by Gonzalez-Regiosa
(1976), deleting items that might not be known to the Turkish speakers (hymen,
tampon). Items were translated into their Turkish equivalents by the second
author (A.A.) and verified by a second native speaker of Turkish. Translation
equivalents did not exist for all the reprimands or taboo words; thus, we substituted items that had similar meanings and emotional connotations, based on a
list of suggestions made by the second author and three faculty members at
Istanbul University. For taboo words, substitutions reflected the judgments of
these four native Turkish speakers that the taboo word had a sexual connotation
or the status of a stigmatized word. Two sexual terms in Turkish are cognates
of English words: seks (sex) and masturubasyon (masturbation). We used the
latter in Turkish and did not employ its English cognate. The reprimands were
selected to be ones that parents would frequently say to children, although many
of these are used in adult-adult contexts as well. When reprimands were displayed visually, they appeared with initial capital letter and final exclamation
point (Shut up!). This contrasted with other stimuli, which appeared in lower
case with no punctuation. Our reason for this visual difference was to use the
visual medium to convey the unit of the expression and its emotionality, so that
any differences between auditory and visual presentation could be attributed to
specifically auditory aspects. This was a concern because, in pilot work, we
observed that lower case multiword utterances (e.g., Shame on you!) were not
always immediately understood to be coherent expressions with emotional force.
After items were selected, we obtained word frequency measures for English
stimuli (using the 1982 Francis and Kucera word frequency database) and Turkish stimuli, using Goz' recently compiled listing of Turkish word frequencies
(Goz, in press). As listed in Table 2, Turkish words had slightly higher word
frequency values than did English items. The positive, negative, and neutral
English words had a mean frequency of 127 occurrences per million words and
did not differ from each other in word frequency, as measured using the Francis
and Kucera (1982) database. The mean frequency for taboo words was substantially less, 4 occurrences per million words. Using Turkish word frequency
counts (Goz, in press), a similar pattern was found: taboo words were much
lower in frequency than the positive, negative, and neutral words, which did not
differ from each other. When comparing frequencies across languages, differ-

568

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

Table 2. Stimulus ratings and response latency

Word Frequency

Response
Latency

English
Familiarity
Unpleasant

Current Native
English Turkish English Turkish English Turkish Subjects Speakers
Reprimands
Taboo
Aversive
Positive
Neutral

--
4
89
114*
175*

--
19
168
467
448

3.9
3.8
3.4
3.0
3.3

3.8
3.9
3.1
2.8
3.0

5.4
4.4
5.8
1.8
3.2

5.5
4.7
6.2
1.8
3.6

4.4*
3.4*
4.6
5.9
5.8

4.9
4.8
4.9
6.0
5.7

Note: The word frequency is the number of occurrences in a corpora of 1 million words.
The response latency is the number of seconds to rate each item on a 1-7 scale for
unpleasantness. Current participants only rated English stimuli for familiarity (1-7
scale). The native speakers were 40 Boston University undergraduates who rated the
stimuli as part of a separate investigation.
*Significant difference p < .05, between English and Turkish values. (Log frequency was
used when conducting the t tests on word frequency.)

ences did emerge (see means in Table 2). Turkish translations of the English
words had higher frequency counts. The mean occurrence per million words
was 297 for Turkish items and 147 for English items, a significant difference,
t (112) = 2.1, p < .04. Because the methodology of database construction likely
differs between the Turkish and English databases, it would be premature to
draw conclusions at this point. However, the frequency difference could mean
that English stimuli were both objectively lower in frequency and probably also
subjectively less frequent to our participants, because of their fewer number of
years speaking English.
All items were recorded and digitized for computerized presentation. Items
were recorded by a female native speaker of each language. For most items, a
neutral tone was employed. For reprimands, a lightly admonishing tone was
used, appropriate to the meaning of the reprimand.
Apparatus and procedure

Stimuli were presented on a Power Macintosh G3 using PsyScope, which is
experimental control software developed by Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, and
Provost (1993). Participants rated each word for pleasantness on a 1-7 scale (7 =
maximally unpleasant) by typing the corresponding key on a standard keyboard
using their nondominant hand. Electrodermal activity was recorded using the
Davicon C2A Custom Skin Conductance Monitor (NeuroDyne Medical Corporation). Electrodes were attached to the tip of the first and second fingers of the
subject's dominant hand. A 10-s recording interval began coincident with stimulus onset. Following Hugdahl (1995), we calculated the amplitude of the phasic
skin conductance response by subtracting the basepoint from the maximum

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

569

score. This amplitude was then divided by the basepoint in order to reduce
variation caused by individual differences in baseline skin conductance levels.
The resulting value in micromhos was our dependent measure; we will refer to
this as the skin conductance response (SCR).
Taboo words, reprimands, and aversive words were distributed throughout
the presentation list to be maximally distant from other items in their category.
Each participant was presented with 64 intermixed trials. This meant that participants could predict neither the language nor the modality of the next item. The
experimenter took notes on trials when artifacts to the electrodermal record may
have been introduced (e.g., participants' talking or sneezing). Less than 2% of
the data were discarded because of artifacts.
To determine if familiarity with words in a second language influences skin
conductance responses, participants rated the English words for familiarity, using the 7-point scale and instructions used by Toglia and Battig (1978). A subset
of 22 participants performed the rating task. Eight participants completed the
rating task immediately after the electrodermal recording session and 14 completed the rating task on a subsequent day. Forty monolingual native speakers
of English also performed the rating task as part of a separate study. We included the native-speaker familiarity ratings in Table 2 as a comparison.
RESULTS

An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the three-factor, withinsubject design. Significant main effects were obtained for language, F (1, 31) =
10.77, p < .002, and for stimulus type, F (4, 124) = 11.56, p < .001, indicating
that SCR amplitudes were higher in Turkish than in English and that amplitudes
differed for word types. The omnibus ANOVA also revealed an interaction between stimulus type and language, F (4, 124) = 2.64, p < .05, and between
language and modality, F (1, 31) = 4.6, p < .05, but no three-way interaction
(p > .3). The significant two-way interactions are graphed in Figures 1 and 2.
Planned comparisons were conducted between Turkish and English for each
of the stimulus types. The largest difference between languages (and the only
statistically significant pairwise comparison) occurred for reprimands, F (1, 31) =
10.78, p < .005, with reprimands in Turkish eliciting stronger SCRs than reprimands in English. This difference held for both auditory and visual presentation.
Taboo words elicited larger skin conductance responses in Turkish than in English, but statistical significance was obtained only when the analysis was restricted to the auditory modality, F (1, 31) = 3.88, p < .05. Responses to taboo
words displayed in the visual modality did not differ between the two languages.
Table 2 presents mean unpleasantness ratings, latency to rate words for unpleasantness, participants' ratings for familiarity of English words and monolingual English familiarity ratings, and mean word frequency values (from the
Kucera and Francis, 1982, corpus of 1 million English words, and the Goz, in
press, corpus of 1 million Turkish words). The time to rate the reprimands and
taboo words was substantially longer (3.8 s) than rating times for other stimulus
categories (3.1 s), as indicated by the main effect of stimulus type in the
ANOVA performed on response latencies, F (4, 124) = 18.2, p < .001. This

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

570

Figure 1. The phasic skin conductance response (mhos) is shown for the five categories of
stimuli. The phasic skin conductance response is obtained by subtracting the minimum from
the maximum score and dividing by the base point.

Figure 2. Averaging over stimulus categories, skin conductance responses are plotted separately for auditory and visual presentation.

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

571

presumably reflects the fact that the neutral, positive, and aversive words were
selected for having specific pleasantness ratings (in English; Toglia & Battig,
1978) and thus could be more easily rated than the taboo words and reprimands.
It is important that the time to rate items was similar in both languages (3.5 s
in English and 3.4 s in Turkish). Participants rated the aversive, neutral, and
positive words in a manner consistent with the Toglia and Battig pleasantness
values (i.e., aversive words were rated as more unpleasant than neutral words and
neutral words as less pleasant than positive words). As shown in Table 2, our
Turkish participants provided very similar ratings for English and Turkish words.
Participants rated English taboo items as the least familiar of all the categories. Taboo items were rated as significantly less familiar than the next most
unfamiliar category, the reprimands, F (1, 21) = 7.0, p < .02. The aversive words
were rated as less familiar than the neutral words, F (1, 21) = 19.5, p < .001.
Turkish participants did rate English taboo words and reprimands as less familiar than did Boston University monolingual undergraduates. It is interesting that
the Turkish participants judged positive, negative, and aversive words as moderately to highly familiar, and gave them similar ratings to those of monolingual
undergraduates. This indicates that Turkish participants had sufficient length of
stay (or sufficient immersion in the English-speaking world) for basic vocabulary items to come to have a similar subjective familiarity to that experienced
by the monolingual undergraduates.
In an exploratory analysis, we investigated whether the length of the reprimands influenced skin conductance amplitudes, and whether individual participants' rating was correlated with skin conductance responses. We compared
short reprimands (Stop that!, Shut up!, No!) to long reprimands (Shame on you!,
Go to your room!, I hate you!, Don't do that!). The Turkish counterparts to
these also had the same length categorization. In Turkish, long auditory reprimands had higher SCRs than short auditory reprimands, t (54) = 2.0, p < .05.
Skin conductance amplitudes were similar for long and short reprimands in the
visual modality, and no differences were apparent in either modality for English.
Long reprimands may have activated stored memories, which increased autonomic responding.
Correlations were conducted on participants' individual pleasantness ratings
and their SCRs. It seemed likely that personal ratings of unpleasantness could
predict SCRs for the taboo words and reprimands, because it is plausible that
individuals differ in whether they find specific items threatening or socially
stigmatized. This expectation was partially confirmed. No significant correlations were obtained for the positive, negative, and neutral items (r = .21 to -.07)
or for the taboo items (r = .19). However, auditory reprimands manifested a
modest correlation with individual unpleasantness ratings (r = .29, p < .05).
To determine if those words that are more familiar to Turkish speakers elicited stronger SCRs, we correlated participants' familiarity ratings with SCRs
elicited by those words. The correlation was near 0 (r = -.05), indicating that
SCR is not influenced by familiarity. Because taboo words had low familiarity
but high SCR, this could mask any subtle familiarity effects when taboo words
are pooled with other stimuli. We thus correlated SCR and familiarity separately
for the five stimulus categories. None of the correlations were significantly different from zero (r = -.09 to .02).

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

572

A final exploratory analysis concerned whether the following demographic
and language-learning variables predicted skin conductance responses: age, age
of exposure to English, age of arrival in the United States, length of stay in the
United States, self-rated proficiency, English verbal fluency (i.e., fluency
scores), and gender. The effects of the age of acquisition on proficiency have
frequently been examined with multiple regression when participants have a
varied age of acquisition. For example, Birdsong and Molis (2001) found that
the age of arrival in the United States was the strongest predictor of English
proficiency for immigrants from Spanish-speaking countries. We conducted two
separate multiple regressions, both using the above predictor variables; but in
one regression the dependent variable was SCRs elicited by English stimuli, and
in the other it was Turkish stimuli. Gender was entered as a dummy variable (1
and -1 for females and males). None of these variables were significantly correlated with SCR in the raw correlation matrix, and they did not become significant when entered as copredictors of SCR analysis with multiple regression.
DISCUSSION

The greatest reactivity was to taboo words in both languages, consistent with
prior studies with monolingual speakers in which taboo words elicited strong
autonomic responses (Gray et al., 1982; McGinnies, 1949; Zajonc, 1962). SCRs
to taboo words were slightly stronger in the L1, especially in the auditory modality. This supports earlier reports that bilingual speakers experience more anxiety when encountering taboo words in an L1 compared to an L2 (Ferenczi,
1916; Greenson, 1950; Javier, 1989). Consistent with this, during debriefing,
several participants reported "feeling nothing" when uttering or hearing a taboo
phrase in their L2. However, Turkish participants nevertheless reacted quite
strongly to English taboo phrases. Indeed, the finding that taboo words in the
L2 elicited larger responses than reprimands in the L1 indicates that the socioemotive force of deviation from social norms has a large effect. Speakers may
report "feeling nothing" when uttering or hearing taboo words in their L2 because they are aware that taboo phrases generate a diminished visceral response.
This relatively lower response is dichotomized as a "nothing" response when
reflecting on the emotional feeling of taboo expressions.
We did not anticipate that there would be such a marked reaction to childhood
reprimands in the native language. Similar expressions in English had very little
effect on these native Turkish speakers. The finding of greater SCRs for childhood reprimands in an L1 compared to an L2 does not have a precedent in the
literature. We included the childhood reprimands to explore the hypothesis that
early language codevelops with emotional regulation systems (Bloom & Beckwith, 1989). The large skin conductance amplitudes for L1 reprimands are consistent with this view or may be due to the family context of learning of the L1
(Bostwick, 1996). Further studies will be needed to substantiate the hypothesis
that language learned early in life, especially emotional expressions, elicits a
more visceral reaction than language learned later in life.
As shown in Figure 2, in the L1, auditory stimuli elicited larger reactivity
than visual stimuli. In the L2, however, mean skin conductance amplitudes were

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

573

equivalent for the auditory and visual modality. Why would auditory stimuli
elicit greater autonomic arousal than visual stimuli in the L1 but not the L2?
This finding could mean that visual and auditory stimuli activate modalityspecific lexical representations (Anooshian & Hertel, 1994). Language acquired
early in life, prior to the age when reading is the principal source of new vocabulary, is acquired via the auditory modality. This modality-specific vocabulary
may be tightly connected to brain systems for emotional arousal, given the proliferation of neural connections in early and middle childhood. Auditory expressions may also have richer associations than representations activated by print,
because more diverse and emotionally rich language experiences occur in the
auditory modality. A greater number of associations may result in greater autonomic reactivity. In an L2, a number of associations between auditory and visual
representations may be more similar to each other. A greater amount of experience in the L2 may take place with print, because of the context of learning in
school and use of the language as an adult in university and work settings.
Of course, the Language x Modality interaction graphed in Figure 2 does not
require us to posit modality-specific representations. Visual and auditory input
could activate modality-independent lexical representations in both Turkish and
English. These representations could then lead to a certain amount of autonomic
arousal. The auditory qualities of the stimulus, such as tone, cadence, accent,
and participants' knowledge that the voice is speaking their L1, may be the
critical factors in eliciting high autonomic arousal to auditory stimuli in the L1.
How much arousal is conferred by auditory aspects, independent of lexical content, could be explored by filtering speech so that words' identities could not be
discerned.
During debriefing, several participants spontaneously mentioned that hearing
the reprimands in Turkish led to a memory (or impression of remembering) a
family member speaking these phrases. This is consistent with the proposal that
modality- and language-specific memories are stored and readily accessible. Our
comparison of auditory and visual presentations presents a cautionary note for
future research. The difference between an L1 and L2 was reduced for written
stimuli. If maximal differences between an L1 and L2 are sought, auditory presentation is probably the more useful experimental approach.
Familiarity and skin conductance

Skin conductance reflects the relevance of a stimulus, such that even a photograph of the face of an acquaintance, when embedded in a stream of unfamiliar
faces, will elicit heightened responsivity (Channouf & Rouibah, 1997; Tranel,
Fowles, & Damasio, 1985). Could increased electrodermal responses to Turkish
words be due, in part, to increased familiarity of Turkish words compared to
English words? Our late learners of English would certainly rate most Turkish
words as more familiar than most English words. However, there are several
reasons to believe that the stronger skin conductance responses to Turkish words
reflect greater emotional associations rather than the greater familiarity of Turkish words. Prior work (all with monolingual speakers) has repeatedly found an
effect of emotionality on skin conductance responses (Bingham, 1943; Man-

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

574

ning & Melchiori, 1974; Mathews, Richards, & Eysenck, 1989), but not of
words' familiarity (Ellis, Hadyn, Quayle, & Young, 1999; Jacobs, 1955). English taboo words were rated as less familiar than the English reprimands and
positive, aversive, and neutral words, yet these items had the strongest SCRs of
the English stimuli. Neutral and positive items were rated as most familiar, yet
showed the weakest SCRs. As noted in the results section, across all of the five
stimulus conditions, English familiarity ratings were uncorrelated with SCRs
elicited by English stimuli.
Electrodermal activity is generally believed to be sensitive to the difference
in emotional valence between neutral and aversive words, with higher SCRs
usually obtained for aversive words (Bingham, 1943; Manning & Melchiori,
1974; Mathews, Richards, & Eysenck, 1989). Unexpectedly, in neither language
did positive and aversive words, such as bride and cancer, elicit significantly
stronger SCRs than neutral words. This is surprising because prior work with
English monolinguals, using the same stimuli and apparatus (Dinn & Harris,
2000, 2003), found elevated SCRs for aversive compared to neutral words. Although future work is needed to resolve this, we suggest the following as an
explanation for the lack of difference between aversive and neutral words. Electrodermal reactivity to arousing stimuli diminishes as those stimuli become expected (Dawson, Schell, & Filion, 1990). Indeed, Dawson et al. (1990) suggest
that one measure of the strength of autonomic response is how many items show
a measurable SCR before habituation occurs. We suggest that the arousing effects of negatively valanced words like cancer and war are reduced when they
are encountered in the context of expletives and sexual terms. This hypothesis
could be tested in future research.
CONCLUSIONS

Electrodermal recording is a robust and sensitive method for investigating psychophysiological concomitants of language. Different response patterns were
found for L1 and L2, and heightened reactivity was found for taboo words in
an L1, especially in the auditory modality. The current work also identified a
new phenomenon: emotional reactivity to childhood phrases in an L1 but not
an L2.
Research on L2 acquisition has traditionally focused on the acquisition of
linguistic systems (phonology, morphology, grammar, lexicon). Reports of differences in the emotional experience associated with language are a reminder
that more than the cognitive realm must be included when considering how
learning an L1 differs from learning an L2. Our study thus contributes to a
growing body of work on differences in emotional responsitivity to speakers'
different languages (e.g., Anooshian & Hertel, 1994; Aycicegi & Harris, in
press; Bond & Lai, 1986; Dewaele & Pavlenko, 2002; Gonzalez-Reigosa, 1976;
Pavlenko, 1999, 2002).
Taboo words and reprimands elicited stronger physiological responses, as
measured by skin conductance, in speakers' L1 than did equivalent words in
their L2, which was learned after the age of 12. Our results explain, in part, the
relative comfort and ease experienced by bilingual speakers when saying taboo

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

575

words in their L2: the terms, although semantically equivalent, are not as physiologically arousing as the L1 terms. The strong reaction to emotionally laden
childhood reprimands in the L1 but not the L2 suggests that a physiological
difference between the L1 and later languages is not limited to taboo words. An
L1 learned early in life may be represented in an individual in a particularly
intimate and pervasive way.
APPENDIX A
ENGLISH AND TURKISH STIMULI
Aversive words

anger
cancer
crime
cruel
danger
death
disease
fight
grave
kill
murder
pain
poison
sick
slavery
war

ofke
kanser
suc
zalim
tehlike
olum
hastalik
kavga
mezar
oldurmek
katletmek
agri
zehir
hasta
kolelik
savas

Neutral words

box
branch
chair
column
door
envelope
finger
foot
job
name
number
part
street

kutu
sube
sandalye
kolon
kapi
zarf
parmak
ayak
is
isim
sayi
kisim
cadde

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

table
tree
window

576

masa
agac
pencere

Positive words

bride
father
freedom
friend
fruit
happy
home
honey
joy
kiss
laugh
love
mother
mountain
smile
sunset

gelin
baba
ozgurluk
arkadas
meyva
mutluluk
ev
canim
sevinc
opucuk
gulmek
ask
anne
dag
gulumsemek
gundogusu

Reprimands (not all are translation equivalents)

Don't do that!
Go to your room!
No!
Shame on you!
Shut up!
Stop that!
I hate you!

Yapma!
Yikil karsimdan! (translation: I don't want to see you!)
Hayir
Seni utanmaz!
Kes sesini!
Dur!
Senden nefret ediyorum!

Taboo words (not all are translation equivalents)

asshole
bitch
breast
oral sex
shit
raped
pee
vagina
whore

sevismek
kahpe
meme
masturbasyon
gerdek
tecavuz
fuhus
bekaret
kilot

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

577

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bruce Mehler from NeuroDyne Medical Corporation provided expertise regarding electrodermal recording. We thank Hiram Brownell, Jean-Marc Dewaele,
Wayne Dinn, and Alison Morris for helpful comments on a previous draft.
REFERENCES
Altarriba, J., & Rivera-Santiago, A. L. (1994). Current perspectives on using linguistic and cultural
factors in counseling the hispanic client. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
25, 388-397.
Anooshian, J. L., & Hertel, T. P. (1994). Emotionality in free recall: Language specificity in bilingual memory. Cognition and Emotion, 8, 503-514.
Aycicegi, A., & Harris, C. L. (in press). Bilinguals' recall and recognition of emotion words. Cognition and Emotion.
Bingham, W. E. (1943). A study of the relations which the galvanic skin response and sensory
reference bear to judgments of the meaningfulness and importance of 72 words. Journal of
Psychology, 16, 21-34.
Birdsong, D., & Molis, M. (2001). On the evidence for maturational constraints in second language
acquisition. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 235-249.
Bloom, L., & Beckwith, R. (1989). Talking with feeling: Integrating affective and linguistic expression in early language development. Cognition and Emotion, 3, 315-342.
Bond, M. H., & Lai, T. (1986). Embarrassment and code-switching into a second language. Journal
of Social Psychology, 126, 179-186.
Bostwick, C. M. (1996). Individual differences in young children's emotion knowledge and emotional expressiveness: The role of the family. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section
B. The Physical Sciences and Engineering, 56, 5193.
Channouf, A., & Rouibah, A. (1997). Suboptimal familiar faces exposure and electrodermal reactions. Annuario de Psicologia, 74, 85-97.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M. R., & Provost, J. (1993). PsyScope: An interactive graphic
system for designing and controlling experiments in the psychology laboratory using Macintosh computers. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Crane, L. D., Dieker, R. J., & Brown, C. T. (1970). The physiological response to the communication modes: Reading, listening, writing, speaking, and evaluating. Journal of Communication, 20, 231-240.
Dawson, M. E., Schell, A. M., & Filion, D. L. (1990). The electrodermal system. In J. T. Cacioppo & L. G. Tassinary (Eds.), Principles of psychophysiology: Physical, social, and inferential elements (pp. 295-324). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Pavlenko, A. (2002). Emotional vocabulary in interlanguage. Language Learning,
52, 263-322.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Regan, V. (2001). The use of colloquial words in advanced French interlanguage.
EUROSLA Yearbook, 1, 51-67.
Dinn, W. M., & Harris, C. L. (1999, August). Orbitofrontal dysfunction: A neurobehavioral continuum. Paper presented at the APA 107th Annual Convention, Boston.
Dinn, W. M., & Harris, C. L. (2000). Neurocognitive function in antisocial personality disorder.
Psychiatry Research, 97, 173-190.
Durst, U. (2001). Why Germans don't feel anger: In J. Harkins, & A. Wierzbicka (Eds.), Emotions
in crosslinguistic perspective. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ellis, H. D., Quayle, A. H., & Young, A. W. (1999). The emotional impact of faces (but not names):
Face specific changes in skin conductance responses to familiar and unfamiliar people. Current Psychology: Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 18, 88-97.
Ervin, S. M. (1964). Language and TAT content in bilinguals. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 5, 500-507.
Ferenczi, S. (1916). Contributions to psychoanalysis. Boston: Badger.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage: Lexicon and grammar.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gleason, J. B. (1985). Language and socialization. In F. S. Kessel (Ed.), The development of language and language researchers: Essays in Honor of Roger Brown. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

578

Gonzalez-Regiosa, F. (1976). The anxiety arousing effect of taboo words in bilinguals. In C. D.
Spielberger & R. Diaz-Guerrero (Eds.), Cross-cultural anxiety (pp. 89-105). Washington,
DC: Hemisphere.
Goodglass, H., & Kaplan, E. (1972). The assessment of aphasia and related disorders. Philadelphia,
PA: Lea & Febiger.
Goz, O. (in press). The word frequency dictionary of written Turkish. Istanbul: Turkish Language
Institute.
Gray, S. G., Hughes, H. H., & Schneider, L. J. (1982). Physiologial responsivity to a socially stressful
situation: The effect of level of moral development. Psychological Record, 32, 29-34.
Greenson, R. (1950). The mother tongue and the mother. International Journal of Psychiatry, 31, 18-23.
Gumperz, J. J., & Hernandez, E. (1971). Bilingualism, bidialectalism, and classroom interaction in
language and social groups. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hill, A. B., & Kemp-Wheeler, S. M. (1989). The influence of context on lexical decision times for
emotionally aversive words. Current Psychology: Research and Reviews, 8, 219-227.
Hugdahl, K. (1995). Psychophysiology: The mind-body perspective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kim, M. (1993). The effects of emotional connotations of English words on event-related potentials
(ERPs) in Korean-English bilinguals and English-speaking monolinguals. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia.
Jacobs, A. (1955). Formation of new associations to words selected on the basis of reaction-timeGSR combinations. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 371-377.
Javier, R. A. (1989). Linguistic considerations in the treatment of bilinguals. Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychology, 6, 87-96.
Javier, R. A., & Marcos, L. R. (1989). The role of stress on the language-independence and codeswitching phenomena. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 18, 449-472.
Jay, T. B. (1992). Cursing in America. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
LaBar, K. S., & Phelps, E. A. (1998). Arousal-mediated memory consolidation: Role of the medial
temporal lobe in humans. Psychological Science, 9, 490-493.
MacKay, D. G., Shafto, M., Taylor, J. K., Marian, D. E., Abrams, L., & Dyer, J. (2002). The taboo
Stroop and related effects of emotion on memory and attention. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Psychonomics Society, Kansas City, MO.
Manning, S. K., & Melchiori, M. P. (1974). Words that upset urban college students: Measures with
GSRs and rating scales. Journal of Social Psychology, 94, 305-306.
Mathews, A., Richards, A., & Eysenck, M. (1989). Interpretation of homophones related to threat
in anxiety states. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 31-34.
Matthews, A., & MacLeod,C. (1985). Discrimination of threat cues without awareness in anxiety
states. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 131-138.
McGinnies, E. (1949). Emotionality of perceptual defense. Psychological Review, 56, 244-251.
Nothman, F. H. (1962). The influence of response conditions on recognition thresholds for taboo
words. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 427-433.
Pavlenko, A. (1999). New approaches to concepts in bilingual memory. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 2, 209-230.
Pavlenko, A. (2002). Bilingualism and emotions. Multilingua, 21, 45-78.
Rubin, D. C., & Friendly, M. (1986). Predicting which words get recalled: Measures of free recall,
availability, goodness, emotionality, and pronunciability for 925 nouns. Memory and Cognition, 14, 79-94.
Schrauf, R. W. (2000). Bilingual autobiographical memory: Experimental studies and clinical cases.
Culture and Psychology, 6, 387-417.
Sechrest, L., Flores, L., & Arellano, L. (1968). Language and social interaction in bilingual culture.
Journal of Social Psychology, 78, 215-224.
Toglia, M. P., & Battig, W. F. (1978). Handbook of semantic word norms. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tranel, D., Fowles, D. C., & Damasio, A. R. (1985). Electrodermal discrimination of familiar and
unfamiliar faces: A methodology. Psychophysiology, 22, 403-408.
Vanderploeg, R. D., Brown, W. S., & Marsh, J. T. (1987). Judgments of emotion in words and
faces: ERP correlates. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 5, 193-205.
Van Lancker, D., & Cummings, J. (1999). Expletives: Neurolinguistics and neurobehavioral perspectives on swearing. Brain Research Reviews, 31, 83-104.

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:4
Harris et al.: Autonomic reactivity in L1 and L2

579

Weber-Fox, C. M., & Neville, H. J. (1999). Functional neural subsystems are differentially affected
by delays in second language immersion: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilinguals. In D.
Birdsong (Ed.), Second language acquisition and the critical period hypothesis. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Wierzbicka, A. (1999). Emotions across languages and cultures: Diversity and universals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wischner, G. J., & Gladis, M. T. (1969). Rate of formation of associations by schizophrenic and
normal subjects as a function of stimulus or response placement of aversive components.
Psychological Reports, 25, 599-605.
Zajonc, R. B. (1962). Response suppression in perceptual defense. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 206-214.

