SSLA, 25, 501-528. Printed in the United States of America.
DOI: 10.1017.S0272263103000214

PARSING STRATEGIES IN L1
AND L2 SENTENCE PROCESSING
A Study of Relative Clause
Attachment in Greek

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen
University of Essex

To contribute to a better understanding of second language (L2) sentence processing, the present study examines how L2 learners parse
temporarily ambiguous sentences containing relative clauses. Results
are reported from both off-line and on-line experiments with three groups
of advanced learners of Greek whose native languages (L1s) were
Spanish, German, or Russian as well as from corresponding experiments with a control group of adult native speakers of Greek. We found
that, despite their nativelike mastery of the construction under investigation, the L2 learners showed relative-clause attachment preferences that were different from those of the native speakers. Moreover,
the L2 learners did not exhibit L1-based preferences in their L2 Greek,
as might be expected if they were directly influenced by L1 attachment preferences. We suggest that L2 learners integrate information
relevant for parsing differently from native speakers, with the L2 learners relying more on lexical cues than the native speakers and less
on purely structurally based parsing strategies.

The research in this paper was supported by a grant from the Leverhulme Foundation to Harald
Clahsen and by a doctoral studentship of the University of Essex to Despina Papadopoulou. We are
very grateful to Phil Scholfield and Ricardo Russo for detailed statistical advice. We also thank Don
Mitchell and the members of our Psycholinguistics Research Group (in particular, Claudia Felser,
Roger Hawkins, Theodoris Marinis, and Leah Roberts) for comments and helpful suggestions.
Address correspondence to: Harald Clahsen, Department of Linguistics, University of Essex, Colchester C04 3SQ, UK; e-mail: harald@essex.ac.uk.
 2003 Cambridge University Press 0272-2631/03 $12.00

501

502

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

Previous second language (L2) acquisition studies have focused on linguistic
knowledge in language learners. By contrast, relatively little is known about
the strategies L2 learners employ to process sentences in real time (see Juffs,
2001; Klein, 1999). It is surprising that the question as to how language learners process the target language has received little attention, given that a learner's ability to process an input string appears to be a crucial prerequisite for
the acquisition of linguistic knowledge (see Fodor, 1998, for relevant theoretical discussion). Some researchers have recently begun to use reaction-time
data and on-line experimental techniques, such as sentence matching, eye tracking, or self-paced reading, to investigate L2 acquisition and parsing (e.g., Clahsen & Hong, 1995; Duffield & White, 1999; Eubank, 1993; Fernandez, 1999, 2000;
Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 1997; Juffs, 1998; Juffs & Harrington, 1995, 1996). The
results obtained thus far are still rather scarce and not yet conclusive. As Klein
(p. 210) pointed out, many of these studies must be replicated before firm
conclusions can be drawn.
Against this background, a research team at the University of Essex has
recently started to conduct a detailed, experimental psycholinguistic study of
sentence processing in child first language (L1) and adult L2 learners, investigating two core aspects of sentence processing: the parsing of temporarily
ambiguous sentences and the processing of filler-gap dependencies. The present study examines parsing preferences in temporarily ambiguous sentences
of Greek--specifically, preferences in the attachment of relative clauses (RCs).
We first present here a brief summary of the psycholinguistic literature on attachment preferences in the L1 and L2. Then, after an overview of some relevant grammatical properties of Greek and the materials and experimental
methods used in this study, we present the experimental results from Greek
native speakers and three groups of L2 learners.
ATTACHMENT PREFERENCES IN NATIVE SPEAKERS1
Consider sentences such as (1) in which the RC can be attached either high,
to the first noun phrase (DP-1) the servant, or low, to the second noun phrase
(DP-2) the actress.
(1) Someone shot [the servant]DP-1 of [the actress]DP-2 who was on the balcony.

Several studies have employed acceptability judgment tasks and reactiontime experiments to examine attachment preferences in such sentences across
different languages. Most studies examining native speakers of English have
found a DP-2 preference--that is, the RC in (1) is preferably associated with
the lower noun phrase (DP) the actress (e.g., see Carreiras & Clifton, 1999;
Cuetos & Mitchell, 1988; Frazier & Clifton, 1996). This preference has been ascribed to a general parsing strategy2 termed right association (Kimball, 1973),
late closure (Frazier, 1978), or recency (Gibson, Pearlmutter, Canseco-Gonzalez, & Hickock, 1996), according to which new phrases are attached to the

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

503

phrase currently being processed (i.e., to the most recent phrase if grammatically possible).
Crosslinguistic Differences in RC Attachment
Results from studies examining languages other than English have shown,
however, that the late closure or recency preference does not hold universally. For example, a high (DP-1) attachment preference was found in sentences equivalent to (1) in languages including Spanish (Cuetos & Mitchell,
1988), German (Hemforth, Konieczny, & Scheepers, 2000; Hemforth, Konieczny, Scheepers, & Strube, 1998), Dutch (Brysbaert & Mitchell, 1996), French
(Zagar, Pynte, & Rativeau, 1997), and Russian (R. Radach & V. Kempe, personal communication, July 21, 2001). On the other hand, a DP-2 preference
was found not only in English but also in Norwegian, Swedish, and Romanian
(Ehrlich, Fernandez, Fodor, Stenshoel, & Vinereanu, 1999) as well as in Brazilian Portuguese (Miyamoto, 1998) and Arabic (Abdelghany & Fodor, 1999).
These findings might mean that at least some parsing strategies are language
specific rather than universal.
There have been three main attempts to explain the crosslinguistic attachment differences in these terms. Within Gibson and Pearlmutter's (1998) multiple-constraint model of sentence processing, attachment preferences are
determined by the relative strength of a number of interacting parsing strategies in a given language. They argued that, in addition to the universal recency
strategy, the parser may employ a second, structurally based parsing strategy
termed predicate proximity, according to which ambiguous modifiers are preferentially attached to constituents as structurally close as possible to the
predicate (i.e., to the S/IP node), hence favoring attachment of the RC to the
overall object DP in (1); see also Gibson and Schutze (1999). Gibson and Pearlmutter further argued that the relative strength of the predicate proximity
strategy is linked to the degree of (non)configurationality of a given language.
That is, in languages such as Spanish, German, or Russian that allow verbs
and their complements to be nonadjacent, the verb may be more active during processing and may, therefore, be more likely to attract ambiguous modifiers. By contrast, configurational languages such as English, Norwegian, Swedish,
and even Brazilian Portuguese (which, as Miyamoto, 1998, pointed out, does
not allow adverbs to intervene between the verb and object) give less weight
to predicate proximity. Greek patterns with Spanish, German, and Russian in
that it allows verbs and their complements to be nonadjacent; from Gibson
and colleagues' account we would therefore expect predicate proximity to be
strong enough to outrank recency, yielding a DP-1 preference in the Greek
equivalents of (1).
The second proposal is the attachment-binding hypothesis of Hemforth
and colleagues (Hemforth et al., 1998; Hemforth et al., 2000; Konieczny, Hemforth, Scheepers, & Strube, 1997). They argued that, in languages in which the
RC is introduced by a relative pronoun (e.g., German), attachment preferences

504

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

are sensitive to more general constraints on pronouns--in particular, to a discourse constraint on anaphoric binding according to which pronouns have to
be attached to salient discourse entities. Arguably, in sentences such as (1),
the head of DP-1 is a more salient discourse entity than that of DP-2 given
that it is an argument of the verb. Consequently, in the German equivalent of
sentences such as (1), the RC is preferably attached high due to constraints
on anaphoric binding. In English, however, in which RCs may be headed by a
complementizer or appear without any overt introductory element, RC attachment is not sensitive to such constraints, which explains the lack of a highattachment preference in English. In this regard, Greek patterns with English
in allowing RCs to be headed by complementizers. Given the attachment-binding account, we would therefore expect to find a low (DP-2) attachment preference in Greek sentences corresponding to (1).
The third attempt to explain crosslinguistic differences in RC attachment is
Mitchell and colleagues' Tuning Hypothesis (e.g., see Mitchell, 1994; Mitchell,
Cuetos, Corley, & Brysbaert, 1995), according to which the parser's attachment preferences in temporarily ambiguous sentences directly correspond to
the frequency distribution of adjunct attachments. That is, a person who is
exposed to a language in which RCs are typically interpreted as high attachments will be more likely to prefer a DP-1 attachment in an ambiguous sentence, whereas a person who is most frequently exposed to low-attachment
input will prefer a DP-2 attachment. To support this account, Mitchell et al.
presented data showing that RC-attachment preferences obtained from experimental studies were positively correlated with the frequency distribution of
attachments obtained from corpus data (see, however, Gibson & Schutze,
1999, for some conflicting evidence). Unfortunately, there are no corpora
available that would allow us to examine the frequency distribution of RC attachments in Greek and to test the Tuning Hypothesis for native speakers of
Greek. We will, however, examine a prediction derived from the Tuning Hypothesis for the L2 data. Recall that previous research on RC attachment has
shown that the L1s of our L2 participants (Spanish, German, and Russian) exhibit a DP-1 attachment preference in sentences such as (1). Likewise, our
findings from native speakers of Greek in the present study also show a clear
DP-1 preference in these kinds of sentences. Thus, it is reasonable to suppose
that our L2 participants have been exposed to a DP-1 preference in both their
L1 and L2. From the perspective of the Tuning Hypothesis, we would therefore
expect that, when faced with an ambiguity, they would choose the option that
had been encountered most often in the past (i.e., high, DP-1 attachment for
the RC).
Lexical Biases in RC Attachment
Another set of findings concerns lexical biases in RC attachment. Several studies have found that, when a DP-2 is introduced by a thematic preposition, the
RC tends to be attached low (e.g., see Felser, Marinis, & Clahsen, in press;

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

505

Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 2000; Gilboy, Sopena, Clifton, & Frazier, 1995; Traxler,
Pickering, & Clifton, 1998). Interestingly, this also holds for languages such as
Spanish and French in which the equivalents of (1) show high attachment.
Thus, the presence of a thematic preposition such as with or con seems to affect
RC-attachment preferences. Frazier and Clifton's (1996) Construal Theory is
an attempt to capture these facts. They argued that so-called nonprimary
phrases (i.e., nonobligatory constituents including RC adjuncts) are construed
or associated with the closest thematic-processing domain. That is, when the
DP-2 receives a theta role from a preposition, as in (2) from with, the RC is
processed within this thematic domain and is consequently attached low.
(2) The doctor recognized [the pupil]DP-1 with [the nurse]DP-2 who was feeling very tired.

In this way, the Construal Theory accounts for the fact that in sentences such
as (2) low attachment is preferred across languages. However, in sentences
such as (1), the closest thematic processing domain is the entire DP (the servant of the actress), which includes both DP-1 and DP-2. Consequently, the Construal Theory does not yield an attachment preference in such sentences.
PREVIOUS STUDIES ON ATTACHMENT PREFERENCES
IN L2 LEARNERS
A small number of previous studies have examined attachment preferences by
L2 learners (Fernandez, 1999; Frenck-Mestre, 1997; Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 1997).
Other studies have explored attachment preferences in bilinguals; see Fernandez (2000) for a review of these studies. Our focus here is on studies examining adult learners who acquired the L2 after puberty.
In two eye-tracking experiments, prepositional phrase (PP) attachment and
main or subordinate clause ambiguities were examined in advanced French
learners of English and English learners of French (Frenck-Mestre & Pynte,
1997).3 In the first experiment, Frenck-Mestre and Pynte addressed the question as to whether L2 learners' parsing strategies differ from the ones native
speakers use when the structures under investigation are identical in the L1
and L2. Their materials consisted of temporarily ambiguous sentences involving the attachment of a PP either to a verb phrase (VP) or a DP, such as Brutus
hit the gladiator with the shield with his bare hands. This sentence is ambiguous
up to the PP with the shield because this PP could be attached to either the
entire VP or the object DP. It is the PP with his bare hands that disambiguates
the sentence toward DP attachment. It was found that, for both native speakers and L2 learners, attachment preferences were dependent on the argument
structure of the verb; for sentences with ditransitive verbs (e.g., hit), VP attachment was preferred, and for those with monotransitive verbs (e.g., reject),
DP attachment was preferred. This was interpreted as supporting a lexically
driven parser in both L2 learners and native speakers in which subcategorization information of the verb affects parsing decisions.

506

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

The second experiment examined whether L2 learners transfer lexical
properties from their L1 when processing temporarily ambiguous L2 input.
Sentences such as Every time the dog obeyed the pretty little girl showed her
approval were used with verbs such as to obey (obeir) that are optionally transitive in English and obligatorily intransitive in French. Consequently, whereas
in English the DP the pretty little girl can be parsed as either the direct object
of the verb or the subject of the subsequent main clause, in the French translation of this sentence, Chaque fois que le chien obeissait la jolie petite fille
montrait sa joie, the DP la jolie petite fille cannot be constructed as a direct
object of the embedded verb. These kinds of sentences were compared with
parallel sentences in which obeir and the like were replaced by verbs such as
aboyer "to bark," which are most typically intransitive in both English and
French. The experimental results indicated that French learners of English
took longer to read sentences with verbs such as to obey than corresponding
sentences with verbs such as to bark. Frenck-Mestre and Pynte (1997) interpreted this finding as an effect of L1 transfer; the L2 learners took extra time
"to reflect upon a verb's usage in cases where information from their native
language conflicted with that from their second language" (pp. 141-142). Note,
however, that a delayed effect is to be expected for verbs such as to obey
(compared to to bark) on independent grounds. Optionally transitive verbs
make available a greater number of structural options for on-line processing
than intransitive verbs, and this difference may have caused the longer reading times for sentences with obey-type verbs. This would also be compatible
with the fact that a similar (albeit smaller) difference in reading times was
found for native speakers. Moreover, the L2 learners were tested in French
and English in the same experiment, which required them to switch back and
forth between L1 and L2, and such a design may have produced arbitrary effects. For these reasons, we think that the L1 transfer explanation offered by
Frenck-Mestre and Pynte is not particularly convincing.
Fernandez (1999) examined RC-attachment preferences in English in two
groups of Spanish L2 learners and in adult native speakers using an off-line
questionnaire. The experimental materials consisted of ambiguous sentences,
such as Roxanne read the review of the play that was written by Diane's friend,
containing RCs preceded by complex DPs linked by the prepositions of or with.
There were 15 early learners (Spanish speakers who started to learn English
before the age of 10) and 15 late learners (who started to learn English after
age 10).4 A clear low-attachment preference was found in the native speakers
but not in the L2 learners. Instead, both early and late learners produced
more high-attachment answers than the native speakers did. Fernandez interpreted this as a result of L1 transfer, reflecting the fact that Spanish prefers
high attachment in cases in which English prefers low attachment. Note, however, that whereas native speakers of Spanish exhibited a clear low-attachment preference for DP-con-DP (e.g., see Cuetos & Mitchell, 1988; Cuetos,
Mitchell, & Corley, 1996), the L2 learners showed no clear preference for either high or low attachment (see Fernandez, p. 227, table 1), which indicates

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

507

that the L2 learners' responses cannot be accounted for in terms of L1 transfer. It should also be mentioned that a direct comparison between the two
conditions (of vs. with) is not possible because the DPs used in both conditions were different.
Frenck-Mestre (1997) examined RC-attachment preferences in temporarily
ambiguous sentences of French by native speakers and so-called beginning
adult L2 learners whose L1s were either English or Spanish.5 RC antecedents
consisted of complex DPs with prepositions that do not assign theta roles (DPde-DP). An overall high-attachment preference was found for native speakers
and Spanish L1 participants, and no preference was found for English L1 participants. Frenck-Mestre interpreted this finding in support of L1 transfer, reflecting the fact that a high-attachment preference is found in L1 Spanish but
not in L1 English. Note, however, that, because Frenck-Mestre did not provide
any background information on the L2 participants (except that they were at
a beginning level), we cannot rule out the possibility that the Spanish and English participants were at different proficiency levels in their L2 and therefore
not directly comparable with each other. Moreover, most studies of native
speakers of English have shown a low-attachment preference; L1 transfer in
the case of English learners should therefore lead to a low-attachment preference (rather than no preference).
In summary, these studies have not produced conclusive results. They are
also hard to interpret because the learners' L2 proficiency and particularly their
grammatical knowledge of the constructions under study were not independently
assessed. It is therefore possible that differences observed between native speakers and L2 learners in the experiments were, at least in part, due to the L2 learners' incomplete acquisition of the relevant grammatical constructions.
THE PRESENT STUDY
Building on the findings summarized in the previous sections, we investigated
RC-attachment preferences in native speakers and L2 learners of Greek. Greek
has some morphological and structural properties that are advantageous for
studying RC-attachment preferences. For example, Greek has (a) relatively
free word order, (b) RCs introduced by complementizers, and (c) morphologically marked genitives. Given (c), genitive antecedents in Greek are therefore
clearly distinct from PP antecedents (unlike, for example, in English, French,
or Spanish).6 Moreover, data from Greek allow us to assess different models
of RC attachment. For example, given property (b), the attachment-binding
model of RC attachment (Hemforth et al., 1998) predicts a low-attachment
preference for Greek, whereas, given (a), the multiple-constraint account of
Gibson and Pearlmutter (1998) predicts a high-attachment preference for the
same sentences. The experimental results reported in the present study show
that native speakers of Greek prefer high attachment of the RC in sentences
with genitive antecedents, thus providing support for Gibson and Pearlmutter's parsing model.

508

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

To examine L2 sentence processing, we investigated RC attachment in
three groups of advanced learners of Greek whose L1s were Spanish, German,
or Russian, using both off-line and on-line experiments on RC attachment. Additionally, the L2 participants underwent a grammaticality judgment test to
ensure that they could handle the kinds of sentences tested in the two main
experiments. With respect to RC-attachment preferences, our results from native speakers of Greek show that Greek patterns with Spanish, German, and
Russian in that these languages prefer high attachment of the RC in sentences
with genitive antecedents. As the L1s and the target language of our L2 participants exhibit the same attachment preferences, one might expect them to perform like native speakers of Greek in these constructions. This would at least
be consistent with experience-based parsing models such as the Tuning Hypothesis as well as with the idea that language-particular attachment preferences of the L1 are transferred to the L2. Our results do not confirm this
prediction, however. Despite nativelike performance in the grammaticality
judgment test and parallel-attachment preferences in both their L1s and
Greek, the L2 learners showed RC-attachment patterns different from native
speakers of Greek. We argue that these results provide evidence against both
the exposure-based models of parsing and the notion of L1 transfer of language-particular attachment preferences in L2 sentence processing.
RESTRICTIVE RCs, GENITIVES, AND PPs IN GREEK
In this section, we provide a brief description of relevant grammatical properties of Greek and the materials used in our experiments. There is extensive
linguistic literature on RCs and the structure of nominals in Greek (e.g., see
Alexiadou, 1999; Holton, Mackridge, & Philippaki-Warburton, 1997; Theophanopoulou-Kontou, 1989; Varlokosta, 1999), which will not be discussed here.
Rather, the following remarks are just meant as background information for
those unfamiliar with the Greek language.
To examine attachment preferences in Greek, we constructed experimental
sentences with a grammatical structure similar to those in (1) and (2). These
sentences have a transitive verb in the main clause with an overt subject and
a direct object followed by either a genitive DP or a PP; the main clause is
followed by a restrictive RC, which is always introduced by the complementizer pu "that," as in (3).
(3) Enas
antras
kitakse ton
dhaskalo
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-NOM looked the-MASC-SG-ACC teacher-MASC-ACC
tis
mathitrias
pu itan stin
avli.
the-FEM-SG-GEN pupil-FEM-SG-GEN that was in-the-FEM schoolyard
"A man looked at the teacher of the pupil who was in the schoolyard."

Mackridge (1985, p. 253) pointed out that the invariant complementizer pu
"that" is the most common element for introducing RCs and that it is used more
frequently than the relative pronouns o opios "who, whichMASC," i opia "who,

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

509

whichFEM," and to opio "who, whichNEUT" in both colloquial speech and writing.
This is particularly the case for subject RCs such as those used in our experiments. In addition to RCs, pu is also used to introduce exclamatives and complements of factive verbs.
Regarding the RC antecedents, the experimental materials contain complex
(object) DPs with possessive genitives, as in (3), or PPs with the preposition
me "with." Similar to previous studies on attachment preferences in languages
other than Greek, the two DPs in the genitive condition of our experiments
express a functional or professional relationship (e.g., teacher of the pupil), a
relationship that Tzartzanos (1991) labeled dependency genitive. Even though
the genitive DP may precede the head DP for purposes of contrast (Holton et
al., 1997, p. 264), the typical order for such complex DPs is for the genitive DP
to follow the head DP, as illustrated in (3).
Most syntactic accounts of Greek have argued that genitive DPs are base
generated postnominally (Alexiadou & Stavrou, 1999; Horrocks & Stavrou, 1987;
Theophanopoulou-Kontou, 1989). In contrast to these no-movement analyses,
Alexiadou (1999) argued that the possessor DP, such as dhaskalo "teacher" in
(3), is base generated after the possessum DP mathitrias "pupil," from which
it is moved to the left of the possessum noun (to check agreement and case
features), yielding a derived structure ([[DPi] DPGEN ti]) with a trace for the
moved DP. We will not elaborate on the syntactic arguments for and against
these conflicting proposals in this study, but it is important to point out that
the predictions for parsing sentences such as (3) are dependent on which syntactic analysis is assumed for complex DPs. Consider, for example, the late
closure or recency strategies, according to which new material is attached to
the most recent phrase. Under the no-movement analysis, the most recent
phrase for the attachment of the RC in (3) is the genitive DP. However, under
Alexiadou's account, the most recent syntactic element before the RC is the
trace of the moved, possessor noun. Thus, late closure or recency paired with
Alexiadou's analysis would yield RC attachment to the DP containing the possessor noun, whereas under the no-movement analysis the same parsing strategy would yield RC attachment to the DP with the possessum noun. When
discussing the experimental results, we have to consider both possibilities.
The second type of complex DP used in the experimental materials contains PPs with the preposition me "with" (e.g., ton kirio me to koritsi "the man
with the girl") in which the PPs denote spatial or temporal accompaniment.
Complex DPs of this kind are straightforwardly right branching and, in contrast to genitive DPs, have not been argued to involve any kind of reordering.
METHOD
Participants
Three groups of advanced learners of Greek, all residents of Greece, were
tested. There were 18 adult L2 learners (L2-S) whose L1 was Spanish, whose

510

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

Table 1. Characteristics of the L2 groups
L2-S
Characteristics
Years of residence in Greece
Years of formal instruction in Greek
Greek Language Proficiency scores
Age of first exposure to Greek

L2-G

L2-R

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

11.21
2.06
75.33
26.39

6.90
1.59
3.27
4.62

13.73
1.42
72.63
23.74

12.16
0.58
5.96
9.22

4.30
2.35
71.90
22.10

3.40
2.54
4.89
6.47

mean age was 38.8 years, and who were all first exposed to Greek after 12
years of age. There were 19 adults (L2-G) whose L1 was German and whose
mean age was 42.9 years. Two of these participants reported having had some
occasional contact with Greek during childhood through grandparents and
other relatives. The remaining 17 participants were first exposed to Greek in
their adulthood. Finally, there were 10 adults (L2-R) whose L1 was Russian,
whose mean age was 27.3 years, and who were all first exposed to Greek as
adults. Additional background information about these three groups is given
in Table 1. All the learners had attended Greek language courses, and when
the experiments took place, all of them were living and working in Athens.
They all reported using Greek on a daily basis for interaction with native and
nonnative speakers--that is, all the participants used Greek in their work environment, and all of them had Greek friends or partners with whom they
communicated in Greek.
To obtain a general measure of the L2 learners' proficiency in Greek, we
tested them on the Greek Language Proficiency Test used at the University of
Athens.7 The maximum score on this test is 80. As can be seen from the proficiency scores in Table 1, all L2 learners achieved very high scores on this test,
which indicated that their knowledge of Greek was at an advanced level.
Additionally, some of the participants knew a third language (L3), which
was English, French, or Italian, but none reported being fluent in any of these
languages. Within the L2-S group, six participants reported knowing English at
an intermediate level and six at an elementary level. However, only one was
actively using English when the experiments took place, as she was taking English language courses at the university. The remaining six participants had
not studied or learned English at all. A similarly mixed picture regarding their
knowledge of English holds for the L2-R group; three reported having advanced knowledge of English, three intermediate, two elementary, and two no
English at all. Only the L2-G group was relatively homogeneous in this respect;
five learners reported having advanced knowledge of English, and the remaining 14 reported having intermediate knowledge.
All L2 learners participated in a grammaticality judgment task, and all of
them, except for one L2-G participant, also took part in the acceptability judgment task. In the self-paced reading (SPR) experiment, there were 16 partici-

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

511

pants from the L2-S group, 11 from the L2-G group, and 9 from the L2-R group.
Furthermore, the two main experiments were administered to two different
control groups of adult native speakers of Greek. For the acceptability judgment task, the control group consisted of 16 native speakers (mean age: 24.2
years; 6 males and 10 females) who were students at the University of Athens.
The SPR task was administered to a group of 20 native speakers (mean age:
24.1 years; 7 males and 13 females) who were students at the University of
Essex.8 All of the participants were naive with respect to the purpose of the
experiments.
Experimental Tasks
The purpose of the grammaticality judgment task was to test, independently
of the two main experiments, whether the L2 learners could handle the constructions under study, particularly RCs with complex antecedents. The task
consisted of 50 sentences, all of which contained various types of RCs. There
were 20 grammatical sentences with subject, direct object, indirect object, or
genitive RCs (five each), and five RCs with two antecedents. The 25 ungrammatical sentences had doubly filled complementizers, sentences without an
overt complementizer, genitive RCs with complementizers but without the required resumptive pronouns, RCs with preposition stranding, and RCs with
two antecedents (five each). The format of the grammaticality judgment task
was adopted from Hawkins and Chan (1997).
The materials used in the two main experiments were similar.9 The critical
sentences were all grammatical, consisted of 4-6 words, and contained a main
clause and a subject-RC with two possible antecedents introduced by the complementizer pu "that," as illustrated in (4).
(4) a. Condition Gen-high
Enas
kirios
fonakse ton
fititi
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-SG-NOM called the-MASC-SG-ACC student-MASC-SG-ACC
tis
kathighitrias
pu itan apoghoitevmenos apo to neo
the-FEM-SG-GEN teacher-FEM-SG-GEN that was disappointed-MASC by the new
ekpedheftiko sistima.
educational system
"A man called the studentMASC of the teacherFEM who was disappointedMASC by the
new educational system."
b. Condition Gen-low
Enas
kirios
fonakse ton
fititi
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-SG-NOM called the-MASC-SG-ACC student-MASC-SG-ACC
tis
kathighitrias
pu itan apoghoitevmeneni apo to neo
the-FEM-SG-GEN teacher-FEM-SG-GEN that was disappointed-FEM by the new
ekpedheftiko sistima.
educational system
"A man called the studentMASC of the teacherFEM who was disappointedFEM by the
new educational system."
c. Condition PP-high
Enas
kirios
fonakse ton
fititi
me
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-SG-NOM called the-MASC-SG-ACC student-MASC-SG-ACC with

512

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen
tin
kathighitria
pu itan apoghoitevmenos apo to neo
the-FEM-SG-ACC teacher-FEM-SG-ACC that was disappointed-MASC by the new
ekpedheftiko sistima.
educational system
"A man called the studentMASC with the teacherFEM who was disappointedMASC by
the new educational system."
d. Condition PP-low
Enas
kirios
fonakse ton
fititi
me
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-SG-NOM called the-MASC-SG-ACC student-MASC-SG-ACC with
tin
kathighitria
pu itan apoghoitevmeneni apo to neo
the-FEM-SG-ACC teacher-FEM-SG-ACC that was disappointed-FEM by the new
ekpedheftiko sistima.
educational system
"A man called the studentMASC with the teacherFEM who was disappointedFEM by the
new educational system."

The two DPs preceding the RC were always animate, had different genders
(either feminine or masculine), and expressed a functional or professional relationship. To examine the role of lexical biases, the form of the RC antecedent
was manipulated (see [4a] and [4b] vs. [4c] and [4d]). The critical sentences
were disambiguated by the form of the participle or adjective, through gender
agreement, yielding either high or low RC attachment. In this way, the variables antecedent (DP + DPGEN vs. DP + PP) and attachment (high vs. low) lead
to four experimental conditions, as shown in (4). Otherwise (i.e., apart from
the different antecedent and attachment types), the experimental sentences
were identical.
With respect to the acceptability judgment task, we expected the participants' acceptability judgments to be affected by their attachment preferences.
Specifically, sentences in which the disambiguating gender information confirms the initial, preferred attachment of the RC should receive higher scores
than sentences in which the gender cue is incompatible with the initial attachment. This is because in the latter case the initial interpretation has to be revised, and in a scaled judgment task this is likely to affect the scores assigned
to the sentences; see also Birdsong (1992) for support to the argument that
scaled judgment tasks are sensitive to degrees of acceptability. There were 20
experimental sentences, 5 for each of the four conditions shown in (4). In addition to the critical sentences, we constructed 40 filler sentences for this
judgment task involving a variety of constructions (e.g., reflexive, control, raising, gerund, and wh-extraction constructions). Ten filler sentences were grammatically well formed. Twenty filler sentences were made ungrammatical by a
gender or number mismatch between the antecedent DP and the past participle; the structure of these sentences was parallel to the experimental sentences. Ten other filler sentences included other kinds of ungrammaticality.
Participants were instructed to read the sentences and judge the acceptability
of each sentence on a 5-point scale from 1 (not at all acceptable) to 5 (completely acceptable). They were instructed to read the sentences as carefully
and quickly as they could and to rely on their personal judgments, not on prescriptive grammatical rules. Additionally, the participants were instructed to

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

513

give the lowest score to any sentence they thought was ungrammatical. The
task was completed in less than half an hour.
The rationale for the SPR task is that increased reading times for a particular segment (relative to the same segment in a control condition) indicate a
relatively higher processing difficulty at this point during the parse. That is,
reading times for the disambiguating segment should be higher for those conditions that force the dispreferred attachment, reflecting the time it takes
comprehenders to revise their initial (i.e., preferred) analysis of the sentence.
There were 24 critical sentences (6 for each condition) as well as 72 filler sentences with different syntactic constructions, all of which were grammatical.
The experimental sentences were parallel to the ones in (4) except that the
auxiliary form itan was replaced by a finite form of the verb fenome "to seem."
This was done to avoid a temporal ambiguity that might result from the fact
that itan is a syncretic form meaning either was or were. The verb fenome has
two different forms in the past continuous, one for singular (fenotan) and one
for plural (fenodan), and thus avoids this ambiguity.10 All experimental and filler sentences were divided into five segments, as illustrated in (5).11
(5) First:

Enas
kirios
fonakse
a-MASC-SG-NOM man-MASC-SG-NOM called
Second: ton
fititi
tis
kathighitrias
the-MASC-SG-ACC student-MASC-SG-ACC the-FEM-SG-GEN teacher-FEM-SG-GEN
Third: pu fenotan
that seemed-SG
Fourth: apoghoitevmenos
disappointed-MASC
Fifth: apo to neo ekpedheftiko sistima.
by the new educational system
"A man called the studentMASC of the teacherFEM who seemed disappointedMASC by the
new educational system."

The critical region is the fourth segment (i.e., apoghoitevmenos "disappointedMASC") because it is here that the disambiguation occurs. A low-attachment
preference would be evident from shorter reading times for the fourth segment of conditions Gen-low and PP-low in comparison to Gen-high and PPhigh. This is because, in the former two conditions, the form of the gender
marking on the adjective is compatible with the initial (low) attachment,
whereas in the latter two conditions it is not. If, on the other hand, participants prefer a high (DP-1) attachment, reading times on the fourth segment
should be shorter for the Gen-high and the PP-high conditions than for the
Gen-low and PP-low conditions.
The stimuli were presented on a computer monitor in white letters (Arial
24-point) on a dark background. The participants were instructed to read the
sentences as quickly and carefully as they could. They read the sentences in
a segment-by-segment fashion, and the presentation of each new segment was
triggered by pressing a pacing button. The times between button presses provide the crucial experimental measure. To make sure that participants paid

514

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen
Table 2. Mean grammaticality judgment scores
and standard deviations for subject RCs with
complex antecedents
L2-S
Subject RCs
Hits
Correct rejections

L2-G

L2-R

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

4.33
5

0.84
0

4
4.84

1
0.50

3.70
4.80

1.16
0.42

Note. The maximum score for hits and correct rejections is 5.

attention to the content of the sentences, they were also required to answer a
yes/no content question after reading each sentence. Questions eliciting yes/
no answers were evenly distributed across the four conditions. The whole experiment lasted 45-60 minutes per person.
RESULTS
Grammaticality Judgments
Table 2 presents the grammaticality judgment scores (mean scores and standard deviations for correct responses) for the constructions that were tested
in the two main experiments--namely, subject RCs with complex (DP + DP)
antecedents. "Hits" are grammatically well-formed sentences that were accepted, and "correct rejections" are ungrammatical sentences that were rejected. The three groups of L2 learners achieved high scores on this task in
terms of hits and correct rejections. Moreover, the scores in Table 2 do not
significantly differ among language groups, showing that the three groups of
L2 learners performed similarly on this task: F(2, 44) = 1.415, p = .254 for hits;
F(2, 44) = 1.227, p = .303 for correct rejections. These results indicate that the
L2 learners we tested have acquired the grammatical properties necessary for
dealing with RCs with complex antecedents such as those used in our main
experiments.
Acceptability Judgments
Recall that in this task participants were confronted with grammatical sentences, as in (4), to test their attachment preferences and with ungrammatical
sentences involving gender or number agreement mismatches, as in (6), to
test whether the L2 learners could handle the kind of long-distance, subjectverb agreement between an antecedent DP and a participle or adjective that
is required for correctly interpreting the experimental sentences.
(6) *O ipiretis hamoghelase ston
vioghrafo
tis
the servant smiled
at-the-MASC-SG-ACC biographer-MASC-SG-ACC the-FEM-SG-GEN

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

515

Table 3. Mean acceptability judgment scores and standard deviations
Gen-high
Participants
Native speakers
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R

Gen-low

PP-high

PP-low

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

4.24
3.26
3.82
3.50

1.10
1.72
1.24
1.50

3.05
3.17
3.54
2.70

1.53
1.71
1.38
1.53

1.62
2.06
2.50
2.42

1.10
1.44
1.40
1.39

2.97
3.02
3.17
3.04

1.67
1.76
1.36
1.51

Note. The scores ranged on a 5-point scale from 1 (not at all acceptable) to 5 (completely acceptable).

ithopiu
pu itan hamena stis skepsis tus.
actress-FEM-SG-GEN who was lost-NEUT-PL in their thoughts
"The servant smiled at the biographer of the actress who was lost in their thoughts."

The results from L2 learners' judgments of the ungrammatical sentences were
parallel to those of the native speakers; the L2-S group correctly rejected 95%,
the L2-G group 95.3%, the L2-R group 96%, and the Greek native speakers
99.3% of the ungrammatical sentences with gender mismatches. These figures
indicate that the L2 learners were sensitive to gender or number agreement
mismatches.
With respect to the acceptability scores for the four experimental conditions, Table 3 presents mean scores and standard deviations. To determine
whether there are reliable differences between the three groups of L2 learners, we first performed a preliminary ANOVA on the acceptability judgment
scores with antecedent (DP + DPGEN vs. DP + PP) and attachment (high vs. low)
as within-subjects variables and L2 group as the between-subjects variable.12
This analysis revealed no significant interactions for any of the three L2
groups, which indicated that they exhibit the same L2-attachment preferences
regardless of their L1. For further statistical analyses we therefore collapsed
them into one L2 group.
To compare the L2 learners to the native speaker control group, a repeated
measures ANOVA was performed with antecedent and attachment as withinparticipants variables and group (native speakers and L2 learners) as a betweenparticipants variable. The labels F1 and t1 refer to subject analyses (treating participants as a random effect), and F2 and t2 refer to item analyses (treating items
as a random effect). A main effect of antecedent was obtained, showing that
overall the Gen conditions yielded higher acceptability judgment scores than
the PP conditions, F1(1, 60) = 77.238, p < .001, and F2(1, 78) = 82.052, p < .001.13
On the other hand, there was no significant main attachment effect, which
shows that overall there was no bias toward low or high attachment. We also
found a significant interaction between antecedent and attachment, which indicates that genitives were treated differently from PPs with respect to RC attachment, F1(1, 60) = 80.203, p < .001, and F2(1, 78) = 84.214, p < .001. Moreover,
there was a significant interaction between group and antecedent, which

516

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

means that native speakers and L2 learners differed in the way they judged
the sentences with genitives and PPs: F1(1, 60) = 8.398, p < .01, and F2(1, 78) =
8.930, p < .01. Finally, there was a significant interaction of antecedent, attachment, and group, F1(1, 60) = 13.096, p < .01, and F2(1, 78) = 14.234, p < .001, showing that the differences between the two antecedents are not the same for the
two attachment types and that the differences between them are not the same
for native speakers and L2 learners.
Further examination of these interactions using matched t-tests revealed
significant differences between the two Gen conditions (Gen-high vs. Gen-low)
for the native speakers, t1-N(15) = 4.442, p < .001, and t2-N(19) = 5.923, p < .01, but
not for the L2 learners, t1-L2(45) = 1.714, p = .093, and t2-L2(59) = 1.877, p = .066.
This means that the native speakers judged the high-attachment sentences as
more acceptable than the low-attachment ones in the Gen conditions, whereas
the L2 learners showed no such preference. In the PP conditions (PP-high vs.
PP-low), on the other hand, there was a significant low-attachment preference
for both participant groups: t1-N(15) = 4.635, p < .01; t2-N(19) = 4.586, p < .01; t1-L2
(45) = 5.451, p < .001; t2-L2(59) = 5.474, p < .001.
In summary, we found that the form of the RC antecedent affected both the
native speakers' and the L2 learners' attachment preferences but in different
ways. The native speakers exhibited a clear high-attachment preference in
sentences with genitive antecedents and, conversely, a low-attachment preference for antecedents with PPs. The L2 learners also preferred low attachment
in the PP conditions, but in the genitive conditions there was no statistically
significant attachment preference. It is also important to point out that the
three groups of L2 learners performed in similar ways in this experiment. Before drawing any conclusions from these findings, we report the results of the
second main experiment, the SPR task, which provide evidence for attachment
preferences in on-line processing.

SPR Task
Recall that in the SPR task each sentence was followed by a comprehension
question to make sure that the participants paid attention to the content of
the sentences. The percentages of erroneous responses to the filler items
were low: native speakers 7.7%, L2-S 11.7%, L2-G 7.1%, and L2-R 7.4%. The percentages of erroneous responses to the experimental items were higher, particularly for the L2 learners (native speakers 8.5%, L2-S 14.6%, L2-G 18.2%, and
L2-R 22.7%), probably because overall the experimental sentences were more
complex than the filler sentences. Trials that produced erroneous responses
to the comprehension questions were excluded from any subsequent analysis.
For the native speakers, reading times that were two standard deviations
above or below the mean of an experimental condition were removed from
the data set before any further statistical analysis, which resulted in the re-

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

517

Table 4. Mean reading times (in milliseconds)
Conditions
Segments
First

Second

Third

Fourth

Fifth

Sixth

Participants

Gen-high

Gen-low

PP-high

PP-low

Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R
Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R
Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R
Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R
Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R
Greeks
L2-S
L2-G
L2-R

873.38
1876.03
3000.52
2085.63
1419.36
3018.37
5515.01
4459.79
970.58
1558.59
1977.86
1956.03
882.64
1915.85
2648.49
2285.79
875.78
1844.04
2209.39
1653.10
2645.62
4075.27
5225.79
4601.09

900.74
1987.28
2753.70
2196.24
1516.41
3322.55
5209.07
4603.49
1011.88
1599.23
2288.31
2013.10
1222.12
1821.26
2894.40
2484.87
961.17
1758.26
2476.83
1844.54
2821.98
4013.82
4624.76
4128.93

816.12
1784.97
3174.88
2137.43
1594.86
3230.45
5241.24
4868.03
1000.27
1718.54
2111.94
1864.65
938.38
2035.71
3225.31
2649.23
1022.01
1766.47
2252.47
1868.19
3043.62
4012.02
5531.66
4382.88

840.18
1851.88
2919.64
2156.65
1618.11
3432.95
4848.40
4861.16
1086.73
1621.09
2053.23
1745.48
864.32
1818.23
2654.04
2223.62
872.11
1582.99
2086.57
1513.20
2708.08
3888.85
4811.26
4898.45

moval of 4.6% of the data set. For the L2 learners, the cut-off point was 2.5
standard deviations, as the data from L2 learners are more susceptible to variation than those from native speakers, resulting in the elimination of 2.1% for
the L2-S group, 3.2% for the L2-G group, and 2.3% for the L2-R group. The reading times per segment and condition are shown in Table 4. Recall from (5) that
the first segment is identical in all experimental conditions. The second one
contains the complex DP, and the third one the beginning of the RC (i.e., the
ambiguous region). The fourth segment is the critical one because it contains
the disambiguating gender marking. The end of the sentence is presented as
the fifth segment, and the sixth segment contains the comprehension question.
We performed the same statistical analyses on the mean reading times as
on the acceptability judgment scores reported in the previous section. For the
first three segments as well as for the sixth segment, these analyses did not
reveal any statistically reliable interactions in either participant group. For the
other segments, however, there were significant effects. These will be reported
here, focusing on the results from the critical (fourth) segment.

518

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

Reading Times for the Fourth Segment
To determine whether there are statistically significant differences among the
three groups of L2 learners, a repeated measures ANOVA was performed with
antecedent and attachment as within-subjects variables and L2-group as the
between-subjects variable. This analysis showed that the variable L2 group
did not significantly interact with either antecedent or attachment, indicating
that the three learner groups showed the same attachment preferences in the
L2. For further statistical analyses, we therefore collapsed them into one L2
group.
To compare the L2 learners to the native speaker control group, an ANOVA
was performed with antecedent and attachment as within-subjects variables
and group (native speakers and L2 learners) as the between-subjects variable.
We found a main effect of group, F1(1, 54) = 60.98, p < .001, and F2(1, 94) = 111.83,
p < .001, which reflected the fact that the native speakers' reading times were
overall much shorter than those of the L2 learners. On the other hand, there
were no significant main effects of either antecedent or attachment, which indicated that overall there was no bias for a particular attachment or antecedent type. There was, however, a significant interaction between antecedent
and attachment, F1(1, 54) = 15.061, p < .001, and F2(1, 94) = 13.621, p < .001,
showing that reading times of high- and low-attachment sentences were different for the two antecedent types. Furthermore, a significant interaction between antecedent and group was obtained, F1(1, 54) = 6.214, p < .05, and F2(1,
94) = 4.389, p < .05, showing that the L2 learners' reading times were different
from those of the native speakers for the two antecedent types. The interaction between attachment and group was also significant, F1(1, 54) = 13.156, p <
.01, and F2(1, 94) = 5.492, p < .05, which indicated that the native speakers'
reading times were different from those of the L2 learners with respect to the
two attachment types.
Further examination of these interactions using matched t-tests revealed
significant differences between the two Gen conditions for the native speakers, t1-N(19) = 4.57, p < .01, and t2-N(23) = 4.56, p < .01, but not for the L2 learners,
t1-L2(35) = 0.872, p = .389, and t2-L2(71) = 0.768, p = .445. This result reflects the
fact that in the Gen conditions the native speakers read the (fourth segment
of) high-attachment sentences much faster than the one in low-attachment
sentences (see Table 4), whereas the L2 learners showed no such preference.
In the PP conditions, on the other hand, there was a significant low-attachment preference for both participant groups in the subject analysis. This
effect was also significant in the item analysis but only for the L2 group: t1-N
(19) = 2.49, p < .05; t2-N(23) = 1.407, p = .173; t1-L2(35) = 3.859, p < .001; t2-L2(71) =
3.760, p < .001.
Other Statistical Analyses
The same ANOVA (with antecedent and attachment as within-subjects variables and group as the between-subjects variable) that was performed on the

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

519

Table 5. Results from statistical analyses of the reading times
of the fifth segment
Results
Main effects or interactions

Participant analyses

Item analyses

--
--
**
*
--
*
--

--
--
**
--
--
**
--

Antecedent
Attachment
Group
Antecedent x Group
Attachment x Group
Antecedent x Attachment
Antecedent x Attachment x Group
Note. Nonsignificant results are indicated by a dash.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

fourth segment was also performed on the reading times for the fifth segment.
The results from this analysis are summarized in Table 5. For each comparison, the results from the participant and the item analyses are reported. The
significant main effects and interactions shown in Table 5 for the fifth segment
are a subset of those obtained for the fourth segment. In particular, there are
no effects that were not already present at the fourth segment. Instead, some
effects from the fourth segment (Attachment x Group and Antecedent x
Group) are either absent or weaker on the fifth segment. These observations
suggest that the effects on the fifth segment are due to a spillover from the
ones originating at the critical (i.e., the fourth) segment. On the sixth segment,
there were no statistically significant main effects or interactions left.
In summary, the overall results of the SPR task are parallel to those of the
acceptability judgment task. In both experiments, the L2 learners showed the
same attachment preferences as the native speakers in the PP conditions but
not in the Gen conditions. That is, when the RC antecedent had a DP + PP
structure with the lexical preposition me "with," all participant groups preferred low attachment of the RC to the PP. In contrast, when the RC antecedent contained a genitive (DP + DPGEN), the native speakers showed a clear
preference to attach the RC to the first DP, whereas the L2 learners of Greek
did not show any statistically significant preference for either attachment
type. Moreover, we found that, in both the SPR and acceptability judgment
tasks, the three groups of L2 learners exhibited similar attachment patterns
regardless of their L1.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Attachment Preferences by Greek Native Speakers
Native speakers showed a clear low-attachment preference for the RC in sentences with DP + PP antecedents and a high-attachment preference in sen-

520

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

tences with DP + DPGEN antecedents. As previously shown, the explanation
for these parsing preferences depends on the syntactic structure posited for
complex DPs in Greek. Consider first Alexiadou's (1999) movement account
according to which possessive genitives are derived structures ([[DPi] DPGEN
ti]) that involve possessor movement. Under this syntactic analysis, the RCattachment preferences could be explained in terms of late closure or recency.
This is obviously the case for DP + PP antecedents and, more interestingly,
also for DP + DPGEN antecedents, in which case late closure or recency paired
with Alexiadou's analysis would yield RC attachment to the trace of the moved
DP. This account provides a simple and straightforward analysis of the present set of results, but it presupposes Alexiadou's analysis of the Greek DP,
which might turn out to be incorrect on independent syntactic grounds. Furthermore, the idea that high-attachment preferences for genitive antecedents
reflect a disguised low-attachment preference (due to possessor movement)
probably does not hold crosslinguistically. For example, possessive constructions in Romance languages are syntactically very similar to each other, and
yet in terms of RC attachment, Romance languages behave rather differently
from one another. The high-attachment preference for genitive antecedents
that was found for Spanish and French might perhaps be attributed to possessor
movement, but then it remains unclear as to why equivalent constructions in
Brazilian Portuguese and Romanian (Ehrlich et al., 1999) yielded a low-attachment preference.
This raises the question as to how the native speakers' attachment preferences can be explained in terms of the no-movement analysis of Greek DPs.
Given these syntactic accounts, attachment preferences by Greek native
speakers turn out to depend on antecedent types (i.e., high attachment for
genitive antecedents and low attachment for PPs). Thus, native speakers' attachment preferences appear to be influenced by both lexical biases of the
antecedents and the structural relationship between the RC and its antecedent. Regarding the lexical biases, our results from Greek replicate previous
findings from other languages showing that, when the second DP is introduced by a theta-role-assigning lexical preposition, the RC tends to be
attached low. On the other hand, for genitive antecedents such as ton fititi tis
kathighitrias "the student of the teacher," the local thematic processing domain is the entire DP, which means that the RC can be associated with DP-1
or DP-2 within this domain. Our experiments, however, revealed a clear DP-1
attachment preference in these sentences, which indicates that lexical or thematic biases provide only a partial account of Greek RC-attachment preferences.
The second relevant factor is structurally based preferences, such as the
late closure or recency strategy and predicate proximity. Recall that (according to the account of Gibson & Pearlmutter, 1998) languages may differ as to
how much weight they give to proximity, depending essentially on a language's
(non)configurationality. In terms of this property, Greek patterns with Spanish, German, and Russian in that it allows adjuncts and other material to occur

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

521

between the head of a predicate phrase and its objects. Consequently, we predicted that predicate proximity would outrank recency in Greek and yield a
high-attachment preference in sentences with genitive antecedents. Our results confirm this prediction.
The attachment-binding hypothesis, on the other hand, is not supported by
our findings. Recall that according to this model attachment preferences
should depend on whether an RC is introduced by a relative pronoun or a
complementizer. Only in the former case should there be a preference for high
attachment, as has been found, for example, for German. However, in our experimental materials, RCs were always introduced by the complementizer pu,
and the native speakers of Greek still exhibited a clear high-attachment preference in sentences with genitive antecedents. Thus, the attachment-binding hypothesis cannot explain these data.
Attachment Preferences by L2 Learners of Greek
The L2 learners showed a different overall RC-attachment pattern from native
speakers--namely, low attachment in sentences with PP antecedents (like native speakers) and no preference in sentences with genitive antecedents (unlike native speakers). In addition to the present set of findings, a recent study
of RC attachment in English (Felser, Roberts, Gross, & Marinis, 2003) yielded
parallel results. Felser et al. examined two groups of L2 learners of English--40
advanced learners whose L1 was Greek and 28 advanced learners whose L1
was German--using a questionnaire and an SPR task. They found that both
groups of L2 learners preferred low attachment in sentences with lexical PPantecedents, such as The dean observed the professor with the researcher who
was never happy. In corresponding sentences with DP-of-DP antecedents, however, the L2 learners did not show any attachment preference. This is different
from English native speakers, who showed a low-attachment preference for
the RC in sentences with DP-of-DP antecedents. Thus, despite the fact that
Felser et al. examined a different target language and L2 learners with a different L1 background, their experiments revealed the same RC-attachment patterns that we found for L2 Greek. Moreover, both studies examined advanced
L2 learners, and yet their attachment patterns were found to be different from
those of native speakers of Greek and English. In the following section, we discuss various factors that might be responsible for this difference.
Transfer and Experience-Based Parsing
From the perspective of experience-based parsing models such as the Tuning
Hypothesis (Mitchell et al., 1995) and the Competition Model (MacWhinney,
1987, 1997), one would expect that attachment preferences in the learners' L1
directly influence their L2 performance. The specific hypothesis derived from
the Tuning Hypothesis was that the L2 participants of our study should easily
get attuned to the high-attachment preference of Greek in RCs with genitive

522

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

antecedents because this is the option they are exposed to in both their L1
(Spanish, German, or Russian) and their L2 (Greek). Our results do not confirm this prediction. However, proponents of experience-based accounts
might argue that L1 parsing preferences only influence L2 parsing during early
stages of L2 development and that the advanced L2 learners we have studied
could have developed out of that stage. This would mean that (due to L1 influence) Spanish, German, or Russian L2 learners of Greek initially prefer high
attachment of an RC to a DP containing a genitive antecedent and that at later
stages of L2 acquisition they give up this preference. That is, the L2 learners
would initially exhibit the same attachment preferences as native speakers of
Greek, and later, when they have acquired more knowledge of Greek, they would
perform differently on the same constructions. This kind of developmental
progression is not what one would expect from the perspective of experiencebased parsing models. According to the Tuning Hypothesis, for example, the
advanced L2 learners' persistent exposure to Greek should have strengthened
the putative (L1-based) high-attachment preference of the initial stages. Yet
none of the three groups of advanced L2 learners we studied showed a highattachment preference for genitive constructions.
Consider also the possibility that attachment preferences in L2 Greek might
be influenced by the learners' knowledge of an L3, specifically their knowledge
of English. Even though we cannot completely rule out this possibility, it is
not very likely for the following reasons. First, all participants' knowledge of
Greek is more advanced than their knowledge of English. Moreover, all participants were living in Greece and using Greek (rather than English) in their everyday life when the experiments took place. From an exposure-based perspective,
one would not expect an L3 to have any substantial influence on the learners'
attachment preferences in their relatively strong L2. Finally, if knowledge of
English had any effect, then those participants who are relatively proficient in
English should have exhibited attachment patterns in L2 Greek that were different from those who are less proficient in English. The former might, for example, prefer low attachment in Greek sentences with genitive antecedents
corresponding to English. This was not the case, however. The L2-G group
was more proficient in English than the L2-S and L2-R groups, and yet the attachment patterns in L2 Greek were similar across these three groups. We
therefore conclude that our findings are hard to explain in terms of L1 transfer
and experience-based parsing models.
Another possibility that needs to be considered is that language-particular
differences precluded the use of L1 transfer. Consider, for example, Spanish
versus Greek in the domain of possessive constructions. Although Greek employs a genitive construction such as i steghi tu spitju "the roof of the house,"
the equivalent construction in Spanish, el techo de la casa, contains a PP and
no genitive. Thus, one might speculate that there is no linguistic basis for
Spanish learners of Greek to transfer attachment preferences from their L1
given that the two languages make use of different means of expression in pos-

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

523

sessive constructions. As regards German and Russian learners of Greek, however, they have genitive constructions in their respective L1s; the German
equivalent would be das Dach des Hauses and the Russian one 8C\yT! *?;!
(krisha doma). Thus, if these linguistic differences played a role for L2 attachment patterns, L1 transfer in the genitive construction should have been more
likely for the German and Russian learners than for the Spanish ones--that is,
at least the German and Russian learners should have shown a high-attachment preference in the genitive construction. Our results show that this was
not the case. Indeed, none of the L2 learner groups showed a reliable highattachment preference in the genitive construction. We can therefore rule out
the possibility that the lack of L1 transfer is due to linguistic differences between the particular languages involved.
Grammatical Knowledge and Parsing Strategies by L2 Learners
Another possibility that needs to be considered is that the differences between L2 learners and native speakers in RC attachment are due to the L2
learners' incomplete acquisition of Greek grammar. For example, gender agreement information was used in the critical experimental sentences for disambiguation, and it is likely that an L2 learner who had not properly acquired
agreement in Greek would not be able to use the disambiguating cues in the
same way as a native speaker.
To assess this possibility, we can rely on the grammaticality judgment and
proficiency tests that were performed by the L2 learners. In the general Greek
Language Proficiency Test, the L2 learners were highly proficient in Greek,
with scores of 72-75 (out of a maximum of 80), as previously illustrated in
Table 1. More importantly, in judgment tasks of the grammatical constructions
under study they also achieved high correctness scores. For subject RCs with
complex (DP + DP or DP + PP) antecedents such as those used in the main experiments, the L2 learners had mean grammaticality judgment scores of over
90% correct (see Table 2). Similarly, in the task that examined gender agreement, the L2 learners achieved correct judgment scores of 95-96%, similar to
those of the native speakers. These results indicate that, with respect to their
knowledge of Greek in the relevant grammatical domains, the L2 learners performed at native-speaker levels. The differences between native speakers and
L2 learners with respect to RC attachment are therefore unlikely to have resulted from the L2 learners' incomplete acquisition of Greek grammar.
CONCLUSION
We found that advanced L2 learners of Greek with Spanish, German, or Russian as L1s exhibited the same low-attachment preference for RCs in sentences with PP antecedents as native speakers of Greek, whereas they did not

524

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

show any attachment preference in sentences with genitive antecedents (unlike the clear high-attachment preferences of the native speakers). Parallel results were obtained by Felser et al. (2003) for Greek and German learners of
L2 English. Taken together, these results show that with different target languages, L2 learners with different L1 backgrounds exhibit the same RC-attachment patterns--namely, a clear low-attachment preference in sentences with
lexical PP-antecedents and no preference in sentences with genitive or DP-ofDP antecedents.
There are various possible reasons as to why the L2 learners' attachment
preferences are different from those of native speakers. One factor could be
the learners' incomplete acquisition of the target language. L2 learners may
have underspecified representations in their lexicons or other gaps in their L2
grammars that may affect their ability to parse particular kinds of sentences.
Note, however, that all of our participants scored very highly on both the language proficiency and the grammaticality judgment tests, which does not make
this possibility seem very likely. Another potentially relevant factor is that,
when L2 learners process a sentence in the L2, grammatical representations
and parsing strategies of the learners' L1 might not be completely suppressed,
thereby affecting their attachment preferences in the L2. We do not wish to
completely exclude the possibility of L1 transfer in L2 sentence processing,
but our findings indicate that, at least in the case of RC attachment to genitive
antecedents, the advanced learners we studied were not directly influenced
by the attachment preferences in their L1s.
A more feasible possibility is that learners may have difficulty integrating
different sources of information when processing their L2. We argued that attachment preferences by native speakers of Greek are influenced by both
structurally based parsing strategies and lexical or thematic biases, whereas
L2 learners' RC-attachment preferences are mainly guided by lexical cues.
More generally, this difference might mean that in contrast to the L1 parser,
which integrates incoming ambiguous elements immediately into the current
parse during on-line processing, the L2 parser delays integration until sufficient lexical (and perhaps other) information has been received for attaching
an ambiguous word or phrase. Under this account, our finding that the L2
learners showed the same low-attachment preference in sentences with PP antecedents as the native speakers can be attributed to the presence of a lexical
cue (i.e., the lexical PP) that biases them toward low attachment. When there
is no such cue (i.e., in sentences with genitive antecedents), the L2 learners
do not show any disambiguation preference. However, further experimentation is needed to determine whether our findings on RC attachment are generalizable to other kinds of ambiguous sentences and to answer the broader
question as to whether L2 parsing is in any fundamental way different from L1
parsing.
(Received 28 October 2002)

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

525

NOTES
1. The literature referred to in this section is concerned with adults parsing in "monolingual
mode" (see Grosjean, 1997). It is assumed in this literature (though not always made explicit) that
what is under study is the language the participants have acquired in childhood. This means that
even though they may have acquired an L2 (typically in a school setting when they were adults),
simultaneous bilinguals (who have learned two languages simultaneously before the age of 5-6
years) are normally not included.
2. We use the term parsing strategy to refer to an operation by which a new node is attached or
associated to previously processed nodes or domains in the left-to-right parse of a sentence. Parsing
strategies make use of different sources of information (e.g., syntactic, semantic, prosodic, and discourse information). For our purposes, the distinction between structure-based parsing strategies
(which make use of phrase-structure information) and lexically based strategies (which make use of
lexical-semantic information) is particularly important.
3. The only information that is provided about the participants of this study is (a) that the English L2 learners of French were students who had studied French for at least 5 years in a school
environment in the United States and lived in France for approximately 9 months and (b) that the
French L2 learners of English were students studying to become English teachers who had recently
lived in the United States or the United Kingdom for 9-12 months. Unfortunately, the study does not
provide any measure of the participants' L2 proficiency.
4. Fernandez (1999) did not provide a measure to decide whether her participants had acquired
the relevant constructions and had proficient control over them. She mentioned, however, that none
of her participants had any trouble understanding the content of the questionnaire, producing, for
example, not more than one incorrect answer in the filler items. From this, she concluded that the
participants' English proficiency was "intermediate to advanced" (p. 224).
5. Again, as in the previously mentioned studies, the information provided about the participants'
linguistic background in the L2 was rather scarce. Frenck-Mestre (1997) mentioned that the participants were "considerably less skilled in their second language" than those studied by Frenck-Mestre
and Pynte (1997). No further details about the participants were provided.
6. Consistent with the psycholinguistic literature on this topic, we use the terms genitive and PP
(RC) antecedents as shortcuts for the difference between the kinds of sentences under study (e.g.,
see [1] and [2]). Even though we have adopted this terminology, it should not be forgotten that,
from a linguistic perspective, it is not very accurate. Clearly, RCs do not have (genitive or PP) antecedents in the sense that reflexive pronouns do. Instead, they modify heads and combine with DPs.
7. The Greek Language Proficiency Test is available from the Teaching Center of Greek as a Foreign Language at the University of Athens (http://www.nglt.uoa.gr).
8. The participants of the two control experiments acquired Greek during childhood. They also
have some knowledge of an L2, typically English acquired in a school setting when they were adults.
None of the participants was a simultaneous bilingual having learned two languages simultaneously
before the age of 5-6 years. We therefore assume that, in contrast to the three groups of L2 learners,
the control participants are processing Greek as a native language or in "monolingual mode" (Grosjean, 1997).
9. A complete list of all experimental stimuli for each task can be found in Papadopoulou (2002)
and will be made available on request.
10. The syncretism of the itan "was" form is less problematic for the acceptability judgment task,
as the participants are required to provide an off-line judgment at the end of the sentence at which
the disambiguating gender information has been encountered. The SPR task, however, provides a
continuous on-line measure of reading. The number ambiguity resulting from the itan form should
therefore be avoided.
11. The format of the SPR task with phrase-by-phrase segmentation was similar to the one used
by De Vincenzi and Job (1993, 1995). A word-by-word presentation was not chosen because the separation of the two RC antecedents may bias the participants toward low attachment; see De Vincenzi
and Job (1995) and Gilboy and Sopena (1996) for discussion.
12. The data from both the acceptability judgment and the SPR tasks pass the customary tests
for normality (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test), sphericity (Mauchly test), and homoscedasticity (Levene
test) and are therefore suitable for ANOVA analyses.
13. This effect might be caused by PP constructions of the kinds we examined occurring less
frequently than corresponding constructions with genitives, but because we do not have any reliable
frequency database, this remains speculative. Note also that, if the reduced acceptability of the PP

526

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

construction was due to its low frequency, one would expect to find longer reading times in the
second segment for PP constructions than for genitives in the SPR task. However, as will become
clear in the following section, this was not the case, which suggests that the experimental results
are unlikely to reflect a frequency difference between the two types of constructions.
REFERENCES
Abdelghany, H., & Fodor, J. D. (1999, September). Low attachment of relative clauses in Arabic. Poster
session presented at Architectures and Mechanisms of Language Processing, Edinburgh, UK.
Alexiadou, A. (1999). On the syntax of nominalisation and possession: Remarks on patterns of ergativity.
Unpublished postdoctoral thesis, University of Potsdam, Germany.
Alexiadou, A., & Stavrou, M. (1999). Reflecting on the genitive case in Greek. In B. D. Joseph & I.
Philippaki-Warburton (Eds.), Themes in Greek linguistics II (pp. 303-330). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Birdsong, D. (1992). Ultimate attainment in second language acquisition. Language, 68, 706-755.
Brysbaert, M., & Mitchell, D. (1996). Modifier attachment in sentence processing: Evidence from
Dutch. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 664-695.
Carreiras, M., & Clifton, C. (1999). Another word on parsing relative clauses: Eyetracking evidence
from Spanish and English. Memory and Cognition, 27, 826-833.
Clahsen, H., & Hong, U. (1995). Agreement and null subjects in German L2 development: New evidence from reaction-time experiments. Second Language Research, 11, 57-87.
Cuetos, F., & Mitchell, D. (1988). Cross-linguistic differences in parsing: Restrictions on the use of the
Late Closure strategy in Spanish. Cognition, 30, 73-105.
Cuetos, F., Mitchell, D., & Corley, M. M. B. (1996). Parsing in different languages. In M. Carreiras, J.
Garcia-Albea, & N. Sebastian-Galles (Eds.), Language processing in Spanish (pp. 145-187). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
De Vincenzi, M., & Job, R. (1993). Some observations on the universality of the late-closure strategy.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 22, 189-206.
De Vincenzi, M., & Job, R. (1995). An investigation of late-closure: The role of syntax, thematic structure, and pragmatics in initial and final interpretation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1303-1321.
Duffield, N., & White, L. (1999). Assessing L2 knowledge of Spanish clitic placement: Converging
methodologies. Second Language Research, 15, 133-160.
Ehrlich, K., Fernandez, E., Fodor, J. D., Stenshoel, E., & Vinereanu, M. (1999, March). Low attachment
of relative clauses: New data from Swedish, Norwegian, and Romanian. Poster session presented
at the 12th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, New York.
Eubank, L. (1993). Sentence matching and processing in L2 development. Second Language Research,
9, 253-280.
Felser, C., Marinis, T., & Clahsen, H. (in press). Children's processing of ambiguous sentences: A
study of relative clause attachment. Language Acquisition.
Felser, C., Roberts, L., Gross, R., & Marinis, T. (2003). The processing of ambiguous sentences by first
and second language learners of English. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 453-489.
Fernandez, E. (1999). Processing strategies in second language acquisition: Some preliminary results.
In E. Klein & G. Martohardjono (Eds.), The development of second language grammars: A generative approach (pp. 217-239). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Fernandez, E. (2000). Bilingual sentence processing: Relative clause attachment in English and Spanish.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, City University of New York.
Fodor, J. D. (1998). Learning to parse? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 27, 285-319.
Frazier, L. (1978). On comprehending sentences: Syntactic parsing strategies. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (1996). Construal. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frenck-Mestre, C. (1997). Examining second language reading: An on-line look. In A. Sorace, C. Heycock, & R. Shillcock (Eds.), Proceedings of the GALA 1997 conference on language acquisition (pp.
474-478). Edinburgh, UK: Human Communications Research Center.
Frenck-Mestre, C., & Pynte, J. (1997). Syntactic ambiguity resolution while reading in second and
native languages. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 119-148.
Frenck-Mestre, C., & Pynte, J. (2000). Resolving syntactic ambiguities: Cross-linguistic differences? In
M. De Vincenzi & V. Lombardo (Eds.), Cross-linguistic perspectives on language processing (pp.
119-148). Dordrecht: Kluwer.

L1 and L2 Sentence Processing

527

Gibson, E., & Pearlmutter, N. (1998). Constraints on sentence comprehension. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 2, 262-268.
Gibson, E., Pearlmutter, N., Canseco-Gonzalez, E., & Hickock, G. (1996). Recency preferences in the
human sentence processing mechanism. Cognition, 59, 23-59.
Gibson, E., & Schutze, C. T. (1999). Disambiguation preferences in noun phrase conjunction do not
mirror corpus frequency. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 263-279.
Gilboy, E., & Sopena, J. M. (1996). Segmentation effects in the processing of complex NPs with RCs.
In M. Carreiras, J. Garcia-Albea, & N. Sebastian-Galles (Eds.), Language processing in Spanish (pp.
191-206). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gilboy, E., Sopena, J. M., Clifton, C., Jr., & Frazier, L. (1995). Argument structure and association
preferences in Spanish and English compound NPs. Cognition, 54, 131-167.
Grosjean, F. (1997). Processing mixed languages: Issues, findings, and models. In A. M. B. de Groot &
J. F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 225-254). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C. Y. (1997). The partial availability of Universal Grammar in second language
acquisition: The "failed functional features hypothesis." Second Language Research, 13, 187-226.
Hemforth, B., Konieczny, L., & Scheepers, C. (2000). Syntactic attachment and anaphor resolution:
Two sides of relative clause attachment. In M. Crocker, M. Pickering, & C. Clifton (Eds.), Architectures and mechanisms for language processing (pp. 259-282). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Hemforth, B., Konieczny, L., Scheepers, C., & Strube, G. (1998). Syntactic ambiguity resolution in German. Syntax and Semantics, 31, 293-309.
Holton, D., Mackridge, P., & Philippaki-Warburton, I. (1997). Greek: A comprehensive grammar of the
Modern Greek language. London: Routledge.
Horrocks, G., & Stavrou, M. (1987). Bounding theory and Greek syntax: Evidence for wh-movement in
NP. Journal of Linguistics, 23, 79-108.
Juffs, A. (1998). Main verb versus reduced relative clause ambiguity resolution in L2 sentence processing. Language Learning, 48, 107-147.
Juffs, A. (2001). Psycholinguistically oriented second language research. Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics, 21, 207-220.
Juffs, A., & Harrington, M. (1995). Parsing effects in second language sentence processing: Subject
and object asymmetries in wh-extraction. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17, 483-516.
Juffs, A., & Harrington, M. (1996). Garden-path sentences and error data in second language processing research. Language Learning, 46, 286-324.
Kimball, J. (1973). Seven principles of surface structure parsing in natural language. Cognition, 2,
15-47.
Klein, E. (1999). Just parsing through. In E. Klein & G. Martohardjono (Eds.), The development of
second language grammars: A generative approach (pp. 197-216). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Konieczny, L., Hemforth, B., Scheepers, C., & Strube, G. (1997). The role of lexical heads in parsing:
Evidence from German. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 307-348.
Mackridge, P. (1985). The Modern Greek language. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). Applying the Competition Model to bilingualism. Applied Psycholinguistics, 8,
315-327.
MacWhinney, B. (1997). Second language acquisition and the Competition Model. In J. Kroll & A. M.
B. de Groot (Eds.), Second language acquisition (pp. 113-142). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mitchell, D. (1994). Sentence parsing. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of psycholinguistics (pp.
375-409). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Mitchell, D., Cuetos, F., Corley, M. M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (1995). Exposure-based models of human
parsing: Evidence for the use of coarse-grained (nonlexical) statistical records. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 469-488.
Miyamoto, E. T. (1998). Relative clause attachment in Brazilian Portuguese. Unpublished manuscript,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
Papadopoulou, D. (2002). Cross-linguistic variation in sentence processing: Evidence from relative clause
attachment preferences in Greek. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Essex, UK.
Theophanopoulou-Kontou, D. (1989).        
[Constructions of complex noun phrase and movement in Modern Greek]. Studies in Greek Linguistics, 10, 337-354.
Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., & Clifton, C. (1998). Adjunct attachment is not a form of lexical ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 558-592.

528

Despina Papadopoulou and Harald Clahsen

Tzartzanos, A. (1991).   (  ) [Syntax of Modern Greek]. Thessaloniki, Greece: Kyriakidi.
Varlokosta, S. (1999). The structure and the acquisition of prepositional relatives in Modern Greek:
Wh-movement or pronominal linkage? In B. D. Joseph & I. Philippaki-Warburton (Eds.), Themes
in Greek linguistics II (pp. 845-853). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Zagar, D., Pynte, J., & Rativeau, S. (1997). Evidence for early closure attachment on first-pass reading
times in French. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 421-438.

