Present Tense Be Use in Young
Children With Specific Language
Impairment: Less Is More
RESEARCH NOTE
Brenda L. Beverly
University of South Alabama,
Mobile

Cynthia C. Williams
St. Mary's County
Public Schools,
Leonardtown, MD

A well-known characteristic of children with specific language impairment (SLI) is
a significant deficit in grammatical morphology production compared with
younger, language-matched, typically developing children. This is true for present
tense be (am, is, are), as well as other inflectional morphemes. However, grammatical morpheme learning by children with SLI may vary depending on developmental stage. Participants were 8 boys with SLI (42 to 58 months old with mean
length of utterances [MLUs]  3.0 morphemes) and 14 MLU-matched controls
(girls and boys; mean age of 27 months). These groups were younger and had
lower MLUs than groups from oft-cited studies (e.g., Cleave & Rice, 1997;
Leonard, Bortolini, Caselli, McGregor, & Sabbadini, 1992; Leonard, Eyer,
Bedore, & Grela, 1997; Rice, Wexler, & Hershberger, 1998). The SLI group had
a significantly higher percentage of be use in obligatory contexts (46%) than did
the younger, typically developing children (27%). This pattern of better performance in grammatical morphology by SLI groups than controls has been
reported. Ingram (1972) and Morehead and Ingram (1973) found similar results
for children with language impairment in early-MLU stages. Although findings are
presented with caution, they afford an opportunity to consider the nature of SLI. If
SLI represents a general processing limitation, then that limitation might enable
the language learner with SLI to acquire some initial morphological mappings
with relative success. This apparent paradox, which also is evident in normal
language acquisition, has been termed less is more by Newport (1990). Limited
perception and memory force attention to smaller pieces of the input, and these
constraints simplify the task for the language learner. SLI is compared with a
chronically constrained system that initially assists the learner to achieve basic
form-function mappings but ultimately hinders mastery of English morphology.
KEY WORDS: specific language impairment, grammatical morphology, verb be,
less is more

C

urrent research in language disorders frequently focuses on children with specific language impairment (SLI). SLI is defined as
a lag in language acquisition despite normal development of cognition, peripheral hearing, and socioemotional and behavioral skills (e.g.,
Leonard, 1998; Stark & Tallal, 1981). A hallmark of SLI for children
learning English is a significant weakness in grammatical morpheme
acquisition and use. Children with SLI produce grammatical morphemes
at lower percentages in obligatory contexts than do younger, languagematched, typically developing children (e.g., Leonard, Eyer, Bedore, &
Grela, 1997; Oetting & Horohov, 1997; Rice, Wexler, & Cleave, 1995;
Steckol & Leonard, 1979).

944

JournalofofSpeech,
Speech,Language,
Language,and
andHearing
HearingResearch
Research ** Vol.
Vol.47
47 ** 944-956
944-956 ** August
August2004
2004 * (c)American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Journal
1092-4388/04/4704-0944

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

An investigation by Cleave and Rice (1997) of the
production of be by children with SLI demonstrated this
characteristic deficit. Twelve children with SLI (age
range = 54-62 months) and 10 typically developing children (age range = 31-42 months) matched for mean
length of utterance (MLU) participated. Three language
samples were collected, and efforts were made to elicit
infrequent be forms in two of the three samples. As expected, percentage of use in obligatory contexts was significantly lower in the SLI group (55% for copula be and
44% for auxiliary be) than in the MLU-matched group
(85% and 76% for copula and auxiliary forms, respectively). Significant differences also were found for be
type: Copula forms were produced more often than auxiliary forms, and contractible forms occurred more often than uncontractible. Both groups showed mostly
omission errors with very few agreement errors.
Ingram (1972), however, reported a different result for a subgroup of children with language impairment. Ingram investigated production of copula and
auxiliary forms of be by 15 children with language impairment (age range = 42-114 months) compared with
15 typically developing children (age range = 19-37
months). Participants were divided into one of five developmental stages based on MLU, and these stages
were used for participant matching. Percentages of
occurrence in obligatory contexts were measured for
contractible and uncontractible be. The 6 languageimpaired children at the two lowest stages (Groups I
and II with MLUs under 3.0 morphemes) produced be
more often (10% and 20%) than the 6 typically developing controls (3% and 5%). However, the typically developing children at the three higher stages (Groups
III, IV, and V with MLUs ranging from 3.0 to 6.0 morphemes) exhibited substantially greater use (75%, 80%,
and 91%) than the children with language impairment
(45%, 47%, and 77%). Ingram (1972) noted this "crossover effect" (p. 84). Results suggested that children with
SLI might perform as well or better than their language-matched peers during an early stage of morpheme development. Morehead and Ingram (1973) reported a crossover for other grammatical morphemes
for the same participants. They described five aspects
of syntactic development, including inflectional morphology. At the first three linguistic levels, which represented MLUs of up to 4.0 morphemes, the children with
language impairment produced more grammatical morphemes (plural -s, past tense -ed, possessive -s, and
present progressive -ing) than did the normally developing children.
Recently, Ingram and Morehead (2002) revisited the
data from their earlier study (Morehead & Ingram, 1973).
Although results for be from Ingram (1972) were not
included in the reanalysis, the reanalysis is presented

here to examine methodological issues. MLU calculation may have affected original findings. Unlike grammatical morpheme investigations by Leonard, Rice, and
their colleagues (e.g., Cleave & Rice, 1997; Leonard et
al., 1992, 1997; Rice et al., 1995; Rice, Wexler, &
Hershberger, 1998), Ingram (1972) excluded single-word
utterances when calculating MLU and reported an average of MLU in words and in morphemes. Ingram and
Morehead (2002) recalculated MLU in morphemes for 6
language-impaired and 6 control participants from two
of the original five groups (i.e., Groups II and III). This
recalculation, using Brown's (1973) rules, resulted in
shorter MLUs for both groups, especially the languageimpaired group compared with the typically developing
group (3.02 and 3.22, respectively) because children with
language impairment produced more one-word utterances. The original finding that more morpheme tokens
were produced by the children with language impairment held for present progressive -ing, plural -s, and
possessive -s, despite MLU and sample size advantages
for the typically developing group. The typically developing children exhibited a higher number of productions
for third-person present tense singular -s and regular
past tense -ed. Percentage of use in obligatory contexts
revealed a statistically significant finding for progressive -ing in which the language-impaired participants
were more accurate than the controls. Additionally,
Ingram and Morehead noted that the age of the children with language impairment from the original study
ranged from 42 months to 114 months (9 years 6 months),
a broader age range and a larger difference between
groups than most studies.
Cautions regarding methodology and participant
characteristics are important. Results from Ingram and
Morehead (Ingram, 1972, 1999; Ingram & Morehead,
2002; Morehead & Ingram, 1973), however, continue to
suggest that children with SLI with MLUs close to 3.0
morphemes demonstrate morpheme use at equivalent
and perhaps better levels than their language-matched
peers. This is incongruous with the well-known profile
of SLI. Note that participants in the Morehead and
Ingram sample with MLUs greater than 4.0 morphemes
showed the more commonly reported pattern. Likewise,
participants in the majority of studies of grammatical
morphology production have had MLUs at or above 3.5
morphemes (Cleave & Rice, 1997; Leonard et al., 1997;
Oetting & Horohov, 1997; Rice et al., 1998). Thus, grammatical morpheme learning by children with SLI might
vary depending on stage of development.
The purpose of this report is twofold. First, we propose that these seemingly disparate findings for grammatical morpheme production can be reconciled, given
a current hypothesis regarding language acquisition,
the less is more hypothesis. To this end, we introduce

Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

945

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

relevant language acquisition literature and draw parallels with SLI as an impairment of limited processing
capacity. Second, in support of our proposal, we present
be production data from children with MLUs close to
3.0 morphemes that confirm the findings of Ingram
(1972) and differ from established results for children
with MLUs above 3.5 (e.g., Cleave & Rice, 1997).
Some researchers argue that SLI stems from a limitation in information-processing capacity. This can be
conceptualized as a general limitation or a limitation in
specific processing mechanisms (see Leonard, 1998, for
a review). Proponents of a general processing explanation propose that there is a limited pool of resources for
manipulating information, and children with SLI have
fewer resources. Limited processing accounts have been
used to describe a variety of deficits in SLI, including
verb morphology production, word recall, and lexical decision tasks (e.g., Dromi, Leonard, Adam, & ZadunaiskyEhrlich, 1999; Ellis Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999;
Windsor & Hwang, 1999).
Understanding a limited capacity account of language impairment is furthered by normal language acquisition frameworks rooted in connectionist models.
For decades, researchers of language acquisition have
debated the nature of constraints required for successful language learning. Newport (1990) proposed the less
is more hypothesis following a series of experiments
targeting the question of a critical period for language
learning. Newport's less is more hypothesis suggests
that children's limited processing capacity supports successful language acquisition. That is, children have an
initial advantage over adults for the task of language
learning based on their processing limitations. This is
the opposite of the expected and more frequent pattern in development whereby increased cognitive development results in improved performance from childhood to adulthood. Newport hypothesized that language
learning ability decreases from childhood to adulthood,
not because of the weakening of some innate faculty,
but due to increases in cognitive ability. The young
child's limited processing abilities provide the basis for
successful language acquisition. Paradoxically, this
advantage for language development disappears as the
child's cognitive capacities mature. To indirectly test
this, Newport investigated deaf individuals and English as a second language (ESL) speakers before and
after puberty.
Newport (1990) examined American Sign Language
(ASL) verb agreement and morphology in adults who
were congenitally or prelingually deaf. Results indicated
that deaf individuals exposed to ASL from birth by deaf
parents outperformed deaf individuals exposed to ASL
between ages 4 to 6 years by deaf peers, and this group
outscored deaf individuals who were not exposed to ASL

946

until after age 12. Late learners, those who were exposed after puberty, had above-chance use of the ASL
morphology, but an error analysis showed more variability and items learned as wholes. As additional evidence in support of less is more, Newport investigated
second-language learners. Results indicated a strong correlation between morphological competence and age of
acquisition for those participants learning English between 3 and 15 years of age and no relationship for individuals who were exposed after age 17. Findings demonstrated that the least mature learners had the most
success learning language, hence, less is more.
Newport (1990) has pointed to differences in errors
between early and late language learners. Early learners make errors by omitting grammatical morphemes,
but they eventually show highly systematic, consistent
use of morphology. Late learners demonstrate the use
of frozen forms in their errors, and they remain inconsistent in their rule use. Newport has suggested that
this disparity is due to differences between children and
adults in perception and storage of complex stimuli. The
limitations of immature learners facilitate some types
of processing. Newport has proposed that limited perception and memory force the child to attend to smaller
pieces of the input. And these smaller pieces often convey form-to-meaning relationships. Overall, a limited
system constrains the number of possibilities available
for analysis from the input, simplifying the task for the
language learner.
Two studies using connectionist models of language
acquisition support the less is more proposal. Goldowsky
and Newport (1993) constructed a computer simulation
to test the idea that a young, normally developing child's
limited perceptual and memory abilities are an advantage during language acquisition, not a liability. Their
computer model was designed to learn by computing
basic correlations among three forms and three meanings occurring in an input, a construct similar to a word
with three features. A filter was used to mimic the processing limitations of the immature learner. In the first
phase, the filter randomly selected half of the formmeaning input to pass to the model. One of three features passed through half the time, and two of three
features passed through the remaining time. In the second phase, the filter allowed approximately three fourths
of the form-meaning input to pass to the model. Ultimately, the model with this childlike filter learned simple
one-to-one mappings without the excess noise observed
in an unfiltered or adultlike condition.
Similarly, Elman (1993) constructed a simple, recurrent neural network in which the internal activation states were fed back to the system as additional
input. This is significant because the network's access
to its own prior states parallels a learner's memory.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Initially, Elman showed that the neural network, without any constraints on feedback, failed to discover the
grammar. Later, Elman limited the system's memory
by removing the recurrent feedback after every third or
fourth word. When the network had this limited window to the input, simple sentences were learned. Elman
(1993) concluded that "starting small" was beneficial for
some aspects of language acquisition.
An investigation by Santelmann and Jusczyk (1998)
extends findings from connectionist models to show that
young children possess a limited window for processing
language. Using a head-turn-preference paradigm,
Santelmann and Jusczyk found that 18-month-old children showed a significant preference for listening to
passages that contained the grammatical pairing of is
with suffix -ing compared with passages containing can
and -ing (e.g., Grandma is singing versus Grandma can
singing). This was true, however, only when the distance
between the morphemes was one or three syllables (e.g.,
Everybody is baking or Everybody can often baking.)
Eighteen-month-olds showed no preference for grammatical passages when the distance between is and -ing
was four or five syllables (e.g., Everybody is effectively
baking or Everybody can cheerfully baking). Thus, very
young children who do not yet produce grammatical utterances recognize grammatical dependencies that cooccur within a small window of the input. They do not
track these discontinuous dependencies across greater
distances. Santelmann and Jusczyk's findings confirm
the sensitivity of very young language learners to basic
morphosyntactic structures, as well as the existence of
processing limitations in recognizing these relationships.
Less is more, within a limited-processing account of
SLI, could frame be findings that appear contradictory.
That is, this hypothesis can motivate investigations seeking to describe and explain the developmental trajectory for grammatical morpheme production by children
with SLI. Given a limited-capacity system, very young
children with SLI might show morpheme learning that
is relatively efficient at an early stage. We hypothesized
that children with SLI who had MLUs at or below 3.0
morphemes would show percentages of use for present
tense be (am, is, are) equal to or greater than younger,
typically developing, MLU-matched children. This would
represent a reversal of the more frequently observed
pattern in which MLU peers outperform children with
SLI. If children with SLI in the earliest stages of morpheme learning and their MLU-matched peers show
comparable levels of be production, weak support for the
less is more explanation of early grammatical morpheme
learning is demonstrated. If children with SLI produce
greater percentages of be in obligatory contexts than
their younger, language-matched peers, then strong
support is presumed.

Method
Participants
Twenty-two children participated, 8 children with
SLI and 14 MLU-matched typically developing children
(TD group). Participants were drawn from the first
author's database of 117 language samples from participants originally recruited as part of an investigation of the effect of morpheme grammaticality on sentence comprehension (Beverly, 1999). The 8 children
with SLI were all boys, with a mean chronological age
of 48 months (range = 42-58). Participants with SLI were
eligible for this investigation based on MLUs  3.0 morphemes and >1.0 SD below the mean for their chronological ages (J. F. Miller, 1981). The mean MLU for the
SLI group was 2.65 morphemes (SD = 0.30). Participants
with SLI had expressive standard scores >1.0 SD below
the mean on the Preschool Language Scale-3 (PLS-3;
Zimmerman, Steiner, & Pond, 1992). Specifically, the
mean expressive language standard score was 76 for the
SLI group. Five of the 8 children with SLI also had receptive standard scores >1.25 SD below the mean on the
PLS-3. The SLI group's mean receptive standard score
was 78. All children with SLI had normal nonverbal intelligence, as determined by their performance on the
Arthur Adaptation of the Leiter International Performance Scale (Arthur, 1952). The mean score on this scale
was 129, with a range from 97 to 149. No neurological or
socioemotional impairment was reported or observed.
The 14 children in the TD group (6 boys, 8 girls)
were matched to SLI participants for MLU (0.2 morphemes), so that 6 boys with SLI had both a male and
female match and 2 boys with SLI had only 1 female
match. The mean MLU for the TD group was 2.66 morphemes (SD = 0.29). An independent-samples t test revealed no significant difference between groups for MLU,
t(20) = 0.076, p = .940. The mean chronological age was
27 months (range = 22-31). All TD participants had expressive and receptive language standard scores within
normal limits on the PLS-3 (group means of 116 and 113,
respectively). Cognitive development was within normal
limits (M = 104) based on the cognitive domain of the
Battelle Developmental Inventory (Newborg, Stock, &
Wnek, 1984). Means, standard deviations, and ranges
for participants' ages, MLUs, receptive and expressive
language standard scores, and cognitive scaled scores
are shown for both groups in Table 1.
All participants passed a pure-tone hearing screening for the frequencies of 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz at 20
dB HL using play audiometry (American Speech-Hearing-Language Association, 1985). To eliminate the factor of phonological production constraints, speech production skills were evaluated during a language sample.
All participants demonstrated 80% or better accuracy
Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

947

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Participant group descriptions.
SLI
(n = 8)
Variable
Age (months)
MLU (morphemes)
PLS-3 Receptive SS
PLS-3 Expressive SS
Cognitive

M

SD

48
6.78
2.65 0.30
78
11.96
76
5.68
129
16.24

TD
(n = 14)
Range
42-58
2.21-3.00
57-96
66-83
97-149

M

SD

27
2.76
2.66 0.29
113
10.41
116
8.62
104
9.98

Range
22-31
2.11-3.09
93-131
98-130
92-126

Note. SS = standard score based on the Preschool Language Scale-3 (Zimmerman, Steiner, & Pond, 1992).
Cognitive scores for the specific language impairment (SLI) group are based on the Arthur Adaptation of the Leiter
International Performance Scale (Arthur, 1952), but cognitive scores for the typically developing (TD) group are
based on the cognitive domain of the Battelle Developmental Inventory (Newborg, Stock, & Wnek, 1984).

for production of postvocalic /s, z/ and unstressed syllables (e.g., bottle). Participants' caregivers spoke Standard American English. The mothers and father of all
participants were Caucasian, except 1 child's father, who
was African American. Mothers and/or fathers of 7 of
the 8 participants with SLI and 11 of 14 of the TD children had at least a college degree (4 participants' parents had graduate degrees). Participant characteristics
were likely the result of recruiting from university clinics and nearby preschools, as well as the need to exclude participants who spoke nonstandard dialects that
could affect verb be use.

Procedure
Language samples were collected by the first author as part of a separate, larger investigation (Beverly,
1999). Samples were audio- and videotaped. During sampling, the investigator engaged in free play with each
participant in his/her home. Toy sets included a preschool
barn with animals, dolls with accessories (e.g., food,
dishes, hair accessories, and doctor's kit), and an assorted vehicle set including a mountain and road. Utterances were not elicited. The input of the investigator
was analyzed for half of the transcripts (4 of 8 in the
SLI group and 7 of 14 from the TD group) selected at
random. Approximately 24% of the investigator's utterances contained a form of present tense be, and 20% of
these were imitations or expansions in response to child
utterances (group differences in input are analyzed in
the Results section). To minimize the effect of investigator input on children's productions, no imitated utterances were included for analysis.
One hundred complete, intelligible, spontaneous
utterances were transcribed using both audiotapes and
videotapes, following the conventions of Systematic
Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT; J. F. Miller &
Chapman, 1999). Although some of the available samples
948

were longer, analysis was limited to 100 utterances to
control for sample size between groups. Both authors
served as transcribers, each transcribing half the total
data set. Child utterances that were immediate repetitions of the adult were excluded from analysis by placing them in mazes (see SALT guidelines, Rules for Identifying Immediate Imitations). One-word utterances
were included in the samples. Yes/no responses to adult
questions were included, but acknowledgments such as
uh-huh or uh-uh were put in mazes to be excluded from
the morpheme analysis. Requests for clarification such
as huh? or hmm? also were excluded.
MLU for the 100-utterance sample was calculated
to determine participant eligibility. Decisions regarding
morpheme segmentation were consistent with SALT conventions. SALT procedures are based on Brown (1973),
as modified by J. F. Miller (1981). For example, can't,
won't, and don't were counted as one morpheme, and
compound words and reduplicated productions were
counted as single morphemes (e.g., bye-bye, night-night).
For each eligible participant, the transcript consisting
of 100 complete, intelligible, spontaneous utterances was
coded for obligatory contexts and productions of present
tense be. Before coding be productions, a graduate assistant removed all identifying information from the
transcripts and randomly assigned half of each participant group to each author. Each author proceeded to
hand-code half of the total transcripts. All obligatory
contexts for present tense be (i.e., am, is, are) were coded
as produced or omitted, copula or auxiliary, and contractible or uncontractible. Conservative criteria for be
production were applied. Utterances without a marked
subject were not considered contexts. Only verbs marked
with -ing were judged as contexts for auxiliary be, because bare-stem verbs often take other suffixes, including third-person present tense -s or past tense -ed (e.g.,
That cow stand[s] up; I fix[ed] it). Utterances consisting of demonstrative + noun were considered copula be

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

contexts based on conversational context. For example,
investigators had to determine if this horsie was an
obligatory context for copula is, as in This is a horsie
versus This horsie, not that one. Decisions were made
on the basis of the transcript gloss or after review of the
videotape. Rules for judging contractibility were adopted
from Cleave and Rice (1997). Be was considered uncontractible for the following contexts: (a) phonotactic constraints (e.g., The brush is mine; There are the pieces);
(b) utterance-position constraints (e.g., Is he going? Yes,
he is); and (c) use of emphasis (e.g., That is not it) judged
from the audiotape. Eligible participants had 10 or more
obligatory contexts.

Reliability
Reliability analysis for transcription and be coding
was undertaken separately. Authors served as reliability judges, each reanalyzing a portion of her original
work and a portion of the other's. Transcript reliability
was established before initiating the data analysis. Transcripts were checked against the original recordings for
2 participants from each group, for a total of four
interreliability and four intrareliability transcript checks.
All words and morphemes in each utterance had to agree,
resulting in utterance-by-utterance percentages of agreement of 89% interreliability and 95% intrareliability. Following data analysis, four transcripts from each group
were recoded for be, for a total of eight interreliability
and eight intrareliability checks. In this manner, 100%
of the SLI data and over 50% of the TD data were rescored.
Morpheme-by-morpheme percentage of agreement for be
coding revealed 94% interjudge and intrajudge reliability. Although reliability for be coding was considered
good, authors reviewed all discrepancies, and agreement
was established before data analysis.

Results
Group data for number of obligatory contexts, number of productions of be, and percentage of be use are

given in Table 2. Means for obligatory contexts for the
SLI and TD groups (19.50 and 18.43, respectively) were
similar. An independent-samples t test was conducted,
and the group difference for obligatory contexts was
nonsignificant, t(20) = 0.373, two-tailed, p = .713. Thus,
children in both groups had similar opportunities for
using be in the 100-utterance samples. The mean number of be productions for the SLI group (M = 8.75) was
higher than that for the TD group (M = 5.71). Both
groups showed large variation, but the TD group had a
larger standard deviation and broader range. Equal
variances were assumed for an independent-samples t
test based on Levene's test (p = .235). The group difference for number of be productions was not statistically
significant, t(20) = 1.292, p = .106, one-tailed.
Traditionally, morpheme use is computed as the
percentage of use in obligatory contexts. One advantage
of the percentage-of-use measure is that it allows each
participant's productions and number of obligatory contexts to vary together. The SLI group had a higher mean
percentage of be use (46%) compared with the TD group
(27%). Levene's test for equality of variance was nonsignificant (p = .248), so equal variance was assumed. An
independent-samples t test revealed significantly greater
percentage of be use in obligatory contexts for the SLI
group, as compared with the younger, MLU-matched TD
group, t(20) = 2.410, p = .013, one-tailed.
Because groups were relatively small and determination of significant findings depends on the measure
selected (total productions versus percentage of use in
obligatory contexts), data were reviewed to compare
participants' percentages of be use in obligatory contexts
for individual SLI-MLU matches. A minimum criterion
of 5% difference, based on the standard error of the mean
(SE = 4.106, for groups combined), was applied in evaluating the matches. All 8 SLI participants had greater
percentages of be use than at least 1 of 2 matched TD
children. Only two of the eight matches showed a mixed
pattern, in which 1 TD child had a greater percentage
of be use than the participant with SLI but the other
TD match had a lower percentage of use. The other six

Table 2. Present tense be obligatory contexts, productions, and percentages of use for SLI and TD participant groups.
SLI
(n = 8)

TD
(n = 14)

Measure

M

SD

Range

M

SD

Range

Obligatory contexts
Productions of be
Percentage of be use

19.50
8.75
45.60

6.68
3.37
12.92

10-28
3-15
30-67

18.43
5.71
27.04

6.38
6.09
19.35

10-34
0-23
0-68

Note. Percentage of be use is determined by the number of productions of be divided by the number of
obligatory contexts for each participant.

Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

949

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 3. Mean percentage of use for three forms of present tense be for subgroups of SLI and TD participants.
SLI

TD

Form of be

n

MLU

M

SD

n

MLU

M

SD

Cont. copula
Uncont. copula
Cont. auxiliary

8
6
4

2.65
2.71
2.56

49.7*
42.8
39.5*

15.79
27.11
12.51

14
6
5

2.66
2.66
2.76

28.5
36.4
16.6

24.27
28.88
16.65

Note.

Only data from participants who had a minimum of four obligatory contexts for each form were included.

*Independent-samples t tests revealed significantly higher percentages of use by children with SLI than the TD
children for the contractible copula and contractible auxiliary forms, p < .05.

matches, 75%, fit the research hypothesis of equal or
greater percentage of be use by the participants with
SLI compared with MLU-matched controls.

p = .029, one-tailed. Differences for percentage of uncontractible copula use were nonsignificant, t(10) = 0.392,
p = .352, one-tailed.

As described in the Method section, investigators
coded be productions and contexts as contractible copula,
uncontractible copula, contractible auxiliary, and uncontractible auxiliary. Further analysis of the data by form
of be is presented here with caution because samples of
100 utterances are considered limited for this type of
analysis. Only participants who had a minimum of four
obligatory contexts for each form were included. Using
this criterion, data from all 22 participants were analyzed for contractible copula, but smaller data sets from
subgroups of participants were available for uncontractible copula and contractible auxiliary analyses.
Analysis of uncontractible auxiliary could not be conducted because no participants met the minimum criterion of four obligatory contexts. Table 3 contains the
number of participants for each group, mean MLU, and
mean percentages of use and standard deviations for
contractible copula, uncontractible copula, and contractible auxiliary. Figure 1 depicts group means and standard deviations. Because the subgroups did not maintain the original MLU pairings, t tests to check for group
differences in MLU were conducted. Differences in MLU
were nonsignificant (p > .05). For each of the forms of
be, the subgroups of children with SLI had higher mean
percentages of use than the TD groups. Independentsamples t tests were conducted to test for differences;
missing data points precluded the use of a multivariate analysis of variance. Note that an independence
assumption may be violated for two reasons. First, each
form of be contributes one data point, but some participants produced multiple forms of be for this analysis. Second, children's copula and auxiliary forms of be
and contractible and uncontractible forms are known
to develop in predictable patterns, suggesting an inseparable relationship. Differences between the SLI and TD
subgroups were significant for percentage of contractible copula use, t(20) = 2.208, p = .020, one-tailed, and
for percentage of contractible auxiliary use, t(7) = 2.275,

In addition to the descriptive and statistical analyses, item analysis was conducted to describe the contexts for productions of be. In keeping with procedures
described by C. A. Miller and Leonard (1998), noun and
pronoun subjects (e.g., that, what, he, car) used in participants' utterances containing obligatory contexts for
be were analyzed. C. A. Miller and Leonard reasoned
that if participants relied on memorized productions,
then no noun or pronoun would appear with correct be
marking in some utterances and be omitted in others.
In accordance with C. A. Miller and Leonard's categories, the present tense be form associated with any noun
or pronoun used twice in an obligatory context for be
was coded as always correct, sometimes correct, or never

950

Figure 1. Mean percentages of correct production of three forms of
be for subgroups of specific language impairment (SLI) and
typically developing (TD) participants who had a minimum of four
obligatory contexts for each form. Cont Cop = mean percentage of
contractible copula be use (n = 8 SLI, 14 TD); UC Cop = mean
percentage of uncontractible copula be use (n = 6 SLI, 6 TD); Cont
Aux = mean percentage of contractible auxiliary be use (n = 4 SLI,
5 TD).

Percentage of Correct
Production

100

SLI
TD

80

60

40

20

0

Cont Cop

UC Cop

Cont Aux

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

correct. Of the 22 participants, 1 child with SLI and 1
TD child did not produce any noun or pronoun subject
more than once in a context for be, and 2 other children,
1 with SLI and 1 TD, did not produce any repeat noun/
pronoun types categorized as sometimes correct. The remaining participants' samples revealed repeat noun/pronoun types with marked be sometimes correct. In keeping with C. A. Miller and Leonard's procedure, the SLI
group used 25 different noun/pronoun subjects more than
once with a be context: 7 were classified as always correct, 12 as sometimes correct, and 6 as never correct. TD
participants produced a total of 49 different noun/pronoun subjects: 5 were always correct, 23 were sometimes
correct, and 21 were never correct. Expected values for
the sometimes correct category, based on a 10.5% retrieval
error rate (C. A. Miller & Leonard, 1998), would be 2.6
noun/pronoun types for the SLI group and 5.2 for the TD
group. Instead, about half of children's repeat noun/pronoun subjects occurred with be sometimes correct (48%
and 47% for SLI and TD groups, respectively). This pattern suggested that for at least 18 of our 22 participants
(82%), be use was not dependent on memorized forms.

be, and 13% were imitations/expansions of the child.
There was a statistically significant difference between
SLI and TD groups for percentage of investigator utterances containing be, t(9) = -1.939, p = .042, one-tailed.
Differences in investigator imitations/expansions were
nonsignificant, t(9) = 1.008, p = .170, one-tailed.

A second source of information regarding children's
knowledge of be comes from errors of substitution; however, data were limited in this regard given the small
sample size and expected low frequency of errors of commission (Cleave & Rice, 1997; Hadley & Rice, 1996; C.
A. Miller & Leonard, 1998; Wilson, 2003). One child with
SLI and 1 TD child produced pronoun plus contraction
ungrammatically, suggesting memorized forms (e.g.,
Here's it, There's it, respectively). This was rare and not
unique to SLI. One child with SLI substituted a form of
be for do (e.g., Is it go down? for Does it go down?). As is
discussed, interpretation of this qualitative data depends
on theoretical perspective.

Children with SLI produced present tense be in
obligatory contexts significantly more often than MLUmatched, TD children. Support for the finding is
strengthened by relative consistency across the database. As predicted, three fourths of the participants with
SLI had equal or greater percentages of be use in obligatory contexts than did TD matches. Also, the pattern of
participants with SLI outperforming controls was evident for three forms of be (contractible copula, uncontractible copula, and contractible auxiliary), and differences were statistically significant for contractible copula
and contractible auxiliary.

Findings raise questions regarding the effect of the
input on children's productions during language sampling; therefore, investigator utterances were studied
in 11 of the 22 transcripts (4 of 8 SLI transcripts and 7
of 14 TD). Variation in the total number of utterances
produced by the investigator was considerable (range =
214-531). This was expected because participants' interaction and communication styles during play-based
sampling differed substantially. The number of investigator productions of be also varied widely (range = 40-
117). Group differences, however, were nonsignificant
based on independent-samples t tests (p > .05). Percentage of occurrence, the number of be productions divided
by the total number of utterances, also was calculated.
This is not the same measure as percentage of obligatory
be use. The investigator produced be in 20% of her utterances when interacting with children with SLI, and 10%
of these were expansions or imitations of the child. For
the TD group, 25% of investigator utterances contained

After analysis of the input, children's utterances containing obligatory contexts for be, marked and unmarked,
were tracked for the next five child utterances following
each of the investigator's be productions. Children with
SLI averaged 4.75 correct spontaneous be productions
following the investigator's productions; however, TD
children produced only 2.71 correct productions after
investigator use. Mean number of obligatory contexts
following investigator productions was 10.5 for the SLI
transcripts but 12 for the TD samples. Variation was
high for this small sample, and group differences for
children's productions and obligatory contexts following
investigator productions were nonsignificant (p > .05).

Discussion

Findings represent a reversal of the standard described in most reports; deficits in grammatical morphology, including be production, for children with SLI
compared with younger, language-matched peers (e.g.,
Cleave & Rice, 1997; Leonard et al., 1997; Oetting &
Horohov, 1997; Rice et al., 1998). An important distinction between this study and others is the participants'
ages and MLUs. Children with SLI were 42 to 58 months
old, with MLUs  3.0 morphemes. Although there is some
overlap, this group is younger with lower MLUs than
groups participating in oft-cited studies (e.g., Cleave &
Rice, 1997; Leonard et al., 1992, 1997; Rice et al., 1998).
This pattern of better grammatical morpheme production by the SLI group than the control group has been
reported previously. Ingram (1972) and Morehead and
Ingram (1973) found similar results for children with SLI
in early stages of MLU production and morpheme learning. Their findings may have been considered an oddity,
but results from this investigation confirm Ingram's be
findings for children with MLUs  3.0 morphemes.

Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

951

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Before discussing implications, it's important to
address sampling context. The use of present tense be
in the input by the investigator arguably could serve to
prompt participants to correctly use the form. Although
not the focus of this investigation, half of the participants' language samples were analyzed, and a significant between-group difference in investigator percentage of be occurrence was found. Investigator use of
present tense be inadvertently favored the typically developing children. Thus, frequency of be forms in the
input cannot explain participants' be production, because
participants with SLI showed higher percentages of
obligatory be use than the TD group despite significantly
fewer models by the investigator. Another possibility,
however, is that groups responded differently to the input. It's conceivable that environmental prompting benefited participants with SLI more so than TD children,
because some, if not all, participants with SLI were receiving speech/language intervention. To consider this,
participants' obligatory use of be following investigator
productions was analyzed. Differences were not statistically significant, although participants with SLI demonstrated an average of two more productions than the
TD children. A causal association with the input cannot
be established. We conclude that the higher number of
productions by participants with SLI compared with the
TD children is consistent with the primary finding of
this investigation, not the result of adult input, as no
imitative utterances were included in analyses. Further support for this conclusion is provided by recent
research in syntactic priming of is auxiliary. No significant group differences in auxiliary production following auxiliary models were found for a group of children with SLI compared with a group of younger,
typically developing children matched for finite verb production (Leonard et al., 2002). Also, Kurtz and Leonard
(2002) investigated the effect of adult productions of
copula be and found no within-sample increase in correct production by preschoolers with SLI. Thus, relative success with obligatory use of be by the children
with SLI compared with the MLU matches is not an
artifact of the investigator input.

Theoretical Implications Regarding
the Nature of SLI
Findings afford an opportunity to consider the nature of SLI. If SLI represents a general limitation in
processing capacity, then that limitation might enable
the language learner with SLI to acquire, with relative
efficiency, some of the initial form-to-function mappings
associated with morphology. This seeming paradox has
been enumerated with regard to normal language acquisition by Newport as the less is more hypothesis
(Goldowsky & Newport, 1993; Newport, 1990; see also
952

Elman, 1999). Children with SLI, like normally developing children, have processing limitations. Newport
hypothesized that processing constraints in the form of
memory and perceptual limitations provide an optimal
condition for learning componential aspects of language,
specifically morphology. A limited system constrains the
number of possibilities available for analysis from the
input, simplifying the task for the language learner
(Elman, 1993, 1999; Goldowsky & Newport, 1993; Newport, 1990). Children with SLI likely have a small window through which to view morphological and syntactic
relationships in the input. Conceivably, the constrained
nature of cognitive processing associated with SLI enables children with SLI to obtain an initial foothold for
morpheme learning.
Our explanation cannot end here; after all, we know
that at higher MLU levels, children with SLI produce
be and other grammatical morphemes less frequently
than their MLU peers. So, despite any initial foothold,
children with SLI show significant weaknesses at later
MLU stages, possibly due to persistent processing limitations. Like the crossover effect observed by Ingram
(1972), it is expected that as MLU increases to 3.5 and
4.0 morphemes, children with SLI will lag behind their
MLU peers and ultimately fall significantly behind in
be production. Can a crossover be explained by less is
more? In their computer model, Goldowsky and Newport (1993) decreased the filtering over time, simulating
learning, and the mature unfiltered model ultimately
learned complex co-occurrences. Elman (1993) modified
his neural network to simulate a gradual increase in
memory, and the network successfully achieved learning
of both simple and complex sentences. Elman (1993)
noted that the early form-meaning relationships learned
by the network constrained possibilities and facilitated
future grammatical discoveries. We hypothesize that
the young, typically developing learner's perceptual and
memory skills gradually increase and he/she masters
all forms and allomorphs of be. Conversely, the learner
with SLI does not experience adequate increases in processing capacity to achieve mastery. The ongoing constraints create a stranglehold on children with SLI's
progress toward mastery of English morphology. Elman's
(1993) simulation modeled small, incremental increases
in the available input, yielding small, incremental increases in learning. If children with SLI do not undergo
these increases, then they may fail to expand their understanding of the grammar. Because the learner has
not seen all the possibilities, he/she develops a solution
that does not include key information. Language impairment can be likened to a chronically filtered system that
cannot see the richness of the data.
We've described Newport's (1990) less is more hypothesis as a framework for understanding an early
stage of be production by children with SLI during which

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

they demonstrate relative success compared with younger,
MLU-matched children. Yet, other explanations are possible. The critical period for normal language learning
may be better explained by the loss of a linguistic mechanism (e.g., Fodor, 1983; Lenneberg, 1967) or the weakening of linguistic constraints that enable early morphological development. Similarly, one could argue that
SLI represents an unusually early decay or loss of specific linguistic functioning. Researchers who support
specific linguistic mechanism models might propose that
children with SLI are missing a necessary module to
acquire aspects of morphology (e.g., Gopnik & Crago,
1991; see Leonard, 1998, for a review). Although this
investigation cannot satisfactorily address these hypotheses, our findings counter the proposal that SLI represents a missing mechanism. In Ingram's (1972) report
and in this investigation, children with SLI showed
higher percentages of be use in obligatory contexts than
MLU peers. In keeping with linguistic models especially
prevalent at the time, Ingram (1972) concluded that
children with SLI were capable of forming the same rules
as typically developing children but lacked the ability
to consistently apply rule knowledge, a performance
account. We agree that the required mechanism to initiate morphological learning is present and functional,
albeit delayed for chronological age expectations, for
children with SLI.
But what mechanism or mechanisms support the
onset of morphological development in children? D.
Ingram (personal communication, October 17, 2002) attributed the children with SLI's success to early rote,
not rule-based, learning. That is, the children with SLI
had extra years to acquire the forms lexically. This proposal can be viewed in the context of domain-specific
linguistic mechanisms. Locke (1994) hypothesized that
SLI represents a neuromaturational delay characterized by late lexical learning that bypasses a critical
period for activation of grammatical capabilities, possibly a special grammatical mechanism. Applied here,
children with MLUs less than or equal to 3.0 morphemes might demonstrate initial success with be forms
due to rote, lexically based learning. Typically developing children soon undergo a shift in their morphological acquisition secondary to domain-specific activation that enables mastery of be and other English
inflectional morphology. Children with SLI, however,
might proceed to acquire morphology in a rote fashion
using neurological mechanisms that are not specialized
for these purposes.
Assumptions of rote, lexically based learning versus productive, rule-based generation are frequently
used in discussions of grammatical morpheme development, and interpretation often seems to be driven by
theoretical perspective. For example, C. A. Miller and
Leonard (1998) concluded that children with SLI are

productive in their use of be, given the greater than expected number of repeat nouns/pronouns occurring with
inconsistent marking (i.e., the sometimes correct category). Using their procedure, we showed that be use
for 18 of our 22 participants was not dependent on memorized forms. Although most productions followed pronoun and other closed-class word types (e.g., he's, that's,
here's, what's), a few children in each group used contractible forms with general and proper nouns (e.g.,
Daddy's, hay's), signifying productive use in some theoretical perspectives. Cleave and Rice (1997) interpreted
their findings of be production by children with SLI as
consistent with productive use, not persistent wholeword production.
On the other hand, theories such as less is more fit
within the genre of connectionist or constructivist accounts of grammar in contrast to traditional generative
approaches (Elman, 1999; Tomasello, 2000; Wilson, 2003).
That is, proponents of constructivist accounts contend that
children first learn individual, item-based constructions.
Gradually, they abstract a general category, such as inflection, from increasingly flexible use of specific constructions that contain inflection. Wilson (2003) investigated
early present tense be productions by 5 typically developing children, to test whether inflection emerged as a
unitary category (e.g., tense), as proposed by special
mechanism accounts, or whether it emerged in a more
lexically based fashion in keeping with connectionist
models. Wilson found large variation among the typically
developing children's be productions, which led him to
conclude that a unitary linguistic feature cannot underlie these constructions in early phases of development.
Wilson also found that children used significantly more
be marking following closed-class subjects. He concluded
that high-frequency forms such as he's and that's are
learned as wholes. Wilson reasoned that children at this
stage possess overlapping constructions, some with correct be marking and others that omit be, for representing the same present progressive or copular meanings.
As described above, our data revealed that participants in both groups used many noun/pronoun subjects
with inconsistent be marking, the sometimes correct category. This is not a problem for constructivist accounts
because early constructions are expected to develop from
lexical items. Rather, productivity is a concept necessary to support proposals of an innate category, Inflection. Participants in this investigation, both SLI and TD,
appeared to be gradually acquiring be constructions, as
evidenced by group percentages of obligatory accuracy
under 50%. One could argue that children's be productions categorized as always correct are actually frozen
forms, and it's true that our SLI group had a higher
proportion of always correct productions than did the
TD group. It is just as likely that this reflects the higher
accuracy for be by the SLI group compared with the TD
Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

953

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

group. After all, the TD group had a much higher proportion of productions categorized as never correct. It
seems that this issue is one of whether the glass is half
empty or half full. Interpreting children's inconsistent
be marking appears inextricably linked to one's theoretical perspective.

Developmental Trajectory
for Be
A tentative trajectory for be development in SLI is
taking shape from the combination of our findings with
those of other studies of be production. Just as children
with SLI are late acquiring their first words, they are
late acquiring forms of be. Hadley and Rice (1996) reported that 11 children with SLI displayed emergence of
copula be (defined as the first uncontracted production)
at an average age of 43 months, unlike a typically developing group (5 children from the CHILDES database)
whose first use emerged between 24 to 26 months. It is
difficult to compare our data with those of Hadley and
Rice because we included contracted forms. Be use by our
participants with SLI and TD participants, who were
somewhat older, can be characterized as emerging.
After children's first use is observed, percentage of
accuracy for obligatory contexts is used to describe
progress toward mastery. Our participants with SLI, who
had MLUs  3.0 morphemes, used correct be coding in
obligatory contexts with 46% accuracy. Hadley and Rice
(1996) reported longitudinal data for SLI participants'
be use, differentiating use at MLU < 3.0 from use at
MLU  3.0 morphemes. Mean percentages of obligatory
use increased from 37% to 64% for copula be and from
24% to 53% for the auxiliary, demonstrating growth in
accuracy with increased length of utterance. Hadley and
Rice did not include a typically developing control group,
so a crossover pattern cannot be evaluated. They did
note that emergence of auxiliary be appeared protracted
for SLI. Participants with SLI averaged 31/2 months from
copula to auxiliary emergence, but typically developing
children developed both copula and auxiliary forms
within a 2-month time period. Hadley and Rice called
on future investigations to determine if children with
SLI would show persistent problems with auxiliary be.
Although methodological differences make comparison
difficult, participants with SLI in this study did not show
relative problems with auxiliary be. They had significantly better obligatory use of contractible auxiliary be
than the MLU-matched children.
Emergence of be production for children with SLI
is protracted compared with age-equivalent peers. A
protracted period of emergence was noted by Elman
(1993) in the neural network investigation simulating
initial memory limitations. Limiting feedback resulted
954

in a protracted learning curve, at least twice as long as
for a prior investigation that manipulated the input
rather than the feedback. Despite late onset, children
with SLI are successful acquiring initial form-to-function mappings. And slowly, children with SLI demonstrate
growth in percentage of accurate be use in obligatory contexts. Elman (1993) described a relatively smooth progression in grammatical learning by the neural network
when recurrent feedback, the learner's memory, was
gradually increased. In connectionist models, the
learner, like the network, initially makes relatively small
hypotheses and limited generalizations about grammar.
Radical hypothetical shifts do not occur.
At some point, the gains by children with SLI fall
off and drop significantly behind accuracy levels displayed by their MLU-matched peers. Typically developing children, like the neural network, progress to mastery, but mastery of be often eludes individuals with SLI.
Even at age 8 years, children with SLI continue to show
deficits in inflectional morphology (Rice et al., 1998). We
conclude that persistent processing limitations associated with SLI make abstracting from specific be uses to
a general be paradigm difficult.

Limitations and Future
Directions
Findings and interpretations are presented with
caution. Sample sizes are small compared with other
studies of be production, which can affect assessment of
grammatical morphology (Balason & Dollaghan, 2002;
Ingram & Morehead, 2002; Lahey, Liebergott, Chesnick,
Menyuk, & Adams, 1992). Prior studies (i.e., Cleave &
Rice, 1997; Leonard et al., 1992, 1997; Rice et al., 1998)
incorporated elicited-sampling methods to ensure a minimum number of obligatory contexts. Their samples
ranged from an average of approximately 230 utterances
to over 700 per child and were collected across more than
one session and day. Ingram (1972) reported mean
sample sizes of 77 to 155 utterances collected during
play and in elicited procedures for participant groups at
MLU levels < 3.0. The inclusion in this study of a minimum of 10 obligatory contexts reduces the likelihood
that sampling size alone would result in a large discrepancy in children's be performance. Sampling context,
however, could affect findings. Children with SLI might
present with optimal use of be given reduced processing
demands in a free-play, spontaneous language sample.
Children in free-play sampling typically have more control of utterance content and form than during elicited
sampling, which requires particular forms associated
with specific lexical items in obligated responses. A context effect for be production would be compatible with
processing-limitation accounts of SLI.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Inclusion of a group of younger, typically developing children matched for MLU in investigations of this
type has drawn criticism (Plante, Swisher, Kiernan, &
Restrepo, 1993). Studies have used MLU matching to
control for utterance length as a predictor of morpheme
production, a conservative criterion because groups are
matched on a variable similar to the experimental focus. However, MLU matching introduces interpretation
problems due to group age differences and variability
across other language, cognitive, and social skills. A valuable investigation of the less is more hypothesis would
compare children with SLI with groups of typically developing children with varying working memory abilities. This would yield a better understanding of the relationship between processing skill and morpheme
learning. Longitudinal investigation or multiple groups
varying on a measure of working memory would be
needed to avoid a null hypothesis (i.e., equivalent morpheme use predicted by equivalent working memory).
A related theoretical concern is the use of MLU as
an indicator of language stage (Balason & Dollaghan,
2002; Leonard & Finneran, 2003). We've proposed that
morphological learning by children with SLI is relatively efficient in early development, defined for this
study as MLU  3.0 morphemes. Although discussing
language stage based on MLU is historically and intuitively appealing, there is little evidence for discrete
language stages based on MLU. Instead, research suggests that children with similar MLUs display large
variation in grammatical morpheme production (Balason
& Dollaghan, 2002; Lahey et al., 1992). MLU is not a
reliable indicator of language stage (Leonard & Finneran,
2003). We've invoked this concept in formulating our
research questions and discussing our findings, but we
agree that stage of development is a convenience more
than a reality. Samples are a snapshot of children's be
use within a highly variable and dynamic process.
Note that our participants with SLI appeared to be
functioning in the high average to above-average range
of intelligence based on the Arthur Adaptation of the
Leiter and the TD controls displayed receptive and expressive skills in the above-average to high range on
the PLS-3. One could argue that the groups had different learning mechanisms given the varying profiles
across cognitive and language skill areas. Perhaps study
findings are spurious, resulting from participants who
are not characteristic of their general populations. Instead, assessment results are best viewed in the context of verifying group inclusion, not as an absolute
measure of either intelligence or linguistic knowledge
and performance. Generalization is limited by participant characteristics, including the relatively high socioeconomic status of the participants, as indicated by a
large proportion of parents with college and graduate
degrees.

Additional research is needed to replicate results
and overcome study limitations. More direct tests of less
is more predictions relative to SLI are needed, and future research can expand findings to other grammatical morphemes, especially morphology associated with
tense. Preliminary data from a similar database suggest that children with SLI show the same pattern of
early, relative advantage for third-person singular -s
when utterance length is below 3.0 morphemes (Goodnoh
& Beverly, 2002). A longitudinal study starting before
emergence is needed to truly establish a crossover.

Acknowledgment
We thank the children and parents who participated in
the language sampling.

References
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(1985). Guidelines for identification audiometry. Asha, 27,
49-53.
Arthur, G. (1952). The Arthur Adaptation of the Leiter
International Performance Scale. Chicago: Stoelting.
Balason, D. V., & Dollaghan, C. A. (2002). Grammatical
morpheme production in 4-year-old children. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 961-969.
Beverly, B. L. (1999, December). Morphosyntactic cues to
verb comprehension for typically developing toddlers and
children with specific language impairment. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cleave, P. L., & Rice, M. L. (1997). An examination of the
morpheme BE in children with specific language impairment: The role of contractibility and grammatical form
class. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 480-492.
Dromi, E., Leonard, L. B., Adam, G., & ZadunaiskyEhrlich, S. (1999). Verb agreement morphology in
Hebrew-speaking children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1414-1431.
Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. J. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural
networks: The importance of starting small. Cognition, 48,
71-90.
Elman, J. L. (1999). The emergence of language: A conspiracy theory. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of
language (pp. 1-27). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). Modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Goldowsky, B. N., & Newport, E. L. (1993). Modeling the
effects of processing limitations on the acquisition of
morphology: The less is more hypothesis. Proceedings of

Beverly & Williams: Be Use in Young Children With SLI

955

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

the 24th Annual Child Language Research Forum, 24,
124-138.
Goodnoh, H., & Beverly, B. L. (2002, November).
Grammatical morpheme patterns as MLU increases in
children with SLI. Paper presented at the annual
convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, Atlanta, GA.
Gopnik, M., & Crago, M. B. (1991). Familial aggregation of
a developmental language disorder. Cognition, 39, 1-50.
Hadley, P. A., & Rice, M. L. (1996). Emergent uses of BE
and DO: Evidence from children with specific language
impairment. Language Acquisition, 5, 209-243.
Ingram, D. (1972). The acquisition of the English verbal
auxiliary and copula in normal and linguistically deviant
children. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 4, 79-91.
Ingram, D. (1999, November). The development of base
syntax revisited. Paper presented at the annual convention
of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association,
San Francisco, CA.
Ingram, D., & Morehead, D. (2002). Morehead & Ingram
(1973) revisited. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 45, 559-563.
Kurtz, R. M., & Leonard, L. B. (2002, November). Adult
influence on copula attempts by children with SLI. Poster
presented at the annual convention of the American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association, Atlanta, GA.
Lahey, M., Liebergott, J., Chesnick, M., Menyuk, P., &
Adams, J. (1992). Variability in children's use of grammatical morphemes. Applied Psycholinguistics, 13, 373-398.
Lenneberg, E. H. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New York: Wiley.

Miller, J. F. (1981). Assessing language production in
children: Experimental procedures. Baltimore: University
Park Press.
Miller, J. F., & Chapman, R. (1999). Systematic analysis of
language transcripts (Version 6.0) [Computer software].
Madison: University of Wisconsin, Language Analysis
Laboratory.
Morehead, D. M., & Ingram, D. (1973). The development of
base syntax in normal and linguistically deviant children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 16, 330-352.
Newborg, J., Stock, J. R., & Wnek, L. (1984). Battelle
Developmental Inventory. Chicago: Riverside.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational constraints on
language learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Oetting, J. B., & Horohov, J. E. (1997). Past-tense
marking by children with and without specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 40, 62-74.
Plante, E., Swisher, L., Kiernan, B., & Restrepo, M. A.
(1993). Language matches: Illuminating or confounding?
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 772-776.
Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language impairment as a period of extended optional
infinitive. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 38, 850-863.
Rice, M. L., Wexler, K., & Hershberger, S. (1998). Tense
over time: The longitudinal course of tense acquisition in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1412-1431.
Santelmann, L. M., & Jusczyk, P. W. (1998). Sensitivity to
discontinuous dependencies in language learners: Evidence
for limitations in processing space. Cognition, 69, 105-134.

Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Stark, R. E., & Tallal, P. (1981). Selection of children with
specific language deficits. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 46, 114-122.

Leonard, L. B., Bortolini, U., Caselli, M. C., McGregor,
K. K., & Sabbadini, L. (1992). Morphological deficits in
children with specific language impairment: The status of
features in the underlying grammar. Language Acquisition, 2, 151-179.

Steckol, K. F., & Leonard, L. B. (1979). The use of
grammatical morphemes by normal and languageimpaired children. Journal of Communication Disorders,
12, 291-301.

Leonard, L. B., Eyer, J., Bedore, L., & Grela, B. (1997).
Three accounts of the grammatical morpheme difficulties
of English-speaking children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 40, 741-753.
Leonard, L. B., & Finneran, D. (2003). Grammatical
morpheme effects on MLU: "The same can be less"
revisited. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 46, 878-888.
Leonard, L. B., Miller, C. A., Deevy, P., Rauf, L., Gerber,
E., & Charest, M. (2002). Production operations and the
use of nonfinite verbs by children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 45, 744-758.

Tomasello, M. (2000). Do young children have adult
syntactic competence? Cognition, 74, 209-253.
Wilson, S. (2003). Lexically specific constructions in the
acquisition of inflection in English. Journal of Child
Language, 30, 75-115.
Windsor, J., & Hwang, M. (1999). Children's auditory
lexical decisions: A limited processing capacity account of
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 990-1002.
Zimmerman, I. L., Steiner, V. G., & Pond, R. E. (1992).
Preschool Language Scale-3. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Received November 16, 2002

Locke, J. L. (1994). Gradual emergence of developmental
language disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 37, 608-616.

Revision received April 25, 2003

Miller, C. A., & Leonard, L. B. (1998). Deficits in finite
verb morphology: Some assumptions in recent accounts of
specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 701-707.

Contact author: Brenda L. Beverly, PhD, Department of
Speech Pathology and Audiology, University of South
Alabama, 2000 UCOM. Mobile, AL 36688-0002. E-mail:
bbeverly@usouthal.edu

956

Accepted November 23, 2003
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2004/070)

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 944-956 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

