The Nature of Written Language
Deficits in Children With SLI
RESEARCH NOTE
Clare Mackie
University of Warwick,
Coventry, England

Julie E. Dockrell
University of London,
London, England

Children with specific language impairment (SLI) have associated difficulties in
reading decoding and reading comprehension. To date, few research studies
have examined the children's written language. The aim of the present study was
to (a) evaluate the nature and extent of the children's difficulties with writing and
(b) investigate the relationship between oral and written language. Eleven
children with SLI were identified (mean age = 11 years) and were compared with
a group of children matched for chronological age (CA; mean age = 11;2
[years;months]) and language age (LA; mean CA = 7;3). All groups completed
standardized measures of language production, writing, and reading decoding.
The writing assessment revealed that the SLI group wrote fewer words and
produced proportionately more syntax errors than the CA group, but they did not
differ on a measure of content of written language or on the proportion of
spelling errors. The SLI group also produced proportionately more syntax errors
than the LA group. The relationships among oral language, reading, and writing
differed for the 3 groups. The nature and extent of the children's written language
problems are considered in the context of difficulties with spoken language.
KEY WORDS: SLI, writing, syntax, fluency

C

hildren with specific language impairment (SLI) experience problems with the acquisition and processing of oral language. The
most commonly used core criterion to identify children with SLI
is that their language problems cannot be explained in terms of other
cognitive, neurological, or perceptual deficits (Bishop, 1992). Their problems are characterized by a protracted rate of language development as
well as difficulties with particular subcomponents of the language system (see Bishop, 1997, and Leonard, 1998, for reviews). These problems
also affect the processing of written text. Difficulties with word decoding and understanding written texts have been reported in a number of
studies (Bishop & Adams, 1990; Botting, Crutchley, & Conti-Ramsden,
1998; Stothard, Snowling, Bishop, Chipchase, & Kaplan, 1998), although
studies examining the children's written skills are rare. The current
study aims to address this gap by considering the written language skills
of children with SLI in relation to chronological-age (CA)- and languageage (LA)-matched peers.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004 * (c)American
Speech-Language-Hearing
Mackie & Dockrell:
Written Language Association
Deficits in SLI
1092-4388/04/4706-1469

1469

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Producing Written Text and
the Potential Impact of Oral
Language Problems
Writing is a complex skill involving a number of linguistic and nonlinguistic processes. Much of our understanding of the writing process has been based on the
model developed by Hayes and Flower (1986; Hayes,
1996). In this model, the skilled writer is conceptualized as using the three recursive skills of translation,
planning, and reviewing to produce text. The model was
derived from work with adults and therefore does not
address how children become good writers. Swanson and
Berninger (1994) have adapted the model to address how
children learn to write. In children, it is known that
translation skill (i.e., putting your words on the page)
develops first, with planning and reviewing emerging
later, once translation skills are well embedded. Young
children's writing includes very little that can be classed
as either planning or reviewing (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
1987). There is, therefore, evidence that investigations
that focus on the initial stages of writing ought to be at
the translation level.
The translation process can be split into two components: text generation and transcription (Berninger,
1999). Text generation involves turning ideas into units
of language--into the words, sentences and larger units
of discourse produced within working memory--whereas
transcription comprises "the cognitive and physical acts
of forming written (as opposed to spoken) representations of text" (McCutchen, 1995, p. 128). Handwriting
processes, for example, would fall under transcription.
For all children, the process of learning to write fluently
and coherently is an extended process. Perera (1984)
carried out an in-depth analysis of the structure of
children's writing. She distinguished some of the characteristics of younger writers, describing their texts as
often muddled and incoherent as the writer lost his/her
train of thought, leading to repetitions, failure of agreement between tenses, and inconsistent use of pronouns.
Young writers were also described as being more likely
to use and rather than other connectives, to use simple
active verbs, and to use constructions more acceptable
in speech. In sum, developing text generation skills in
typical learners is an extended process that is mirrored
by a range of errors in their written text, errors that are
no longer common in their oral language. Text generation is reported by teachers as being particularly difficult for children with SLI (Dockrell & Lindsay, 2000).
There are a number of reasons to predict that children with SLI will experience difficulties with writing
and text generation specifically. The high cognitive demands placed on the individual in creating written text
may overload a language system that is, arguably,
1470

reduced in processing capacity (Ellis Weismer, Evans,
& Hesketh, 1999; Montgomery, 2000; Windsor & Hwang,
1999). Such difficulties would lead to reduced length of
texts and higher levels of errors than those of agematched peers. There are also reasons to predict particular patterns of errors in the written text itself. The
reduced lexical knowledge experienced by some children
with SLI may directly affect the children's written output. More advanced writing is associated with a greater
number of different words (Beard, 1986), increases in
the number of adjectives (Wells & Chang, 1986), and an
increased number of adverbs and adverbial phrases
(Perera, 1984). Thus, limits in vocabulary are likely to
influence both the length and content of the written texts
of children with SLI. In contrast, the grammatical complexity of the written output may be influenced by the
morphological (Leonard, Eyer, Bedore, & Grela, 1997)
and the syntactic problems experienced by the children
(van der Lely & Christian, 2000; van der Lely & Ullman,
2001). Grammatical difficulties may manifest themselves in writing through, for example, the construction
of simple sentences and the omission of prepositions,
articles, and verbs. Associated problems with phonology and reading may also affect writing through increased numbers of spelling errors (Clarke-Klein, 1994;
Lewis & Freebairn, 1992; Treiman, 1991) or the lack of
experience with written narratives (Fitzgerald &
Shanahan, 2000). Thus, there are a variety of indirect
reasons to predict that children with SLI will experience difficulties with generating written text. The relationship between oral language performance and written language performance requires systematic
investigation to identify specific vulnerabilities and to
guide evidence-based interventions.

Previous Research on the Written
Language Skills of Children With
Language Impairment
Three studies provide direct evidence of the written
language performance of children with language learning difficulties (LLD). Gillam and Johnston (1992) studied both spoken and written narratives of 9-12-year-old
children with and without LLD. The sample consisted
of 10 children with LLD and three matched comparisons: a group matched for CA, a group matched for LA
(as measured by performance on a sentence-imitation
task), and a group matched for reading age. The children
were asked to produce both a spoken and a written story
in response to a picture. The results indicated that producing a written narrative was significantly more difficult than producing an oral narrative. This was true for
all groups, with fewer morphemes and prepositions occurring in written as compared with spoken narratives.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

No differences were found among the groups on vocabulary, content, organization, or the number of prepositions. The only measure that differentiated the LLD
group from all the comparison groups in the writing
measure was the number of grammatical errors in complex T-units, that is, sentences that include a main clause
and a subordinate clause (Hunt, 1970). These results
support the view that the children are experiencing a
particular vulnerability in linguistic form, as evidenced
by their grammatical errors.
More recently, two further studies (Scott & Windsor,
2000; Windsor, Scott, & Street, 2000) have explored in
greater detail the written language of children with LLD.
In the first study, 20 students with LLD, many of whom
were receiving or had received special education for a
spoken language impairment, were matched with CA
and LA matches. LA scores for matching were derived
from a composite expressive and receptive language
measure (age-appropriate version of the Test of Language Development--2; Hammill & Newcomer, 1988;
Newcomer & Hammill, 1988). Participants produced oral
and written summaries of two educational videos. The
task was designed to reflect typical classroom demands,
and the "children were asked to summarize new and
extensive information" (Scott & Windsor, 2000, p. 336).
As in the Gillam and Johnston (1992) study, it was the
percentage of written utterances containing grammatical errors that clearly separated the children with LLD
from their LA-matched peers. In a related study, with
the same sample group, the key aspect that differentiated the children with LLD and their LA-matched peers
was the total number of verb composite errors (Windsor
et al., 2000). Windsor et al. argued that this finding
complemented similar findings for spoken language, as
omission of -ed is a particular deficit in the spoken language of children with SLI (Marchman, Wulfeck, & Ellis
Weismer, 1999; Rice, Wexler, & Cleave, 1995). These
three studies provide important empirical evidence of
the impact of children's oral language difficulties on
written language, when they are asked to produce a story
or relate information. For the majority of measures, performance is commensurate with that of LA-matched
peers but not that of CA-matched peers. Moreover, the
results highlight specific limitations with written syntax beyond those of LA-matched peers for children with
LLD. These limitations may characterize the children's
core linguistic deficit.
Given the range of language-related difficulties experienced by children with SLI, it is important to consider the extent to which these conclusions are valid with
different language-impaired populations and for different types of language comparisons. All three studies
described have included participants with LLD; however, these children's difficulties may not be specific to
language, reflecting more general difficulties in

generating written text experienced by children with
learning disabilities (Graham, 1990; MacArthur & Graham, 1987). This broader sample may obscure the impact of the language-processing deficits and minimize
the correlates of oral language problems. By corollary,
the ways in which language matches are identified raise
conceptual issues. Participants can be matched on an
overall LA measure, as in Scott and Windsor (2000) and
Windsor et al. (2000), or on a more specific measure,
such as sentence repetition, as in the Gillam and
Johnston (1992) study. Neither of these matches would
capture the ability to generate ideas in oral language.
Matching children a priori on their production of oral
narratives and then testing their performance on written narratives is a further way to identify linguistic features of writing that are central to the children's problems. In addition, as suggested by Windsor et al.,
investigations of the written text of children with language difficulties should include an analysis of the types
of errors made as well as the frequency of errors.

Purpose
The current study develops previous work by exploring the delays and differences in the written output
of children with SLI. We consider whether the written
narratives of children with SLI can be distinguished from
those of children matched by a similar level of oral narrative ability and those of their age- and nonverbal-ability-matched peers. Specific research questions centered
on (a) the pattern of performance across the three groups
in terms of fluency, content, and accuracy of written text;
(b) the interrelationships among oral language, reading, and writing performance; and (c) the nature of the
errors produced by children with SLI. We hypothesized
that the children with SLI would perform as well on a
measure of fluency and content of written language as a
language comparison group matched on expressive narrative language. Given the reduced levels of oral language of the children with SLI, we predicted that their
performance would be significantly poorer than chronologically matched children on these dimensions. It was
further predicted that the children with SLI would have
specific difficulties with grammar and spelling in relation to both CA and LA comparison groups.
To evaluate these predictions, a writing assessment
that examined each of the elements of written language
was identified. To provide a robust test of these predictions, a stimulus that did not require additional processing or that placed demands on working memory
(Bishop, 1997; Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990) was chosen. The Picture Story Language Test (PSLT; Myklebust,
1965) assessed the written samples, as it met all the
following criteria. The assessment directly measures

Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1471

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

children's ability to generate a piece of original discourse
by asking the children to produce a story in response to
a visual prompt. Appropriate comparisons can be made
across different ages. In addition, the measure includes
an analytic scoring scheme examining content, productivity, and syntax, thereby addressing the three writing
dimensions of concern for the present study. This type
of scoring has been shown to introduce a higher level of
reliability than those based only on one general holistic
score (Westby & Clauser, 1999). An assessment that incorporated a visual prompt was chosen to ensure that
the children's poor literacy or memorial skills did not
compromise performance. As a direct comparison with
the PSLT, the Bus Story Test of Continuous Speech
(Renfrew, 1985) was chosen to measure oral language
abilities. The Bus Story measures narrative ability and
has been shown to be an indicator of early language
ability that has strong relationships with future language and literacy performance (Stothard et al., 1998).

Method
Participants
The total sample consisted of 33 children, 11 children in each of three matched groups: (a) 8 boys and 3
girls (mean age 11 years, range 9;8-12;3) who were diagnosed with SLI and were attending a special language
school; (b) 11 typically developing children matched for
CA and gender (mean age 11;2, range 10;0-12;3); and
(c) 11 typically developing children matched for gender
and LA on the Bus Story (mean age 7:3, range 6:0-9:8).
For all participants with SLI, their diagnosis was
confirmed by assessment with the Clinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals--Revised (CELF-R; Semel,
Wiig, & Secord, 1987). All children with SLI had total
language scores on the CELF-R that were more than 2
SD below the mean (British standardization).1 Nonverbal scores on Raven's Progressive Matrices (Raven, Court,
& Raven, 1983) were within the average range, that is,
above the 25th percentile. These data confirmed the diagnosis of SLI. The Bus Story Test of Continuous Speech
(Renfrew, 1985) was used to document each child's expressive narrative language. An example of each group's
transcript is given in Appendix A. Participants achieved
an age-equivalent score of 6;8 (range 4;6-8;5) on the Bus
Story. Children's reading skills were assessed on the
Wechsler Objective Reading Dimensions (WORD; Rust,
Golombok, & Trickey, 1993). As expected, reading skills
were delayed (mean reading age 7:2, range 6:0-9:0).
The two groups of comparison children attended a
local primary school. They had no identified language
1
The British standardization of the CELF-R is commonly used as part of
the identification process for SLI in the United Kingdom.

1472

or learning difficulties and were selected by teachers as
having attained average scores on curriculum assessments. The three groups did not differ in nonverbal ability, as measured by the raw scores on Raven's Progressive Matrices, F(2, 30) = 0.80, p = .46. The CA comparison
children were matched within an average of 2 months
to the children with SLI, t(20) = 0.54, p = .59. The LA
comparison children were matched to the children with
SLI on LA scores from the Bus Story information score.
All the children were matched within an average of 3.5
months. The LA matches did not differ significantly from
the children with SLI on the Bus Story information measure raw scores, t(20) = 0.66, p = .50, or on the Bus Story
sentence length raw scores, t(20) = 1.15, p = .26. The LA
and SLI groups were also matched on the WORD reading test within a 3-month age-equivalent window. Performance on the raw scores of the WORD reading test
did not differ, t(20) = 0.20, p = .84. Table 1 contains scores
for the three groups of children on the language, reading, and cognitive measures.

Instruments
There were two language assessments administered
to the children as part of this study: the Bus Story Test
of Continuous Speech (Renfrew, 1985) and the CELF-R
(Semel et al., 1987). The Bus Story Test involves the
examiner telling the child a story while the child looks
through accompanying pictures. The child then retells
the story, which is audiotaped and transcribed. The oral
narratives are scored for the amount of correct information; this yields an Information score. The maximum
score is 40 for recalling key items, such as the referents
and actions performed, in the correct order. In addition,
the Bus Story also yields a Sentence Length score. The
CELF-R is a language test covering a range of language
functions including phonology, syntax, semantics,
memory, and word finding. This measure provides both
an expressive and receptive language score, which is
totaled to yield an overall language score.
The WORD (Rust et al., 1993) is an individually
administered test of single-word reading accuracy. The
test provides standard scores and reading age equivalents. Raven's Progressive Matrices (Raven et al., 1983)
is a nonverbal ability test, which presents the child with
a series of patterns from which a piece is missing. The
child is instructed to look at the pattern and select the
piece that can complete it.
The PSLT (Myklebust, 1965) was used to assess the
children's written skills. The PSLT is a standardized
writing assessment for children and older adolescents
between the ages of 6 and 17 years. It incorporates a
visual prompt, which enables the children to generate a
piece of original text.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Results of standardized tests used for identification and matching.
SLI group (n = 11)
Bus Story
Information raw score
M
SD
Range
Length
M
SD
Range
WORD raw score
M
SD
Range
Standard score
M
SD
Range
Raven's Progressive Matrices raw score
M
SD
Range
CELF-R raw score
M
SD
Range
Standard score
M
SD
Range

29.82
4.64
18-34
10.20
1.44
7.4-12.6

CA group (n = 11)

LA group (n = 11)

32.82
4.90
23-40

26.73
6.60
16-34

14.26
2.71
11-19.2

9.25
2.15
5.1-13.6

22.82
8.44
10-35

40.27
6.45
32-48

23.64
10.44
5-35

72.45
9.10
59-92

96.27
11.77
83-111

99.27
6.83
89-117

31.36
3.35
25-35

29.91
2.55
26-34

30.43
1.72
28-33

31.55
8.32
21-48

--

--

65.91
10.45
50-85

--

--

Note. SLI = specific language impairment; CA = chronological age; LA = language age; WORD = Wechsler
Objective Reading Dimensions; CELF-R = Clinical Evaluations of Language Fundamentals--Revised. Dashes
indicate that the test was not completed.

Procedure
Each child was tested individually over a period of
4 to 5 days. Clare Mackie administered each assessment,
at a separate time and according to the standard format. For the PSLT, the child was asked to look at the
picture carefully and then to write a story about it. The
picture was placed in a central position where it could
be easily seen throughout the task. The PSLT states that
if a child asks questions, for example, "Should it have a
title?" the reply should be nondirective, as in, "If you
want the story to have a title, it can" (Myklebust, 1965,
p. 93). The children were allowed 30 min to complete
the story. Time taken to complete the written text was
recorded. At the end, the examiner, with the child, read
the story out loud to ascertain the child's meaning. This
also enabled the examiner to decipher any words spelled
incorrectly. The order of the assessments was counterbalanced across participants, with half the children

undertaking the language assessments first and the
other half undertaking the writing measure first.

Writing Analysis
The PSLT contains three scales: Productivity, Syntax, and Abstract-Concrete, which examines written
content. Productivity is measured through the total
number of words written.
The Syntax scale provides a total count of errors in
grammatical construction and morphological features.
Within each of these categories, error types, additions,
omissions, and substitutions are scored in relation to
grammatical construction, for example., omission of a
word that is obligatory to the context (e.g., A boy [is] playing with toys) and inflectional morphology (e.g., addition
of a grammatical inflection, There are toys shoes). The
picture and the children's written narrative provided sufficient information to support the classification of error
Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1473

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

types into omissions or substitutions. The reliability of
the coding was established separately (see below). The
final error score was divided by the total number of
words, which allowed the error analysis to be corrected
by the length of the writing sample.
For the PSLT, content is evaluated by means of the
Abstract-Concrete scale, which consists of five levels to
be used in rating the level of abstract thought or ideation. For example, Level 1 would be assigned for a series of unrelated letters or words, while Level 4 and 5
would be assigned for stories in which the picture served
as a point of reference rather than being central to the
story itself. Factors of language proficiency are ignored;
only the content or quality of the ideation is evaluated.
Fluency. Each child was allowed 30 min to complete
the writing task, but not all children used the allocated
time. To produce a fluency measure based on output,
the time each child had taken to complete the PSLT was
divided by the total number of words to represent a
measure of fluency.
Classification of spelling errors. Initially, all spellings were determined to be correct or incorrect. Those
that were incorrect were further categorized according
to phonological and orthographic accuracy. A scoring
scheme initially developed by Bruck and Waters (1988)
and Bruck, Treiman, Caravolas, Genesee, and Cassar
(1998) was used to further analyze error patterns. This
scheme allowed for an analysis of error patterns when
children were producing different word types rather than
a standardized spelling assessment. The spellings were
classified as either phonologically inaccurate or as orthographically inaccurate. Each error therefore received
two ratings. A phonologically inaccurate error was defined as not having a possible phoneme-to-grapheme correspondence in English, for example, clars instead of
clouds. Typically, these errors involved the substitution
of wrong sounds, insertion of phonemes, or deletion of
phonemes. An orthographically inaccurate error was defined as a misspelling containing a sequence of letters
that was illegal, which would include positional restriction, for example, wusz instead of once.
Coding reliability. Reliability checks were performed
on 100% of writing samples, on all scales, by Clare Mackie
and a postgraduate research officer and, in the case of
the Abstract-Concrete scale, by an additional researcher,
who was a trained primary school teacher. All of the writing samples were scored for all scales. The procedures for
scoring followed the detailed instructions in the PSLT. In
the case of an interrater disagreement, Clare Mackie's
scores were used. Mean reliability for the Syntax scale
was 89% and that for the Abstract-Concrete scale was
92%. With regard to judging whether a word was spelled
correctly, reliability was also 100%. Across all spelling
error categories, mean reliability was 91%.
1474

Results
Patterns of Differences in Writing
Task Performance Across the SLI,
CA, and LA Groups
Examples of matched SLI, CA, and LA comparison
groups' writing samples are shown in Appendix B. Table
2 presents the performance of the groups on the writing
test. Results of a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA),
corrected for Type I error using a Bonferroni correction
(using a probability level of .01), revealed a statistically
significant difference among the three groups on the total
number of words written, F(2, 30) = 7.35, p = .003, partial 2 = .32. A series of Tukey honestly significant difference post hoc analyses indicated that the children
with SLI were producing significantly fewer written
words than the CA group (p = .002) but not the LA group
(p = .61). The LA group did not differ significantly from
the CA group (p = .027).
The mean writing time for the SLI group on the writing task was 14 min 55 s (SD = 5.68); that for the CA
group was 13 min 13 s (SD = 4.10); that for the LA group
was 15 min 45 s (SD = 4.72). There was no statistically
Table 2. Performance on the writing task: Length, fluency, content,
syntax, and spelling errors.

Total no. words
M
SD
Range
Fluency (words
per minute)
M
SD
Range
Content
M
SD
Range
Proportion of
syntax errors
M
SD
Range
Proportion of
spelling errors
M
SD
Range

SLI group
(n = 11)

CA group
(n = 11)

LA group
(n = 11)

39.9
30.49
3-124

91.00
33.86
49-173

53.18
32.89
20-130

p
.003

.002
3.23
2.44
0.15-8.27

7.94
4.27
4.45-18.60

3.69
2.40
1-8.60

9.09
3.96
4-18

14.55
5.07
7-12

12.36
4.84
7-19

.194
.172
.00-.67

.017
.014
.00-.04

.040
.033
.00-.11

.156
.185
.00-.60

.031
.031
.00-.09

.162
.127
.00-.26

.042

.001

.007

Note. SLI = specific language impairment; CA = chronological age; LA
= language age.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

significant difference among the groups, F(2, 30) = 0.89,
p = .42, on the time taken to complete the writing task.
Fluency of writing across the groups, based on the number of words produced per minute, was statistically significantly different, F(2, 30) = 7.42, p = .002, partial 2 =
.33. The children with SLI were producing significantly
fewer written words than was the CA group (p = .004)
but not the LA group (p = .94). The LA group also wrote
fewer words than the CA group (p = .01). Thus, in terms
of both total number of words and fluency, the children
with SLI differed significantly from their CA peers but
not their LA peers. Surprisingly, there was no statistically significant difference among groups on a measure
of content, F(2, 30) = 3.54, p = .042.
The mean total number of syntax errors differed significantly across groups, F(2, 30) = 6.67, p = .004, partial
2 = .30, with the SLI group producing more errors (M =
5.91, SD = 4.35) than the CA group (M = 1.64, SD = 1.29)
and the LA group (M = 2.45, SD = 2.21). To reflect a true
syntax error score, the total number of errors divided by
the total number of words was used to create a proportion score. The groups differed statistically significantly
in the proportion of syntax errors produced, F(2, 30) =
9.98, p = .001, partial 2 = .39. Post hoc tests revealed
that the SLI group produced statistically significantly
more errors than both the CA group (p = .001) and the LA
group (p = .003). There was no statistically significant
difference between the CA group and the LA group (p =
.86) in their proportion of syntax errors.
To reflect an error rate in spelling, the total number
of words written was divided by the total number of
words spelled incorrectly. Due to unequal variance, the
Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the proportion of spelling errors. The groups differed statistically
significantly in the proportion of spelling errors produced, 2(2, N = 33) = 9.88, p = .007, partial 2 = .19.
When comparing the groups individually, the Mann-
Whitney test was used. There were no statistically significant differences between the SLI and the CA groups,

U(11) = 32.00, p = .06, or between the SLI and the LA
groups, U(11) = 48.00, p = .43. However, the LA group
produced statistically significantly more errors than the
CA group, U(11) = 11.00, p = .001, Cohen's d = 1.65.

Patterns of Relationships Between
Measures of Oral and Written Language
To examine the relationship between the written
measures and the children's oral language ability, partial correlation analyses were carried out separately for
the three groups of participants, controlling for age. All
correlations were corrected for Type I error using a
Bonferroni correction (using a probability level of .006).
All correlations are presented in Table 3 for the SLI group,
Table 4 for the CA group, and Table 5 for the LA group.
As Table 3 shows, for the SLI group, there were no
statistically significant correlations between oral language and any measure of writing, between reading and
oral language, or between the different measures of written language. However, there was a statistically significant negative relationship between word reading and the
proportion of spelling errors produced, r(11) = -.82, p =
.002, indicating that the higher the score on word reading, the lower the proportion of spelling errors were produced. No other relationships approached significance.
Patterns for the two comparison groups differed from
that for the children with SLI. For the CA group, there
were no statistically significant correlation between the
oral language measures and any measure of writing at
the .006 corrected level. However, there was a trend for
content to be associated with total words written, r(11)
= .76, p = .01. Thus, the higher the score on the Content
scale, the more words the children wrote. The small
sample size may explain the lack of relationship revealed
between the measures.
The LA matches also did not demonstrate any statistically significant correlations among word reading,

Table 3. Correlations among oral language, reading, and writing measures for the SLI group.
Measure (n = 11)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Bus Story Information
Bus Story Sentence Length
Word reading
Total words
Content score
Proportion of syntax errors
Proportion of spelling errors
Fluency (words per minute)

1

2

--
.52
.08
-.17
.14
.16
.22
.25

--
.12
.05
.29
.23
-.21
.26

3

--
.25
-.28
.52
-.82*
.58

4

5

--
.58
-.11
-.11
.48

--
-.10
-.29
.10

6

7

8

--
-.53
-.28

--
-.35

--

Note. SLI = specific language impairment.
*p < .006.

Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1475

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 4. Correlations among oral language, reading, and writing for the CA group.
Measure (n = 11)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Bus Story Information
Bus Story Sentence Length
Word reading
Total words
Content score
Proportion of syntax errors
Proportion of spelling errors
Fluency (words per minute)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

--
.69
.26
-.02
-.06
-.29
-.13
.48

--
.09
-.41
-.17
-.38
-.19
.03

--
-.52
-.72
-.40
-.66
-.04

--
.76
.31
.55
.51

--
.62
.61
.55

--
-.16
.45

--
.09

--

Note. CA group = chronological-age-matched group.

oral language, and any measure of writing. However, a
positive relationship was revealed between the total
number of words and fluency per minute, r(11) = .80, p
= .005. In addition, there were trends indicating positive relationships between content and total words, r(11)
= .76, p = .011, and between scores on the two language
measures: the Bus Story Information score and the Bus
Story Sentence Length score, r(11) = .77, p = .009.
None of the groups demonstrated a statistically significant relationship between oral language, as measured by the Bus Story, and written language or between
written content and written word production.

Spelling Errors
For this level of analysis, only the phonologically
and orthographically inaccurate errors are discussed.
The SLI group (M = .58, SD = .43) produced proportionately more phonologically inaccurate errors than both
the CA (M = .09, SD = .18) and the LA (M = .37, SD =
.34) groups. In addition, for orthographic errors, the SLI
group (M = .34, SD = .38) produced proportionately more
orthographically inaccurate errors than the CA (M = .01,
SD = .03) and the LA (M = .22, SD = .31) groups. Results
of a one-way ANOVA, corrected for Type I error using a

Bonferroni correction (using a probability level of .01)
revealed a statistically significant difference between the
groups in the proportion of phonologically inaccurate errors, F(2, 30) = 5.88, p = .007, partial 2 = .28. Post hoc
tests revealed a statistically significant difference between
the SLI and CA groups (p = .005) but not the SLI and LA
groups (p = .32) or the CA and LA groups (p = .14). For
the proportion of orthographically inaccurate spelling
errors, no statistically significant difference was revealed
among the groups, F(2, 30) = 3.75, p = .035, partial 2 =
.20, at the corrected .01 level. Post hoc tests showed a
trend toward a statistically significant difference between the SLI group and the CA group (p = .03) but no
differences between the SLI and LA groups (p = .63) or
between the CA and LA groups (p = .20).

Specific Syntax Measures
As we have shown, the major difference between
the children with SLI and their LA-matched peers is in
terms of the proportion of syntax errors produced. To
explore these differences further, this section compares
the children's performance on the two aspects of the
Syntax scale: word usage and word endings. Within each
of these categories, the specified error types included

Table 5. Correlations among oral language, reading, and writing for the LA group.
Measure (n = 11)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Bus Story Information
Bus Story Sentence Length
Word reading
Total words
Content score
Proportion of syntax errors
Proportion of spelling errors
Fluency (words per minute)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

--
.77
.21
.16
.23
.06
-.65
.39

--
.11
.13
.03
.41
-.41
.42

--
.60
.44
.32
-.44
.40

--
.76
.27
-.05
.80*

--
.19
-.01
.62

--
-.03
.31

--
-.23

--

Note. LA group = language-age-matched group.
*p < .006.

1476

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

additions, omissions, and substitutions. Table 6 contains
the proportion and raw scores of whole-word addition,
omission, and substitution errors. As Table 6 shows,
children with SLI produced more errors of all types in
comparison with both CA and LA matches.
The Kruskal-Wallis test was used, owing to unequal
variance, and data were corrected for the possibility of a
Type I error using a Bonferroni correction (with a probability level of .01). The three groups differed statistically significantly in the proportion of whole-word addition errors produced, 2(2, N = 11) = 10.56, p = .005, partial
2= .23. Comparisons among the groups using the Mann-
Whitney test demonstrated that there was a trend toward children with SLI producing more whole-word addition errors than the CA group, U(11) = 24.00, p = .016,
partial 2 = .29, but not the LA group, U(11) = 55.00, p =
.75. The LA group produced more whole-word addition
errors than did the CA group, U(11) = 18.00, p = .004,
partial 2 = .31. The groups also differed in the proportion of whole-word omission errors produced, 2(2, N =
11) = 10.26, p = .006, partial 2 = .15. There was a trend
for the SLI group to produce a greater proportion of wholeword omission errors than the CA group, U(11) = 24.00, p
= .016, partial 2 = .10, and at a statistically significant
level for the LA group, U(11) = 21.00, p = .008, partial 2
= .19. There was no statistically significant difference
between the CA and the LA group, U(11) = 47.00, p = .40.
In contrast, there was no statistically significant difference among the three groups on the proportion of wholeword substitution errors, 2(2, N = 11) = 2.60, p = .27.
Table 6. Mean proportions of and total whole-word errors as part
of the Syntax scale.

Errors
Addition
M
SD
Range
Total
Omission
M
SD
Range
Total
Substitution
M
SD
Range
Total

SLI group
(n = 11)

CA group
(n = 11)

LA group
(n = 11)

.029
.032
.00-.10
16

.001
.003
.00-.01
1

.025
.026
.00-.09
17

.100
.191
.00-.67
21

.009
.011
.00-.03
9

.004
.007
.00-.02
3

.023
.033
.00-.10
10

.004
.008
.00-.02
4

.008
.010
.00-.03
6

p

A descriptive analysis of the whole-word syntax errors made by the SLI group revealed that the majority
of the errors were verbs, specifically copula and auxiliary forms of be (e.g., omissions of is, are, or were; n = 8).
There were 5 omissions of prepositions (with) and pronouns (he, they). In addition there were 2 omissions of
conjunctions (and) and one omission of a definite article
(the). The CA-matched group produced 9 whole-word
omissions, with 5 instances of a preposition, a single
instance of an auxiliary verb, an intransitive verb, a
pronoun, and an indefinite article. The LA group produced only 3 whole-word omission errors; none of these
were verb errors; all were pronouns.
Table 7 contains the performance of the groups on
the proportion and raw scores of word-ending errors.
Because no word-ending addition errors were produced
by the LA group, a t test was performed between the
SLI and CA group; no statistically significant difference
was revealed between the two groups, t(20) = 1.87, p =
.85, on the proportion of word-ending addition errors.
In contrast, there was a difference among the three
groups in the proportion of omission-of-word-ending errors, F(2, 30) = 4.34, p = .022, partial 2 = .22, although
not statistically significant at the .01 level. Post hoc tests
revealed a trend toward a difference between the SLI
group and both the CA group (p = .043) and the LA group
(p = .04), however, not at the corrected .01 level. There
was no statistically significant difference between the
CA and the LA groups (p = .99). The SLI group omitted
8 word endings that included the progressive -ing, 1 past
tense -ed, 2 cases of third-person singular, and a further
6 omissions of the plural -s. The CA and LA groups produced only omissions of the plural -s, with the CA group
Table 7. Mean proportions of and total of word-ending errors as
part of the Syntax scale.

.005

.006

.270

Note. SLI group = group with specific language impairment; CA group
= chronological-age-matched group; LA group = language-agematched group.

Addition errors
M
SD
Range
Total
Omission errors
M
SD
Range
Total

SLI group
(n = 11)

CA group
(n = 11)

LA group
(n = 11)

.002
.007
.00-.02
1

.002
.004
.00-.01
2

--

.041
.064
.00-.17
17

.002
.005
.00-.02
3

.001
.004
.00-.01
1

p
.85

.022

Note. SLI group = group with specific language impairment; CA group
= chronological-age-matched group; LA group = language-agematched group. Dashes indicate that none of this particular type of
syntax error was produced. No groups produced any substitution
errors.

Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1477

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

producing 3 instances and the LA group producing only
1 instance.

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to investigate the written compositions produced by school-age children with
SLI, in comparison with their CA- and LA-matched peers.
Our first aim was to evaluate the pattern of written performance across the three groups. Second, we aimed to
investigate the relationship among the children's oral
language, reading, and writing. Third, we aimed to examine the nature of the written errors produced by the
children with SLI. It was predicted that the children with
SLI would be delayed in their written language skills
relative to their CA-matched peers. In contrast, it was
expected that content and length of the children's written narratives would be equivalent to those of their LAmatched peers but significantly reduced in relation to CAmatched peers. In addition, it was predicted that the
children with SLI would experience greater problems with
grammar and spelling than their LA-matched peers. The
children's oral language skills, as measured by the Bus
Story, were expected to be positively related to the content and length of their written output.

Assessment of Written Language
Performance Across the Three Groups
All groups spent a similar amount of time producing their texts; thus, there was no evidence to indicate
that the children's performance was constrained by a
time limitation. As predicted, the SLI group produced
written stories that were shorter than those of the CAmatched group but not the LA-matched group. This was
in keeping with studies citing productivity as a problem
for children with language difficulties (Scott & Windsor,
2000) and learning difficulties (Graham, 1990). However, in contrast to earlier work (Scott & Windsor, 2000),
the children with SLI also produced fewer words per
minute than their CA peers but not their LA peers. These
differing results in the rate of written production may
reflect the reduced processing resources found in the oral
language of the children with SLI. Alternatively, the
different tasks used in this study may have reduced the
processing demands for the typically developing children
so that they were able to produce their written work
more fluently and automatically. Thus, there is preliminary evidence that the children with SLI were having
more difficulty generating text than children of a
comparable chronological age. Although the amount of
text produced was similar to that of LA peers, note that
the children with SLI had on average 4 more years of
formal education and by corollary significantly more
1478

practice (and instruction) in writing than the LA
matches. Despite differences in generating text, the content, as assessed by the current measures, was equivalent across the three groups, although there was a trend
suggesting that the SLI group was producing fewer ideas
than the CA group. It would therefore appear that the
children in the SLI group were capable of producing abstract and imaginative stories, albeit more slowly. In
contrast to the length and content of the texts, specific
problems were evident in the children's written syntax.
On this measure, both LA and CA peers were performing more accurately than the children with SLI.
Surprisingly, there was no statistically significant
difference between the children with SLI and the two
comparison groups on the proportion of spelling errors
produced. Qualitative analysis from reports of the SLI
children suggested that they wrote words that they could
spell rather than attempt words that they could not spell.
Children would explicitly note that they could not spell
a word and choose a similar but simpler word to spell.
No such statements were recorded from any child in the
CA or LA groups. Thus, the lack of difference in spelling
accuracy may reflect a strategy used by the children with
SLI rather than a similar level of spelling performance
per se. This interpretation is further supported by the
types of errors produced by the three groups of children.
These errors revealed that the children with SLI made
more phonological errors than both the CA and the LA
groups. Research has accumulated that shows the importance of phonological processing deficits in causing
the literacy difficulties of children. These deficits are
common in children with SLI and appear to be revealed
in the specific difficulties with the phonological component of their spellings but not in their overall performance on the current task.

Relationships Among Oral
Language, Reading, and Writing
Assessments of the relationships among language,
literacy, and word reading for the three groups revealed
unpredicted patterns. No relationships were found in
any of the three groups between the oral language measures and the written language measure. Both the small
sample size and the measures chosen (or the lack of sensitivity of the measures) may explain these results. It is
also possible that the relationship between language and
writing is mediated by other factors, and there was an
indication that relationships did exist between other
measures and writing.
Reading accuracy, as measured by the WORD, was
negatively associated with spelling errors for the SLI
group, confirming the conventional link between reading and spelling (Caravolas, Hulme, & Snowling, 2001).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

There were a number of interrelationships between the
writing measures for both the LA- and CA-matched peers.
For the CA group, there was a trend for content to be
related to the total amount of words written. For the LA
group, both fluency and content were related to the
amount of written text, revealing that the more written
text the children produced, the higher their score on the
Content scale. For the children with SLI, no associations
were evident either between the writing measures or between reading and writing. Such a pattern of results suggests that there are other specific elements of the writing
task that are influencing performance for these children.
This potential disparity in performance is evident when
we consider the nature of the children's written errors.

Nature of Written Errors
Produced by the SLI Group
The only statistically significant difference between
the children with SLI and their LA-matched peers was
on the measure of syntax. The Syntax scale was divided
between whole-word and word-ending errors, and further divided among addition, omission, and substitution
errors. Both the SLI and the LA group produced more
whole-word addition errors than the CA group. The majority of these addition errors were of the conjunctive and,
which reflects developmental patterns in writing described by Perera (1984). She has shown how connectives
such as and are used repeatedly to outline a chronological sequence and to keep the discourse moving forward
by young writers. Perera has argued that as children
mature linguistically, their dependence on coordination
decreases, and the results of the current study corroborate these findings in a group of children with SLI.
The omission of whole words was an area that the
SLI group produced more errors than both the CA group
and, at a statistically significant level, the LA group,
but there was no statistically significant difference between the LA and CA groups. This finding indicates that
as in oral language, the omission of whole words within
writing is a specific difficulty for children with SLI. Many
of the whole-word omission errors produced by the SLI
group were auxiliary verbs, particularly the auxiliary
be. Research has revealed that for children with SLI,
verb usage within their spoken language is particularly
problematic (Fletcher & Peters, 1984; Watkins, Rice, &
Moltz, 1993), and recently, studies have focused on the
omission of auxiliary forms of be (Grela & Leonard,
2000). The results of this writing analysis indicate that
difficulties in auxiliary verbs are perpetuated in the
children's written language. However, the children also
omitted prepositions and pronouns, indicating that errors are not specific to verbs and mirroring difficulties
found in the oral language of some children with SLI
(Plaza & le Normand, 1996).

Errors for the children with SLI were not restricted
to whole words. The findings also demonstrate difficulties with inflectional morphology. Within the Syntax
scale, the additions, omissions, and substitutions of word
endings were evaluated. It was again revealed that the
only measure that differentiated the children with SLI
from their CA- and LA-matched peers was that of omission of word endings. No difference was revealed between
the CA and LA groups on this measure. The SLI group
made more omissions of progressive inflection -ing, thirdperson singular, regular plural -s errors, and omissions
of past tense -ed.
To what extent can the children's difficulties with
inflectional morphology be explained by spelling difficulties? Children with SLI produced proportionately
more inaccurate phonological and orthographic sequences than their LA- and CA-matched peers, thus
demonstrating a marked vulnerability with spelling that
could not be accounted for by LA or reading age alone.
Current models of spelling highlight the role of phonology in both phonological (Bruck & Waters, 1988) and
orthographic (Treiman & Cassar, 1996) contributions to
accurate spelling. The children's difficulties may stem
from an underlying phonological deficit (Fowler &
Liberman, 1995). Inflectional morphemes would be particularly affected because of their low perceptual salience. Studies of children's spelling have shown that they
fail to represent the second and third consonants of a cluster if they are not salient (Treiman, 1993). This could account for the omissions of third-person singular -s produced by the SLI group. However, this would not account
for the omissions of the progressive -ing produced by the
SLI group. Morphological factors in spelling may also
contribute to the difficulties experienced with inflected
forms (Hauerwas & Walker, 2003; Nunes, Byrant, &
Bindman, 1997; Treiman & Cassar, 1996). Thus, deficits
in both phonological and morphological awareness may
contribute to omissions of inflectional morphology in the
written language of children with SLI. This explanation
would be consistent with recent research suggesting that
children use phonological, morphological, and orthographic strategies when engaged in spelling (Treiman &
Bourassa, 2000). However, the current study does not
identify the specific causal mechanism for these spelling
patterns. Although the negative correlation between word
reading and spelling accuracy does highlight the importance of accurate reading decoding and spelling for the
SLI group, it is unclear whether this association is best
explained by phonological awareness or orthographic familiarity. There is a need to investigate the writing of
children across a range of contexts that can elucidate the
relationship among spelling, reading, written syntax errors, and aspects of oral language difficulty.
The range of errors produced by the children is not
easily explained by any single theory of linguistic deficit
Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1479

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of SLI. Children's errors were not restricted to obligatory tense marking or omissions of the copula and auxiliary, as would be predicted by the extended optional
infinitive theory proposed by Rice et al. (1995). In contrast, errors in inflections were evident, in equal proportions, for nouns and verbs. Specifically the progressive -ing and the plural -s morpheme were absent in
the children's writing. It has been argued that both are
relatively unaffected in the children's oral language
(Bishop, 1994; Rice & Wexler, 1996). Thus, while the
omission of word-ending errors in this sample is consistent with reports stating that children with SLI also
have difficulty with both noun and verb morphology in
their spoken language (Conti-Ramsden & Windfuhr,
2002; Leonard, McGregor, & Allen, 1992) and recently
in written narratives (Windsor et al., 2000), explanations based on oral language deficits alone cannot explain the children's written language problems. In addition, omissions of prepositions, pronouns, and
conjunctions point to limitations with processing that
may reflect differential attention and difficulties with
revision skills. These skills may be particularly vulnerable when core transcription skills are not automatic
and spelling is compromised. Thus, the results of the
present small-scale study suggest that children with SLI
are vulnerable to a range of limitations that affect their
written language, which are not confined to delays with
tense markers and are important in text generation.
These difficulties with written grammar and morphology separate their performance from both CA-matched
and LA-matched peers.

Limitations and Future Research
The results of the current study indicate that children with SLI have specific deficits in written language
in comparison with CA- and LA-matched peers. The
nature of the error patterns suggests that children with
SLI experience specific problems with productivity, syntax, and spelling but not content. In addition, the use of
verbs was compromised, but omissions of plural inflections and other word forms were also evident. Children
with SLI have the ability to produce imaginative stories, but not the linguistic and cognitive resources to
translate their ideas into written language. The data
also suggest that the children's reviewing skills are
reduced, possibly as a result of limited processing resources.
These conclusions need to be considered in conjunction with the methods used in the current study and the
level at which the difficulties experienced by the children with SLI were described. The results need to be
replicated on a larger sample of children where there is
a greater likelihood to detect differences and to provide
information about patterns within the different groups.
1480

A sequence of pictures may elicit a response that is more
cohesive and goal directed than a single visual prompt
(Hooper et al., 1994). The content of the children's written narratives, but not their spelling and grammar (Cole
& McLeod, 1999), may have been limited by the stimuli.
The reduced fluency of the children with SLI may further differentially affect tasks requiring a more cohesive and goal-directed written piece, with potentially
further detrimental effects on grammar and spelling.
Children with SLI are a heterogeneous group of children, and further work should consider both the ways in
which specific linguistic deficits affect the production of
written text and different assessments of their specific
written difficulties. For example, to what extent then do
children who have difficulties with morphology and argument structure in oral language (King & Fletcher, 1993;
Thordardottir & Ellis Weismer, 2002) differ from children
whose deficits are specific to vocabulary or phonology? A
more fine-grained analysis of the children's oral language
difficulties should be complemented by a similar analysis of the children's written language. Confirmation of
the deficits and the ways in which they manifest themselves across a range of writing tasks would further our
understanding of SLI and the writing process more generally. Moreover, such data could inform clinical practice
and educational interventions.
The current study extends previous work with students with LLD in implicating oral language problems
as a risk factor in producing written text for children
with SLI. These children did not have specific problems
in generating ideas. They did, however, have marked
difficulties in the grammar of writing. The nature of their
errors was different from that of their CA- and LAmatched peers, indicating a specific vulnerability with
inflectional morphology and producing grammatical sentences. This raises questions for further research examining the links between oral language and writing.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted in partial fulfillment of a
master's degree from the Institute of Education, University of
London, supported by an Economic and Social Science
Research Council grant awarded to Clare Mackie. Thanks are
due to all the children who took part; to Moor House School,
Oxted, England, for their continued support in research; and
to V. Connelly, Susan Ebbels, G. Lindsay, and three anonymous reviewers for constructive critical comments.

References
Beard, R. (1986). Children's writing in the primary school.
Sevenoaks, England: Hodder & Stroughton.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of
written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Berninger, V. (1999). Coordinating transcription and text
generation in working memory during composing:
Automatic and constructive processes. Learning Disability
Quarterly, 22, 99-112.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1992). The underlying nature of specific
language impairment. Journal of Child Psychology and
Child Psychiatry, 3, 1-64.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1994). Grammatical errors in specific
language impairment: Competence or performance
limitations. Applied Psycholinguistics, 15, 507-550.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1997). Uncommon understanding:
Development and disorders of language comprehension in
children. Hove, England: Psychology Press.
Bishop, D. V. M., & Adams, C. (1990). A prospective study
of the relationship between specific language impairment,
phonological disorders and reading retardation. Journal of
Child Psychology and Child Psychiatry, 31, 1027-1050.
Botting, N., Crutchley, A., & Conti-Ramsden, G. (1998).
Educational transitions of 7-year-old children with SLI in
language units: A longitudinal study. International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 33,
177-197.
Bruck, M., Treiman, R., Caravolas, M., Genesee, F., &
Cassar, M. (1998). Spelling skills of children in whole
language and phonics classrooms. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 669-684.
Bruck, M., & Waters, G. (1988). An analysis of the spelling
errors of children who differ in their reading and spelling
skills. Applied Psycholinguistics, 9, 77-92.
Caravolas, M., Hulme, C., & Snowling, M. (2001). The
foundations of spelling ability: Evidence from a 3-year
longitudinal study. Journal of Memory and Language, 45,
751-774.

processing (pp. 189-209). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there
a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29, 336-360.
Gentry, J. R. (1982). An analysis of developmental spelling
in GNYS AT WRK. The Reading Teacher, 36, 192-200.
Gillam, R., & Johnston, J. (1992). Spoken and written
language relationships in language learning impaired and
normally achieving school-age children. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 35, 1303-1315.
Graham, S. (1990). The role of production factors in
learning disabled students' compositions. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82, 781-791.
Grela, B. G., & Leonard, L. B. (2000). The influence of
argument structure complexity on the use of auxiliary
verbs by children with SLI. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 43, 1115-1125.
Hammill, D., & Newcomer, P. (1988). Test of Language
Development--2. Intermediate. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hauerwas, L. B., & Walker, J. (2003). Spelling of inflected
morphology in children with spelling deficits. Learning
Disabilities Research and Practice, 18, 25-35.
Hayes, J. R. (1996). A new framework for understanding
cognition and affect in writing. In C. M. Levy & S.
Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods,
individual differences and applications (pp. 1-27).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1986). Writing research and
the writer. American Psychologist, 41, 1106-1113.

Clarke-Klein, S. M. (1994). Expressive phonological
deficiencies: Impact on spelling development. Topics in
Language Disorders, 14, 40-55.

Hooper, S. R., Montgomery, J., Swartz, C., Reed, M. S.,
Sandler, A. D., Levine, M. D., et al. (1994). Measurement of written language expression. In G. R. Lyon (Ed.),
Frames of reference for the assessment of learning disabilities: New views on measurement issues (pp. 375-417).
Baltimore: Brooks.

Cole, J. C., & McLeod, J. S. (1999). Children's writing
ability: The impact of the pictorial stimulus. Psychology in
the Schools, 36, 359-370.

Hunt, K. (1970). Syntactic maturity in school children and
adults. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 35(1, Serial No. 134).

Conti-Ramsden, G., & Windfuhr, K. (2002). Productivity
with word order and morphology: A comparative look at
children with SLI and children with normal language
abilities. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 37, 17-30.

King, G., & Fletcher, P. (1993). Grammatical problems in
school-age children with specific language impairment.
Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 7, 339-352.

Dockrell, J., & Lindsay, G. (2000). Meeting the needs of
children with specific speech and language difficulties.
European Journal of Special Needs Education, 15, 24-41.
Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.
Fitzgerald, J., & Shanahan, T. (2000). Reading and
writing relations and their development. Educational
Psychologist, 35, 39-50.

Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L. B., Eyer, J., Bedore, L., & Grela, B. (1997).
Three accounts of the grammatical morpheme difficulties
of English-speaking children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 40, 741-753.
Leonard, L. B., McGregor, K. K., & Allen, G. D. (1992).
Grammatical morphology and speech perception in
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 1076-1085.

Fletcher, P., & Peters, J. (1984). Characterizing language
impairment in children: An exploratory study. Language
Testing, 1, 33-49.

Lewis, B., & Freebairn, L. (1992). Residual effects of
preschool phonology disorder in grade school, adolescence,
and adulthood. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
35, 819-831.

Fowler, A. E., & Liberman, I. Y. (1995). The role of
phonology and orthography in morphological awareness.
In L. Feldman (Ed.), Morphological aspects of language

MacArthur, C., & Graham, S. (1987). Learning disabled
students' composing with three methods: Handwriting,

Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1481

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

dictation and word processing. Journal of Special Education, 21, 22-42.
Marchman, V. A., Wulfeck, B., & Ellis Weismer, S.
(1999). Morphological productivity in children with normal
language and SLI: A study of the English past tense.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42,
206-219.
McCutchen, D. (1995). Cognitive processes in children's
writing: Developmental and individual differences. Issues
in Education, Contributions from Educational Psychology,
1, 123-160.
Montgomery, J. (2000). Relation of working memory to offline and real-time sentence processing in children with
specific language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics,
21, 117-148.

Swanson, H. L., & Berninger, V. (1994). Working memory
as a source of individual difference in children's writing.
In E. Butterfield (Ed.), Children's writing: Toward a
process theory of development of skilled writing (pp. 31-
56). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Thordardottir, E. T., & Ellis Weismer, S. (2002). Verb
argument structure weakness in specific language
impairment in relation to age and utterance length.
Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 16, 233-250.
Treiman, R. (1991). Children's spelling errors on syllable
initial consonant clusters. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 83, 346-360.
Treiman, R. (1993). Phonology and spelling: The case of
syllabic consonants. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
56, 267-290.

Myklebust, H. R. (1965). The Picture Story Language Test.
New York: Grune & Stratton.

Treiman, R., & Bourassa, D. C. (2000). The development
of spelling skill. Topics in Language Disorders, 20, 1-18.

Newcomer, P., & Hammill, D. (1988). Test of Language
Development: 2. Primary. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Treiman, R., & Cassar, M. (1996). Effects of morphology on
children's spelling of final consonant clusters. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 63, 141-170.

Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Bindman, M. (1997). Spelling and
grammar: The NECECSED move. In C. Perfetti, L.
Rieben, & M. Fayol (Eds.), Learning to spell: Research,
theory and practice across languages (pp. 151-170).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Perera, K. (1984). Children's writing and reading: Analyzing classroom language. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Plaza, M., & le Normand, M. T. (1996). Singular personal
pronoun use: A comparative study of children with specific
language impairment and normally French speaking
children. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 10, 299-310.
Raven, J. C., Court, J. H., & Raven, J. (1983). Raven's
Progressive Matrices. London: H. K. Lewis.
Renfrew, C. E. (1997). The Bus Story. Bicester, England:
Winslow.
Rice, M. L., & Wexler, K. (1996). Toward tense as a clinical
marker of specific language impairment in Englishspeaking children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 1239-1257.
Rice, M. L., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. L. (1995). Specific
language impairment as a period of extended optional
infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38,
850-863.
Rust, J., Golombok, S., & Trickey, G. (1993). Wechsler
Objective Reading Dimensions. Sidcup, UK: Psychological
Corporation.
Scott, C., & Windsor, J. (2000). General language performance measures in spoken and written discourse
produced by school-age children with and without
language learning disabilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 324-339.

van der Lely, H. K. J., & Christian, V. (2000). Lexical
word formation in children with grammatical SLI: A
grammar-specific versus an input-processing deficit?
Cognition, 75, 33-63.
van der Lely, H. K. J., & Ullman, M. T. (2001). Past tense
morphology in specifically language impaired and
normally developing children. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 16, 177-217.
Watkins, R., Rice, M. L., & Moltz, C. (1993). Verb use by
language-impaired and normally developing children.
First Language, 13, 133-143.
Wells, G., & Chang, G. L. (1986). From speech to writing:
Some evidence on the relationship between oracy and
literacy. In A. Wilkinson (Ed.), The writing of writing (pp.
109-131). Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press.
Westby, C., & Clauser, P. S. (1999). The right stuff for
writing: Assessing and facilitating written language. In H.
Catts & A. Kamhi (Eds.), Language and reading disabilities (pp. 259-313). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Windsor, J., & Hwang, M. (1999). Children's auditory
lexical decisions: A limited processing capacity account of
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 990-1002.
Windsor, J., Scott, C. M., & Street, C. K. (2000). Verb and
noun morphology: The spoken and written language of
children with language learning disabilities. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 1322-1336.
Received January 24, 2003
Revision received August 28, 2003

Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. (1987). Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-Revised. London:
Psychological Corporation, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Accepted April 18, 2004

Stothard, S. S., Snowling, M. J., Bishop, D. V. M.,
Chipchase, B. B., & Kaplan, C. A. (1998). Languageimpaired preschoolers: A follow-up into adolescence.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41,
407-418.

Contact author: Julie E. Dockrell, School of Psychology and
Human Development, Institute of Education, University
of London, 20 Bedford Way, London WC1H 0AL, United
Kingdom. E-mail: j.dockrell@ioe.ac.uk

1482

DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2004/109)

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 1469-1483 * December 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix A. Extract of Bus Story transcripts for all

Appendix B. Sample of writing pieces from the three

three groups.

groups for matched participants.

Group With Specific Language Impairment

Group With Specific Language Impairments

Once upon a time there was a naughty bus

The boy play where his toy

and he broke down

The boy is sitting on table

and the driver fixed him

The boy is 5 years old

but he ran away

The boy is play where old toy

on the way he met a train

The boy like football

and he was very angry
he was trying to beat him

Chronological-Age-Matched Group

but he went through the tunnel and on to the town

There is a boy in this picture and he is making a movie with his
toys. He is concentrating hard and careful. He is living in a
very old house long ago with toys on the table. He seems to be
very quiet and must be talking in his head. It looks as though
that he is interested in making up movies, with his toys. The
boy looks very young and does not have a school to work in,
however, he does have books on the shelf beside him. He looks
very sad and seems lonely because he looks like he does not
have any friends.

He was going to try to run over people
and they just quickly ran out of the way
he was still on the road

Chronological-Age-Matched Group
Once upon a time there was a bus driver
he was trying to mend it but the bus ran away
on the way he met a train they are all racing and making
funny faces at each other
the train was a bit of a person who never liked losing so he
went under the tunnel
the bus went into town
the bus was in the city
and the policeman blew his whistle and said stop
he ran people over

Language-Age-Matched Group
One day a boy was playing with his toys and he had a ghost
friend and the ghost friend was called Bob and the boy was
called Jamie and they lived together in a big house with 6
bedrooms and they can almost fit a dozen cow in it. One day
the boy went to bed a dreamed that he had a dozen cows. He
went down to the kitchen and in the kitchen there was a dozen
cows.

Language-Age-Matched Group
Once upon a time there was a naughty bus
the naughty bus ran away
and then he meets a train
and they make funny faces
and then the train went into a tunnel
and the bus felt all alone
he met a policeman
and the policeman blew his whistle and is shouting "stop, stop"

Mackie & Dockrell: Written Language Deficits in SLI

1483

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

