Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Phonological phrase boundaries constrain lexical access
II. Infant data
Ariel Gouta,b, Anne Christophea,*, James L. Morganc
a

Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, EHESS/ENS/CNRS, Paris, France
b
Service de Neuropediatrie, CHU Bicetre, Paris, France
c
Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, USA
Received 17 October 2003; revision received 24 May 2004
Available online 11 September 2004

Abstract
The location of phonological phrase boundaries was shown to affect lexical access by English-learning infants of 10
and 13 months of age. Experiments 1 and 2 used the head-turn preference procedure: infants were familiarized with two
bisyllabic words, then presented with sentences that either contained the familiarized words or contained both their syllables separated by a phonological phrase boundary. Ten-month-olds did not show any listening preference, whereas
13-month-olds listened significantly longer to sentences containing the familiarized words. Experiments 3 and 4 relied
on a variant of the conditioned head-turning technique. In a first session, infants were trained to turn their heads for an
isolated bisyllabic word. In the second session, they were exposed to the same sentences as above. Both 10- and 12.5month-old infants turned significantly more often when the target word truly appeared in the sentence. These results
suggest that phonological phrase boundaries constrain on-line lexical access in infants.
 2004 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Keywords: Lexical acquisition; Segmentation into words; Prosodic boundary cues

Introduction
In recent years, it has been argued that infants may
exploit phonetic, prosodic, and statistical clues in language input to extract information about word boundaries (e.g., Jusczyk, 1999; Jusczyk, Houston, &
Newsome, 1999), about the grammatical category membership of words (Kelly, 1996; Shi, Morgan, & Allopenna, 1998), and about some general aspects of phrase
structure (Gerken, Jusczyk, & Mandel, 1994; Hirsh-Pasek et al., 1987; Jusczyk et al., 1992). Existing research

*

Corresponding author. Fax: +33-144-32-23-60.
E-mail address: anne@lscp.ehess.fr (A. Christophe).

0749-596X/$ - see front matter  2004 Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2004.07.002

indicates both that language input provides cues to each
of these aspects of structure, and that infants can exploit
cues to individual levels of structure. However, the question of how infants coordinate cues to multiple levels of
language structure has not yet been explored. In this
article, we examine how 10- to 13-month-old infants
integrate word-boundary cues with phrase boundary
cues.
The claim that languages are hierarchically structured is well known with respect to syntactic structure
(Bloomfield, 1933; Chomsky, 1957): words constitute
phrases, phrases constitute clauses, and so forth. A corollary of this claim is that units at lower levels cannot
straddle boundaries between units at higher levels:
words cannot bridge phrases, nor can phrases bridge

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

clauses. Parallel claims have been made with respect to
the prosodic structure of language (Nespor & Vogel,
1986; Selkirk, 1980): prosodic words constitute phonological phrases, which in turn constitute intonational
phrases. Consequently, prosodic words may not straddle
phonological phrase boundaries. In other words, phonological phrase boundaries should always be interpreted
as word boundaries. Do lexical access processes exploit
this property of language? Recent results suggest that
for adults, phonological phrase boundaries serve on-line
to constrain lexical access (Christophe, Peperkamp, Pallier, Block, & Mehler, in press). However, whether they
do so for infants early in acquisition is unknown.
In the following, we first review some recent findings
on infantsO use of cues in segmenting input speech. We
next consider evidence on the role of cues to phonological phrase boundaries in processing of speech by both
infants and adults. Then, we present four infant studies
in which we manipulate cues to phonological phrase
boundaries. The results of these studies show that, as
early as 10 months, infants may use cues to phonological
phrase boundaries to segment connected speech.
Exploiting transitional probabilities and lexical stress as
cues to word boundaries
Within the past 10 years, the roles of several potential
types of cues to word boundaries have been experimentally investigated (see Jusczyk, 1997; for a review). These
include distributional statistics, lexical stress, phonotactics, allophonic cues, and co-articulation. We will focus
here on the first two of these, because they figure in
our experiments.
It has long been hypothesized that by computing the
transitional probabilities between syllables or segments
and using the relative strengths of these probabilities
to hypothesize word boundaries, listeners (or learners)
may exploit distributional regularities to extract words
from continuous speech (Harris, 1955; Hayes & Clark,
1970). Goodsitt, Morgan, and Kuhl (1993) showed that
8-month-old infants were able to exploit the systematic
co-occurrence of 2 syllables to infer that they were a single unit. More generally, Saffran, Aslin, and Newport
(1996) demonstrated that 8-month-old infants were able
to extract word-like units from a 2-min continuous
stream of syllables on the basis of transitional probabilities (see also Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998). Computer simulations have shown that this strategy works
well on a variety of real-life corpora, using a variety of
algorithms (Batchelder, 2002; Brent, 1999; Brent & Cartwright, 1996; Cairns, Shillcock, Chater, & Levy, 1997;
Christiansen, Allen, & Seidenberg, 1998; Venkataraman,
2001). For example, Batchelder (2002) showed that a
distributional algorithm could recognize 65% of the
words in a corpus of English infant-directed speech,
and 56% of the words in a corpus of Japanese speech.

549

Lexical stress has also been investigated as a word
segmentation cue. In English, content words predominantly start with strong syllables, containing a full vowel
(Cutler & Carter, 1987). Hence, positing a word boundary before strong syllables is a useful strategy for English. English-speaking adults have been shown to use
this strategy in a variety of experimental tasks (e.g., Cutler & Butterfield, 1992; Norris, McQueen, & Cutler,
1995). When do infants become able to exploit this regularity of English? Jusczyk, Cutler, and Redanz (1993)
showed that 9-month-old American infants, but not 6month-olds, listen longer to lists of bisyllabic Strong-
Weak (SW) words rather than to Weak-Strong (WS)
words. Morgan (1996) demonstrated that by the same
age, English-learning infants tend to perceive pairs of
syllables as cohesive units only when they exhibit a trochaic (i.e., SW) rhythm. Furthermore, Jusczyk et al.
(1999) showed that American infants are able to extract
SW bisyllabic words at 7.5 months or after, but WS
bisyllabic words only at 10.5 months or after. These results suggest that English-learning infants, like adults,
exploit lexical stress to hypothesize word boundaries;
in addition, they do so at a very early age. Finally, Morgan and Saffran (1995) showed that by 9 months, infants
integrate lexical stress and distributional regularities in
grouping syllables into word-like units; from this age onwards, therefore, the coincidence of these two types of
cues may be an especially powerful indicator for the
location of word boundaries, as simulations by Christiansen et al. (1998) confirm.
The prosodic structure of language
Theoretical accounts of the prosodic structure of spoken language (Nespor & Vogel, 1986; Selkirk, 1983)
have proposed a hierarchy of elements ranging from
morae and syllables to intonational phrases and utterances. Elements in the hierarchy above the prosodic
word are derived from (though do not necessarily mirror) syntactic structure and serve as the domains within
which particular types of phonological rules apply (Nespor & Vogel, 1986). The intonational phrase, which most
often corresponds to whole clauses, is generally delimited by final lengthening and a pause. The phonological
phrase, whose boundaries coincide with syntactic phrase
boundaries, is characterized by final lengthening and a
single pitch contour (Wightman, Shattuck-Hufnagel,
Ostendorf, & Price, 1992; among others). It also exhibits
greater initial strengthening (such that the first phoneme
of a phonological phrase is typically more strongly articulated and potentially longer, see Fougeron & Keating,
1997; Keating, Cho, Fougeron, & Hsu, 2003), as well as
reduced coarticulation between phonemes that span the
boundary (see e.g., Byrd, Kaun, Narayanan, & Saltzman, 2000; Hardcastle, 1985; Holst & Nolan, 1995).
Phonological phrases may incorporate material from

550

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

one or more syntactic phrases, and edges of phonological phrases may not map 1-to-1 onto edges of syntactic
phrases. Nevertheless, whenever there is a phonological
phrase boundary, there is also a syntactic phrase boundary. For example, the sentence [He]NP [kicked [the
ball]NP]VP may be prosodically realized as [He kicked]PP
[the ball]PP. Note that here the boundary between the
two phonological phrases coincides with the onset of
the NP ``the ball''; in English in general, as in other
right-branching languages, phonological phrase boundaries coincide with the onsets of syntactic phrases. A fortiori, wherever there is a phonological phrase boundary,
there must also be a word boundary.
Intonational phrase boundaries have been shown to
be perceptible by young infants: Hirsh-Pasek et al.
(1987) observed that infants listened longer to stimulus
sets in which silences were inserted at points coincident
with intonational phrase boundaries than to stimuli in
which silences were non-coincident. They have also been
shown to influence on-line sentence comprehension in
adults (see e.g. Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999; Warren, Grabe,
& Nolan, 1995). Thus, this higher level of the prosodic
hierarchy seems to participate in language processing.
With respect to phonological phrases, Christophe,
Dupoux, Bertoncini, and Mehler (1994) and Christophe,
Mehler, and Sebastian-Galles (2001) showed that, from
very early on, infants are sensitive to prosodic cues correlated with phonological phrase boundaries. Using a
High Amplitude Sucking Procedure, they observed that
newborns could discriminate between two lists of bisyllabic stimuli that were extracted from French and Spanish sentences; one list contained bisyllables that
belonged to a single word, whereas the second list contained bisyllables that were separated by a phonological
phrase boundary. InfantsO sensitivity to phonological
phrase boundaries in English has also been studied with
the pause-insertion technique. Jusczyk et al. (1992)
showed that 9-month-olds are sensitive to syntactic
phrase boundaries that correspond to phonological
phrase boundaries. Gerken et al. (1994) replicated this
result and showed in addition that 9-month-olds do
not seem to perceive syntactic phrase boundaries, which
do not correspond to phonological phrase boundaries
(as in ``[he # kicked] [the ball]'' as opposed to ``[the caterpillar] # [kicked the ball],'' where # stands for the inserted pause).
Using phonological phrase boundaries to constrain lexical
access
Recent experimental results show that French adults
postulate a word boundary whenever they encounter a
phonological phrase boundary (Christophe et al., in
press). In a word detection task, adults were slowed by
local lexical ambiguities within phonological phrases:
the target word chat (``cat'') was responded to more

slowly in . . .son chat grincheux. . . (``. . .his grumpy
cat. . .''), where chagrin is also a word, than in son chat
drogue (``his drugged cat''), where no competitor word
starts with chad. . .. In contrast, when the target word
was followed by a phonological phrase boundary, participants responded equally fast in both conditions, irrespective of the following context; e.g., chat in [son grand
chat] [grimpait aux arbres] (``his big cat climbed up
trees''; potential competitor chagrin) vs. [son grand chat]
[dressait lOoreille] (``his big cat pricked up its ears''; no
competitor). This result shows that phonological phrase
boundaries constrain lexical access on-line in (French)
adults.
Whether infants also exploit phonological phrase
boundary information to constrain lexical access has
not yet been directly investigated. However, certain
experiments from a recent extensive series of studies
investigating the role of lexical stress in infant speech
segmentation indirectly bear on this issue (Jusczyk
et al., 1999). Because Jusczyk et al. (1999) did not design
their stimuli to test for the relative contributions of cues
to phonological phrases vs. cues to words, several plausible alternative explanations of the results cannot be ruled out. We consider these experiments in some detail
here in order to make explicit the factors that must be
controlled in investigating how infants coordinate cues
to phrase boundaries with word-boundary cues. Jusczyk
et al. (1999) familiarized 7.5- and 10.5-month-old infants
with sets of sentences containing weak1/strong2/weak3
(W1S2W3) syllabic sequences such as guitar is or beret
on. InfantsO listening time was measured for bisyllables
contained in the sentences vs. comparable bisyllables
that they had not heard. At 7.5 months, infants listened
longer to familiar S2W3 bisyllables (e.g., taris) than to
unfamiliar strong-weak bisyllables. In contrast, after
having been familiarized with the WS bisyllabic word
(e.g., guitar), infants did not listen longer to sentences
containing the familiarized WS bisyllable. Jusczyk
et al. attributed this to an early reliance on a metrical
segmentation strategy according to which strong syllables are taken to signal onsets of words. Ten-month-olds
displayed the opposite pattern of behavior, thus correctly segmenting the speech sequence as adults would:
they must have relied on word-boundary cues other than
the stress pattern--and phonological phrase boundaries
are one such candidate.
In Jusczyk et al.Os experiment 14, 10-month-olds
showed no differences in listening time to familiar vs.
unfamiliar S2W3 sequences (e.g., taris). These bisyllables
appeared with the same regularity in the sets of familiarization sentences as did the W1S2 bisyllables and moreover manifested the predominant lexical stress pattern
of English. Why then did 10-month-olds apparently fail
to recognize them as familiar? One possible explanation
is that phonological phrase boundaries sometimes intervened between the S2 and W3 syllables, thereby signaling

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

an intervening word boundary. Inspection of their stimuli suggests that about 60% of the sentences used may
have included phonological phrase boundaries in this
key position. Jusczyk et al. note allophonic differences
between familiarization sequences and test items that
are at least partially consistent with this possibility. On
this view, the phrase boundaries that did occur may have
led 10-month-old infants to segment the trisyllabic sequences (appropriately) as W1S2 + W3, so that the
S2W3 test bisyllables failed to correspond to any perceived units. One potential interpretation for the above
results is therefore that 10-month-olds, but not 7month-olds, exploit phonological phrase boundaries to
constrain their lexical segmentation processes.
However, other alternative interpretations cannot be
ruled out. First, there were differences in the statistical
relations within the W1S2 and S2W3 bisyllables.
Although S2 followed W1 and W3 followed S2 with perfect regularity in the familiarization sentences (making
the W1S2 and W2S3 sequences equally probable within
this restricted corpus), the same is not true when one
considers the entire English corpus 10-month-olds have
been exposed to. In each instance, the W3 syllable was
a closed-class item (is, on, to, or in); by 10 months, as
Jusczyk et al. note, infants may well have learned that
these high frequency English words occur in combination with many other different words. As a consequence
of the very high frequency of W3, the mutual predictability (mutual information, Cover & Thomas, 1991) of S2
and W3 would not be as strong as that of W1 and S2
(Morgan, 1996; and Swingley, 2000; have suggested that
such asymmetries in mutual information may signal
word boundaries). Second, it is possible that the
10-month-olds did not segment bisyllables from the
familiarization sentences but rather segmented complete
trisyllabic sequences. On this view, the W1S2 bisyllables
may have served more effectively as probes activating
the stored W1S2W3 trisyllables due to their shared onsets. There have been many demonstrations that word
onsets enjoy privileged status as cues for word retrieval
in adults (e.g., Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus,
1998); it would not be surprising to discover that the
same phenomenon holds true for infants.
The studies reported below were designed to explicitly test infantsO reliance on phonological phrase boundaries for lexical access, with an eye toward avoiding the
sorts of alternative explanations just cited. In Experiments 1 and 2, we used the now-standard version of
the head-turn preference procedure originally developed
by Jusczyk and Aslin (1995) for assessing infantsO recognition of spoken words in fluent speech. Infants were
first familiarized with tokens of two bisyllabic words
(paper and beacon). They were then tested on passages
made up of two types of sentences. The crucial experimental manipulation was that the bisyllables were either
contained within a phonological phrase, as in (1) or they

551

straddled a phonological phrase boundary, as in (2)
(similar sentences were constructed for beacon).
1. [The college] [with the biggest paper forms] [is best]
2. [The butler] [with the highest pay] [performs the most]
If infants have learned to coordinate cues to phrasal
and lexical structure of input, then the presence of
an intervening phonological phrase boundary should
block (or at least, impede) infantsO recognition of the
familiar bisyllabic words. As a result, we expected longer
listening times for sentences that contained the familiar
bisyllabic words within a phonological phrase. In Experiments 3 and 4 we replicated the first two experiments
using a conditioned head-turn procedure, which provides on-line measures of infantsO speech processing.
Two features of the experimental design we used are
worth noting. First, the constituent syllables of the
familiarized words manifested the same lexical stress
pattern and statistical relationships in both experimental
conditions (with and without an intervening prosodic
boundary). As a consequence, any differences between
the conditions can only be due to the presence of the
phonological phrase boundary. Second, two powerful
cues should encourage infants to consider the bisyllabic
items as single units: They have a SW pattern, and their
syllables display a strong statistical relationship within
the experimental corpus (whenever S1 occurs it is followed by W2, and vice versa). Lexical stress appears to
be a powerful cue to word boundaries in English: for instance, both SW patterns and coarticulatory cues have
been shown to override distributional cues (Johnson &
Jusczyk, 2001; though Thiessen & Saffran, 2003; observed that distributional cues overrode stress patterns
in 7-month-olds), and SW patterns have been show to
override phonotactic regularities as well (Mattys, Jusczyk, Luce, & Morgan, 1999; Myers et al., 1996). Therefore, if phonological phrase boundaries are found to
effectively prevent infants from considering the SW
bisyllables as single units, it will follow that these prosodic boundary cues are very powerful word-boundary
cues. This is consistent with our hypothesis that word
segmentation strategies apply within the domain of the
phonological phrase.

Experiment 1
Ten-month-old infants were first exposed to tokens
of two bisyllabic words (paper and beacon), until they
accumulated 30 s of attentive listening to each word.
They were then tested on four different passages. In
two of these passages, all sentences contained instances
of one of the familiarized bisyllabic words. In the other
two, all sentences contained both syllables of one of the
familiarized words, separated by a phonological phrase

552

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

boundary. Previous work has shown that 10-month-old
infants are already proficient at segmenting words from
fluent speech (e.g., Jusczyk et al., 1999) and also that
they can perceive phonological phrase boundaries (e.g.,
Gerken et al., 1994). We therefore expected 10-monthold infants to be able to exploit phonological phrase
boundaries and thus show longer listening times for sentences actually containing the familiar words.
Method
Participants
Infants approximately 10 months old were recruited
from information provided by the Rhode Island Department of Health. Twenty-one infants were tested to attain
the final sample of 18 infants (mean age: 10 months 14
days, range: 10 months 0 days to 10 months 30 days).
Three infants were excluded for the following reasons:
technical problems (1), restlessness (2).
Stimuli
Stimuli for the familiarization phase were isolated
words: tokens of paper and beacon. We selected paper
and beacon, two bisyllabic SW words, because the first
syllables (pay or bee) are words, and the second syllables
(per or con) are the beginnings of many verbs (e.g., perform, perceive, conflict, confound, and so forth). This allowed us to construct many different sentences
containing either the bisyllabic words themselves or both
syllables of these words separated by phonological
phrase boundaries. We chose words with a SW pattern
because this pattern is predominant among English content words.
The stimuli for the test phase were fluent sentences.
For each target word (paper and beacon) we constructed
12 pairs of sentences such that one member of each pair
contained the bisyllabic word itself while the second
member contained both syllables of this word separated
by a phonological phrase boundary. For Experiments 1
and 2 relying on the head-turn preference procedure,
only the first six sentence pairs were used for each word.
Example pairs of sentences are shown below (see Appendix for a complete list of materials).
3a. [The scandalous paper] [sways him] [to tell the truth].
3b. [The outstanding pay] [persuades him] [to go to
France].
4a. [The owner of the beacon] [founded the association].
4b. [The color of the bee] [confounded the new
beekeeper].
In the following, we refer to sentences like (3a) and
(4a) as ``paper-type sentences'' and to sentences like
(3b) and (4b) as ``pay#per-type sentences.'' Sentences
of each pair were matched in their prosodic structures
before the target word, as well as in total number of

syllables and feet and in the number of syllables before and after the target words (mean number of syllables was 14).1 Sentences were randomly ordered in a
list (together with a number of distractor sentences)
and read by a female American speaker who was naive to the aim of the experiment and who was asked
to read in a lively voice. After reading and recording
all the sentences, the same speaker was asked to pronounce the target words in isolation. We selected one
exemplar for each sentence and 6 exemplars for each
word.
We analyzed the acoustic realizations of the phonological phrase boundaries by measuring the duration
of each phoneme in the bisyllabic targets (see Table 1
for means, as well as statistical tests of differences between
means), using Praat software (http://www.fon.hum.
uva.nl/praat/). We used the waveform to identify segmentsO beginnings and ends; vowels were identified
by their periodicity; stops began with a closure (silent
interval, zero amplitude), and ended after a burst when
the periodicity of the vowel started. As expected from
the literature (e.g., Gussenhoven & Rietveld, 1992; Wightman et al., 1992), we observed highly significant
phrase-final vowel lengthening: thus, [eI ] from Opay#
per. . .O (phrase-final) was about 75% longer than [eI ]
from OpaperO (word-medial). Note that this phrase-final
vowel is also word final, and significant word-final vowel
lengthening has also been reported in the literature (e.g.,
Wightman et al., 1992). Word-final lengthening was observed in the present data too: [E] from OpaperO (word-final but not always phrase-final) was longer than [E] from
Opay#per. . .O (word-medial; 42% lengthening on average). As expected from the literature, we also observed
significant phrase-initial consonant lengthening: [p] from
Opay#per. . .O was significantly longer than [p] from OpaperO (32% lengthening) (e.g., Christophe et al., 2001;
Fougeron & Keating, 1997; Quene, 1992).
In five pay#per-type sentences (out of 24), we observed a short pause between the crucial words (3 pay#per sentences and 2 bee#con sentences). Whenever there
was a pause, it was impossible to measure the beginning
of the closure of the following unvoiced stop consonant
because it was not marked acoustically. To split the silent interval into pause and stop-closure in as objective
a fashion as possible, we assigned to the stop-closure
the mean duration of the other stop-closures in the same
condition (either Opay#per. . .O or Obee#con. . .O). The
duration of the pause was whatever remained of the silent interval. The mean duration of pauses was 133 ms

1

Note that in most cases, a phonological phrase boundary
occurred after the bisyllabic target word, paper or beacon (as in
sentences 3a and 4a). This boundary may facilitate the
extraction of the bisyllabic target words from fluent sentences.
We thank James McQueen for pointing this out to us.

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

553

Table 1
Duration measurements for each individual segment in the Boundary and No-Boundary experimental conditions (averaging over paper
and beacon sentences): mean duration in both conditions, difference between the Boundary and the No-Boundary conditions (and
standard error of this difference), percentage lengthening (longest duration minus shortest duration divided by shortest duration and
multiplied by 100)

p
eI
p
E

Phonological Phrase Boundary pay [per. . .]

No-Boundary paper

Difference

Mean (ms)

Mean (ms)

Mean (ms)

SE

t test
t(23)

p

% Lengthening

129
198
137
86

115
112
104
122

14
86
33
36

6.7
10.0
4.4
5.4

1.9
8.6
7.5
6.7

.06
<106
<106
<106

11.4
76.4
31.9
41.7

E The data show significant word-final and phrase-final rhyme lengthening as well as significant word-initial consonant lengthening.

(range 82-167 ms). Phrase-final lengthening may be
greater in the presence of a pause than in its absence.
To check that the above results were not due solely to
the few sentences, which exhibited a pause, we computed
the same analysis without these five sentences, and observed very similar results (phrase-final vowel lengthening: 64%, t(18) = 7.28, p < .001; initial consonant
lengthening: 32%, t(18) = 6.4, p < .001). These short
pauses were carefully edited out before the experiment
began so as not to leave any audible click. The edited
sentences sounded perfectly natural.
To summarize these acoustic analyses, we observed
that most sentences were realized without a pause at
the phonological phrase boundary, but with very significant phrase-final and phrase-initial lengthening compared to the same phonemes in word-medial position.
Phonological phrase boundaries in our sentences were
therefore marked clearly but not by pauses.
Apparatus
Testing was conducted in a three-walled testing
booth within a sound-treated laboratory room. Each
beige pegboard wall of the booth was 120 cm wide. A
chair was positioned at the open end of the booth where
the parent sat with the infant on his/her lap. The infant
sat approximately 110 cm from the front of the booth.
Advent loudspeakers were located behind both side
walls of the booth. At the infantsO eye level, 86 cm above
the floor, a yellow light was mounted on the front wall.
Each of the side walls had a similar green light at the
same level. A Panasonic CCTV video camera (model
WV-BP330) was mounted behind the testing booth
12.3 cm above the yellow light. In a separate control
room, a Panasonic monitor (WV-5410) was connected
to the video camera in the testing booth. The participants were displayed on the monitor in the control
room, where the experimenter judged infantsO looking,
pressing buttons on the mouse of a Windows computer
to control the custom experimental software. The computer was equipped with a Sound-Blaster compatible
soundboard connected to a Yamaha amplifier. Speech

stimuli were set at conversation level (75 dB) using a
Realistic sound level meter.
Procedure
The experiment consisted of two phases completed
within a single session. The infant was seated on the parentOs lap facing the yellow light. The parent listened to
instrumental music over Bose aircraft-quality noise-cancellation headphones to mask the stimuli. Each trial began with the yellow light flashing until the experimenter
judged that the infant fixated on the flashing light. At that
point, this light was turned off and one of the green side
lights began to flash to attract the infantOs attention to
the side. Side of presentation was randomized across trials, so that all stimuli occurred on both sides. After the infant turned to look at the flashing green light, the speech
stimuli for that trial began to play. The sound continued
to play and the green light remained on for the duration of
the infantOs fixation on the light. Each trial continued until the infant looked away for two seconds, or until 30 s of
looking time had been accumulated during that trial. If
the infant looked away, but then looked back within
two seconds, the trial continued. For each trial, cumulative listening time was computed as the sum of the duration of the looks towards the blinking light.
In the familiarization phase, infants listened to lists
of bisyllabic words. Side of presentation was random.
Trials alternated between paper and beacon lists. The
familiarization phase lasted until an infant accumulated
30 s of attentive listening to each of the familiarized
words. Once the infant had exceeded 30 s of looking time
with one word, all subsequent familiarization trials presented the alternate word. As soon as the infant reached
30 s of looking time with the second word, the test phase
began. During the test phase, infants listened to passages
composed of 6 sentences each. The order of sentences
within passages was randomized on each trial. Four different passages were repeated three times each (one passage with paper sentences, one with beacon sentences,
one with pay#per sentences, and one with bee#con sentences), yielding a total of 12 test trials. Passages were

554

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

presented in three blocks of four passages, with the order of passages being random within each block. The
experimental measure was the cumulative listening time
to each type of passage.
We incorporated several refinements in HPP introduced in recent studies (Bortfeld & Morgan, 2000;
Singh, Bortfeld, & Morgan, 2002; Singh, Morgan, &
White, 2004). First, in all trials, speech stimuli were directly contingent on infantsO looking. As soon as the infant looked away, the sound stopped. If the infant
looked back within two seconds, the sound resumed
and the trial continued, but if the infant continued to
look away for two or more seconds, the trial ended. This
modification helps infants to learn the task contingency
very rapidly. Second, the amount of familiarization per
stimulus set was controlled. As soon as infants had
reached the familiarization criterion for one set, all subsequent familiarization trials presented the other set.
This is an important control because greater familiarization may cause a familiarity preference to flip to a novelty preference (Aslin & Mehler, 2002; Hunter & Ames,
1988). Thus, if an infant accumulates highly disparate
amounts of familiarization with two stimuli, the result
may be a familiarity preference for one and a novelty
preference for the other. Combined, these may cancel
each other out. Third, to ensure that infants heard enough of the stimuli to make a decision to continue or terminate listening, we required that infants listen a
minimum amount of time on each trial (2 s). If the infant
failed to meet this minimum, the trial was repeated with
a novel randomization of the stimuli; otherwise, the procedure advanced to the next trial.
Results and discussion
Mean listening times to each type of passage are presented in Fig. 1. A t test revealed no significant difference
in listening times to the two passage types (7.0 s for both,
standard error of the difference .66), t(17) < 1. Only 8
out of 18 infants listened longer to passages containing
the actual bisyllabic words.
Contrary to our expectations, 10-month-old infants
familiarized with SW bisyllabic words listened no longer
to passages containing paper-type sentences than to passages containing pay#per-type sentences. This failure to
find the expected pattern of results may have been due to
several reasons.
First, infants may have failed to detect the familiarized word forms when they recurred in fluent speech.
Previous research has shown that infants are capable
of detecting SW words in fluent speech from 7.5 months
onwards (Jusczyk et al., 1999), but the long sentences
that we used here may have excessively taxed infantsO
processing resources, especially because targets always
appeared in sentence-medial positions. Second, it is possible that, for reasons extraneous to present concerns, in

Fig. 1. Results from Experiments 1 and 2: mean listening time
(seconds) for sentences containing the bisyllabic word (papersentences, dark-gray bars) and sentences in which it straddled a
phonological phrase boundary (pay#per-sentences, light-gray
bars). Error bars represent the standard error of the difference.

the absence of experience infants may have preferred the
sentences in which phonological phrase boundaries
intervened between the two syllables of the targets.
Familiarization with the targets may have served to
counteract this preference, resulting in a null effect.
Third, it is possible that the difference between the two
types of passages used here was not sufficiently salient
for 10-month-old infants to notice spontaneously. The
difference between sentence types was rather subtle,
since the same two syllables were present in all sentences
and only phrasal prosody distinguished between them.
Nevertheless, previous work suggests that 10-monthold infants are sensitive to phonological phrase boundaries (Gerken et al., 1994). To test whether the prosodic
distinctions in our stimuli were excessively subtle, we
replicated Experiment 1 with slightly older infants.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 aimed at replicating Experiment 1 with
13-month-old infants. By 13 months, infants typically
have receptive vocabularies of approximately 50 words
(Fenson et al., 1994) and are producing their first words.
These phenomena indicate that, by this age, infantsO segmentation abilities are more advanced.

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

Method
Participants
Infants approximately 13 months old were recruited
from information provided by the Rhode Island Department of Health. Twenty-three infants were tested to attain the final sample of 18 infants (mean age: 13 months
8 days, range: 12 months 24 days to 13 months 26 days).
Five infants were excluded for the following reasons:
technical problem (1), drowsiness (1), restlessness (3).
Experimental design, stimuli, apparatus, and procedure
The experimental design, stimuli, apparatus and procedure were identical to those used in Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
Mean listening times to each type of passage are presented in Fig. 1. A t test revealed that 13-month-old infants listened longer to passages containing paper-type
sentences that to passages containing pay#per-type sentences (8.0 s vs. 6.5 s, standard error of the difference .5),
t(17) = 2.9, p < .01. Fifteen of 18 infants listened longer
to passages with paper-type sentences (binomial p < .01).
A joint analysis of Experiments 1 and 2 revealed that
the performance of 13-month-olds (mean difference
score = 1.5 s) was significantly different from that of
10-month-olds (mean difference score = .0 s), t(35) = 1.8,
p < .05 (1-tail). Moreover, significantly more 13-montholds than 10-month-olds listened longer to paper-type
sentences, v2(1) = 5.90, p < .05.
Thirteen-month-old infants who were familiarized
with two bisyllabic words, paper and beacon, listened
longer to fluent passages with paper-type sentences than
to passages with pay#per-type sentences. This result
indicates that infants readily identified the familiarized
bisyllabic words when they were embedded within fluently spoken sentences, in keeping with previous studies
of infant word recognition (e.g., Jusczyk & Aslin, 1995;
Jusczyk et al., 1999). This also shows that the prosodic
marking of phonological phrases was sufficient for infants to exploit: infants apparently did not consider both
syllables of the bisyllables separated by a phonological
phrase boundary as good instances of the familiarized
bisyllabic words. Possibly, infants may also be able to
exploit simple word boundaries, even if these were not
marked through special allophonic, phonotactic, or lexical stress cues, but solely through prosodic cues (i.e.,
modifications of segments duration, pitch, and coarticulation similar to those marking phonological phrase
boundary, but of lesser magnitude). Even though the
present experimental design does not allow us to address
this question, recent experimental data by Johnson
(2003), suggests that this is the case at 12 months of
age. Johnson observed that infants familiarized with
passages containing both syllables of a SW word (e.g.,

555

OrubyO in Orue bequestO) did not listen longer to that SW
word during test, whereas they did when they had been
familiarized with passages containing the SW word itself
(no acoustic measurements are presented). Future work
should address the question of whether or not phonological phrase boundaries are used earlier by infants, or
more reliably, than simple word boundaries.
Taken together, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that infantsO ability to exploit phonological phrase
boundaries in segmenting words from fluent speech might
emerge sometime between 10 and 13 months (although it
remains possible that younger infants have difficulty in
detecting words in the middle of long sentences). Existing
work on infantsO sensitivity to phonological phrase
boundaries demonstrates that such boundaries are detected by nine months (Gerken et al., 1994); it is possible
that the ability to exploit such boundaries would appear
only after some lag. On the other hand, it is possible that
the results of Experiment 1 underestimate younger infantsO abilities. In the head-turn preference procedure,
the presence of a preference necessarily implies the ability
to discriminate; however the reverse is not true. As Aslin,
Pisoni, and Jusczyk (1983) have pointed out, in preference
techniques, what serves to maintain the infantOs interest in
the task is the stimuli themselves. Thus, a loss (or lack) of
interest in the stimuli may mask discriminative abilities.
In the conditioned head-turning technique (CHT),
infants are trained to turn when they hear a particular
auditory stimulus; if they turn at the appropriate time,
an interesting visual event occurs. Thus, in CHT, the
reinforcer and the stimuli are separate, so that results
(or lack of results) cannot be attributed to the intrinsic
interest of the stimuli. In addition, in CHT, infantsO responses are time-locked to particular stimuli, whereas
in HPP, the dependent measure (differences in looking
time) represents a global response to opposed stimulus
sets. These attributes suggest that CHT may provide a
more sensitive index of infantsO speech processing abilities. Accordingly, we set out to replicate Experiment 1
using CHT to see whether 10-month-olds are indeed
incapable of exploiting phonological phrase boundaries.
Before doing so, however, to establish comparability of
results obtained with HPP and CHT, we replicated
Experiment 2 using the latter procedure.

Experiment 3
In this experiment, we used a conditioned head-turn
procedure to provide an on-line measure of infantsO
word detection. Infants participated in two experimental
sessions. During an initial training session, infants
learned to turn their head upon hearing a particular
word. One group of infants was trained on a bisyllabic
target (either paper or beacon); a second group was
trained on a monosyllabic target that matched the first

556

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

syllable of one of the bisyllabic targets (either pay or
bee). During the test session, infants heard fluent sentences containing or not these targets (the same sentences that were used in Experiments 1 and 2). Some
sentences contained the bisyllabic target itself (paper or
beacon), while others contained both its syllables separated by a phonological phrase boundary (e.g., [the outstanding pay] [persuades him. . .]). We expected infants
trained on bisyllabic targets to turn their head more often when the targets did not straddle a phonological
phrase boundary than when they did.
Infants from the monosyllabic group were tested on
the same sentences, and were expected to show the reverse
pattern of results, turning more often for Opay#per-sentencesO that actually contain the target word pay than
for Opaper-sentencesO that contain a syllable homophonous to the target word. Note, however, that phonological phrase boundaries should be sufficient, though not
necessary, for locating word boundaries. Indeed, most
phonological phrases contain more than one word, so
that many word boundaries do not coincide with a phonological phrase boundary. Monosyllabic targets either
immediately preceded a phonological phrase boundary
(when the associated bisyllable straddled the boundary,
O. . .pay] [persuades. . .]O) or constituted one syllable of a
continuing prosodic group (. . .paper. . .). Although the
presence of a phonological phrase boundary located just
after the targets might aid infants in segmenting the target
from the sentences, the absence of such a boundary
should not preclude them from doing so. We therefore expected a smaller difference between sentence types for infants trained on monosyllabic targets.
Method
Participants
Infants approximately 12.5 months old were recruited
from information provided by the Rhode Island Department of Health. In the bisyllabic target group, 49 infants
were tested to attain the final sample of 24 infants (mean
age at the first session: 12 months 6 days, range: 11
months 24 days to 12 months 22 days); in the monosyllabic target group, 30 infants were tested to attain the final sample of 16 infants (mean age at the first session: 12
months 9 days, range: 11 months 18 days to 12 months 28
days). Infants were excluded for the following reasons:
technical problems (3), failure to meet the predetermined
training criterion within 30 trials in the initial session (9),
difficulties scheduling the subsequent testing session
within a 3-10 days period (6), crying or restlessness during training (14) or during test (7).
Stimuli
The same stimuli as in Experiments 1 and 2 served for
this experiment. Stimuli for the first session were isolated
words: tokens of paper and beacon for the bisyllabic

group, and tokens of pay and bee for the monosyllabic
group (monosyllabic targets were recorded at the same
time as bisyllabic targets). The stimuli for the test session
were fluent sentences, some containing the bisyllabic
word itself (e.g., O..paper. . .O)while others contained both
syllables of this word separated by a phonological
phrase boundary (e.g., [the outstanding pay] [persuades
him. . .]). The full sets of 12 sentence pairs (for both paper and beacon) were used in this experiment. In addition, 26 distractor sentences that did not contain either
the target words or their constituent syllables were included. These were matched with the test sentences in
mean number of syllables, and had been recorded at
the same time as the test sentences. As mentioned above,
five pay#per-type sentences exhibited short pauses between the crucial words; these pauses were not excised
from the stimuli used here.
Apparatus
Infants were tested in a sound-treated laboratory
room. An experimenter in an adjoining room monitored
the infantOs behavior via a Panasonic closed circuit television (CCTV) system. Trial duration, stimulus presentation, and delivery of reinforcement were controlled
by custom designed software running on a PC compatible equipped with a Zefiro acoustics ZA-2 sound board.
Stimuli were presented through an Onkyo P-301 pre-amplifier connected to an Onkyo M-504 amplifier and an
Electrovoice Sentry 100A loudspeaker located in the
testing room with the infant.
Two smoked Plexiglas boxes containing mechanical
toys that provided reinforcement were located under
the loudspeaker. Four TV screens, playing Dumbo cartoons and situated under the Plexiglas boxes could also
provide reinforcement when the child was afraid or
bored with the mechanical toys.
Procedure
The experiment consisted of three main phases: shaping, criterion, and test. The shaping and criterion phases
were completed in an initial training session; the test
phase was completed during a second session. The sessions were separated by a maximum of 10 days.
Throughout both sessions, infants were seated on
their parentsO laps at a small table. An assistant seated
directly across from the infant maintained the infantOs
attention at midline by displaying and manipulating an
assortment of toys. A loudspeaker and the motorized
animals that provided reinforcement were located 90
from midline on the infantOs left, about 1.5 m away; a video camera was located directly above the loudspeaker.
Another experimenter in the control room observed the
infant on a video monitor and judged whether the infant
looked into the camera. Throughout all sessions, parent,
assistant and experimenter listened to music over noisecancellation headphones.

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

The outside experimenter initiated trials by pressing a
button when infantsO attention was focused at midline.
When the infant turned its head toward the loudspeaker,
the outside experimenter pressed another button to signal a head-turn. The experimenter served as sole judge
of whether the infant turned its head during trials, and
the computer delivered reinforcement if it was an appropriate head-turn (i.e., to a target word).
The Training Session comprised the Shaping and the
Criterion phases. During this session, infants heard a
background word which was played continuously, presented at a comfortable listening level (68 dB SPL-b) with
1000 ms inter-stimulus interval, and occasionally replaced by three repetitions of the target word, allowing
for a response window of 4 s. Infants were taught to turn
their head toward the loudspeaker whenever they heard
the target word. Infants from the bisyllabic group heard
the words paper and beacon and infants from the monosyllabic group heard the words pay and bee. For each infant, one of the words served as target and the other one
as background (half the infants from the bisyllabic group
heard paper as target and the other half heard beacon as
target; similarly, half the infants from the monosyllabic
group heard pay as target and the other half heard bee
as target). For example, if an infant was taught to turn
its head for paper, the background word beacon was
played continuously and replaced by three repetitions
of the target word paper when a trial occurred. Only
head-turns occurring while the target word was being
played were reinforced. During the shaping phase, all trials were change trials. Initially, the target word was presented at a level 12 dB greater than the background word
to elicit orienting head-turns. The intensity difference between target and background words was decreased by
4 dB whenever the infant responded correctly to a change
trial, until both stimuli were presented at equal intensity
levels. When the infant failed to turn on three consecutive
trials, the sound level increased by 4 dB. The shaping
phase continued until 30 trials were completed (in this
case, the experiment was terminated) or until the infant
turned its head on two consecutive trials with the target
sound level at the background level.
At this point, the Criterion phase (second phase of
the Training Session) began. This phase was similar to
the Shaping phase, except that trials were either change
trials or no-change trials (50% of each, randomly selected by the computer). Infants were tested until they
had reached the predetermined criterion of responding
correctly on seven out of eight consecutive trials (by
turning on change trials and not turning on no-change
trials). When an infant failed on three consecutive trials
(change and no-change trials), retraining trials were
introduced, following the same schedule as during Shaping, until the infant turned correctly on two consecutive
trials with equal intensity. Infants not reaching criterion
within 40 trials were excluded from further participa-

557

tion; infants who reached criterion returned for the test
session, 3-10 days later.
The Testing Session began with a review phase,
including a maximum of ten trials and requiring four
head-turns: the background and the target words were
presented sentence-finally in short sentences (e.g., ``Look
at the beacon!''). Initially, the intensity of the target
words within the sentences was raised by 12 dB; this
was gradually lowered, following each head-turn, until
it was equal to the background intensity level. Following
this, the test phase began. Infants heard 24 experimental
sentences (either the paper and pay#per sentences, or the
beacon and bee#con sentences, depending on the target
word on which the infant was trained) and 26 distractor
sentences, presented in random order, for a 50-trial session. Infants were reinforced when they turned within a
period of 3 s beginning with the onset of the target word,
and reinforcement was presented for 2.5 s. During the
test phase, review trials were presented when infants
failed to turn on three target trials, or after a break. Review trials were presented until the infant turned at least
twice (once with a sound level 4 dB greater than background, and once at the same level).
During the test session, infants were reinforced when
they turned their head to the target word: thus, infants
from the bisyllabic group who were trained with the
word paper were reinforced when they turned for paper
but not when they turned for pay#per, while infants
from the monosyllabic group who were trained with
pay were reinforced for pay#per but not for paper.
Results and discussion
An ANOVA was conducted on the percentages of
head-turns during target experimental sentences, with
participants as the random variable. There were two between-subjects factors, Group (bisyllabic vs. monosyllabic) and Material (counterbalancing factor: beacon/bee
vs. paper/pay), as well as one within-subject factor, Condition (no-boundary vs. boundary). The ANOVA revealed
a main effect of Group, F(1, 36) = 13.3, p < .001, as well as
a main effect of Condition, F(1, 36) = 35.1, p < .001. Crucially, there was a significant cross-over interaction between Group and Condition, F(1, 36) = 165, p < .001.
This interaction derived from the fact that infants in the
bisyllabic group turned more often in the no-boundary
than in the boundary condition (80.6% vs. 25.1%),
F(1, 22) = 182, p < .001, whereas infants in the monosyllabic group showed the reverse pattern (48.6% vs.
81.8%), F(1, 14) = 33.1, p < .001. The counterbalancing
factor Material showed no main effect and did not interact
with any of the other factors (see Fig. 2).
We also computed an A0 (non-parametric version of
the d0 ) for each infant, using the number of hits, misses,
false alarms, and correct rejections (Grier, 1971). For infants in the bisyllabic group, the mean A0 was .85

558

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

Fig. 2. Results from Experiment 3: percentage of head-turns
for 12.5-month-old infants in the bisyllabic group (left-hand
bars, target word, e.g., paper) and in the monosyllabic group
(right-hand bars, target word, e.g., pay). Infants heard sentences containing the bisyllabic word (paper-sentences, darkgray bars) and sentences in which it straddled a phonological
phrase boundary (pay#per-sentences, light-gray bars).

(SE = .02), a value which was significantly higher than .5,
the chance level, t(23) = 16.7, p < .001. For infants in the
monosyllabic group the mean A0 was somewhat lower
(which stems from the fact that the number of false
alarms was higher, that is head-turns to paper when
pay was the target) with a mean of .74 (SE = .05) but nevertheless significantly above chance, t(15) = 4.7, p < .001.
Twelve-and-a-half-month-old infants who were
trained to detect a bisyllabic target word turned significantly more often when they heard the target word than
when they heard its constituent syllables separated by a
phonological phrase boundary. In contrast, infants who
were trained to detect a monosyllabic word turned significantly more often for sentences containing the monosyllabic target word itself than when it was a part of a word.
Importantly, the behavior of both groups was significantly different: There was a significant interaction between Group and Condition. This significant interaction
means that infants from the bisyllabic group did not respond more often to paper sentences than to pay#per sentences because of some uncontrolled properties of paper
sentences (which would trigger higher response rates),
but rather because the phonological phrase boundary
effectively reduced infantsO detection of paper in pay#per
sentences. Thus, the presence or absence of a phonological
phrase boundary constrained infantsO lexical access.
Note that we strongly predicted a difference between
sentence types for infants in the bisyllabic group, while

we expected a smaller difference in the other direction
for infants in the monosyllabic group: this is the pattern
of results that we observed. Since a phonological phrase
boundary always signals a word boundary, it should be
impossible (or, very unlikely) to access a ``word'' that
straddles a phonological phrase boundary. In contrast,
the absence of a phonological phrase boundary does
not imply the absence of a word boundary: most phonological phrases contain more than one word and many
word boundaries do not coincide with phonological
phrase boundaries. As a consequence, we strongly expected infants trained on paper to turn their head significantly more often for paper sentences than for pay#per
sentences: and we observed a 55.5% difference between
conditions. The prediction was less strong for infants
trained on pay, since this syllable was present within a
phonological phrase in both types of sentences. The
advantage for pay#per sentences was that the target
word was followed by a phonological phrase boundary,
which may make it easier to segment. Congruent with
our expectations, we observed a 33.2% difference between conditions for infants in the monosyllabic group,
which is significantly smaller than the 55.5% observed
for infants in the bisyllabic group, F(1, 36) = 10.4,
p < .01 (another way of testing this is by comparing
the A0 for both groups, .85 for the bisyllabic group vs.
.74 for the monosyllabic group, t(39) = 2.4, p < .02).
We also evaluated whether the CHT word-detection
method may provide individual results. As mentioned
above, an A0 was computed for each infant (Grier,
1971). To determine what A0 score measured performance that was significantly above chance, we conducted a Monte Carlo simulation. One million 24-trial
(half target, half control) sequences were generated
based on random responding, an A0 score was computed
for each, and the distribution of obtained A0 scores was
evaluated. Our simulation showed that A0 scores of .755
or greater occurred by chance in less that five percent of
the sequences. We focused this analysis on infants from
the bisyllabic group, since in this group we had a clear
prediction that infants should orient to paper-type sentences but not to pay#per-type sentences. We observed
that 20 out of 24 infants performed significantly above
chance (23 out of 24 infants showed a difference in response rate in the expected direction and had an A0
above .5, one had a difference of 0 exactly and therefore
an A0 of .5). It thus appears that the word-detection
technique used in Experiment 3 is very reliable: a vast
majority of infants demonstrated their ability to extract
bisyllabic words from continuous speech and to exploit
phonological phrase boundaries.
These results confirm and extend those of Experiment 2: they show that 12.5-month-old infants recognize
a bisyllabic SW word embedded in sentences and that
they can distinguish such a target from both its constituent syllables separated by a phonological phrase

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

boundary. In addition, the experimental design with two
groups of infants (bisyllabic and monosyllabic) ensures
that infantsO response pattern cannot be due to intrinsic
properties of experimental sentences (a feature that was
absent from Experiment 2). Thus, we confirm the conclusion that twelve-and-a-half-month-old infants can exploit the presence of phonological phrase boundaries to
infer the presence of word boundaries and therefore to
extract words from fluent speech.

Experiment 4
Experiments 2 and 3 both demonstrated that
12.5-month-old infants exploit prosodic boundaries to
constrain lexical access. Our hypothesis was thus fully
confirmed with this age group. In Experiment 1, in contrast, 10-month-old infants did not show any preference
for any type of sentence. As we argued above, the CHT
word-detection technique may be a more sensitive technique than the head-turn preference procedure to test infantsO word recognition abilities. Our next step, therefore,
was to replicate Experiment 3 with 10-month-old infants.
Method
Participants
Infants approximately 10 months old were recruited
from information provided by the Rhode Island Department of Health. There were two groups of infants. In the
bisyllabic condition, 52 infants were tested to attain the
final sample of 24 infants (mean age at the first session: 9
months 30 days, range: 9 months 21 days to 10 months
10 days), and in the monosyllabic condition, 27 infants
to attain the final sample of 16 infants (mean age at
the first session: 10 months 4 days, range: 9 months 26
days to 10 months 12 days). Thirty-nine infants were excluded for the following reasons: difficulties scheduling
the subsequent testing session within a 3-10 days period
(5), technical problems (5), failure to meet the predetermined training criterion within 30 trials in the initial session (14), crying or restlessness during training (14) or
during test (7).

559

there was a significant interaction between Group and
Condition, F(1, 36) = 33.6, p < .001. This interaction derived from the fact that infants from the bisyllabic group
turned their head more often in the no-boundary than in
the boundary condition (48.6% vs. 15%), F(1, 22) = 48.7,
p < .001, whereas infants from the monosyllabic group
showed a tendency in the reverse direction (41.6% vs.
48.5%), F(1, 14) = 2.3, p > .1. The counterbalancing factor Material showed no main effect and did not interact
with any of the other factors (see Fig. 3).
As before, we also computed an A0 for each infant
(Grier, 1971). For infants in the bisyllabic group, the
mean A0 was .74 (SE = .04), a value which was significantly higher than .5, the chance level, t(23) = 5.8,
p < .001. For infants in the monosyllabic group the
mean A0 was .53 (SE = .05) and not significantly different from chance, t(15) < 1.
As in Experiment 3, 10-month-old infants who were
trained to respond to a bisyllabic target word turned
their head significantly more often when they heard
the target word itself than when they heard its constituent syllables separated by a phonological phrase boundary. Ten-month-old infants who were trained to respond
to a monosyllabic word turned their head slightly more
often for sentences containing the monosyllabic target
word than when it was a part of a word but, unlike in
Experiment 3, this difference did not reach significance.
These results show that 10-month-old infants, like
12.5-month-old infants, can exploit the presence of

Experimental design, stimuli, apparatus, and procedure
The experimental design, stimuli, apparatus, and procedure were identical to those used in Experiment 3.
Results and discussion
A 2 * 2 * 2 Group by Material by Condition ANOVA was conducted on the percentage of head-turns during target experimental sentences, with participants as
the random variable. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of Group, F(1, 36) = 13.7, p < .001 as well as a main
effect of Condition, F(1, 36) = 25.9, p < .001. Crucially,

Fig. 3. Results from Experiment 4: percentage of head-turns
for 10-month-old infants in the bisyllabic group (left-hand bars,
target word paper) and in the monosyllabic group (right-hand
bars, target word pay). Infants heard sentences containing the
bisyllabic word (paper-sentences, dark-gray bars) and sentences
in which it straddled a phonological phrase boundary (pay#persentences, light-gray bars).

560

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

phonological phrase boundaries to infer the presence of
word boundaries and therefore to extract words from
fluent speech. Again, we observed a greater difference
between sentence types for infants from the bisyllabic
group (33.6%) relative to infants from the monosyllabic
group (6.9% in the other direction). This suggests that
the presence of a phonological phrase boundary drastically reduces the activation of words that straddle it,
while the absence of a phonological phrase boundary
does not imply the absence of a word boundary.
We evaluated whether the CHT word-detection method provides individual results at 10 months of age, again
focusing the analysis on infants from the bisyllabic group,
where we had a clear prediction that infants should orient
to paper-type sentences but not to pay#per-type sentences. We observed that 17 out of 24 infants of 10 months
had an A0 above .755, and therefore performed significantly above chance (21 out of 24 infants showed a difference in response rate in the expected direction, 3 showed a
difference in the reverse direction).
A comparison between Experiments 3 and 4 revealed
that 13-month-old infants performed better than 10month-olds: The hit rate was higher for older infants,
both for bisyllabic target words (80.6% for 12.5-montholds vs. 48.6% for 10-month-olds), F(1, 44) = 47.7,
p < .001 in a joint ANOVA, and for monosyllabic target
words (81.8% vs. 48.5%), F(1, 28) = 30.1, p < .001.2
There was also a significant three-way interaction be2
The false alarm rate was also greater for older infants,
significantly so in the bisyllabic group only (25% vs. 15%,
t(46) = 2.5, p < .02 for the bisyllabic groups; 48.5% vs. 41.5%,
t(30) = 1.5, p = .15 for the monosyllabic groups). This 10%
increase in the false-alarm rate between 10 and 12.5 months of
age (in the bisyllabic group) is hard to interpret because infants
may turn their head in this condition for three independent
reasons: (1) by chance; (2) because the first syllable of ``paper''
was heard (similarity with the target); and (3) because they
failed to perceive/exploit the phonological phrase boundary
between ``pay'' and the following verb. As a consequence, the
difference between 12.5- and 10-month-olds may be due to three
reasons: (1) An increase in by-chance responses, which may be
due to a greater restlessness in the older infants, who seem to
display a greater tendency to check what happens in the
reinforcement area; (2) an increase in infantsO willingness to
identify words even in the presence of incomplete information;
or (3) a greater tendency for older infants to overlook the
phonological phrase boundary, and think that they heard
``paper'' upon hearing ``pay#per.'' The last two interpretations
are not very plausible given that older infants perform better in
the word-detection task. However, in order to disentangle these
interpretations, we need to incorporate some additional conditions in future experiments: a ``baseline false alarm'' condition
to measure by-chance head-turns to words which are completely different from the target word ``paper'' (e.g., ``banjo'');
and a ``word-beginning catch trial'' condition to measure
spurious head-turns to bisyllabic words starting with ``pay''
(e.g. ``payment'').

tween Age, Condition, and Group, indicating that older
infants performed significantly better than younger infants, F(1, 72) = 24.2, p < .001; in other words, the crucial
Condition by Group interaction, showing that infants
exploited prosodic information to constrain lexical access, was of greater magnitude for older than for younger
infants. In addition, a comparison of mean A0 revealed
significantly better performance for older infants than
for younger infants (.85 vs. .74, t(47) = 2.5, p < .02, for
the bisyllabic groups; .74 vs. .53, t(31) = 2.9, p < .01,
for the monosyllabic groups). These analyses indicate
continuing improvement in segmentation ability between
the ages of 10 and 12.5 months.
The results of Experiment 4 thus show that 10month-old infants, just like 13-month-olds, are already
able to exploit phonological phrase boundaries to infer
word boundaries. This result contrasts with what we observed in Experiment 1. This discrepancy must come
from the difference in experimental techniques, since
we used the very same stimuli in both experiments.
Two possibilities exist: either the CHT technique as we
used it in Experiment 4 is more sensitive than the HPP
technique as we used it in Experiment 1; Or, some feature of the CHT technique used in Experiment 4 lead
us to overestimate infantsO performance at this age.
One obvious candidate is that infants in the CHT task
are reinforced for turning their head towards the target
word. Since reinforcement must be continued throughout the procedure, this raises the question of what
should be reinforced during the test trials (issues of
selective reinforcement do not arise in HPP). We chose
to administer reinforcement only for target-containing
sentences, and not for foil-containing sentences. As a result, infants might have learned during the test phase
which sentences they had to respond to and which sentences they should not respond to. If this were the case,
infantsO performance should improve as the test phase
unfolds, either through an increase in hit rate, a decrease
in false alarm rate, or both.
To test these predictions, we conducted split-third
analyses of hit rate, false alarm rate, and hit rate minus
false alarm rate (since there were 24 test trials, split-third
analyses were computed on blocks of 8 trials each). The
data are shown in Table 2.
Examination of the 10-month-old data shows no significant difference across the three thirds of the experiment, whether on hit rate, false alarm rate, or the
difference between them (all three F(2, 44) < 1). In fact,
performance is remarkably stable throughout the experiment. Looking at these data a bit differently, there are
significant differences between hits and false alarms in
all three thirds of the test sessions (all three p < .001).
Examination of the 13-month-old data shows the same
results (no significant difference across the three thirds
of the experiment, all three F(2, 44) < 1), except that
the hit rate tends to decline (non-significantly) across

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

561

Table 2
Split-third analysis of Experiments 3 and 4, bisyllabic groups: percent hits, percent false alarms, and difference between them are shown
for each third of the test session
10-month-old-infants (Experiment 4)

1st Third

2nd Third

3rd Third

Total

% Hits (SE)
% False Alarms (SE)
%H  %FA
t(23)

48.4 (4.8)
16.0 (4.2)
32.4*
4.5

45.1 (5.7)
14.4 (4.1)
30.7*
5.5

50.6 (5.6)
14.4 (4.6)
36.2*
4.6

48.6 (3.2)
15.1 (3.0)
33.5*
7.2

13-month-old-infants (Experiment 3)

1st Third

2nd Third

3rd Third

Total

% Hits (SE)
% False Alarms (SE)
%H  %FA
t(23)

84.9 (4.7)
21.3 (4.6)
63.6*
10.9

81.1 (4.1)
26.9 (4.4)
54.2*
9.0

74.2 (5.8)
21.0 (4.0)
53.2*
7.3

80.6 (3.3)
25.5 (2.7)
55.1*
13.5

InfantsO performance is significantly better than chance in each third of the experiment (the difference between %Hits and %False
Alarms is significantly greater than 0), and it does not improve over time.
*
p < .001.

the test session for the older infants, probably due to
boredom with the task.
There is thus no indication that selective reinforcement of target-containing trials exerts even marginal effects on the results. There is, however, one additional
possibility: infants might learn on the basis of one or
two non-reinforced false alarm trials not to turn to bee#con or pay#per. This possibility seems highly unlikely for
two reasons. First, half of the 10-month-olds did not
false-alarm at all during the first third of the experiment;
these 12 infants nevertheless averaged a hit rate of 54%
(SE = 6.7). It is thus not the case that at least one false
alarm is necessary for infants to behave better than
chance. Second, in other studies with conditioned headturning, Morgan (1998) has found that high rates of false
alarms may be maintained in the presence of selective
reinforcement. In these studies, 13- and 14-month-olds
were trained on monosyllables and tested on sentences
that contained either the target form (e.g., /rIn/), an ``inflected'' version of the target form (plural, /rInz/), or a
variant of the target form that cannot be morphologically linked to it (/rIns/). Only responses to the target
form were reinforced. Nevertheless, infants showed high
rates of false alarms to the ``inflected'' version (/rInz/),
and these rates were maintained across the test session.
Overall, there is no indication that infantsO performance in CHT experiments was artificially boosted up
by selective reinforcement of target-bearing sentences.
It thus seems that CHT was more sensitive than HPP,
at least when used with the experimental designs that
we selected.

phonological phrase boundaries to extract words from
whole sentences. Experiments 1 and 2 relied on the
head-turn preference procedure, while Experiments 3
and 4 relied on a variant of the conditioned head-turning
technique. With both experimental techniques, 13month-old infants showed a good ability to interpret
phonological phrase boundaries as natural word boundaries: They did not access lexical items comprising pairs
of syllables that spanned such a boundary (Experiments
2 and 3). For 10-month-old infants, the conditioned
head-turn procedure indicated that they were also able
to exploit phonological phrase boundaries to constrain
lexical access (even though their overall performance
was significantly worse than that of 13-month-old infants). In the head-turn preference procedure, however,
they did not behave as if they spontaneously noticed
the difference between sentence types (Experiment 1).
In all four experiments, word-level cues to word
boundaries were identical in both experimental conditions: The same syllables occurred adjacently in the same
order (100% transitional probability between pay and
per or bee and con) and they always exhibited a SW pattern. These two powerful word-boundary cues lent
strong cohesiveness to the pay and per (or bee and
con) syllables in our sentences. Nevertheless, when a
phonological boundary intervened between the syllables,
infants typically did not regard these pairs of syllables as
plausible word candidates. These results strongly suggest
that lexical access processes occur within the domain of
phonological phrases.
Methodological considerations

General discussion
The experiments reported in this paper suggest that
both 10- and 13-month-old infants are able to exploit

Below, we consider the theoretical implications of
our results. First, however, we wish to discuss methodological aspects of the experimental techniques that we
used and compare their advantages and disadvantages.

562

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

The Head-turn Preference Procedure, one variant of
which was used in Experiments 1 and 2, is at present
the predominant technique used in studies of infant
speech processing. There are several reasons for this:
HPP is relatively easy to administer, can be used with a
wide range of ages, and usually has low levels of subject
loss (for example, in 11 studies with 7.5-month-olds in
Jusczyk et al., 1999; subject loss averaged 21%, whereas
in four studies with 10.5-month-olds, it averaged 16%).
The conditioned head-turn word-detection technique
used in Experiments 3 and 4 provides a valuable supplement to HPP. First, the word-detection technique yields
quantitative results, so that it is well suited to the finegrained comparison of multiple groups of infants. For
example, comparison of Experiments 3 and 4 showed a
significant improvement in word-detection rate between
10- and 12.5-month-old infants (from about 50 to 80%
hit rate), as well as a significant improvement in the ability to exploit phrasal prosody to constrain lexical access
(as evidenced by the significant 3-way interaction between age, condition, and group).
Second, word-detection is an on-line method in
which the infantsO responses are time-locked to the
occurrence of particular stimulus events. This affords
direct measurement of infantsO speech processing.
Although we did not do so here, it is possible to measure
response latencies, which may be as informative as response rates (Morgan, 1994, 1996; Swingley & Fernald,
2002; Swingley, Pinto, & Fernald, 1999). Item-by-item
results may allow experimenters to correlate particular
cues in the stimuli with infantsO response patterns. Because individual subjects contribute multiple data
points, several factors may be manipulated within subjects. Moreover, multiple data points for each infant allowed us to compute individual statistics; for example, in
the bisyllabic group in Experiment 3 we observed that 20
out of 24 infants performed better than chance.
To be sure, the word-detection technique is not without drawbacks. It is a fairly difficult procedure to administer. InfantsO attention is intentionally divided between
toys shown at midline and speech stimuli presented to
one side; maintaining an appropriate balance requires
exquisite sensitivity and coordination between experimenters. Levels of subject loss are higher than in HPP:
in Experiments 3 and 4, loss averaged about 50%. Since
most subjects were lost either during the first session or
between sessions, it is not the case that the procedure OselectedO those infants who were able to succeed in the test
phase (which might have led to underestimating the age
at which the average infant is able to perform the task).
However, the first session may well have served to OselectO infants who were willing to actively participate in
a language-related experiment. It may be that these infants paid more attention to the speech stimuli delivered
during the experiment than the average infant involved
in an HPP experiment (where a lesser level of attention

suffices to complete the experiment). This may be one
of the reasons why CHT appeared to be more sensitive
than HPP in our experiments.
In summary, both HPP and the CHT word-detection
technique have advantages and disadvantages. Together, they yield a stronger pattern of results than either
could alone. However, as we ask increasingly sophisticated questions about infantsO spoken language processing, it will become more and more important to compare
findings to those in the extensive existing literature on
adult spoken word recognition. To do so, we must have
comparable measures of behavior. The CHT word-detection paradigm is one step in this direction, since it furnishes data comparable to word monitoring in adults
(see Christophe et al., in press). Another promising avenue of research comes from recent work showing that
eye-tracking methods, which have been used in studies
of adult language processing (e.g., Allopenna et al.,
1998; Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), may be adapted for use in referential tasks
with toddlers and older infants (e.g., Fernald, Pinto,
Swingley, Weinberg, & McRoberts, 1998; Swingley &
Aslin, 2000). Such a technique, if tailored for younger
infants in non-referential tasks, has the potential to combine the strengths of both HPP and CHT.
Theoretical implications: lexical access, universality, and
acquisition of syntax
As noted earlier, our results show that lexical access
processes occur within the domain of phonological
phrases. Let us spell out the implications of this conclusion for models of lexical access. Segmentation procedures can be sorted into two main categories: on the
one hand, ``lexical segmentation'' strategies, in which
segmentation is a by-product of word recognition (a
strategy called ``serendipitous segmentation'' by Cutler,
1990); on the other hand, ``prelexical segmentation''
strategies exploit bottom-up cues (such as prosodic
boundaries, allophonic or lexical stress cues, as reviewed
in Introduction) that are extracted from the speech signal without reference to lexical items. In terms of lexical
acquisition, ``lexical segmentation'' strategies require initial reliance on isolated lexical items, and continuing
reliance on known lexical items, as is the case for instance in the INCDROP model proposed by Brent and
Siskind (2001). In contrast, ``prelexical segmentation''
strategies can be generally exploited by infants as soon
as they have learned the relevant properties of some
words and their boundaries in their native language (it
has often been proposed that infants first rely on utterance boundaries, which are clearly marked by silent
pauses, to learn about these properties). In adults, there
is good experimental evidence that both types of strategies are exploited, and it makes sense to think that they
are both exploited in infants as well (recent evidence

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

indicates that early use of lexical segmentation may be
restricted to a handful of highly familiar items, such as
the infantOs own name, see Rathbun, Bortfeld, Morgan,
& Golinkoff, 2002).
The question arises as to the type of relationship between these two strategies in the course of lexical access.
Two opposing views may be spelled out: on the one
hand, lexical segmentation could be the main process,
with prelexical segmentation cues being called upon only
when lexical segmentation failed. In that view, prelexical
segmentation would be used initially only for long utterances that do not contain known lexical items, and
would be used less and less as children grow up and increase their lexicons. On the other hand, prelexical segmentation cues may be computed at the same time as
lexical recognition takes place, and directly influence lexical activation and recognition. The relative influence of
prelexical segmentation relative to lexical segmentation
would depend on the strength of the prelexical cues
(highly predictive of a word boundary or not) as well
as on the strength of the lexical items involved (wellknown and frequent lexical item or not). In our experiments, we used an experimental design in which both
the prelexical and the lexical segmentation cues were
very powerful: thus, words should not straddle phonological phrase boundaries, and we used well-marked
phonological phrase boundaries. But also, the target
word (either paper or beacon) had been presented many
times in the experimental setup: between 60 and 200 repetitions in the word-detection technique, and infants
were reinforced for responding to the target word;
roughly 30 repetitions for the head-turn preference procedure. The target word was thus in a good position to
ensure adequate lexical segmentation. Still, in these conditions, we found that infants typically did not access the
target word when its syllables straddled a phonological
phrase boundary. It thus seems that at least in some instances, purely bottom-up cues to segmentation, such as
those provided by phrasal prosody, may suffice to constrain lexical access.
Second, we may wonder to what extent our results
would generalize to other languages. They have been obtained with American infants listening to American sentences. Some recent adult experiments suggest that they
might also obtain in French. Christophe et al. (in revision) showed that phonological phrase boundaries constrain on-line lexical access in French adults listening
to French sentences that either did or did not contain
a local lexical ambiguity, with a design exactly parallel
to the one used in the present studies. Similarly, in Korean, Choi and Mazuka (2003) observed that both 3year-old and adults were able to use phonological phrase
boundaries to resolve lexical ambiguities (using an offline task). In addition, phonological phrases are thought
to exist in all languages of the world (Nespor & Vogel,
1986; Selkirk, 1984), and prosodic cues to phonological

563

phrases have been measured in several unrelated languages (e.g., Barbosa, 2002 for Brazilian Portuguese;
de Pijper & Sanderman, 1994 for Dutch; Fisher & Tokura, 1996 for Japanese; Rietveld, 1980 for French; and
Wightman et al., 1992 for English). As a result, phonological phrases are potentially available universally for
lexical acquisition, even though the exploitation of
boundary cues may be language-specific.
Third, phonological phrase boundaries may provide
some information as to the syntactic structure of sentences (Gerken et al., 1994; Morgan, 1986). It has often
been claimed that prosodic structure may help bootstrap
syntactic acquisition (Gleitman & Wanner, 1982; HirshPasek et al., 1987; Jusczyk, 1997; Morgan & Demuth,
1996; Nespor, Guasti, & Christophe, 1996). Phonological phrase boundaries systematically coincide with
boundaries of syntactic constituents (even though the reverse is not true, see Introduction); as a result, some syntactic constituents are prosodically marked.
This information can be exploited in two different
ways: on the one hand, to constrain distributional analyses of the speech input. Thus, function words and morphemes tend to occur at the edges of syntactic phrases,
and therefore also at the edges of phonological phrases:
their position within phonological phrases may thus be
one of the cues that distinguish function words from
content words (Morgan, Shi, & Allopenna, 1996; Shi
et al., 1998). Infants could compile a list of the syllables
that occur at the beginning and end of prosodic
units, storing the most frequent syllables in a separate
list, and subsequently identifying these syllables as
closed-class items when encountered at the borders of
a prosodic unit (see Shady, 1996; and Shafer, Shucard,
Shucard, & Gerken, 1998; for evidence that 11-monthold English infants already know some of the function
words of English). As soon as a list of function words
is established, infants could strip off those very frequent
syllables when encountered at the borders of prosodic
units and identify the rest of the string as a content word
(``function word-stripping'' strategy).
On the other hand, phonological phrase boundaries
may also be exploited directly by infants to constrain
on-line syntactic analysis. Prosody may be a cue to syntactic structure (Gerken et al., 1994; Morgan, 1986), since
phonological phrase boundaries coincide with syntactic
boundaries.3 Note that prosody in itself provides no cue
to the labeling of constituents (into, e.g., Noun Phrase,
Verb Phrase, etc.). However, prosodic information may

3
Some adult experiments show that intonational phrase
boundaries are exploited on-line to resolve temporary syntactic
ambiguities (see e.g., Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999; Schepman &
Rodway, 2000). Recent experimental evidence suggests that
phonological phrase boundaries may also be exploited by adults
to constrain syntactic analysis (Millotte & Christophe, 2003).

564

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

be used in conjunction with function words to perform an
initial segmentation and labeling of sentences into syntactic constituents. Thus, the sentence ``the little boy is running fast'' may be initially perceived as [the xxx]NP [is
xxx]VP, where the boundaries are given by prosody and
the labeling is given by the function words (assuming infants managed to learn broad categories of function
words, see Hohle, Weissenborn, Kiefer, Schulz, & Schmitz, 2004, for evidence at 16 months in German). Simultaneous access to both function words and phonological
phrase boundaries may thus allow young children to start
constructing rough syntactic analyses for the sentences
they hear, even before they know the meaning of many
content words (Christophe, Guasti, Nespor, Dupoux, &
van Ooyen, 1997). In fact, such a skeleton of a syntactic
structure may be what is needed to help in learning the
meaning of words (Gleitman, 1990).

Conclusion
In this article, we presented converging evidence from
two experimental techniques showing that American infants as young as 10 months of age spontaneously interpret well-marked phonological phrase boundaries as
word boundaries. This indicates that word-finding processes apply primarily within the domain of phonological phrases and, hence, that lexical segmentation must
be constrained by at least some bottom-up, prelexical
cues. Infants integrate word-boundary cues with phrase
boundary cues by subordinating the former to the latter:
hierarchical prosodic structure governs processing by infants as well as adults.

Acknowledgments
The work reported in this paper was made possible
by a ``poste dOaccueil INSERM'' to AG (1998-2001), a
grant from the National Institute of Health (5 RO1
HD32005) to JLM, as well as a grant from the ``Convention CNRS GIS 97/C/28,'' the ``Convention CNRS GIS
99N35/0008,'' and the ``Action Concertee Incitative
Cognitique'' from the French Ministry of Research to
the LSCP. We thank Nancy Allard, Karen Rathbun,
and Crystal Wilson for their assistance in testing infants,
and Sven Mattys, James McQueen, and two anonymous
reviewers for comments on an earlier version.

Appendix. Experimental material
Pairs of sentences with paper:
1. The outstanding pay persuades him to go to France.
The scandalous paper sways him to tell the truth.

2. My friend says that smaller pay perpetuates unhappiness.
The girl found the meager paper petulant and annoying.
3. The wealthy tycoon with all the pay pursued his rivals.
The young man who often reads the paper sued the lady.
4. The girl with piles of pay perfumed the smelly house.
The burning piles of paper fumed through every room.
5. After he was promoted, his increased pay permuted into
that of his bosses.
Although he was conservative, his revised paper muted the
reply of his colleagues.
6. The abrupt increase in pay pertained to his fine work.
The quite sudden rise in paper tainted her good mood.
7. The man with the least pay perspires constantly.
The church with the most paper spires is heavenly.
8. The butler with the highest pay performs the most.
The college with the biggest paper forms is best.
9. She thought the beautiful pay permitted all the dolls.
She put the beautiful paper mittens on the doll.
10. Such little pay perturbed her big family.
The tiny paper turban flew off the manOs head.
11. Our friend worked consistently but her awful pay perplexed us.
We built a model hockey stadium and used paper
Plexiglas.
12. A pumpkin farmer with lots of pay perceives his improving yields.
A coffee filter is like a paper sieve to remove the grounds.
Pairs of sentences with beacon:
1. The plastic decorative bee contained the sparkling
necklace.
The very large and ugly beacon tainted the beautiful
skyline.
2. We saw the yellow bee constrained with the weight of its
load.
The person with the beacon strained to transmit the
message.
3. The girl watched the little bee controlling all the rose
pollen.
The fisherman saw the beacon rolling in the foggy bay.
4. The color of the bee confounded the new beekeeper.
The owner of the beacon founded the association.
5. She was surprised to discover the bumble bee confused
about flowers.
It was amusing to see the overheated beacon fusing to the
ice.
6. The vicious bee confronted all the angry crowd.
The striped beacon fronted on the rocky shore.
7. The glowing bee conserved its breath for its flight around
the flowers.
The glowing beacon served as light for the sailors in the
harbor.
8. He had the yellow bee concealed again to prevent the girls
from stealing.
He had the ancient beacon sealed again to stop the new
lens from cracking.
9. He told us it was the old man that the bee contended with.
She explained that the girl with the glowing beacon tended
it.
10. The bumble bee confounded the study and upset us.
The golden beacon found by the lake really surprised her.

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567
11. The wasps buzzed around the light, and the pesky bee conflicted with them.
The stars sparkled in the sky, and the glowing beacon sparkled with them.
12. The pesky birds stole the pollen that the enormous bee
converted.
My brother Fred watched as Mary set the gigantic beacon
vertical.

References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998).
Tracking the time course of spoken work recognition using
eye movements: Evidence for continuous mapping models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 419-439.
Aslin, R. N., & Mehler, J. (2002). McDonnell Foundation
Progress Report: Methods for assessing cognitive development in human infants.
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of probability statistics by 8-month-old
infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Aslin, R. N., Pisoni, D. B., & Jusczyk, P. W. (1983). Auditory
development and speech perception in infancy. In M. M.
Haith & J. J. Campos (Eds.), CarmichaelOs Manual of Child
Psychology, Volume II: Infancy and the Biology of Development (pp. 573-687). New York: Wiley and Sons.
Barbosa, P. A. (2002). Integrating gestural temporal constraints
in a model of speech rhythm production. In S. Hawkins &
N. NGuyen (Eds.), Proceedings of the ISCA workshop on
Temporal Integration in the Perception of Speech (pp. 54).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Printing Service.
Batchelder, E. O. (2002). Bootstrapping the lexicon: A computational model of infant speech segmentation. Cognition, 83,
167-206.
Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Bortfeld, H., & Morgan, J. L. (2000). The influence of focusing
stress on infantsO recognition of words in fluent speech. In S.
C. Howell, S. A. Fish, & T. Keith-Lucas (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 24th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development (pp. 151-163). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Brent, M. R. (1999). Speech segmentation and word discovery: A
computational perspective. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3,
294-301.
Brent, M. R., & Cartwright, T. A. (1996). Distributional
regularity and phonotactic constraints are useful for segmentation. Cognition, 61, 93-125.
Brent, M. R., & Siskind, J. M. (2001). The role of exposure to
isolated words in early vocabulary development. Cognition,
33-44.
Byrd, D., Kaun, A., Narayanan, S., & Saltzman, E. (2000).
Phrasal signatures in articulation. In M. B. Broe & J. B.
Pierrehumbert (Eds.), Papers in Laboratory Phonology V:
Acquisition and the lexicon (pp. 70-87). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cairns, P., Shillcock, R., Chater, N., & Levy, J. (1997).
Bootstrapping word boundaries: A bottom-up corpus-based
approach to speech segmentation. Cognitive Psychology, 33,
111-153.

565

Choi, Y., & Mazuka, R. (2003). Young childrenOs use of
prosody in sentence parsing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32, 197-217.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Christiansen, M. H., Allen, J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1998).
Learning to segment speech using multiple cues: A connectionist model. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13,
221-268.
Christophe, A., Dupoux, E., Bertoncini, J., & Mehler, J. (1994).
Do infants perceive word boundaries? An empirical study of
the bootstrapping of lexical acquisition. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 95, 1570-1580.
Christophe, A., Guasti, M. T., Nespor, M., Dupoux, E., & van
Ooyen, B. (1997). Reflections on phonological bootstrapping: Its role for lexical and syntactic acquisition. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 12, 585-612.
Christophe, A., Mehler, J., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2001).
Perception of prosodic boundary correlates by newborn
infants. Infancy, 2, 385-394.
Christophe, A., Peperkamp, S., Pallier, C., Block, E., & Mehler,
J. (in press). Phonological phrase boundaries constrain lexical
access: I. Adult data. Journal of Memory and Language.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (1991). Elements of information
theory. New York: Wiley.
Cutler, A. (1990). Exploiting prosodic probabilities in speech
segmentation. In G. T. M. Altmann (Ed.), Cognitive Models
of Speech Processing: Psycholinguistic and Computational
Perspectives (pp. 105-121). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1992). Rhythmic cues to speech
segmentation: evidence from juncture misperception. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 218-236.
Cutler, A., & Carter, D. M. (1987). The predominance of strong
initial syllables in the English vocabulary. Computer Speech
and Language, 2, 133-142.
de Pijper, J. R., & Sanderman, A. A. (1994). On the perceptual
strength of prosodic boundaries and its relation to suprasegmental cues. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
96, 2037-2047.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., &
Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59.
Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., &
McRoberts, G. (1998). Rapid gains in speed of verbal
processing by infants in the second year. Psychological
Science, 9, 228-231.
Fisher, C., & Tokura, H. (1996). Prosody in speech to infants:
Direct and indirect acoustic cues to syntactic structure. In
J. L. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax:
Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in early acquisition
(pp. 343-363). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Fougeron, C., & Keating, P. (1997). Articulatory strengthening
at edges of prosodic domains. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 101, 3728-3740.
Gerken, L., Jusczyk, P. W., & Mandel, D. R. (1994). When
prosody fails to cue syntactic structure: 9-month-oldsO
sensitivity to phonological versus syntactic phrases. Cognition, 51, 237-265.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.

566

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567

Gleitman, L., & Wanner, E. (1982). The state of the state of the
art. In E. Wanner & L. Gleitman (Eds.), Language
acquisition: The state of the art (pp. 3-48). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Goodsitt, J. V., Morgan, J. L., & Kuhl, P. K. (1993). Perceptual
strategies in prelingual speech segmentation. Journal of
Child Language, 20, 229-252.
Grier, J. B. (1971). Nonparametric indexes for sensitivity and
bias: Computing formulas. Psychological Bulletin, 75,
424-429.
Gussenhoven, C., & Rietveld, A. C. M. (1992). Intonation
contours, prosodic structure and preboundary lengthening.
Journal of Phonetics, 20, 282-303.
Hardcastle, W. (1985). Some phonetic and syntactic constraints
on lingual coarticulation during /kl/ sequences. Speech
Communication, 4, 247-263.
Harris, Z. S. (1955). From phoneme to morpheme. Language,
31, 190-222.
Hayes, J. R., & Clark, H. H. (1970). Experiments on the
segmentation of an artificial speech analogue. In J. R. Hayes
(Ed.), Cognition and the development of language
(pp. 221-234). New York: Wiley.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Nelson, D. G. K., Jusczyk, P. W., Cassidy, K.
W., Druss, B., & Kennedy, L. (1987). Clauses are perceptual
units for young infants. Cognition, 26, 269-286.
Hohle, B., Weissenborn, J., Kiefer, D., Schulz, A., & Schmitz,
M. (2004). Functional elements in infantsO speech processing: The role of determiners in the syntactic categorization
of lexical elements. Infancy, 5, 341-353.
Holst, T., & Nolan, F. (1995). The influence of syntactic
structure on [s] to [sh] articulation. In B. Connell & A.
Arvaniti (Eds.), Papers in Laboratory Phonology IV: Phonology and Phonetic Evidence (pp. 315-333). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hunter, M. A., & Ames, E. W. (1988). A multifactor model of
infant preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. In C.
Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.). Advances in infancy
research (Vol. 5, pp. 69-95). Ablex: Norwood, NJ.
Johnson, E. K. (2003). Speaker intent influences infantsO
segmentation of potentially ambiguous utterances. Paper
presented at the 15th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences, Barcelona.
Johnson, E. K., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Word segmentation
by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count more
than statistics. Journal of Memory and Language, 44,
548-567.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1997). The discovery of spoken language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1999). How infants begin to extract words from
speech. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 323-328.
Jusczyk, P. W., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). InfantsO detection of the
sound patterns of words in fluent speech. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 1-23.
Jusczyk, P. W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N. J. (1993). InfantsO
preference for the predominant stress patterns of English
words. Child Development, 64, 675-687.
Jusczyk, P. W., Houston, D. M., & Newsome, M. (1999). The
beginnings of word segmentation in English-learning
infants. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 159-207.
Jusczyk, P. W., Kemler-Nelson, D. G., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Kennedy, L., Woodward, A., & Piwoz, J. (1992). Perception

of acoustic correlates of major phrasal units by young
infants. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 252-293.
Keating, P., Cho, T., Fougeron, C., & Hsu, C.-S. (2003).
Domain-initial articulatory strengthening in four languages.
In J. Local, R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.), Papers in
Laboratory Phonology, VI: Phonetic Interpretation
(pp. 143-161). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kelly, M. (1996). The role of phonology in grammatical
category assignments. In J. L. Morgan & K. Demuth
(Eds.), Signal to Syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to
grammar in early acquisition (pp. 249-262). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kjelgaard, M. M., & Speer, S. R. (1999). Prosodic facilitation
and interference in the resolution of temporary syntactic
closure ambiguity. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
153-194.
Mattys, S. L., Jusczyk, P. W., Luce, P. A., & Morgan, J. L.
(1999). Phonotactic and prosodic effects on word segmentation in infants. Cognitive Psychology, 38, 465-494.
Millotte, S., & Christophe, A. (2003). Are phonological phrases
exploited on-line for the syntactic analysis of spoken sentences? Paper presented at the 16th annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
Morgan, J. (1998). Early recognition of morphophonological
alternations. Paper presented at the International Conference on Infant Studies, Atlanta.
Morgan, J. L. (1986). From simple input to complex grammar.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morgan, J. L. (1994). Converging measures of speech segmentation in preverbal infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 389-403.
Morgan, J. L. (1996). A rhythmic bias in preverbal speech
segmentation. Journal of Memory and Language, 35,
666-688.
Morgan, J. L., & Demuth, K. (1996). Signal to syntax: An
overview. In J. L. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to
syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in early
acquisition (pp. 1-22). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Morgan, J. L., & Saffran, J. R. (1995). Emerging integration of
sequential and suprasegmental information in preverbal
speech segmentation. Child Development, 66, 911-936.
Morgan, J. L., Shi, R., & Allopenna, P. (1996). Perceptual bases
of rudimentary grammatical categories: Toward a broader
conceptualization of bootstrapping. In J. L. Morgan & K.
Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from speech
to grammar in early acquisition (pp. 263-283). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Myers, J., Jusczyk, P. W., Nelson, D. G. K., Charles-Luce, J.,
Woodward, A. L., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1996). Infants
sensitivity to word boundaries in fluent speech. Journal of
Child Language, 23, 1-30.
Nespor, M., Guasti, M. T., & Christophe, A. (1996). Selecting
word order: The rhythmic activation principle. In U. Kleinhenz (Ed.), Interfaces in phonology (pp. 1-26). Berlin:
Akademie Verlag.
Nespor, M., & Vogel, I. (1986). Prosodic phonology. Dordrecht:
Foris.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (1995). Competition
and segmentation in spoken word recognition. Journal of

A. Gout et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2004) 548-567
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1209-1228.
Quene, H. (1992). Durational cues for word segmentation in
Dutch. Journal of Phonetics, 20, 331-350.
Rathbun, K., Bortfeld, H., Morgan, J., & Golinkoff, R. (2002).
WhatOs in a name: Using highly familiar items to aid
segmention. Paper presented at the Boston University
Conference on Language Development.
Rietveld, A. C. M. (1980). Word boundaries in the French
language. Language and Speech, 23, 289-296.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Schepman, A., & Rodway, P. (2000). Prosody and on-line
parsing in coordination structures. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 53, 377-396.
Selkirk, E. O. (1980). The role of prosodic categories in English
word stress. Linguistic Inquiry, 11, 563-605.
Selkirk, E. O. (1984). Phonology and syntax: The relation
between sound and structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shady, M. (1996). InfantOs sensitivity to function morphemes.
Unpublished PhD Thesis, State University of New York,
Buffalo.
Shafer, V. L., Shucard, D. W., Shucard, J. L., & Gerken, L.
(1998). An electrophysiological study of infantsO sensitivity
to the sound patterns of English speech. Journal of Speech,
Language and Hearing Research, 41, 874-886.
Shi, R., Morgan, J. L., & Allopenna, P. (1998). Phonological
and acoustic bases for earliest grammatical category assignment: a cross-linguistic perspective. Journal of Child Language, 25, 169-201.
Singh, L., Bortfeld, H., & Morgan, J. L. (2002). Effects of
variability on infant word recognition. In B. Skarabela, S.
Fish, & A. H.-J. Do (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development
(pp. 608-619). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

567

Singh, L., Morgan, J. L., & White, K. S. (2004). Preference
and processing: The role of speech affect in early spoken
word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 51,
173-189.
Swingley, D. (2000). On the origins of infantsO lexical parsing
preferences. Paper presented at the 25th Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development,
Boston.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Spoken word recognition
and lexical representation in very young children. Cognition,
76, 147-166.
Swingley, D., & Fernald, A. (2002). Recognition of words
referring to present and absent objects by 24-month-olds.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 39-56.
Swingley, D., Pinto, J. P., & Fernald, A. (1999). Continuous
processing in word recognition at 24 months. Cognition, 71,
73-108.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M.,
& Sedivy, J. E. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Thiessen, E. D., & Saffran, J. R. (2003). When cues collide:
Use of stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by
7- to 9-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 39,
706-716.
Venkataraman, A. (2001). A statistical model for word discovery in transcribed speech. Computational Linguistics, 27,
352-372.
Warren, P., Grabe, E., & Nolan, F. (1995). Prosody, phonology
and parsing in closure ambiguities. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 10, 457-486.
Wightman, C. W., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., Ostendorf, M., &
Price, P. J. (1992). Segmental durations in the vicinity of
prosodic phrase boundaries. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 91, 1707-1717.

