The Search for Common Ground:
Part II. Nonlinguistic Performance
by Linguistically Diverse Learners
Kathryn Kohnert
Jennifer Windsor
University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis

Below-average performance on some nonlinguistic tasks often is considered a
potential correlate of primary language impairment (LI). If nonlinguistic cognitive
processing truly is deficient in children with LI, then measures may be identified
that distinguish language learners at risk for LI that are independent of the
number and type of languages learned. This study focuses on within- and acrosstask performance on 4 basic nonlinguistic processing tasks. The aim was to
systematically investigate areas of potential overlap and divergence among 3
groups of linguistically diverse children: English-only speakers with LI, typically
developing English-only speakers (EO), and typically developing bilingual
Spanish-English speakers (BI). The performance of the 100 8-13-year-old
children who took part in J. Windsor and K. Kohnert's (2004) study was analyzed. Experimental tasks were simple and choice versions of auditory- and
visual-detection tasks. Each task included 4 levels of motor difficulty: responding
with the preferred and nonpreferred hand and foot. Analyses revealed no
significant differences among groups in simple auditory detection. The EO group
was significantly faster than the LI group in each of the other 3 tasks. While the
same pattern was evident for the BI group, the difference was significant only in
choice visual detection. Overall patterns of response latency within and across
tasks were qualitatively similar across the 3 groups. Development, indexed here
by chronological age, played a significant role in predicting response latencies
for children in all 3 groups.
KEY WORDS: primary language impairment, bilingual language learners,
response time, auditory detection, visual detection

T

he current study is the second part of a larger project designed to
determine the existence and location of fault lines, or distinct patterns of performance, that might separate children with primary
language impairment (LI) from those with intact language-processing
systems, independent of variations in the number or type of languages
spoken. Our overall goal is to contribute to a model of language learning
that is broad enough to address diverse populations of language learners
within the one theoretical framework. Three groups of diverse language
learners are of interest here: monolingual English-speaking children
with intact language (EO group), bilingual Spanish-English-speaking children with intact language (BI group), and monolingual English-speaking
children with LI (LI group). In Windsor and Kohnert (2004), we investigated potential quantitative and qualitative differences between diverse
learners on two lexical tasks, word recognition and picture naming. The
tasks were relatively simple and emphasized linguistic processing (speed

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004 * (c)American
KohnertSpeech-Language-Hearing
& Windsor: NonlinguisticAssociation
Performance
1092-4388/04/4704-0891

891

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of accessing known lexical information) rather than
knowledge. Picture-naming accuracy and response time
(RT) for later-acquired English words were both sufficient measures to separate children with LI from their
EO peers. However, there was overlap in performance
between children with LI and typical BI children, and
there was no task on which the BI children outperformed
children with LI. That is, these language-dependent
measures were not able to separate children with intact
language-processing skills but less English experience
from children assumed to have faulty or compromised
language-processing skills.
The general goal here is to determine if there are
robust quantitative and/or qualitative differences in
nonlinguistic task performance that would serve to separate these three groups of diverse language learners in
predictable ways. The nonlinguistic measures of interest are RT tasks that each involve differing degrees of
motor difficulty but invoke minimal cognitive demands.

Nonlinguistic Processing
in Language Impairment
There is good reason to believe that monolingual
children with LI have subtle nonlinguistic deficits and,
as such, that nonlinguistic task performance may provide a valuable window to language learning in diverse
populations. First, although conventionally defined as
having normal nonverbal intelligence, children with LI
tend to have slightly lower nonverbal IQ test scores
(Swisher, Plante, & Lowell, 1994). From an informationprocessing perspective, it is possible that rather than
being confounded with or causing LI, the lower IQ test
scores are as much an outcome of inefficient information processing as is the language deficit. Second, mounting experimental evidence indicates that children diagnosed with primary, or specific, LI also have relative
weaknesses in a range of nonlinguistic processing skills.
For example, studies have found that when compared
with typical age peers, children with LI are slower in
mental rotation (Johnston & Ellis Weismer, 1983; C.
Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin, 2001), digit scanning
(Sininger, Klatzky, & Kirchner, 1989), peg moving
(Bishop & Edmundson, 1987), and auditory and visual
detection (Lahey & Edwards, 1996; Montgomery &
Leonard, 1998; Windsor & Hwang, 1999). Despite these
consistent findings, the issue of whether the nonlinguistic deficits play a part in causing LI or only are correlated with LI remains open to debate (cf. C. Miller et al.,
2001, and Rice, Wexler, & Cleave, 1995). The factors
motivating the relatively slower RT also are unclear and
may include factors that are intrinsic to the child, such
as underlying speed of information processing, intelligence, and maturation. Extrinsic factors, such as the
892

cognitive domain, methods, and difficulty of the task to
be performed, also may be implicated (Windsor, 2002;
Windsor, Milbrath, Carney, & Rakowski, 2001).
General interactive information-processing theories
consider basic cognitive mechanisms, such as perception, attention, and speed of information processing, to
be integral to efficient language learning and use (E.
Bates & MacWhinney, 1987, 1989; Kail, 1994; Kail &
Salthouse, 1994; MacWhinney, 1997; Segalowitz, 1997).
Interactive frameworks generally are consistent with
the highly parallel distributed processing models instantiated in neural computational networks, known as
connectionism (e.g., Elman et al., 1996; MacDonald &
Christiansen, 2002). From this perspective, there is a
causal link that can be established between the subtle,
subclinical deficits in the underlying nonlinguistic cognitive processing mechanisms found in children with LI
and the more obvious deficits observed in language (see
Leonard, 1998, for review). If this is the case, we may be
able to exploit these subclinical deficits in information
processing to help identify children who are at risk for
language difficulties by virtue of an inefficient/faulty
processing system and those with intact processing systems who show language performance differences secondary to limited experience with the language of interest. To our knowledge, performance by typically
developing bilingual children relative to monolingual
children with LI has not previously been considered with
respect to these types of nonlinguistic processing tasks.
Typically developing sequential bilinguals are presumed to have intact language-learning systems and
intact nonlinguistic cognitive processing mechanisms,
as do their typically developing monolingual peers. However, typically developing bilingual children may perform more poorly on language-dependent processing
tasks relative to monolingual peers with and without
LI, presumably because of differences external to the
child, such as language experience (Windsor & Kohnert,
2004). Our specific goal here is to determine if the nonlinguistic deficits documented in the monolingual LI literature can provide a new foothold from which to systematically investigate the joint study of developmental
LI and typical sequential bilingualism. Specifically, there
may be nonlinguistic processing differences between children with and without LI that hold across linguistically
diverse groups. If the presence and stability of this common cognitive processing ground can be shown across
diverse linguistic groups, it may be possible to develop
methods to exploit these areas to separate language differences (normal skills in the face of diverse experiences)
from language impairment (inefficient or faulty language-processing skills). Such evidence would also be
most consistent with general interactive informationprocessing theories of language and stand in contrast to
strict modular views of language and cognition.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Nonlinguistic-Processing Tasks
To help clarify the nature of the relationship between
underlying information processing and language, systematic investigation that considers both learner and
task variation is warranted. All nonlinguistic tasks are
not equal in difficulty but vary considerably in the demands they place on motor, perceptual, and elementary
and higher level cognitive processing. For example,
mental rotation and visual pattern matching are nonlinguistic processing tasks that emphasize symbol processing/nonverbal reasoning. In contrast, rapid finger tapping relies primarily on the motor control system, with
minimal demands on higher order cognitive skills. Four
tasks that are mainly perceptual-motor, and do not invoke higher level, symbolic processing, are of interest
here. These are simple and choice versions of auditory
and visual detection tasks.
Even though the cognitive load imposed by detection tasks is very small, smaller than that associated
with other elementary cognitive tasks, such as matching
or discrimination (Frearson & Eysenck, 1986), detection
tasks can be manipulated to have slightly different cognitive demands. This can be done by implementation
as either simple or choice RT tasks. In simple detection tasks, only one stimulus is presented for response
(e.g., a tone or colored light), and the individual need
only make a single response (e.g., pushing a button) to

indicate the presence of the stimulus. Thus, speed of
task completion emphasizes the time needed to perceptually encode the auditory or visual stimulus and motor
response time. In choice detection tasks, there are two
stimuli (e.g., a high and low tone), and the individual
must make one of two responses (e.g., pressing one of
two buttons) to indicate the presence of the particular
stimulus. In these tasks, speed of task completion includes the time needed to perceptually encode the visual stimulus, the time to make a decision, and motor
response time. The processing speed associated with the
first two components may overlap in time, and both can
reflect a third variable, an underlying rate at which all
information can be processed in the brain. However these
components are viewed, they usually are considered
separate from motor response time, which is seen as
adding an independent time component (T. C. Bates &
Eysenck, 1993). Even given the potential overlap between encoding and decision time, choice tasks are considered to introduce the additional cognitive component
of discriminating which response is required (Cerella &
Hale, 1994).
Detection tasks were chosen for this study because
these currently are the RT tasks on which the most
data are available for children with LI, although the
tasks typically are administered to obtain a baseline
RT for other tasks rather than as the focus of interest.
Table 1 contains key information from studies including

Table 1. Auditory- and visual-detection tasks comparing English-speaking (EO) children with and without primary language impairment (LI).
Reaction time

Age range
(years)

n

Auditory detection
Edwards & Lahey (1996)
Ellis Weismer & Hesketh (1996)
Ellis Weismer & Hesketh (1998)
Hanson & Montgomery (2002)
Lahey & Edwards (1996)
Montgomery (2000)
Montgomery (2002)
Montgomery & Leonard (1998)
Riddle (1992)
Windsor & Hwang (1999)

4-10
7
7-10
6-10
4-10
7-11
7-11
9
4-6
10-13

46
16
20
12
66
12
21
21
10
23

Visual detection
Lahey & Edwards (1996)
C. Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin (2001)
Nichols, Townsend, & Wulfeck (1995)a
Nichols, Townsend, & Wulfeck (1995)b

4-10
8-9
9-13
9-13

66
26
17
17

Study

Items

Response

LI

EO

Group
comparison

2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1

20
60
60
32
10
36
36
36
12
20

Verbal
Mouse click
Mouse click
Button press
Verbal
Pad press
Pad press
Pad press
Button press
Button press

511
643
606
522
583
434
385
411
789
349

457
584
597
439
490
353
321
337
658
328

ns
ns
ns
ns
LI > EO
ns
ns
LI > EO
ns
LI > EO

1
3
10
10

10
24
240
240

Verbal
Keystroke
Button press
Button press

609
870
--
--

505
840
--
--

LI > EO
--
LI > EO
ns

Conditions

Note. LI > EO = statistically slower performance by the LI group; n = no. children with LI participating in the study. For studies with more than one
task condition, the mean response time (RT) is given. Group comparison for C. Miller et al. was not given. Nichols et al. (1995) presented RT
graphically.
a

Children responded to a peripheral visual cue.

Children responded to a central visual cue.

b

Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

893

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

auditory- or visual-detection tasks, with all studies comparing the RT of monolingual English-speaking children
with LI and their EO peers. To our knowledge, there
are no data about bilingual performance on these types
of nonlinguistic detection tasks.
For the studies reviewed in Table 1, all auditory
tasks involved responding to a tone; visual tasks involved
responding to a circle, arrow, or visual brightening on a
computer screen. A number of aspects of these data are
notable. First, of the 14 EO-LI comparisons, most used
auditory rather than visual tasks, and according to the
study methods, all seem to be simple RT tasks. Also,
only one study (Lahey & Edwards, 1996) has data from
auditory and visual tasks administered to the same
group of children (with the finding of no significant task
difference). Second, and of key interest, the RT of the LI
groups is slower than that of the EO groups in all tasks,
ranging from 2% to 23% slower. However, the group differences are statistically significant for only five tasks.
This may speak to the statistical power of the comparisons, large within-group variability in RT, differences
in task methods or difficulty, and/or differences in the
age range or other characteristics of the participants.
The data also may reflect the robustness or sensitivity
of detection tasks to consistently capture any important
differences (if they truly exist) between children with
and without LI.
Finally, most tasks used one or two conditions, that
is, only one level of task difficulty. The main exceptions
included C. Miller et al. (2001), with three task conditions in which children responded to a colored dot after
a presentation delay of 1, 2, or 5 s, and Nichols, Townsend, and Wulfeck (1995), in which children responded
to a visual stimulus under varying visual field and cue
conditions. The trend for a minimal number of conditions is an important potential limitation of the data.
As found by Windsor and Kohnert (2004), one possibility is that the value of a task to identify intact language
learners among linguistically diverse children interacts
with how difficult the task is. These data indicate that
we know little about how within- and across-task difficulty could influence any potential qualitative group
differences in nonlinguistic task performance.
In this study, across-task difficulty was manipulated
by means of the comparison between simple and choice
RT tasks. We were also interested in any potential effects of modality. One methodological reason for this is
that detection tasks often have been used as a covariate
or baseline in EO-LI group comparisons designed to
illuminate differences in language processing. To be
most informative, the choice of detection task would
match the modality and simple/choice nature of the
language task. For example, performance on a choice
auditory-detection task may be the most appropriate

894

baseline for a word/nonword recognition task; simple
visual detection may be the most appropriate baseline
for a picture-naming task. There also may be important
theoretical implications of any differential sensitivity
in auditory and visual tasks to discriminate among diverse groups of language learners. However, we made
no specific a priori predictions about differences in RT
between the particular auditory and visual tasks in this
study. This was because RT in speeded auditory and visual tasks relies on a range of factors, including stimulus integrity and intensity, the form of response, and
the presence of irrelevant stimuli (Brawn & Snowden,
1999; Keuss, Van der Zee, & Van den Bree, 1990; J.
Miller, Franz, & Ulrich, 1999). These factors were beyond the immediate scope of interest here and were not
controlled systematically across the auditory and visual
tasks.
Within-task difficulty was manipulated by means
of four conditions of increasing motor control demands:
response using the preferred hand, nonpreferred hand,
preferred foot, and nonpreferred foot. Children's preference, or dominance, tends to stabilize before they reach
school age, by about 4 years of age (Haywood & Getchell,
2001), and there is some motivation for these four conditions in the LI literature. Bishop and Edmundson (1987)
found that young children with LI were slower than EO
children to move pegs across a pegboard. Both groups of
children were slower to complete the task using the left
(nonpreferred) hand in comparison with the right (preferred) hand. Bishop (1990) reported a similar trend for a
right hand-left hand difference in the pegboard task at
older ages. Although not all comparisons reached the level
of statistical significance, Powell and Bishop (1992)
found that LI and EO children tended to be faster using
the preferred hand versus nonpreferred hand in peg
moving and ball rolling. Both groups tended to be able
to balance longer and were able to roll a ball more quickly
using the preferred versus nonpreferred foot. Although
Bishop and colleagues found no qualitatively different
patterns in the LI and EO children's responses, it is possible that the longer RT resulting from responding with
the nonpreferred compared with the preferred hand or
foot provides a larger measurement window to separate
intact language learners from children with LI.
Two primary questions motivated this study. The
first question was whether, when we used robust and
replicable task procedures, auditory- and/or visual-detection tasks would be sensitive to group differences
between intact EO and BI language learners compared
with monolingual children with LI. The second question was whether task type or motor difficulty would
interact with any group differences in RT; that is, we
were interested in possible qualitative as well as quantitative differences.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

BI group all learned Spanish as a first or primary language in the home, had 4 to 8 years of English experience, and attended English-only educational programs.
Although the EO and BI groups had higher mean nonverbal IQs than the LI group, children in all three groups
had a standard score of at least 85 on the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence-3 (TONI-3; Brown, Sherbenou, &
Johnsen, 1997). All children passed hearing, vision (acuity and color), and oral-motor screening and had no history of neurological or socioemotional concerns. Complete details about the participant groups are given in
Windsor and Kohnert (2004). Table 1 from Windsor and
Kohnert (2004) is reproduced here as Table 2 and shows
standard scores from test administrations in English
for the LI and EO groups and test administrations in
English and Spanish for children in the BI group.

Method
Participants
One hundred children between the ages of 8 and 13
years took part in each of the four experimental tasks
described here. These were the same children who participated in the word-recognition and picture-naming
tasks in Windsor and Kohnert (2004). We took a very
conservative approach to identifying typically developing bilinguals as well as with a clinically relevant approach to identifying LI. Twenty-eight children, 26 of
whom received special education services, were monolingual English speakers with primary language impairments (LI group: mean age = 10 years 6 months, SD = 1
year 7 months); 50 children were typically developing
monolingual English speakers of the same chronological age (EO group: mean age = 10 years 7 months, SD =
1 year 10 months); and 22 children were typically developing bilingual Spanish-English speakers (BI group:
mean age = 9 years 9 months, SD = 1 year 5 month).
Children in the LI group had Listening and/or Speaking standard scores on the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-3 (CELF-3; Semel, Wiig, & Secord,
1995) that were greater than 1 SD below the mean and
met traditional exclusionary criteria for specific LI. Seventeen of the 28 children also had reading difficulties,
with standard scores below 85 on either or both of the
Word Identification and Passage Comprehension
subtests of the Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests-Revised (WRMT-R; Woodcock, 1987). Children in the EO
group demonstrated age-appropriate spoken language
and reading performance on both the CELF-3 and
WRMT-R. Children in the BI group demonstrated ageappropriate spoken language in both Spanish and English, measured conservatively as a total CELF-3 standard score of 85 or above on both English and Spanish
(Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 1997) versions of the test. The

Experimental Tasks
The four experimental tasks were administered as
part of the larger protocol of cognitive linguistic processing tasks. The four tasks included simple auditory- and
visual-detection tasks and parallel choice auditory- and
visual-detection tasks. Half of the children first took part
in simple visual detection, followed in order by simple
auditory, choice visual, and choice auditory detection.
The other half of the children first took part in choice
visual detection, followed in order by choice auditory,
simple auditory, and simple visual detection. In both task
orders, there were several other tasks administered between each of these four tasks.

Simple Auditory Detection
In this task, children responded as quickly as possible to the presence of a 2000 Hz tone over 100 experimental trials. The tone was 250 ms long, and RT was
measured from stimulus onset. Twenty-five trials were

Table 2. Standard test scores for participant groups.
TONI-3

CELF-3-E

CELF-S

Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

EO
LI
BI

110
102
114

12
12
13

114
80
102

13
9
14

--
--
116

PPVT-R

TVIP

SD

M

SD

M

12

115
96
101

12
11
16

--
--
101

EOW-3-E

EOW-S

SD

M

SD

M

SD

14

115
93
96

12
15
16

--
--
88

20

Note. TONI-3 = Test of Nonverbal Intelligence-3 (Brown, Sherbenou, & Johnsen, 1997); CELF-3-E and CELF-S = total scores from English (E) and
Spanish (S) versions of the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 1995, 1997); PPVT-R = Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (Dunn & Dunn, 1997); TVIP = Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes Peabody (Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; Dunn, Padilla, Lugo, &
Dunn, 1986); EOW-E and EOW-S = English (Brownell, 2000) and Spanish (Brownell, 2001) versions of the Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test; EO = English-only group; LI = language-impaired group; BI = bilingual group without language impairment. There was a significant
difference in TONI scores, F(2, 99) = 6.14, p < .01, f = .4, with the mean scores of the EO and BI groups being equivalently higher than that of the LI
group. From "The Search for Common Ground: Part I. Lexical Performance by Linguistically Diverse Learners," by J. Windsor and K. Kohnert, 2004,
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, p. xxx.

Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

895

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

blocked in each of four, randomly ordered response conditions: responding with the preferred hand (Condition
1), nonpreferred hand (Condition 2), preferred foot (Condition 3), or nonpreferred foot (Condition 4). The tone
was digitized and presented to children using E-Prime
software; children responded using an E-Prime serial
response box and foot pedals (Psychology Software Tools,
Inc., 2000).
Tones were presented at a comfortable listening level
through headphones while children sat in front of a computer screen. A cartoon character with his hand cupped
to his ear appeared on the computer screen as a warning signal/fixation point before the tone presentation,
and there was a variable time interval (1-3 s) between
tone presentations to avoid anticipatory response effects.
The cartoon character disappeared when the child made
a response and reappeared before the next tone presentation. Children used the index finger of the preferred/
nonpreferred hand to push a button on the response box,
indicating when they heard each tone or pushed foot
pedals with their preferred/nonpreferred feet. The pedals were customized to accommodate each child's foot size
and comfortable foot placement. The children wore socks
but not shoes in these two task conditions. Children's
hand and foot preference was determined using the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971) as
part of the larger standardized testing procedures.
To increase task integrity, children received standard instructions and took part in training and practice components before the experimental portion of each
of the four conditions. During training, the children
heard eight tones and were given feedback about the
accuracy and speed of their responses and about consistent placement of their finger on the response button or foot on the foot pedal. During practice, they heard
another eight tones and were not given feedback. To
ensure that the children understood the task requirements and were comfortable using the response button/foot pedal, they were required to achieve a minimum of six accurate responses during practice before
proceeding to the experimental portion of the task condition. All participants met this criterion during one
set of practice trials.

Simple Visual Detection
Simple visual-detection task methods and conditions
were identical in all respects to simple auditory detection except that instead of a tone, the children responded as quickly as possible to 100 presentations of
a blue circle about 4.5 cm in size that was presented
centrally on a white background on a computer screen.
The circle remained on the screen until the child responded. A black cross that appeared centrally on a white
computer screen was used as a fixation point instead of
896

the cartoon character used in the auditory task. Instructions, training, and practice trials parallel to simple
auditory detection were used, with all children meeting
the criterion of six accurate responses out of eight during one set of practice trials. As is conventional, RT again
was measured from stimulus onset. Measuring RT from
stimulus onset in all tasks presented a potential methodological difference between the simple and choice visual- and auditory-detection tasks. Children may or may
not have waited until the end of the 250-ms tone to respond in the auditory tasks; in the visual tasks, they
may have responded more immediately to the stimulus.

Choice Auditory Detection
In this task, children pressed one response button/
pedal as quickly as possible to indicate the presence of a
low (500 Hz) tone and pressed a second response button/foot pedal to indicate the presence of a high (2000
Hz) tone. There were 100 experimental trials, with 25
trials (12/13 randomly ordered presentations of each
tone) blocked in each of the same four response conditions as in other tasks: preferred hand, nonpreferred
hand, preferred foot, and nonpreferred foot. Children
were taught through instructions and training and practice trials to associate the low tone with one response
button/pedal and the high tone with a second response
button/pedal. The words high and low also were written
on the appropriate response buttons. All other procedures were identical to simple auditory detection, with
the distinguishing feature of this task being the slight
increase in cognitive load introduced by the choice nature of the task. One participant from the BI group and
2 from the LI group did not meet the criterion of six
accurate responses out of eight during practice trials.
These children repeated the training and practice trials
once to reach criterion.

Choice Visual Detection
This task was identical in all respects to choice auditory detection except that instead of two tones, the
stimuli were 50 presentations of a blue circle and 50
presentations of a red circle on a computer screen. There
was a random order of stimulus presentation. Children
were trained to associate the blue circle with one response button/pedal and the red circle with a second
button/pedal. The response buttons also were identified
by a blue or red dot. As for the two auditory tasks, the
key distinction between simple and choice visual detection was that children had two response options for each
stimulus presentation in choice visual detection. One
participant from the BI group did not meet the criterion
of six accurate responses out of eight during the practice trials and therefore repeated the training and practice trials.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Analyses
Mean accuracy and RT measures were obtained for
each child in each task, with all children completing the
tasks successfully. For the RT measures, only accurate
responses were included. The four tasks were designed
to be easy enough to ensure high accuracy. As expected,
mean accuracy was greater than 95% across all groups,
tasks, and conditions. As such, we report only results
for the RT data. Outliers, defined as 2 SD from the
mean task RT for an individual child, were excluded.
This resulted in eliminating about 4% of the data from
subsequent analysis in each task
As for word recognition and picture naming, described in Windsor and Kohnert (2004), age and nonverbal intelligence could contribute to differences in
group performance. While the more minimal cognitive
load of simple auditory and visual detection may make
these tasks less sensitive to age differences than choice
auditory and visual detection (Salthouse, 1992), age was
an important potential contributor in all tasks. A preliminary regression analysis showed that age in months
accounted for 38.6% (p < .01) of the total variance in the
EO group's RT performance, with the dependent variable being a child's mean RT across all four tasks. Age
accounted for 39.8% (p < .01) of the total variance in LI
Figure 1. Mean response times (RT; adjusted for age) across groups
for the simple auditory-detection task. In all figures, the bars indicate
1 SE. EO = English-only group with no language impairment; BI =
bilingual group with no language impairment; LI = English-only
language-impaired group; PH (1) = preferred hand (Condition 1);
NH (2) = nonpreferred hand (Condition 2); PF (3) = preferred foot
(Condition 3); NF (4) = nonpreferred foot (Condition 4).

Nonverbal intelligence (TONI-3 standard score),
however, did not contribute any significant proportion
of variance once the contribution of age was accounted
for. As noted by Windsor and Kohnert (2004), the EO
group had higher English vocabulary scores than did the
LI and BI groups. This is shown in the scores from the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R;
Dunn & Dunn, 1997) and the Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test (Brownell, 2000) in Table 2. Unlike for the lexical tasks examined by Windsor and
Kohnert, this difference was not expected to affect
nonlinguistic task performance. Thus, analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs), with age as the only covariate, were
used to analyze group differences. A separate analysis
was conducted for each of the four tasks, with language
status (EO, LI, BI) as the between-group factor and response condition (preferred hand, nonpreferred hand,
preferred foot, or nonpreferred foot) as the within-group
factor. Effect sizes were calculated for unequal sample
sizes, following Cohen (1988). Significant main and interaction effects were investigated with pairwise comparisons, by means of Bonferroni adjustment for the
number of comparisons.

Results
Simple Auditory Detection

600

The mean RT in each response condition for the
three groups for simple auditory detection is shown in
Figure 1. In line with the statistical analyses, the RT
values are adjusted for participant age in all figures. As
shown in Figure 1, although the BI and EO groups
tended to be a little faster than the LI group, overall
performance was fairly similar across groups. Also, there
was no marked effect of condition difficulty. A 3 (group)
x 4 (condition) ANCOVA confirmed these impressions
and showed no significant group, condition, or Group x
Condition interaction effects.

500

Simple Visual Detection

800

700

RT (ms)

group's RT performance and 40.1% of the total variance
in BI group's RT.

EO
BI
LI

400

300

200
PH (1)

NH (2)

PF (3)

Conditions

NF (4)

Figure 2 shows the mean RT for the simple visualdetection task across response conditions for the three
groups. This task tended to separate performance of
those in the LI group from that of the other two groups.
An ANCOVA indicated that the overall group effect just
failed to reach a conventional level of statistical significance, F(2, 99) = 2.68, p = .07, f = .2. Post hoc comparisons indicated that there was a significant difference
between the EO and LI groups (p = .03, d = 0.5) and the
RT difference in the LI and BI comparison approached,
but did not reach, statistical significance (p = .10, d =
Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

897

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Mean RT (adjusted for age) across groups for the simple
visual-detection task.

Figure 3. Mean RT (adjusted for age) across groups for the choice
auditory-detection task.

800

700

1200
EO
BI
LI

1100

1000
RT (ms)

600

RT (ms)

EO
BI
LI

500

900

800
400

700
300

600
200

PH (1)
PH (1)

NH (2)

PF (3)

NF (4)

NH (2)

PF (3)

NF (4)

Conditions

Conditions

0.3). There was no difference in RT between BI and EO
groups. There was also a main effect of condition, F(3,
300) = 5.28, p < .01, f = .3. Mean RT increased systematically across conditions, with a significant difference
between hand responses (Conditions 1 and 2) and foot
responses (Conditions 3 and 4; p < .01). The Group x
Condition interaction effect was not significant.

Choice Auditory Detection
Results for the choice auditory-detection task are
shown in Figure 3. As with the simple visual-detection
task, the LI group tended to have a slower RT than did
the EO and BI groups, and the RT of all three groups
tended to be affected by response condition. However,
there was large variability in the performance of children in the LI group. An ANCOVA showed that there
were significant group, F(2, 99) = 3.44, p < .01, f = .2;
condition, F(3, 300) = 2.28, p = .04, f = .3; and Group x
Condition interaction, F(6, 300) = 2.96, p = .04, effects.
Post hoc comparisons indicated that the EO group had
a significantly faster mean RT than that of the LI group
(p = .02, d = 0.5); the RT of the BI group was again only
marginally different from the LI group (p = .18, d =
0.5). There was no significant difference between the
RT of BI and EO groups. Hand responses (Conditions 1
and 2) were significantly faster than foot responses (Conditions 3 and 4) for all three groups (p < .01). The Group
x Condition interaction effect was due to the EO group
898

showing a slightly, and nonsignificantly, faster RT for
nonpreferred foot responses (Condition 4) than for preferred foot responses (Condition 3).

Choice Visual Detection
Results for the choice visual-detection task are
shown in Figure 4. Performance on this task appeared
to clearly separate the LI group from the two groups of
intact language learners. An ANCOVA showed a significant main effect of group, F(2, 99) = 6.80, p < .01, f = .4,
with post hoc comparisons indicating a slower mean RT
for the LI group compared with both the EO group (p <
.01, d = 0.7) and the BI group (p = .01, d = 0.8), and
equivalent RTs for the EO and BI groups. There was
also a significant main effect of condition, F(3, 300) =
5.83, p < .01, f = .5, with all groups being quicker with
hand responses (Conditions 1 and 2) versus foot responses (Conditions 3 and 4). These main effects were
further qualified by a significant Group x Condition interaction effect, F(6, 300) = 2.61, p = .02. As in choice
auditory-detection, this effect was due to the EO group
showing a faster, but nonsignificant, RT for nonpreferred (Condition 4) than preferred (Condition 3) foot
responses.

Summary
Performance on three of the four tasks (i.e., except
for simple auditory detection) showed group and response

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 4. Mean RT (adjusted for age) across groups for the choice
visual-detection task.
1200
EO
BI
LI

1100

RT (ms)

1000

900

800

700

when responding with the nonpreferred versus preferred
foot. Overall, of the four perceptual-motor tasks, the most
robust task for separating the two intact language
groups (EO and BI) from the LI group was choice visual
detection. Except for the small difference in direction of
RT between preferred and nonpreferred foot for the EO
group, the three groups showed qualitatively similar
performance across different conditions of motor difficulty. Although not of interest in the statistical analyses, comparison of Figures 1 and 3 shows that RT in
choice auditory detection was longer than in simple auditory detection for all groups. Similarly, Figures 2 and
4 show that choice visual detection was associated with
a longer RT than simple visual detection. While mean
response latencies overlapped for simple auditory and
visual detection (Figures 1 and 2), all groups tended to
show a longer RT in choice auditory than visual detection (Figures 3 and 4). Recall, however, that stimulus
length was not controlled across auditory and visual
tasks, as cross-modal comparisons were not of primary
interest.

600
PH (1)

NH (2)

PF (3)

NF (4)

Discussion

Conditions

condition differences. On both the choice auditory-detection and simple and choice visual-detection tasks, the
EO group was significantly faster than children with
LI. The BI group also tended to be faster than the LI
group, although this difference was statistically significant only for the choice visual-detection task. BI and
EO groups showed an equivalent mean RT in each of
the four tasks. The age-adjusted mean group RTs for
each task are summarized in Table 3. Response condition also played a role in these three tasks for all groups,
with preferred and nonpreferred hand responses being quicker than preferred and nonpreferred foot responses. Although the difference was not significant,
the EO group unexpectedly showed a slightly longer
RT for the choice auditory- and visual-detection tasks

The primary question of the current study was
whether response speed on auditory- and/or visual-detection tasks would be sensitive to group differences
between intact monolingual and bilingual language
learners, compared with monolingual children with LI.
A related question was whether task type or response
difficulty would interact with any group differences,
thereby reflecting qualitative as well as quantitative
differences in RT between the three groups of diverse
learners. We begin our discussion by presenting results
related to these study questions. We then broaden our
discussion to compare children's performance on the
current nonlinguistic tasks with their performance on
the language-based tasks reported by Windsor and
Kohnert (2004).

Nonlinguistic Processing

Table 3. Age-adjusted mean RT (ms).

Quantitative Effects

Task
Group

Simple
auditory

Simple
visual

Choice
auditory

Choice
visual

EO
LI
BI

468
485
458

430
485
443

815
932
855

711
840
691

Note. Age-adjusted mean RT for each task, collapsing across the four
conditions. EO = English only; LI = language impairment; BI = typical
bilingual.

Overall, results from the nonlinguistic experimental tasks used here provide clear evidence for quantitative differences between intact language learners and
LI learners, at some level, independent of the number
of languages spoken. The task producing the most robust between-group differences was choice visual detection. On this task, there were significant differences between the LI and BI groups, as well as between the LI
and EO groups. Despite the consistently slower performance by the LI group on simple visual- and choice auditory-detection tasks, these differences did not reach

Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

899

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

the conventional level of statistical significance needed
for separating LI learners from both intact groups. Specifically, performance on choice auditory detection separated EO and LI groups; however, the RT difference between BI and LI groups was smaller and did not reach
statistical significance. As shown in Figure 3, withingroup variability is large on this task, especially in the
LI group. For simple visual detection (Figure 2), the difference between the LI and EO groups was again statistically reliable. Although there was clear overlap between the EO and BI groups, the difference between
the LI and BI groups was not statistically significant. It
may be that the fewer BI (n = 22) than EO (n = 50) participants reduced the sensitivity of these measures for
separating BI-LI performance. The presence of small
(0.3) to medium (0.5) effect sizes for the BI-LI comparisons on these tasks supports this reasoning. As in most
other EO-LI comparisons in the literature (see Table 1),
the very small mean RT difference in simple auditory
detection was insufficient to separate these groups of
children. However, the presence and strength of other
group differences suggest that there are true deficits in
perceptual-motor speed for children with LI compared
with intact language learners. That it was a choice rather
than simple detection task that best separated the LI
group from the two intact groups suggests that the LI
group also was differentially sensitive to the minimal
cognitive load introduced by the choice task.
These generally slower responses on auditory and
visual detection by children with LI relative to typically
developing age peers are consistent with previous findings. However, the large proportion of variance in task
performance accounted for by chronological age (about
40%) also suggests that LI deficits on perceptual-motor
tasks may not be apparent if the age range of study participants is not considered. This finding underscores the
need to use methods that consider age-related factors.
In the current study, statistical analyses were conducted
that controlled for age-related variation in RT within
each group. This method allowed us to identify the independent contribution of perceptual-motor processing
to task performance.

Qualitative Effects
Despite the quantitative differences between intact
and impaired learners on three of the four tasks, there
were striking qualitative similarities in the way the
groups responded to variations in task type, modality,
and response difficulty. As evident in Figures 1-4, all
groups were slower in the choice relative to simple detection tasks, with longer response latencies in foot relative to hand responses. The relative increase in cognitive demands when children were required to make a
decision about stimuli as well as perceive and encode

900

the stimuli is well in line with previous literature indicating longer response latencies in choice than simple
nonlinguistic tasks (Cerella & Hale, 1994). The qualitative similarity among the groups of children as they responded with preferred or nonpreferred hands and feet
is in line with previous research with monolingual children with and without LI (Bishop & Edmundson, 1987;
Powell & Bishop, 1992). All three groups of children were
affected systematically by increasing task difficulty, and
all groups responded in qualitatively the same way. All
groups of children also tended to be faster in choice visual detection than choice auditory detection. It may be
that this modality difference is task driven, stemming
from the potentially longer stimulus length of the auditory than visual stimuli. While the current study was
not designed to tease apart underlying group differences
in auditory and visual processing, this findings suggests
that further research is warranted to determine the relative sensitivity of visual- and auditory-processing tasks
to detect differences in LI.

Summary
The quantitative differences found here suggest
that subtle inefficiencies in basic nonlinguistic information processing play a fundamental role in the performance profile of LI. The qualitative similarities between LI and typically developing children across
varied task demands are consistent with a characterization of the general information-processing system in
which children with LI are viewed as typical but less
efficient processors rather than as operating under systematically different processing principles. As such,
these results are consistent with broader theoretical
frameworks (e.g., MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002)
that emphasize interactions among general cognitive
processing mechanisms and experience with language
as being sufficient to explain language performance
across diverse populations of language learners. This
interpretation is constrained by the finding that only
one nonlinguistic task, choice visual detection, served
to statistically separate the LI group from both groups
of intact language learners.

Cross-Study Comparison: Overlap
and Divergence in Diverse Learners
In the two companion studies, we have begun to
search for common linguistic and nonlinguistic processing ground among three groups of linguistically diverse
school-age children. We defined diversity along two dimensions, variations in the integrity of the cognitive linguistic processing system and variations in the number
of languages available in the child's environment. Examination of systematic learner and task comparisons

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

between learners at different points on these intersecting dimensions is important to advance our theoretical
understanding of the underlying nature and variation
in language development and impairment. Delineation
of common ground between typical language learners,
regardless of diversity in language experiences, and
separation of children with LI also have the potential to
serve as an important foothold into effective and nonbiased clinical assessment techniques.
We examined two lexical tasks in Part 1; in Part 2,
we examined four elementary nonlinguistic tasks. Results for the six tasks are summarized in Table 4. We
found that monolingual children with LI and BI children shared common ground on the lexical measures.
That is, although the EO group outperformed the other
two groups in picture naming, the BI group was not distinguishable from children with LI in speed or accuracy
in word recognition or picture naming. Thus, for schoolage children, it appears that picture naming measures
may tend to overidentify children with diverse language
experiences as LI and that word-recognition measures
may be insensitive to the presence of LI. In contrast,
nonlinguistic tasks, in particular choice visual detection,
were sensitive to differences in the integrity of the underlying language-processing system yet independent
of the diverse linguistic experiences of our participants.
Given the pattern of results shown in Table 4, it is
clear that response speed on basic nonlinguistic processing tasks may hold significant clinical promise as one
component in a nonbiased assessment battery for schoolage children with suspected LI. A number of challenges
need to be met to translate current study findings into
the clinical setting. For example, it will be important to

determine if and how group performance documented
in this first series of studies can be used to qualify performance at the individual level and if methods used in
the experimental setting can be exploited for clinical use.
Also, although we believe a fundamental strength of the
current companion studies is the restricted criteria used
for both BI and LI group inclusion, it will be important
for future studies to include a broader skill range in
both the intact and impaired groups to determine a
range of typical performance and critical cutoffs, should
they exist. Despite these significant challenges, combined results from the lexical and nonlinguistic processing studies clearly point us in a new direction for
the development of nonbiased assessment, and possibly intervention, techniques. This is one of the greatest
areas of practical need within the field of speech-language pathology, as clinicians are faced with the challenges of accurately separating differences from disorders in an increasingly diverse population (Kohnert,
Kennedy, Glaze, Kan, & Carney, 2003). Of equal importance, results from these studies provide empirical data
needed to develop models that link typical and atypical
first- and second-language learning in children within
the same comprehensive theoretical framework.

Acknowledgments
Portions of this study were presented at the Annual
Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association in Atlanta, GA, November 2002. Funding for this
research was provided by National Institute of Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders Grant R03 DC05542, titled
"Cognitive-Linguistic Processing in LI and L2 Learners,"
awarded to Kathryn Kohnert, and R01 DC04437, titled

Table 4. Cross-study comparison: Summary of between-group differences.
Task
Word recognition
Result

Picture naming

Simple
auditory RT

Simple
visual RT

Choice
auditory RT

Choice
visual RT

Yes
0.4

No

Yes
0.5

Yes
0.5

Yes
0.7

Yes
1.3

Yes
0.4

No

No

No

No

Noa

No

No

Nob
0.5

Nob
0.3

Yes
0.8

Accuracy

RT

Accuracy

RT

EO > LI
d

No

No

Yes
0.9

EO > BI
d

No

No

BI > LI
d

No

No

Note. The table shows the presence (Yes) or absence (No) of significantly better performance (>) by one group
relative to another group. Included are the two lexical tasks (percentage accurate and RT) from Windsor and
Kohnert (2004) and the four nonlinguistic tasks (RT only) from the current study. EO = English-only; LI = language
impairment; BI = typical bilingual. Effect sizes are included for significant group differences.
The LI group had significantly higher accuracy than did the BI group. bThe trend was for the BI group to be faster
than the LI group. The effect sizes support some absence of overlap between the two groups.
a

Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

901

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

"General Slowing in Language Impairment: Does It Exist?"
awarded to Jennifer Windsor. Additional funding was
provided to Kathryn Kohnert by the University of Minnesota
(McKnight Land-Grant Professorship and Grant-in-Aid of
Research, Artistry and Scholarship) and to Jennifer Windsor
and Kathryn Kohnert (Interdisciplinary Research, Scholarly
and Creative Activities Program).
We are grateful to the following research assistants for
help with stimulus development, data collection, and data
scoring: Meredith Bailey-Orr, Krista Bowe, Tara Cassidy,
Kerry Danahy, Mark DeRuiter, Caren Dorman, Patti Dropik,
Martha Hegewisch, Pui Fong Kan, Ruth Miller, Amanda
Rowe, Cheryl Street, Krisana Theis, Sara Turman, and
Dongsun Yim. We thank Edward Carney for technical
assistance.

References
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition,
variation, and language learning. In B. MacWhinney
(Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition (pp. 157-193).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1989). Functionalism and
the competition model. In B. MacWhinney & E. Bates
(Eds.), The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing (pp.
3-76). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bates, T. C., & Eysenck, H. J. (1993). Intelligence, inspection time, and decision time. Intelligence, 17, 523-531.
Bishop, D. (1990). Handedness, clumsiness and developmental language disorders. Neuropsychologia, 28, 681-690.
Bishop, D., & Edmundson, A. (1987). Specific language
impairment as a maturational lag: Evidence from longitudinal data on language and motor development. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 29, 442-459.
Brawn, P., & Snowden, R. (1999). Can one pay attention
to a particular color? Perception and Psychophysics, 61,
860-873.
Brown, L., Sherbenou, R., & Johnsen, S. (1997). Test of
Nonverbal Intelligence (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Brownell, R. (2000). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary
Test (3rd ed.). Novato, CA: Academic Therapy Publications.

Ellis Weismer, S., & Hesketh, L. (1996). Lexical learning
by children with specific language impairment: Effects of
linguistic input presented at varying speaking rates.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 177-190.
Ellis Weismer, S., & Hesketh, L. (1998). The impact of
emphatic stress on novel word learning by children with
specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1444-1458.
Elman, J., Bates, E., Johnson, M., Karmiloff-Smith, A.,
Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness:
A connectionist perspective on development. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Frearson, W., & Eysenck, H. J. (1986). Intelligence,
reaction time (RT) and a new "odd-man-out" RT paradigm.
Personality and Individual Differences, 7, 807-817.
Hanson, R. A., & Montgomery, J. W. (2002). Effects of
general processing capacity and sustained selective
attention on temporal processing performance of children
with specific language impairments. Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 75-93.
Haywood, K., & Getchell, N. (2001). Life span motor
development (3rd ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Johnston, J., & Ellis Weismer, S. (1983). Mental rotation
abilities in language-disordered children. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 26, 397-403.
Kail, R. (1994). A method of studying the generalized
slowing hypothesis in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37,
418-421.
Kail, R., & Salthouse, T. (1994). Processing speed as a
mental capacity. Acta Psychologica, 86, 199-225.
Keuss, P., Van der Zee, F., & Van den Bree, M. (1990).
Auditory accessory effects on visual processing. Acta
Psychologica, 75, 41-54.
Kohnert, K., Kennedy, M., Glaze, L., Kan, P., & Carney,
E. (2003). Breadth and depth of diversity in Minnesota:
Challenges to clinical competency. American Journal of
Speech-Language Pathology, 12, 259-272.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with
specific language impairment name pictures more slowly
than their peers? Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 30, 1081-1097.

Brownell, R. (2001). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test: Spanish-English edition. Novato, CA: Academic
Therapy Publications.

Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cerella, J., & Hale, S. (1994). The rise and fall in information-processing rates over the life span. Acta Psychologica,
86, 109-197.

MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002).
Reassessing working memory: Comment on Just and
Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-Revised (3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN:
American Guidance Service.
Dunn, L. M., Padilla, E. R., Lugo, D. E., & Dunn, L. M.
(1986). Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes Peabody [Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test]. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Edwards, J., & Lahey, M. (1996). Auditory lexical decisions
of children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 1263-1273.

902

MacWhinney, B. (1997). Second language acquisition and
the competition model. In A. M. B. de Groot & J. K. Kroll
(Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 113-144). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Miller, C., Kail, R., Leonard, L., & Tomblin, B. (2001).
Speed of processing in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 44, 416-433.
Miller, J., Franz, V., & Ulrich, R. (1999). Effects of
auditory stimulus intensity on response force in simple,
go/no-go, and choice RT tasks. Perception and Psychophysics, 61, 107-119.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 47 * 891-903 * August 2004

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Montgomery, J. (2000). Relation of working memory to offline and real-time sentence processing in children with
specific language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics,
21, 117-148.
Montgomery, J. (2002). Examining the nature of lexical
processing in children with specific language impairment:
Temporal processing or processing capacity deficit?
Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 447-470.
Montgomery, J. W., & Leonard, L. (1998). Real-time
inflectional processing by children with specific language
impairment: Effects of phonetic substance. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1412-1431.
Nichols, S., Townsend, J., & Wulfeck, B. (1995). Covert
visual attention in language-impaired children (Tech. Rep.
No. CND-9502). San Diego: University of California,
Center for Research in Language.
Oldfield, R.C. (1971). The Edinburgh Handedness Inventory: The assessment and analysis of handedness.
Neuropsychologia, 9, 360-386.

of language fundamentals (3rd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.
Semel, E., Wiig, E., & Secord, W. (1997). Clinical evaluation of language fundamentals (Spanish ed.). San Antonio,
TX: Psychological Corporation.
Sininger, Y., Klatzky, R., & Kirchner, D. (1989). Memory
scanning speed in language-disordered children. Journal
of Speech and Research, 32, 289-297.
Swisher, L., Plante, E., & Lowell, S. (1994). Nonlinguistic
deficits of children with language disorders complicate the
interpretation of their nonverbal IQ scores. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, 25, 235-240.
Windsor, J. (2002). Contrasting general and process-specific
slowing in language impairment. Topics in Language
Disorders, 22, 49-61.
Windsor, J., & Hwang, M. (1999). Children's auditory
lexical decisions. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 990-1002.

Powell, R., & Bishop, D. (1992). Clumsiness and perceptual problems in children with specific language impairment. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 34,
755-765.

Windsor, J., & Kohnert, K. (2004). The search for common
ground: Part I. Lexical performance by linguistically
diverse learners. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 47, xxx-xxx.

Psychology Software Tools, Inc. (2000). E-Prime [Computer software]. Pittsburgh, PA: Author.

Windsor, J., Milbrath, R., Carney, E., & Rakowski, S.
(2001). General slowing in language impairment:
Methodological considerations in testing the hypothesis.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44,
446-461.

Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language impairment as a period of extended optional
infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38,
850-863.
Riddle, L. (1992). The attentional capacity of children with
specific language impairment. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Indiana University, Bloomington.
Salthouse, T. A. (1992). Mechanisms of age-cognition
relations in adulthood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Segalowitz, N. (1997). Individual differences in second
language acquisition. In A. M. B. de Groot & J. F. Kroll
(Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 85-112). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Semel, E., Wiig, E., & Secord, W. (1995). Clinical evaluation

Woodcock, R. (1987). Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests-
Revised. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Received May 26, 2003
Revision received September 15, 2003
Accepted December 11, 2003
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2004/066)
Contact author: Kathryn Kohnert or Jennifer Windsor,
Department of Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, 115
Shevlin Hall, University of Minnesota,164 Pillsbury Drive,
SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455. E-mail: kohne005@umn.edu
or windsor@umn.edu

Kohnert & Windsor: Nonlinguistic Performance

903

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

