Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Changing places: A cross-language perspective
on frequency and family size in Dutch and Hebrew
Fermin Moscoso del Prado Martin a,*, Avital Deutsch b, Ram Frost b,
Robert Schreuder c, Nivja H. De Jong c,d, R. Harald Baayen c,d
a

d

MRC-Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK
b
The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
c
University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Received 7 August 2003; revision received 20 June 2005
Available online 30 September 2005

Abstract
This study uses the morphological family size effect as a tool for exploring the degree of isomorphism in the networks
of morphologically related words in the Hebrew and Dutch mental lexicon. Hebrew and Dutch are genetically unrelated, and they structure their morphologically complex words in very different ways. Two visual lexical decision experiments document substantial cross-language predictivity for the family size measure after partialing out the effect of
word frequency and word length. Our data show that the morphological family size effect is not restricted to Indo-European languages but extends to languages with non-concatenative morphology. In Hebrew, a new inhibitory component of the family size effect emerged that arises when a Hebrew root participates in different semantic fields.
O 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Morphological processing; Family size effect; Hebrew; Semitic root; Visual lexical decision

The morphological family size of a word is the type
count of all the complex words in which this word appears as a constituent (Baayen, Lieber, & Schreuder,
1997; Schreuder & Baayen, 1997). Words with large
morphological families elicit faster response latencies
in visual lexical decision than words with small morphological families. For instance, the English word man appears as a constituent in nearly 200 other English words,
including compounds such as policeman or manpower,

*

Corresponding author. Fax: +44 1223 359 062.
E-mail address: fermin.moscoso-del-prado-martin@mrc-cbu.
cam.ac.uk (F. Moscoso del Prado Martin).

and derived words such as manhood. On the other extreme, word such as scythe do not appear as constituents
in any other words. (Note here that inflectional variants
of a word are not counted as different members of the
morphological family, thus one would not count scythes
or policemen as different from scythe or policeman for the
purpose of calculating morphological family sizes.)
Although morphological family size is highly correlated
with word frequency, i.e., the more frequent a word is,
the larger its morphological family size tends to be, the
effect of family size is present even after having controlled for the effects of word frequency (Schreuder &
Baayen, 1997). The growing body of experimental evidence on the morphological family size effect shows that

0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2005.07.003

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

the locus of this effect is at the semantic level. Schreuder
and Baayen (1997) and Bertram, Schreuder, and Baayen
(2000) pointed out, using visual lexical decision, that the
exclusion of opaque family members from the family
counts improves the correlations with response latencies.
Similarly, in priming experiments the morphological
family size of a target word interacts with the amount
of priming elicited by semantically related prime-target
pairs (Feldman & Pastizzo, 2003). De Jong, Schreuder,
and Baayen (2000), again using visual lexical decision,
provided further evidence that the effect of family size
is not mediated by surface form. For instance, the Dutch
irregular past participle ``gevochten'' (i.e., fought) activates only the family of ``vechten'' (i.e., to fight) and
not that of ``vocht'' (moisture). In addition, homonyms
show differential family size effects when presented in a
disambiguating context (De Jong, 2002). The effect of
family size has been observed not only for Dutch, but
also for English (Baayen, Lieber et al., 1997; see also
De Jong, Feldman, Schreuder, Pastizzo, & Baayen,
2002) and German (Ludeling & De Jong, 2002). Additionally, Feldman and Siok (1997, 1999) report a similar
effect in visual lexical decision in Chinese, where characters with semantic radicals (a pseudo-morphological unit
without a phonetic realization) that are present in many
other characters are recognised faster.
Although previous research indicates that the locus
of the family size effect is at the semantic and not at
the formal level, it remains an open question how general this finding is. It might be the case that, in other languages with different and more complex word formation
systems than English or Dutch, the role of the form-related aspects of a complex word might be more important than its semantic characteristics, compared to
English or Dutch. An example of such a language is
Hebrew, which belongs to the Hamo-Semitic language
family, in contrast with the Indoeuropean languages
that were previously studied. Previous research in
masked priming has shown that morphologically related
Hebrew words showed priming independently of their
semantic relatedness. This suggests a stronger role of
the purely formal factors of Hebrew morphological
structure than in other languages.
All Hebrew verbs and most Hebrew nouns and adjectives are comprised of two basic derivational morphemes: the root and the word pattern. The root
usually consists of three consonants, while the word pattern consists of a cluster of vowels, or vowels and consonants. The root generally conveys the core meaning of
the word, while the word-pattern creates variations on
its meaning, and determines the grammatical properties
of the word. This combination of root and word patterns is an example of a non-concatenative morphology
(Berman, 1978; McCarthy, 1981). The morphological
units of Hebrew words cannot generally be found by
splitting words into sequences of morphemes as beads

497

on a string. More complex interposition processes are
required.
Although word patterns shape the meaning of words,
the exact meaning of a word cannot be unequivocally
predicted from its constituent morphemes, the root
and the word pattern. This is because of the linguistic
characteristics of the word patterns on the one hand,
and the existence of homonymic roots on the other
hand. As to the word patterns, although they determine
the core meaning of words, their semantic characteristics, most markedly in the nominal system, can be
ambiguous: many of the nominal word patterns can denote more than one semantic category (e.g., the nominal
word pattern -a-e-et can denote both profession and disease) on the one hand, and a specific semantic category
can be expressed by more than one nominal pattern
(e.g., profession can be denoted by the nominal patterns
-a-e-et and -a-a-). (The long dash between the two vowels represents a gemination or OdoublingO of the corresponding root consonant.)
An example of such a homonymic root is G-D-R
(root consonants are shown in upper case throughout
this paper), which is present in the words GaDeR (fence)
and haGDaRa (definition). In contrast, as an example of
a root with a constant semantic contribution, consider
the root SH-M-N, which always carries the core meaning fat. This root can be embedded in the nominal pattern -e-e- to form the noun SHeMeN (oil), in the
adjectival pattern -a-e- to form the adjective SHaMeN
(fat), or in the verbal pattern hi--i- creating the verb
hiSHMiN (to become fat).
Previous studies in Hebrew using masked and cross
modal priming paradigms have demonstrated the role
of the root morpheme in the lexical access of Hebrew
complex words, suggesting that root morphemes constitute lexical units in the Hebrew lexicon (Deutsch, Frost,
Pollatsek, & Rayner, 2000; Frost, Deutsch, & Forster,
2000; Frost, Forster, & Deutsch, 1997). Furthermore,
the findings in forward masked priming experiments
indicate that the lexical status of the root morphemes
and their role in mediating lexical access is not conditioned by semantic transparency (Frost et al., 1997),
although it can interact with semantic effects (Frost,
Deutsch, Gilboa, Tannenbaum, & Marslen-Wilson,
2000). In addition, further investigation of irregular root
morphemes, the so-called defective roots in which one or
two consonants may be absent, indicates that the role of
the root in mediating lexical access is very sensitive to
the abstract structural characteristics of the morpheme
(Frost et al., 2000). Violation of the standard morphological form inhibits the priming effect between morphologically related words. Possibly, the exact repetition of
the root structure allows the root to acquire a formal
representation that is independent of meaning. In other
words, the Hebrew root seems to be an autonomous
form unit, in the sense of Aronoff (1994).

498

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

If the representation of the root is indeed independent of meaning, meaning overlap would not be a
requirement for a word to participate in a given morphological family. We will refer to this possibility as
the formal family hypothesis. On the other hand, considering that Hebrew words sharing a root generally belong
to the same semantic field, and considering that the morphological priming effect in Hebrew interacts with
semantic transparency (Frost, Deutsch, Gilboa et al.,
2000), it is also possible that the family size effect in Hebrew might have a conceptual, post-access origin, just as
in Germanic languages. According to this second
hypothesis, that we will call the conceptual family
hypothesis, Hebrew roots which express more than one
semantic field should be split into as many homonymic
roots as there are semantic fields, similar to previous
findings in Indoeuropean languages.
In Experiment 1, using visual lexical decision, we
clarify the nature of the family size effect in Hebrew,
i.e., whether it is formal or semantic in nature. We do
this by contrasting non-homonymic roots (i.e., roots
that appear in words that always share the same semantic field), with homonymic roots (i.e., roots that appear
in words belonging to more than one semantic field).
If the conceptual family hypothesis is correct, we expect
to find differential family size effects for these two kinds
of roots. Non-homonymic roots should reveal a family
size effect just as observed in visual lexical decision for
Dutch, German, and English. Homonymic roots, on
the other hand, might reveal separate family size effects
for each of their semantic fields (cf., De Jong, 2002).
Alternatively, if the formal family hypothesis is correct,
it makes no sense to distinguish between homonymic
and non-homonymic roots in Hebrew. In that case, the
family size effect will be caused by the total number of
words derived from the homonymic root (regardless of
the different semantic fields) just as in the case of nonhomonymic roots.
We have opted for using visual lexical decision as our
experimental task because in our previous studies visual
lexical decision has emerged as a highly sensitive task for
tracing the effects of family size. Effects of family size
and family frequency have also been studied using
MEG, see Pylkkanen, Feintuch, Hopkins, and Marantz
(2004) and word naming (Baayen, 2005).
The second issue that this study addresses is the extent to which Hebrew and Dutch are isomorphic at the
conceptual level. The issue of cross language isomorphy
at the conceptual level is addressed by Bates et al. (2003).
They report that in picture naming in seven different languages, naming latencies correlate with the (objective or
subjective) frequency of a word in a language equally
strongly as they correlate with the frequency of its translation into another language. They found, for instance,
that Chinese frequencies predict English naming latencies just as well as English frequencies do, and vice versa.

As noted by Bates et al., although these results suggest
that there is a substantial conceptual component to the
word frequency effect, this cross-linguistic evidence does
not rule out the possibility of form playing a role as well.
To what extent perceptual familiarity with the word
form on the one hand (Bradley & Forster, 1987; Morton, 1969) and familiarity with specific objects and concepts on the other hand (Becker, 1979; Borowsky &
Besner, 1993; Plaut & Booth, 2000; Stanovich & West,
1981) contribute to this symmetric word frequency effect
in picture naming across languages is at present unclear.
To gain further insight into the extent to which the
conceptual systems of unrelated languages might be isomorphic, we use the family size effect as a diagnostic
tool. Parallel to Experiment 1, we report a second experiment with the Dutch translations of the Hebrew words.
This experiment will allow us to ascertain whether the
cross-linguistic predictivity of word frequency in picture
naming reported by Bates and colleagues generalizes to
visual lexical decision. More importantly, this experiment will also make it possible to investigate the crosslinguistic predictivity of another count not considered
by Bates and her colleagues, the family size effect. Given
the conceptual nature of the family size effect, if Hebrew
family sizes predict Dutch response latencies after having partialled out the effects of Dutch word frequency,
word length and family size, and, likewise Dutch counts
predict Hebrew response latencies, this would provide
clear evidence for considerable overlap in cross-linguistic lexico-semantic organization.
For what follows, it should be kept in mind that
word formation in Hebrew and Dutch are fundamentally different at the level of form. This difference in form
does not only concern the non-concatenative morphology involved in the formation of derived words in Hebrew
and the concatenative morphology characterizing word
formation in Dutch. A difference between the two languages is also present with respect to the use of compounding for word formation. Compounding is a
concatenative process, which is used abundantly in
Dutch. In fact, in Dutch, compounding is the most productive word formation process. Although Hebrew has
some concatenative derivational affixes, typically used
in combination with non-concatenative processes, it
makes hardly any use of the purely concatenative process of compounding. The function of compounding as
known in English or Dutch is taken over in Hebrew
by phrasal constructions. Consequently, morphological
families in Hebrew and Dutch differ substantially with
respect to both their magnitude and the kind of words
that make up the families. In Dutch, as in English, morphological families consist largely of compounds (see
Schreuder & Baayen, 1997), while in Hebrew, they consist almost exclusively of derived words. The difference
in the magnitude of the family sizes in the two languages
is clear from the differences in the ranges. For Dutch, the

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

range of the overall family size counts is [0,549], for Hebrew, the range is roughly [0,25]. If we consider the
range of the family size count in Dutch when this count
is restricted to derivation, we find a substantially reduced range, [0,11]. This range is smaller than the range
for Hebrew, reflecting the greater productivity of derivation in Hebrew compared to Dutch. The bulk of morphological families in Dutch consists of words with
compound structure, with a range of [0,448]. In other
words, Hebrew and Dutch differ both with respect to
the dimension of concatenation and with respect to the
productivity of derivation and compounding. Note that,
given the smaller sizes of morphological families in Hebrew, it is not self-evident that it will be possible to observe a significant effect in Hebrew. Due to the small
family sizes in Hebrew, this lexical variable might not
have measurable consequences in this language.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Forty undergraduate students at the Hebrew University were paid to take part in this experiment. All were
native speakers of Hebrew.
Materials
We compiled a list of 99 Hebrew roots and their
morphological families using a Hebrew dictionary
(Schweika, 1997). Forty-three of these roots were nonhomonymic in the sense that all their family members
belong to the same semantic field. The remaining fiftysix roots were homonymic, i.e., their family members
belong to two or more different semantic fields. An
example of a non-homonymic root is B-G-R, which
has as family members the words BaGRut (maturity),
mBuGaR (an adult), hitBaGRut (maturation), mitBaGeR
(teenager), BoGeR (mature), BaGaR (to grow up),
BiGGeR (to grow), and hitBaGeR (to mature). By homonymic root we refer to Hebrew families whose members
cluster into different semantic fields. An example of a
homonymic family is the root X-SH-B, which appears
in two semantic fields, one relating to thinking, e.g., XaSHaB (to think), maXSHaBa (a thought), XaSHiBa
(thinking), and one relating to arithmetics and calculations, e.g., XiSHeB (to calculate), XeSHBon (arithmetics), XiSHuB (calculation). It can be observed in this
example that, although thinking and calculating both
refer to mental activities, any two words from these
two semantic fields will be less similar in meaning than
any two words selected from the same semantic field.
The assignment of words to semantic fields, carried
out by the second author on the basis of dictionary
definitions, is supported by an analysis of semantic

499

distances based upon Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997). As no operational LSA system is available for Hebrew, we obtained vector-based
semantic similarity scores for the English translations
of our Hebrew words, using the scripts available at
http://lsa.colorado.edu with their default settings. The average similarity between the pairs of target
words from different semantic fields of the same Hebrew
root was 0.09. We compared these similarities with pairs
of words from the same semantic field of a Hebrew root,
choosing the target word and a member of the morphological family with, if possible, a translation equivalent
in English that was not morphologically related, to be
conservative (e.g., calculation and arithmetic). The average similarity between these pairs of words was 0.31,
which is significantly greater than the average similarity
score for the pairs of words from different semantic
fields (W = 448.5, p < .0001, one-tailed Wilcoxon rank
sum test). In addition, we calculated the LSA similarity
scores for the English translations of 25 randomly selected pairs of words from our experiment (independently of
them sharing a root or not). The average similarity score
between these pairs was also 0.09, not significantly different from the average similarity scores obtained for
words from different semantic fields of the same root
(W = 834.5, p = .2202). Thus, our traditional lexicographic assignment of words to semantic fields is supported by current co-occurrence based techniques.
For each non-homonymic root, we selected one family member for presentation in the experiment. For each
homonymic root, we selected two words belonging to
different semantic fields for inclusion in the experiment.
Each of the target words was associated with two
counts, the count of family members in the same semantic field, henceforth the related family size, and the count
of family members in other semantic fields, henceforth
the unrelated family size.1 We have chosen this terminology for notational convenience, and it should be kept in
mind that there are gradations of semantic similarity
both within and between semantic fields. For each word,
we also obtained a frequency count using a corpus of
200 million words of Hebrew newspaper texts (David
Plaut, personal communication).
We constructed two experimental master lists. Both
master lists contained the 43 words representing the 43
non-homonymic roots. To each master list, we added
56 words with homonymic roots. We assigned the words
with homonymic roots to these lists such that two words
sharing a given homonymic root did not appear in the
same list. Thus, exactly the same 99 roots appeared in
both lists. We also made sure that the average related
family size was approximately the same across the two

1
Note that, for the unrelated family size count, all nonhomonymic roots have a value of zero.

500

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

Table 1
Means and standard derivation for the different counts in the Hebrew data set, and in the subsets of homonymic and non-homonymic
(after removing the 3 outliers and 1 word with unreliable family size counts)
Total (151 items)
Mean
Frequency
Word length
Total family size
Related family size
Unrelated family size
Family size ratio
Response latency
Error

32.17
4.16
12.06
7.21
4.79
0.60
681 ms
3.02%

Standard deviation
88.44
0.89
5.94
4.52
4.79
1.25
56 ms
4.74%

Non-homonymic roots (43 items)
Mean
36.09
3.90
8.95
8.95
0.00
2.14
678 ms
3.93%

Standard deviation
111.14
0.91
5.44
5.44
0.00
0.61
47 ms
5.22%

Homonymic roots (108 items)
Mean
30.63
4.26
13.28
6.53
6.75
0.00
682 ms
2.66%

Standard deviation
78.32
0.87
5.69
3.93
4.37
0.86
59 ms
4.52%

The word frequency counts are in occurrences per million.

lists. Each word was paired with a pseudo-word that did
not violate the phonological structure of Hebrew. These
pseudo-words were constructed by applying the wordpattern of the corresponding word to a non-existing
(but possible) Hebrew root. We constructed three pseudo-randomized versions of each master list, each of
which was preceded by a practice session of 10 words
and 10 pseudo-words. Both words and pseudo-words
were displayed with the vowel signs to avoid ambiguity
of interpretation of the target words.Table 1 provides
the means and standard deviations for the frequency
and family size counts for this dataset.
Procedure
Participants performed the experiment in noise-attenuated experimental rooms. They were asked to decide as
quickly and accurately as possible whether the letter
string appearing on the computer screen was a real Hebrew word. Each stimulus was preceded by a fixation
mark in the middle of the screen for 500 ms. followed
after 50ms. blank screen by the stimulus, which appeared at the middle of the screen.
Stimuli were presented on color monitors in white
lowercase 28 point letters on a dark background and
they remained on the screen for 1500 ms. The maximum
time span allowed for a response was 2000 ms from
stimulus onset.
Results and discussion
All participants in this experiment performed with an
error rate less than 15%. Three words elicited error rates
above 30% and were removed from the data set.
Family size is known to be correlated with frequency
(Schreuder & Baayen, 1997). In this data set, the correlation between related log family size and log word frequency is r = .24 (p = .0031). The correlations between
word frequency, family size, and word length introduce
medium collinearity in our data matrix (with a condition

number j of 15.40), consequently, our analyses are to be
interpreted with caution when generalizing beyond the
range of frequencies and family sizes represented in the
data set (Belsley, Kuh, & Welsch, 1980). To ascertain
whether family size contributes to the reaction times
independently of word frequency and word length, we
first partial out the effect of word frequency and word
length before testing for an effect of family size.
For the words with homonymic roots, we have two
family size counts, one count for the family members
with meanings related to the meaning of the target word
(the related family size), and one count of family members with meanings that are unrelated to that of the target (the unrelated family size).
For a by-participant regression analysis, Lorch and
Myers (1990) provide a technique (used, e.g., by Alegre
& Gordon, 1999) that yields significance values for the
predictors, but that does not allow a straightforward procedure for partialling out the contribution of word frequency before assessing the contribution of family size.
Hence, we have made use of a multi-level extension of
the Lorch and Myers approach that overcomes this disadvantage while maintaining the strengths of the original
Lorch and Myers technique (Baayen, Tweedie, & Schreuder, 2002; Pinheiro & Bates, 2000). A multi-level linear
regression with log response latency as dependent variable
and log word frequency, word length, and log family size
as predictors revealed a significant facilitatory effect of
word frequency (F (1, 3716) = 267.8, p < .0001), but no
significant effect of word length after having partialled
out the effect of word frequency (F (1, 3715) = 2.1,
p = .1500). Both the related (F (1, 3716) = 10.9, p <
.0010) and unrelated family size (F (1, 3716) = 10.5,
p < .0012) counts had significant effects on the regression
after partialling out the effect of word frequency.
A by-item multiple regression revealed the same
pattern of results: a facilitatory effect of word frequency
(F (1, 146) = 86.3, p < .0001), no effect of word length
(F < 1), a marginally significant facilitatory effect of

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

the related family size (F (1, 145) = 3.6, p = .0598) and a
marginally significant inhibitory effect of the unrelated
family size count (F (1, 145) = 2.8, p = .0941), after
partialling out the effect of word frequency.
In both the by-participant and by-item regressions,
the effects of related and unrelated family size had coefficients of opposite signs: negative for the related family
size count, and positive for the unrelated family size
count. The absolute values of these coefficients were
of very similar magnitudes (0.010 and 0.008 by-participant; 0.012 and 0.009 by-item). We can test
whether these two coefficients differ only in sign but
not in absolute magnitude by fitting a second model
to the data in which related and unrelated family size
are represented by a single parameter, the family size
ratio,


related family size  1
/ 1/4 log
;
1
unrelated family size  1
where, as before, we add 1 to the counts to avoid having
to take the logarithm of zero. (Throughout the text, we
use log to refer to the natural logarithm.) Since


related family size  1
log
unrelated family size  1
1/4 logrelated family size  1
 logunrelated family size  1;

2

a model with the family size ratio is mathematically
equivalent to a model with two coefficients with different
sign but the same absolute value. We compare the more
complex model with two predictors with the simpler
model with only one predictor (the family size ratio)
using a likelihood ratio test for the by-participant analysis (Crawley, 2002, p. 696) and the standard F test for
the by-item analysis (Chatterjee, Hadi, & Price, 2000,
pp. 70-72).
A multi-level linear regression with log response
latency as dependent variable and log word frequency
and family size ratio as predictors revealed a significant
facilitatory effect of word frequency (F (1, 3717) =
267.9, p < .0001) and a significant facilitatory effect of
the family size ratio (F (1, 3717) = 21.3, p < .0001).
The likelihood ratio test comparing this simpler model
with the more complex model revealed that the extra
parameter of the more complex model does not lead
to a significantly better fit to the data (L (7,6) = 0.12,
p = .7234).
The by-item multiple regression revealed the same
pattern of results: a facilitatory effect of word frequency
(F (1, 146) = 87.42, p < .0001) and a significant effect of
the family size ratio (F (1, 146) = 7.34, p = .0076) after
partialling out the effect of word frequency. The F test
comparing the more complex with the simpler model
yielded F < 1. Again, model parsimony requires selection of the simpler model.

501

The use of the family size ratio has as additional
advantages (1) that its distribution is less skewed--for
non-homonymic roots, the unrelated family size count
is always zero, and (2) that the collinearity in the model
is reduced. Hence, the models with the family size ratio
combine greater parsimony with a data matrix that is
more appropriate for regression analysis.
The error analysis for this dataset confirmed the main
effects that were found on the reaction times, without
showing any speed-accuracy trade-off.
The above analyses showed solid effects of word frequency in both the by-subject and the by-item analyses.
None of these analyses revealed an independent contribution of Hebrew word length after having partialled
out the effects of word frequency. The effect of written
frequency, documented in Hebrew in the present paper
for the first time, is not surprising given the strong effects
of frequency that have been reported in many other languages, and in cognition in general (e.g., Hasher &
Zacks, 1984; Taft, 1979). The lack of reliable effects
for word length is probably due to the relatively low variance of Hebrew word length in our data.
More interesting is that, in these analyses, the family
size ratio also emerged as a strong independent predictor
of response latencies, after partialling out the effects of
word frequency and word length. In other words, our
analyses show that related and unrelated family size
have effects of the same magnitude but with opposite
sign, facilitatory for the related family, and inhibitory
for the unrelated family [see Eq. (1)]. The latter inhibitory effect is, by definition, present only for words with
homonymic roots--for non-homonymic roots, the count
of unrelated family size is zero, and does therefore not
contribute to the family size ratio.
The effect of the family size ratio is consistent with
two different interpretations. One possible interpretation
is that we are observing the outcome of two separate
processes of equal magnitude. Another possibility is that
we are observing the effect of a single process, for instance, the joint influence of all words sharing a root,
moderated by their semantic relation to the target word.
The present data do not enable us to choose between
these options, although OccamOs razor favors the single
process solution. Further research is required here.
Experiment 1 documents for the first time a Family
Size effect for a non Indo-European language. Whereas
the Family Size effect in Indo-European languages is anchored in the presence of a shared stem, i.e., an independent morphological unit that, in English, German, or
Dutch, can even be a word in the language, the family
size effect in Hebrew is anchored in the Semitic root, a
non-concatenating morphological unit, which can never
exist as a word without a word pattern. In addition,
Experiment 1 shows that family size effects are present
in a language with hardly any compounding. This shows
that it is not the formal aspects of word formation

502

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

(concatenative or non-concatenative, derivation or compounding) that are relevant for the family size effect, but
rather the semantic aspect of word formation: the creation or denotation of concepts. Finally, the results for
the homonymic roots support the conceptual family
hypothesis and argue against the formal family
hypothesis.
The inhibitory effect of the unrelated family size that
emerges for the Hebrew words with homonymic roots
contrasts with the family size effects documented for
homonymic words in Dutch (De Jong, 2002). When
Dutch homonymic words are presented in a disambiguating context, only the family size of the contextually
appropriate meaning has a facilitatory effect, with no
trace of an inhibitory effect of the family size of the contextually inappropriate reading of the homonym. Note
that there is a difference between the Dutch and Hebrew
homonyms. Dutch homonyms, like English homonyms
such as bank, share the same phonological form, while
Hebrew words with homonymic roots have different
phonological forms (compare, for instance, GaDeR
and haGDaRa). This suggests that the inhibition from
the unrelated family size observed for Hebrew homonymic roots might arise due to the combination of differences in phonological form and differences in
meaning for words sharing the same basic morpheme.
This hypothesis receives support from a study addressing the family size effect in the bilingual lexicon. Dijkstra, Moscoso del Prado Martin, Schulpen, Schreuder,
and Baayen (2005) observed an inhibitory effect in the
bilingual lexicon similar to the one reported in the present study for Hebrew words with homonymic roots.
Dutch-English interlingual homographs, i.e., words with
identical spelling but different meanings and pronunciations across two languages, elicited a facilitatory effect of
the homographOs family size in the language that is relevant for the task (e.g., Dutch, when performing Dutch
visual lexical decision), and an inhibitory effect of the
family size in the irrelevant language (e.g., English, when
performing Dutch lexical decision). Crucially, the
amount of inhibition caused by the family size in the
irrelevant language increases as the pronunciations of
the homograph in Dutch and English become more dissimilar. This suggests that the accumulation of dissimilarities at the phonological and semantic levels
interferes with lexical decision.
Experiment 2 examined the visual lexical decision
latencies to the Dutch translation equivalents of the Hebrew words used in Experiment 1. This second experiment was motivated by three considerations. First, it
follows from the claim that the family size effect is
semantic in nature that the family size effect observed
for Hebrew should also be observed for the translation
equivalents of these Hebrew words in Dutch. More specifically, the family size counts in Hebrew might be significant predictors for Dutch response latencies after

partialling out Dutch word frequency. If so, this would
provide evidence for cross-language similarity in lexical
conceptual organization. Second, since the Hebrew
words with homonymic roots have morphological families that translate into Dutch words that are not morphologically related, we predict that the Hebrew
unrelated family size should not be predictive for the
translation equivalents of the Hebrew homonymic
words, while the Hebrew related family size should have
significant cross-language predictive value. Third,
Experiment 2 will enable us to address the issues raised
by Bates and her colleagues, namely, whether the frequency counts from a given language predict the response latencies in another unrelated language equally
well as the frequency counts from that language itself.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Thirty-six undergraduate students at the University
of Nijmegen were paid to take part in this experiment.
All were native speakers of Dutch.
Materials
The 155 Hebrew words from Experiment 1 were
translated into Dutch. The translation was done by hand
using a Dutch-Hebrew Dictionary (Bolle & Pimentel,
1984), checked with the English translation of the words
provided by the second author, and validated by a Hebrew-Dutch bilingual. When a word had different possible translations into Dutch with different meanings, we
included all different translations in the experiment. In
this way, after removing those words which appeared
twice, we obtained a set of 162 Dutch words. Frequency
and family size counts for these words were extracted
from the CELEX lexical database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995). (The family size count of a
given word is calculated by counting the number of morphological parses in the CELEX lexical database in
which the stem appears as a constituent, independently
of their regularity or semantic relation to the stem.)
Each of these words was paired with a pseudo-word
whose phonotactics did not violate the phonology of
Dutch. These pseudo-words were constructed by changing one or two letters of the stem of the corresponding
Dutch word without altering its affixes. Twenty practice
trials, ten words and ten pseudo-words were run before
the actual experiment. We constructed three different
permutations and their corresponding reversed versions
of the original word list.
Table 2 provides the means and standard deviations
for word length, logarithmic frequency, and logarithmic
family size counts for this data set.

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512
Table 2
Means and standard derivation for the different counts after
removing the three outliers in the Dutch data set
160 items
Frequency
Word length
Family size
Response latency
Error

Mean

Standard deviation

88.26
7.17
24.81
578 ms
3.17%

312.55
2.47
30.56
78 ms
4.71%

Procedure
Participants performed the experiment in noise-attenuated experimental rooms. They were asked to decide as quickly and accurately as possible whether the
letter string appearing on the computer screen was a
real Dutch word. Following a pause after the test trials, the experiment was run with two further pauses,
dividing the experiment in three blocks, each of them
containing one third of the stimuli. Each stimulus was
preceded by a fixation mark in the middle of the
screen for 500 ms. After these 500 ms., the stimulus
appeared at the same position. Stimuli were presented
on NEC Multisync color monitors in white lowercase
21 point Arial letters on a dark background and they
remained on the screen for 1500 ms. The maximum
time span allowed for a response was 2000 ms from
stimulus onset.
Results and discussion
All participants in this experiment performed with an
error rate less than 15%. Three words elicited error rates
above 30% and were removed from the data set.
A by-participant multilevel linear regression analysis
of the data with log reaction time as dependent variable
and log frequency, word length, and log family size as
independent covariates revealed facilitatory main effects
of word frequency (F (1, 5505) = 773.18, p < .0001), an
inhibitory effect of word length (F (1, 5505) = 247.98,
p < .0001, after partialling out the effect of word frequency), and a facilitatory effect of family size
(F (1, 5505) = 62.413, p < .0001, after partialling out the
effects of word frequency and word length).
A by-item multiple regression with log reaction times
as the dependent variable and logarithmic word frequency, word length, and logarithmic family size similarly
showed a facilitatory main effect of word frequency
(F (1, 156) = 138.451, p < .0001), an inhibitory main effect of word length (F (1, 156) = 42.82, p < .0001, after
the effect of word frequency), and a facilitatory effect
of family size (F (1, 156) = 10.97, p = .0011, after partialling out the effects of word frequency and word length).
The error analysis for this dataset confirmed the main
effects that were found on the reaction times, without
showing any speed-accuracy trade-off.

503

We further inspected the contributions of the (small)
counts of derived words in the morphological families
and the (large) counts of the compounds in the morphological families separately. A multiple regression model
on the item means revealed a small effect in the expected
direction for the derived family size (F (1, 154) = 2.85) =
0.0468, one-tailed test and a highly significant effect for
the compound family size (F (1, 154) = 15.71, p < .0001,
two-tailed test) in the expected direction. This result
shows that in Dutch the family size effect is not restricted
to compounds only. Even for the small numbers of derived words, an effect of family size seems to be present.
Summing up, just as for Hebrew, the analysis of the
Dutch data set revealed strong facilitatory effects of
written word frequency and family size, i.e., frequent
words and words with large morphological families elicit
shorter response latencies. Additionally, in Dutch, we
also found an inhibitory effect of word length, i.e., longer words elicit longer response latencies.

Cross-language analyses
We now consider the similarities and differences between family size, word length, and frequency effects in
Hebrew and Dutch. Recall that Bates and her colleagues
report that picture naming latencies in several unrelated
languages can be predicted equally well from frequency
counts from the same language as from frequency
counts of translation equivalents in another (unrelated)
language. The question to be addressed now is whether
a similar symmetry in cross-language predictivity is present in our comprehension data for Hebrew and Dutch.
In what follows, we first study the correlations between our independent variables in both experiments.
This will allow us to gauge to what extent the frequency,
family size, and word length counts in the two languages
interrelate. We continue by assessing the individual predictive power of each of these variables on the response
latencies in both experiments. Finally, we present multiple regression analyses in which we assess whether each
of these variables has additional predictive power on the
response latencies, after having partialled out the effects
of the within language counts that were found in the
within language analyses.
Before reporting these analysis, two comments on the
variables in our study are in order. First, recall that the
Hebrew and Dutch frequency counts are based on corpora of different size, 200 million words for Hebrew
and 42 million words for Dutch. A preliminary question
is to what extent this difference might affect our crosslinguistic comparisons. With respect to the frequency
counts, Baayen, Moscoso del Prado, Schreuder, and
Wurm (2003) show that under the lognormal model
(Baayen, 2001; Carroll, 1967) a change in corpus size
amounts to a change in the intercept for the regression

504

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

of frequencies in the one language on the frequencies in
the other language. Since our analyses make use of logtransformed frequencies, the change in corpus size has
no qualitative effect on our regression models. However,
there will be more sampling error in the Dutch counts
(which are based on the smaller corpus), but this may
be offset by better morphological analyses and better
corpus design for Dutch than for Hebrew, resulting in
more accurate frequency estimates.
With respect to the family size counts, it should be
kept in mind that these are based on a comparative analysis of several dictionaries for Hebrew, and on the morphological parses available for Dutch in the CELEX
lexical database. For both languages, we have used the
most comprehensive resources available for estimating
the family size counts. Note that the typological difference between Hebrew and Dutch is visible in the family
size counts, which in Hebrew are restricted to a smaller
range ([0,3.37], in log units) than in Dutch ([0,4.82], in
log units). Under the simplifying assumption that a
one unit change in family size has the same effect size
in both languages, the Dutch family size has a larger
a-priori probability of being a significant predictor.
The same holds for length in letters (range [3,18] for
Dutch, range [3,7] for Hebrew). Therefore, observing
cross-language effects for the Hebrew variables, especially family size and word length, is potentially more difficult than for the Dutch variables.
We begin with an analysis of the correlational structure of the Hebrew and Dutch frequency, word length,
and family size measures. Table 3 summarizes the correlations between the logarithmic frequency counts, word
length, and logarithmic family size in Hebrew and Dutch.
We find an asymmetry in the correlations between Dutch
family size and the word frequencies in both languages.
On the one hand, according to Downie and HeathOs
(1965) method for comparing correlation coefficients
from non-independent samples, the correlation of Dutch
family size and Dutch frequency (r = .63) is significantly
stronger (Z = 2.88, p = .0020) than the correlation between Dutch family size and Hebrew frequency
(r = .40). On the other hand, the correlations of Dutch
or Hebrew frequency with Hebrew related family size do
not differ significantly (Z = 0.34, p = .3657). In fact, the

correlation between Dutch family size and Hebrew frequency (r = .40) is significantly stronger (Z = 1.72,
p = .0428) than the correlation between Hebrew related
family size and Hebrew frequency (r = .24).
With respect to word length, we observed a clear pattern. Dutch word length correlates better than Hebrew
word length both with Hebrew frequency (Z = 1.74,
p = .0409) and with Dutch Frequency (Z = 2.81,
p = .0024), with the correlation between Hebrew length
and Hebrew frequency not reaching significance
(r = .14, p = .08).
Table 4 summarizes the Pearson correlations between the frequency and family size counts and the response latencies in the two languages. First consider
the correlations between the frequency measures and
the reaction times in both languages. Note that there is
an asymmetry between the correlation of frequency
and response latencies. The correlations of Hebrew frequency and Hebrew RT (r = .60) and Dutch frequency
and Dutch RT (r = .65) are not different according to
FisherOs Z-transformation for comparing correlation
coefficients (Z = 0.62, p = .2593). By contrast, Dutch
frequency shows a correlation with Hebrew RT
(r = .39) that is significantly smaller (Z = 2.57,
p = .0051) than the correlation of Hebrew frequency
and Hebrew RT (r = .60). Similarly the correlation
between Hebrew frequency and Dutch RT (r = .44)
is significantly reduced (Z = 2.61, p = .0051) when

Table 4
Pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients between the frequency,
word length, and family size measures in both languages, with
mean logarithmic response latencies from both experiments
RT Hebrew
Frequency (Hebrew)
Frequency (Dutch)
Related family size (Hebrew)
Family size ratio (Hebrew)
Family size (Dutch)
Word length (Hebrew)
Word Length (Dutch)

*

0.60
0.39*
0.26*
0.21*
0.36*
0.14
0.30*

RT Dutch
0.44*
0.65*
0.26*
0.14
0.60*
0.17*
0.60*

The correlations marked with an asterisk are those that are
significant at the 5% level.

Table 3
Pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients between the logarithmic frequency, word length, and family size counts

Fam. S. Dutch
Fam. S. Ratio Hebrew
Rel. Fam. S. Hebrew
Length Dutch
Length Hebrew
Freq. Dutch

Frequency
Hebrew

Frequency
Dutch

Length
Hebrew

Length
Dutch

Fam. S.
Hebrew

Fam. S. Ratio
Hebrew

0.40*
0.06
0.24*
0.31*
0.14
0.46*

0.63*
0.07
0.21*
0.44*
0.18*

0.15
0.04
0.11
0.30*

0.50*
0.02
0.11

0.33*
0.04

0.17*

The correlations marked with an asterisk are those that are significant at the 5% level.

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

compared with the correlation between Dutch frequency
and Dutch response latencies (r = .65). In other words,
correlations between frequency and reaction times are
weaker across languages than within languages. This
pattern differs from that reported by Bates et al. (2003)
for the picture naming paradigm: they observed equal
cross and within-language correlations.
A pattern different from that observed for the frequency-RT correlations emerges in the correlations between family sizes and reaction times, as can be seen
in the central sector of Table 4. The correlation of Dutch
family size with Dutch response latencies (r = .60) is
significantly stronger (Z = 4.05, p < .0001) than that of
Hebrew family size ratio with Hebrew response latencies
(r = .21), (this is also true for Hebrew related family
size and Hebrew reaction times (r = .26, Z = 3.55,
p = .0002) or Hebrew total family size (r = .16,
Z = 4.42, p < .0001)). At the same time, the correlation
between Dutch family size and Hebrew response latencies (0.36) is slightly greater than the correlation between Hebrew family size ratios and Hebrew response
latencies (0.21). Although this difference is only marginally significant (Z = 1.55, p = .06), it is interesting
since it indicates that Dutch family size is at least as
good a predictor of Hebrew response latencies, as any
of the Hebrew family size counts.
Word length (see the bottom rows of Table 4) shows
a similar pattern to that of family size. The correlation
between Dutch word length with Dutch reaction times
(r = .60) is significantly greater (Z = 4.65, p < .0001)
than that between Hebrew word length and Hebrew
reaction times (r = .14). At the same time, the correlation between Dutch word length and Hebrew reaction
times (r = .30) is greater (Z = 1.52, p < .05) than the correlation between Hebrew word length and Hebrew reaction times (r = .14). This indicates that Dutch word
length emerges as a better predictor of response latencies
in both languages. The reduced correlations observed
for Hebrew family size and Hebrew length are in line
with the reduced ranges of these variables in Hebrew
as compared to Dutch.
Having outlined the correlational structure of the
data sets, we proceed to ascertain whether frequency,
word length and family size are significant predictors
of the response latencies in the other language. More
precisely, we want to ascertain whether frequency, word
length, and family size counts from one language, explain variance in the response latencies in the other language, after having partialled out the within language
variables. For instance, we may ask whether Dutch frequency, family size and word length predict Hebrew response latencies, after having partialled out Hebrew
frequency, word length and family size.
For the by-participant analysis, we added log Hebrew frequency, Hebrew word length, and log Hebrew
related family size, one at time, as predictors to the

505

by-participant regression fit to the Dutch data in Experiment 2. Sequential analyses of variance revealed additional significant main effects of Hebrew frequency
(F (1, 5221) = 13.38, p = .0003), and Hebrew related
family size (F (1, 5221) = 20.31, p < .0001), without any
significant effect for Hebrew word length (F < 1) or family size ratio (F (1, 5220) = 3.78, p = .0518).
For the by-item analysis, we similarly added log Hebrew word frequency, Hebrew word length, and Hebrew
family size ratio (one at a time) as predictors to the byitem regression model that was fit to the Dutch data in
Experiment 2. Sequential analyses of variance revealed
an additional significant facilitatory effect of Hebrew
related family size (F (1, 145) = 3.97, p = .0482), and
did not reveal any additional main effects of log Hebrew
word frequency (F (1, 145) = 2.07, p = .1521), Hebrew
word length (F < 1) or family size ratio (F < 1).
What these analyses show are a strong facilitatory
effect of Hebrew related family size on Dutch response
latencies and an indication of a similar effect of word
frequency. Crucially, we do not find an inhibitory effect of the number of unrelated family members in Hebrew on Dutch reaction times. This is in line with our
interpretation of the family size effect in Hebrew as a
complex effect with an inhibitory and a facilitating
component. The facilitating component is not language
specific. Due to the translation equivalence between
Hebrew and Dutch target words, sizes of the morphological families in the two languages are correlated,
consequently, Hebrew related family size predicts
Dutch response latencies. The inhibitory component
is specific to Hebrew. As a Hebrew speaker activates
all words sharing a given root, the unrelated family
members are activated along with the related family
members. We have seen that the related family members give rise to facilitation in the response latencies,
and that the unrelated family members give rise to
inhibition. This inhibitory effect does not arise in
Dutch because the unrelated family members of the
Hebrew target words fall completely outside the morphological families of their Dutch translation
equivalents.
To study the predictive power of Dutch word frequency, word length and family size on Hebrew response
latencies in more detail, we added the Dutch family
counts and frequencies from Experiment 2 as predictors
for the Hebrew response latencies of Experiment 1.
By-participant
multilevel regression
analyses
revealed additional significant main effects of Dutch
frequency (F (1, 3716) = 10.58, p = .0012), Dutch word
length (F (1, 3715) = 9.71, p = .0019), and Dutch family
size (F (1, 3716) = 11.01, p = .0009) in sequential analyses
of variance, i.e., after having partialled out the Hebrew
predictors.
By-item regression analyses revealed only marginal
main effects of log Dutch word frequency (F (1, 145) =

506

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

3.83, p = .0523), Dutch family size (F (1, 145) = 2.83,
p = .0944), and Dutch word length (F (1, 145) = 3.53,
p = .0623) in sequential analyses of variance, under conservative two-tailed testing (as predicted, the effect of
family size is also facilitatory).
These analyses show that frequency is a significant
predictor across the two languages. In addition, related
family size in Hebrew and family size in Dutch emerge
as cross-language predictors. We interpret these two
family size measures as capturing cross-language similarities in semantic space. Note that the morphology
of Hebrew introduces an asymmetry for the Hebrew
homonymic roots, with cross-language predictivity for
the related family size but not for the unrelated family
size.

General discussion
In this study, we have addressed two main questions.
First, is family size in Hebrew determined only by morphological form or also by meaning? Second, do the
conceptual structures that give rise to the family size effect overlap across languages?
In Experiment 1, we used a regression design with
frequency, word length, and family size as independent
variables, and response latencies and error scores as
dependent variables. We observed independent effects
of frequency and family size, both for the response latencies and for the error measure. The fact that family size
emerged as an independent predictor supports the
hypothesis advanced in Feldman, Frost, and Pnini
(1995) that the number of words in which a Hebrew root
appears might be an important processing variable. The
predictivity of the family size count for a language with
non-concatenative morphology and with derivation to
the near exclusion of compounding supports the hypothesis that the family size effect is independent of word
form and arises at post-access, central levels of lexical
processing and representation.
This hypothesis finds further support by the interesting new finding that the effect of family size was
different for the non-homonymic roots and the homonymic roots. For non-homonymic roots, the family
comprises, by definition, only semantically related
words. The count of this number of words is negatively correlated with reaction times. In the case of homonymic roots, the count of all family members does
not correlate well with reaction times. However, when
we count the semantically related family members and
the semantically unrelated family members separately,
both counts correlate with the reaction times and errors, with equivalent strength in absolute value, but
with opposite signs. The related family size is facilitatory, while the unrelated family size is inhibitory.
These different effects of related and unrelated family

size counts argue in favor of the conceptual family
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the family
size effect in Hebrew arises at the conceptual level, just
as it does in Dutch or English. However, the presence
of an inhibitory effect for the unrelated family members suggests that Hebrew speakers are indeed sensitive to the formal aspect of the three-consonantal
roots of Hebrew words. This is partially in line with
the formal family hypothesis: it suggests that sharing
a purely formal root leads to activation of all family
members with that root. However, contrary to the formal family hypothesis, the unrelated family members
give rise to longer instead of shorter RTOs, indicating
that Hebrew speakers are also sensitive to the degree
of semantic relatedness between the morphologically
related words.
At this point, the question arises of whether the
inhibitory effect of the unrelated family size arises at
the level of orthographic or phonological form, or at
the conceptual level. Consider the possibility that it
arises at the form level, keeping in mind that the
semantic distinction between related and unrelated
family size members cannot be operative at the pre-lexical level of form processing by definition. In this case,
one would predict that a greater total family size would
lead to greater inhibition, as all family members share
the same root form. This prediction, however, holds
true only for the unrelated family members, and not
for the related family members for words with homonymic and non-homonymic roots alike. This points
to competition arising at more central, post-access levels of lexical processing. Since the formal aspects of the
Hebrew root play a central role in the process of word
recognition, we hypothesize that the activation of a
homonymic root results in activation of conflicting
semantic fields and hence to semantic competition
(see, e.g., Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1997; Plaut &
Booth, 2000, for more detailed theories of competition
at the semantic level). Interestingly, this pattern of effects in opposite directions, i.e., facilitatory for the
related members of the family and inhibitory for the
unrelated family members, is reminiscent of the results
reported for Chinese semantic radicals. In priming
experiments, Feldman and Siok (1999) found that Chinese characters sharing the same semantic radical with
the target character facilitated its recognition when
both prime and target where semantically related, but
inhibited the recognition of the target if prime and target where semantically unrelated. (but see Taft & Zhu,
1997, for data suggesting that the semantics of the Chinese radical might be irrelevant).
Experiment 2 investigated the processing in the visual
modality of the Dutch translation equivalents of the Hebrew words from Experiment 1. We observed independent effects of written frequency and family size.
Interestingly, cross-language comparisons revealed that

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

reaction times for Hebrew words can be predicted from
the frequency and family size counts of their Dutch
translation equivalents, and vice-versa. Crucially, this
is so even after having partialled out the effects of the
within language variables. The predictivity of frequency
across languages in visual lexical decision is in line with
the results reported by Bates et al. (2003) for picture
naming.
Recall that Bates and colleagues report equal predictivity for word frequency within and across languages,
whereas we observed asymmetrical cross-language predictivity. There are several possible reasons for this difference. In picture naming, participants receive exactly
the same pictorial visual input, independently of the language in which the pictures are being named. In visual
lexical decision, by contrast, participants receive orthographic visual input which differs substantially between
Hebrew and Dutch. Cross-language differences are more
likely to arise in a task with language-specific stimuli
than in a task using non-linguistic stimuli that are language-independent. More specifically, in picture naming,
participants begin with conceptualizing the picture
shown, and there is little reason to suppose that this process would differ substantially across speakers of different languages, especially as Bates et al. (2003) used
pictures that were explicitly selected by their Opotential
cross-cultural validity.O Conversely, in visual lexical decision, participants have to process the visual input,
which, in the case of Hebrew, proceeds primarily
through root consonants that do not even exist in
Dutch. In other words, language differences are present
from stimulus onset in visual lexical decision, which may
make it more likely to elicit cross-language differences in
lexical processing.
Furthermore, a comparison of the concreteness and
imageability ratings for the materials used by Bates
and the English translations of the materials we used
for Hebrew and Dutch points to substantial differences
(t = 7.89, df = 43.681, p < .0001 for concreteness,
t = 7.01, df = 44.81, p < .0001 for imageability). These
differences are not surprising given that Bates et al. used
picture naming, which requires narrowing down the
stimuli to picturable, concrete, and highly imageable
nouns. Our materials were unrestricted in this sense.

507

They varied across word categories, and some words
had culturally highly specific meanings in Hebrew, e.g.,
orthodox, sermon, parable, and garbage site (mizbala),
a special place for depositing used bibles. Thus, our
cross-linguistic comparison is more susceptible to cultural-specific differences in the usage (and perhaps meaning) of the translation equivalents.
Whereas the cross-linguistic predictivity of word
frequency provides only inconclusive evidence for the
similarity and salience of concepts across languages,
the cross-language predictivity of family size documented in the present study provides unambiguous evidence for a surprising degree of isomorphism in the
way concepts are organized in the Hebrew and Dutch
mental lexicon. Although these two languages are
genetically unrelated and make use of radically different means for creating morphologically complex words
(non-concatenative versus concatenative, and derivation versus predominantly compounding), the networks
of morphologically related words are similar enough to
allow response latencies in the one language to be predicted from the network size in the other language.
Thus, the family size effect emerges as an excellent tool
for mapping the degree of isomorphism in the conceptual relations in the Hebrew and Dutch mental
lexicons.

Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Keren Shatzman for
her help in translating the Hebrew stimuli into Dutch.
We also wish to thank Laurie Feldman, David Plaut,
and three anonymous reviewers for comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this manuscript. This research was supported by the Dutch Research Council
(NWO), the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
and the University of Nijmegen, through a PIONIER
Grant to R.H. Baayen. During the last stages of preparation of this manuscript, the first author received
additional support from the Medical Research Council
(UK) and the European Community under the ``Information Society Technologies Programme'' (IST-200135282).

Appendix A
List of stimuli used in the experiments
Dutch
Word
aantal
adoptie
afdeling

Hebrew
Freq.

Fam. size

Root

16,009
119
2,795

0
5
23

spr
h_  m  s
h_  g  p

Word
[mispar]
_
1/2himu
s
_
1/2hagap

English

Freq.

Unrelated

88212
1,222
6,470

23
7
5

Related

Word

13
``number''
5
``adoption''
2
``wing''
(continued on next page)

508

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

Appendix A (continued)
Dutch
Word
afzetter
angst
annulering
arbeider
archief
baard
balans
barman
barst
been
bemesting
bemesting
berekening
bevelschrift
bewerking
bezoek
biggelen
brief
brug
cadet
chagrijning
cirkel
controle
cultuur
definitie
dief
ding
doof
dragen
dwingen
eenheid
eindigen
eis
fusie
gaande
gebruiken
gedachte
geleidingsvermogen
gevecht
gewoonte
gezwel
glanzend
gooien
greep
grendel
groot
haan
hechtenis
heilig
hek
held
herstelling
hoffelijk
hypothese
indruk
ingewikkeld

Hebrew
Freq.
7
7,490
11
2,606
453
974
598
106
373
7,991
25
25
689
9
374
4,163
42
8,494
2,189
460
109
1,115
2,307
4,200
1,441
572
15,709
377
11,963
3,451
2,984
2,041
3,420
236
416
17,227
11,735
4
1,025
2,459
249
0
4,594
2,231
304
51,667
717
95
2,261
1,307
1,407
15
248
789
6,556
1,951

Fam. size
2
42
1
58
13
15
9
1
9
76
1
1
11
1
7
18
2
78
37
1
2
21
47
104
5
21
16
16
82
6
54
9
20
4
1
53
23
1
38
21
21
14
24
14
7
100
14
2
26
12
29
3
3
10
7
1

Root
gzl
xrd
bT  l
O b  d
gnz
zqn
h_  z  n
mzg
b  q O
r g  l
zbl
d  s_  n
x  s_  b
gzr
O b  d
bqr
zlg
ktb
g  s_  r
s  `  r
zOp
O g l
bqr
gdl
gdr
gnb
dbr
x  r  s_
l  b  s_
h_  l  s
h_  x  d
gmr
d  r  s_
mzg
hlk
s_  m  s_
x  s_  b
hlk
h_  b  q
rgl
gdl
brq
zrq
h_  x  z
brx
gdl
gbr
x  b  h_
q  d  s_
gdr
gbr
tqn
h_  d  v
s_  `  r
r  s_  m
sbk

Word
[gazlan]
[xarada]
[biTul]
[Ooved]
[gniza]
[zaqan]
_
1/2mahazan
[mozeg]
[beqaO]
[regel]
[zibul]
1/2di_sun
1/2xi_sub
[gzera]
[Oibud]
[biqur]
[zalag]
[mixtab]
1/2ge_ser
1/2so`er
[zoOep]
[Oigul]
[baqara]
[gidul]
[hagdara]
[ganab]
[dabar]
1/2xere_s
1/2laba_s
_ s
1/2hile
_
1/2haxdut
[gamar]
1/2dri_sa
[hitmazgut]
[halika]
1/2hi_stame_s
1/2max s_ aba
[molikut]
_
1/2mahabaq
[hergel]
[gidul]
[mabriq]
[zaraq]
_
1/2haxiza
[bariax]
[gadol]
[geber]
1/2maxbo_s
1/2qado_s
[gader]
[gibor]
[tiqun]
_
1/2hadiv
1/2ha_s`ara
1/2mar_sim
[mesubak]

Freq.
2
3,313
4,169
17,424
47
3,071
2,268
75
349
7,313
0
355
1,297
722
3,076
8,018
1
11,680
4,500
58
87
512
1,295
10,717
1,456
1,640
98,082
343
743
286
22,945
7,209
2,877
51
3,563
1,541
4,744
71
6,067
4,259
10,717
2,608
799
1,791
664
62,129
12,899
19
3,051
1,710
4,067
4,375
478
863
6,275
2,659

English
Unrelated
0
4
0
6
0
8
5
7
0
8
2
0
10
9
8
8
12
0
0
5
0
3
4
16
8
0
17
9
0
0
0
0
8
10
1
3
14
14
10
9
16
1
5
2
6
5
12
4
3
7
9
7
0
3
12
2

Related
8
7
12
8
8
3
8
6
16
9
5
8
15
4
6
3
0
29
5
1
13
12
7
5
5
13
2
8
14
6
12
5
6
3
16
12
11
3
6
8
5
6
6
4
3
16
3
4
11
6
6
11
2
4
6
8

Word
``swindler''
``anxiety''
``cancellation''
``worker''
``archives''
``beard''
``balance''
``barman''
``crack''
``leg''
``fertilizing''
``fertilization''
``calculation''
``edict''
``processing''
``visit''
``to shed''
``letter''
``bridge''
``cadet''
``enraged''
``circle''
``control''
``cultivation''
``definition''
``thief''
``thing''
``deaf''
``wore''
``to compel''
``unity''
``to finish''
``requirement''
``coalescence''
``walking''
``used''
``thought''
``conductivity''
``struggle''
``habit''
``growth''
``shining''
``to throw''
``grasp''
``bolt''
``big''
``rooster''
``detention''
``holy''
``fence''
``hero''
``repair''
``polite''
``hypothesis''
``impression''
``complicated''

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

509

Appendix A (continued)
Dutch
Word
injectiespuit
keuken
kledingstuk
knipsel
koesteren
koken
koning
kristallisatie
kus
laatst
lampenkap
landgoed
liefde
lijm
lijst
lijst
man
minuscuul
model
moed
moordpartij
neusring
omtrekken
onverschillig
onderzoeken
oogst
oor
oosten
opdracht
opgraving
orthodox
ouderdom
overrijden
parabel
paramedisch
ploegende
poort
praten
preek
print
puber
racisme
regelen
regen
regering
reglement
reptiel
rijpheid
schandalig
scheiding
schrijven
schroef
sluiting
snelheid
spanning
springen

Hebrew
Freq.
62
4,040
377
71
1,575
2,436
4,249
14
784
11,769
0
407
7,199
284
1,858
1,858
50,439
165
4,370
2,101
59
0
37
1,174
4,017
674
4,671
1,676
3,722
110
382
538
95
42
43
0
1,468
14,570
379
3
170
110
2,497
2,336
4,887
329
136
120
113
1,589
21,201
283
314
1,694
3,164
5,030

Fam. size
1
57
0
6
3
30
55
2
11
4
1
2
70
10
38
38
347
0
31
53
0
0
4
1
0
16
66
6
13
1
3
11
2
1
1
25
28
53
14
3
5
0
123
58
90
9
2
3
1
27
135
18
27
26
38
49

Root
zrq
Tbx
bgd
gzr
Tpx
b  s_  l
mlk
g  b  s_
n  s_  q
h_  x  r
h_  h  l
h_  x  z
h_  h  v
dbq
sgr
r  s_  m
gbr
z  O m
dgm
h_  m  s
Tbx
nzm
h_  g  p
h_  d  s_
bdk
q  s  r
h_  z  n
zrx
q  d  s_
xpr
x  rd
zqn
drs
m  s_  l
x  b  h_
x  r  s_
s_  `  r
db  r
d  r  s_
dps
bgr
g  z O
sdr
g  s_  m
m  s_  l
tqn
zxl
b  s_  l
xpr
plg
xbr
brg
sgr
mhr
mtx
znq

Word
[mazreq]
[miTbax]
[beged]
[gazir]
[Tipeax]
1/2bi_sul
[melek]
1/2gibu_s
1/2n_siqa
_
1/2haxaron
_
1/2hahil
_
1/2haxuza
_
1/2hahava
[debeq]
[misgeret]
1/2r_sima
[geber]
[zaOum]
[degem]
_
1/2home
s
[Tebax]
[nezem]
_
1/2higup
_ s
1/2hadi_
[badak]
1/2qasir
_
1/2hozen
[mizrax]
1/2haqda_sa
[xapira]
[xaredi]
[ziqna]
[daras]
1/2ma_sal
1/2xobe_s
1/2xari_s
1/2_sa`ar
[diber]
1/2dra_sa
[dpus]
[mitbager]
[gizOanut]
[sider]
1/2ge_sem
1/2mem_sala
[taqanon]
[zoxel]
1/2b_selut
[maxpir]
[pilug]
[xiber]
[boreg]
[sgira]
[mhirut]
[metax]
[zineq]

Freq.
417
2,863
2,391
31
134
4,310
6,764
980
1,238
9,619
155
342
21,292
2,217
3,884
5,168
12,899
564
3,106
3,369
2,070
17
30
990
15
1,420
1,691
5,362
215
260
1,224
1,299
214
3,759
747
445
69,710
6,349
1,407
1,877
523
1,253
993
5,190
25,800
811
175
586
382
161
783
7,990
1,594
4,555
5,873
1,196

English
Unrelated
6
4
7
6
2
2
0
0
9
6
2
3
0
3
15
6
12
6
0
1
4
0
2
0
10
15
8
0
11
1
7
3
1
5
1
10
5
5
5
0
0
0
0
8
7
11
0
11
10
3
10
0
7
0
0
0

Related
5
4
2
7
4
12
12
11
7
3
2
3
10
14
7
12
3
1
10
11
4
1
5
2
10
5
5
8
3
11
4
8
7
7
7
7
2
14
9
11
8
6
22
2
5
7
11
3
2
13
9
9
15
7
13
5

Word
``injector''
``kitchen''
``cloth''
``clippable''
``to nurture''
``cooking''
``king''
``crystallization''
``kiss''
``last''
``lampshade''
``estate''
``love''
``glue''
``frame''
``list''
``man''
``tiny''
``model''
``courage''
``slaughter''
``nose-ring''
``outflaking''
``indifferent''
``to examine''
``harvest''
``ear''
``east''
``dedication''
``excavation''
``orthodox''
``old age''
``to run over(a car)''
``parable''
``medical assistant''
``ploughing''
``gate''
``to talk''
``sermon''
``print''
``teenager''
``racism''
``to arrange''
``rain''
``government''
``reglament''
``reptile''
``maturation''
``shameful''
``split''
``to write''
``screw''
``closing''
``speed''
``tension''
``to jump''
(continued on next page)

510

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

Appendix A (continued)
Dutch
Word
staande
steunzool
stof
struikelen
tak
telegram
tent
tik
toegewijd
trede
treurig
tumor
vaart
vangen
verenigen
vergeven
verhaal
verkoper
verkorting
verlies
verraden
vertraging
vervullen
verzegelen
vlag
vluchten
voedsel
vriend
vuilnisbelt
wagen
wapen
wassen
wassend
wijnstok
woede
zaad
zeggen
zelfmoord
zon

Hebrew
Freq.
17
14
4,319
790
2,305
399
1,141
387
138
344
853
281
1,025
3,435
3,905
1,028
10,107
614
99
1,765
1,406
367
3,189
161
1,217
1,836
2,792
12,053
70
5,148
3,002
2,475
0
180
2,755
1,339
148,830
679
1,953

Fam. size
0
1
139
5
23
4
37
13
1
2
1
7
89
31
59
14
23
3
3
15
8
3
10
2
13
51
46
59
1
104
60
93
93
1
14
40
45
9
93

Root
dgl
drs
h_  b  q
m  O d
sbk
brq
h_  h  l
Tpx
dbq
drg
s  `  r
gdl
plg
lkd
lkd
mxl
spr
zbn
q  s  r
h_  b  d
bgd
h_  x  r
g  s_  m
h_  T  m
dgl
brx
h_  k  l
xbr
zbl
O g  l
n  s_  q
r  x  s
kbs
gpn
z  O m
z  r O
h_  m  r
h_  b  d
s_  m  s_

Word
[dagal]
[midras]
_
1/2habaq
[maOad]
[sbak]
[mibraq]
_
1/2hohel
[Tpixa]
[dabeq]
[madrega]
1/2si`er
[gidul]
[haplaga]
[lakad]
[hitlaked]
[maxal]
[sipur]
[zaban]
1/2qisur
1/2_sabeda
[bgida]
_
1/2hixur
1/2hig_sim
_
1/2haTam
[degel]
[barax]
_
1/2hoxel
[xaber]
[mizbala]
[Oagala]
1/2ne_seq
1/2hitraxes
[kbisa]
[gepen]
[zaOam]
[zeraO]
_
1/2hamar
_
1/2hithabed
1/2_seme_s

Freq.
20,252
69
2,266
108
364
2,509
1,580
86
2,217
2,057
13
10,717
494
129
23
49
28,529
68
1,833
433
1,044
381
236
23
2,553
2,828
33,359
24,814
26
538
7,489
10
2,193
5,455
3,966
1,432
140,962
745
6,719

English
Unrelated
5
7
4
0
7
5
2
4
14
0
1
16
13
8
9
0
20
0
5
3
2
3
2
0
2
1
0
9
4
12
12
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
12

Related
12
1
12
3
3
2
2
2
3
12
5
5
3
9
8
4
16
2
15
8
7
6
8
11
3
8
11
10
3
3
4
9
9
1
6
7
8
3
3

Word
``to stand for''
``sole''
``dust''
``to stumble''
``thick branch''
``telegram''
``tent''
``tap''
``devoted''
``step''
``sad''
``tumor''
``sailing''
``to capture''
``become united''
``to forgive''
``story''
``salesman''
``shortening''
``loss''
``treason''
``delay''
``to perform''
``to seal''
``flag''
``to run away''
``food''
``friend''
``garbage site''
``wagon''
``weapon''
``wash oneself''
``laundering''
``vine''
``rage''
``seed''
``to say''
``committed suicide''
``sun''

For simplicity we have not transcribed the geminations or ``doublings'' of root consonants in the Hebrew transcriptions.

References
Alegre, M., & Gordon, P. (1999). Frequency effects and the
representational status of regular inflections. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 41-61.
Aronoff, M. (1994). Morphology by itself: Stems and inflectional
classes. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Baayen, R. H. (2001). Word frequency distributions. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baayen, R. H. (2005). Data mining at the intersection of
psychology and linguistics. In A. Cutler (Ed.), Twenty-first
century psycholinguistics: Four cornerstones. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Baayen, R. H., Lieber, R., & Schreuder, R. (1997). The
morphological complexity of simplex nouns. Linguistics, 35,
861-877.
Baayen, R. H., Moscoso del Prado, F., Schreuder, R., & Wurm,
L. (2003). When word frequencies do NOT regress towards
the mean. In R. H. Baayen & R. Schreuder (Eds.),
Morphological
structure
in
language
processing
(pp. 463-484). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database (CD-ROM), linguistic data consortium. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania.
Baayen, R. H., Tweedie, F. J., & Schreuder, R. (2002). The
subjects as a simple random effect fallacy: Subject variability

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512
and morphological family effects in the mental lexicon.
Brain and Language, 81, 55-65.
Bates, E., DOAmico, S., Jacobsen, T., Szekely, A., Andonova,
E., Devescovi, A., et al. (2003). Timed picture naming in
seven languages. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10(2),
344-380.
Becker, C. A. (1979). Semantic context and word frequency
effects in visual word recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5,
252-259.
Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. E. (1980). Regression
diagnostics. Identifying influential data and sources of collinearity. Wiley, New York: Wiley Series in Probability and
Mathematical Statistics.
Berman, R. (1978). Modern Hebrew structure. Tel Aviv:
University Publishing Projects.
Bertram, R., Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. H. (2000). The
balance of storage and computation in morphological
processing: The role of word formation type, affixal
homonymy, and productivity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 419-511.
Bolle, M., & Pimentel, J. (1984). Woordenboek Nederlands
Hebreeuws. Naarden, The Netherlands: StrengholtOs
Boeken.
Borowsky, R., & Besner, D. (1993). Visual word recognition: A
multistage activation model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 813-840.
Bradley, D. C., & Forster, K. I. (1987). A readerOs view of
listening. Cognition, 25, 103-134.
Carroll, J. B. (1967). On sampling from a lognormal model of
word frequency distribution. In H. Kucera & W. N. Francis
(Eds.), Computational analysis of present-day American
english (pp. 406-424). Providence: Brown University Press.
Chatterjee, S., Hadi, A., & Price, B. (2000). Regression analysis
by example. New York: John Wiley.
Crawley, M. J. (2002). Statistical computing. An introduction to
data analysis using S-plus. Wiley: Chichester.
De Jong, N. H. (2002). Morphological families in the mental
lexicon, MPI series in psycholinguistics. Nijmegen, The
Netherlands: Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics.
De Jong, N. H., Feldman, L. B., Schreuder, R., Pastizzo, M., &
Baayen, R. H. (2002). The processing and representation of
Dutch and English compounds: Peripheral morphological,
and central orthographic effects. Brain and Language, 81,
555-567.
De Jong, N. H., Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. H. (2000). The
morphological family size effect and morphology. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 15, 329-365.
Deutsch, A., Frost, R., Pollatsek, A., & Rayner, K. (2000).
Early morphological effects in word recognition in Hebrew:
Evidence from parafoveal preview benefit. Cross-linguistic
perspectives on morphological processing, 15(4-5), 487-506.
Dijkstra, T., Moscoso del Prado Martin, F., Schulpen, B.,
Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. (2005). A roommate in
cream: Morphological family size effects on interlingual
homograph recognition. Language and Cognitive Processes, 20(1), 7-42.
Downie, N. M., & Heath, R. W. (Eds.). (1965). Basic statistical
methods. New York: Harper and Row.
Feldman, L. B., & Pastizzo, M. J. (2003). Morphological
facilitation: the role of semantic transparency and family

511

size. In R. H. Baayen & R. Schreuder (Eds.), Morphological
structure in language processing (pp. 233-258). Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Feldman, L. B., & Siok, W. W. T. (1997). The role of
component function in visual recognition of Chinese characters. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 23, 778-781.
Feldman, L. B., & Siok, W. W. T. (1999). Semantic radicals
contribute to the visual identification of Chinese characters.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 559-576.
Feldman, L. B., Frost, R., & Pnini, T. (1995). Decomposing
words into their constituent morphemes: Evidence from
English and Hebrew. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(4), 947-960.
Frost, R., Deutsch, A., & Forster, K. (2000). Decomposing
morphologically complex words in a nonlinear morphology.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26(3), 751-765.
Frost, R., Deutsch, A., Gilboa, O., Tannenbaum, M., &
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2000). Morphological priming:
Dissociation of phonological, semantic and morphological
factors. Memory & Cognition, 28(8), 1277-1288.
Frost, R., Forster, K. I., & Deutsch, A. (1997). What can we
learn from the morphology of Hebrew? A masked-priming
investigation of morphological representation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 829-856.
Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1997). Integrating form
and meaning: A distributed model of speech perception.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 613-656.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1984). Automatic processing of
fundamental information. The case of frequency of occurrence. American Psychologist, 39, 1372-1388.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solution to PlatoOs
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition,
induction and representation of knowledge. Psychological
Review, 104(2), 211-240.
Lorch, R. F., & Myers, J. L. (1990). Regression analyses of
repeated measures data in cognitive research. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 149-157.
Ludeling, A., & De Jong, N. H. (2002). German particle verbs
and word-formation. In N. Dehe, R. Jackendoff, A.
McIntyre, & S. Urban (Eds.), Verb-particle explorations
(pp. 315-333). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
McCarthy, J. J. (1981). A prosodic theory of non-concatenative
morphology. Linguistic Inquiry, 12, 373-418.
Morton, J. (1969). The interaction of information in word
recognition. Psychological Review, 76, 165-178.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models in
S and S-PLUS, statistics and computing. New York:
Springer.
Plaut, D. C., & Booth, J. R. (2000). Individual and
developmental differences in semantic priming: Empirical
and computational support for a single mechanism
account of lexical processing. Psychological Review, 107,
786-823.
Pylkkanen, L., Feintuch, S., Hopkins, E., & Marantz, A.
(2004). Neural correlates of the effects of morphological
family frequency and family size: An MEG study. Cognition, 91, B35-B45.

512

F. Moscoso del Prado Martin et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 496-512

Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. H. (1997). How complex simplex
words can be. Journal of Memory and Language, 37,
118-139.
Schweika, Y. (1997). Modern Hebrew dictionary. Tel-Aviv: RavMilim Matach.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1981). The effect of sentence
context on ongoing word recognition: Test of a two-process

theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7, 658-672.
Taft, M. (1979). Recognition of affixed words and the word
frequency effect. Memory & Cognition, 7, 263-272.
Taft, M., & Zhu, X. (1997). Submorphemic processing in
reading Chinese. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 761-775.

