Lexical Training Through Modeling
and Elicitation Procedures With
Late Talkers Who Have Specific
Language Impairment and
Developmental Delays
Theresa A. Kouri
University of Northern Iowa,
Cedar Falls

Late talkers with specific language impairment and developmental delay make up
a large portion of our early childhood caseloads; therefore, an understanding of
best clinical practices for these populations is essential. Early lexical learning was
examined in 2 interactive treatment approaches with 29 late-talking preschoolers
with language and developmental disabilities. Children were randomly assigned
to either a mand-elicited imitation (MEI) condition in which elicitations and
imitative prompts were used or to a modeling with auditory bombardment (ModAB) condition in which auditory bombardment and play modeling were incorporated with no response demands on participants. Lexical production of target
vocabulary words already comprehended was measured during a 10-session
training period and then during two 50-min play interactions with a parent/
caretaker in the home after treatment was completed. Results indicated that the
MEI procedure was relatively more effective in facilitating frequency and rate of
target word learning in the treatment setting, but no significant differences were
found between conditions in the number or percentage of target words generalized to the home setting. Mod-AB children produced more target words that were
limited to the home setting than did MEI children, whose productivity was more
balanced across settings. Treatment by aptitude regression analyses indicated that
none of the preintervention language, cognitive, or total development aptitude
scores were predictive of child performance in 1 treatment condition or the other,
although Battelle Developmental Inventory communication scores and sizes of
preintervention lexicons were predictive of child performance across conditions.
Empirical and clinical issues pertaining to the efficacy of modeling- and elicitation-based procedures for late-talking preschoolers are discussed.
KEY WORDS: lexical training, late talkers, mand-model, modeling, treatment
efficacy

M

any investigators have examined the effectiveness of different
treatment approaches for young children with language disorders and various types of associated developmental delays (e.g.,
Camarata, Nelson, & Camarata, 1994; Connell & Stone, 1992; Ellis
Weismer, 2000; Ellis Weismer, Murray-Branch, & Miller, 1993; Ezell &
Goldstein, 1989; Kaiser & Hester, 1994; Warren & Bambura, 1989;
Wilcox, Kouri, & Caswell, 1991). Reviews of the intervention literature

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005
* (c)American
Speech-Language-Hearing
Kouri:
Lexical Training
Through Modeling andAssociation
Elicitation
1092-4388/05/4801-0157

157

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

have highlighted the efficacy of numerous treatment approaches (e.g., Fey, 1986; Leonard, 1998), while also
emphasizing the need to sort out the comparative efficacy of different types of training methods for various
child populations and different language structures (e.g.,
Leonard, 1998; Nye, Foster, & Seaman, 1987). One population that has received considerable coverage in the literature and is of high interest to many professionals in
the clinical arena is the group of toddlers commonly referred to as "late talkers" (Paul, 1991).
Late talkers are typically identified on the basis of
their early restricted expressive language abilities in
the absence of other developmental limitations. According to specific criteria, toddlers are considered late talkers if they demonstrate expressive vocabularies of less
than 50 words and produce no multiword combinations
by 24 months of age (Paul, 1993; Rescorla, 1989). A variety of terms have been used in the literature (see
Robertson & Ellis Weismer, 1999, for review) to refer to
populations of toddlers with expressive language delays,
with and without receptive limitations, including "slow
expressive language development" (SELD). Even though
approximately half of late talkers catch up to their peers
by age 3 (Paul, 1991), numerous studies have reported
long-term negative effects associated with early SELD
(Paul, 1991; Paul, Murray, Clancy, & Andrews, 1997;
Rescorla, 2002; Rescorla, Dahlsgaard, & Roberts, 2000).
Another population of children to which many of the
same clinical implications apply are those toddlers referred to as having mild developmental delay (DD) without apparent etiology. In terms of classification, there can
be potential overlaps or fuzzy distinctions between children regarded as having SELD and those with mild DD.
For instance, although late talkers are typically identified on the basis of weak expressive language skills, some
researchers have noted various restrictions in other developmental areas such as receptive language, speech,
symbolic play, and socialization skills (Ellis Weismer,
Murray-Branch, & Miller, 1994; Irwin, Carter, & BriggsGowan, 2002; Paul, 1991; Paul & Jennings, 1992; Rescorla
& Goosens, 1992), as well as unstable or unpredictable
growth trajectories across different developmental domains over time (e.g., Ellis Weismer et al., 1994;
Rescorla, 2002). The important thing to consider is that
although toddlers with mild DD typically exhibit deficiencies across a number of developmental domains, they
often reflect the same growth potential and clinical needs
as children with SELD (Calandrella & Wilcox, 2000; Ellis
Weismer, 2000; Yoder, Davies, Bishop, & Munson, 1994).
One crucial clinical need relates to the development of
early lexical skills. While the efficacy research addressing lexical training procedures for late talkers is relatively limited (e.g., Ellis Weismer et al., 1993; Robertson
& Ellis Weismer, 1999), that focusing on preschoolers

158

with DD is even more scant (e.g., Kouri, Wilcox, &
Caswell, 1991; Wilcox et al., 1991). Essentially, the few
studies that have been conducted demonstrate the potential for late talkers, with and without DD, to acquire
lexical forms through a variety of training regimens.
One important efficacy issue concerns the type of
input used by a trainer to facilitate early word learning.
For instance, input composed largely of modeling without any associated response requirements may result
in different acquisition patterns than input that includes
prompts for productions and frequent response demands.
The primary focus of this study is to examine the comparative efficacy of these contrastive types of input when
training lexical forms with late talkers, with and without DD. Before addressing the issue of modeling versus
elicitation however, one needs to consider the environmental context in which different training procedures
have been implemented with late-talking preschoolers.
The level of naturalness reflected in a particular
training setting is an important factor in the design and
interpretation of treatment efficacy studies (e.g., Fey,
1986). Most language interventions can be characterized along a continuum of naturalness, from highly didactic and structured in nature to that closely resembling mother-child interactions with child-lead
orientations. The more naturalistic approaches often
entail the provision of nondemanding models of targeted
language structures and place a particularly high focus
on the enhancement of social communication skills (Fey,
1986). Given the widespread conversion to naturalistic
models of language teaching (Fey, 1986), a number of
efficacy studies have been motivated that demonstrate
the success of naturalistic training procedures with toddlers and preschoolers (e.g., Cole & Dale, 1986; Ellis
Weismer et al., 1993; Robertson & Ellis Weismer, 1999;
Wilcox et al., 1991; Yoder, Kaiser, & Alpert, 1991). These
studies have implemented different language stimulation techniques that have raised a fair amount of controversy in the training literature, including modeling
and elicitation procedures.

Modeling Versus
Elicitation Training Procedures
The distinction between modeling and elicitation
training approaches stems back to the earlier training
literature in which modeling- versus imitation-based
comparisons were a common focus. At one point it may
have been concluded that modeling was clearly the more
powerful training technique, especially when used in a
structured, trainer-oriented teaching context (e.g.,
Courtright & Courtright, 1976, 1979; Leonard, 1975;
Prelock & Panagos, 1980). However, contrary results
supporting the advantages of imitation procedures have

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

been yielded by a number of other investigators comparing modeling and imitation approaches (e.g., Connell,
1987; Connell & Stone, 1992; Ezell & Goldstein, 1989).
Most of the earlier studies employed highly structured or
didactic training paradigms in which the benefits of modeling and imitation strategies were contrasted. Other
studies have since emerged incorporating more naturalistic types of treatment contexts and demonstrating the
effectiveness of modeling and imitation types of procedures for training various language structures (e.g.,
Camarata et al., 1994; Ellis Weismer & Murray-Branch,
1989; Nelson, Camarata, Welsh, Butkovsky, & Camarata,
1996). The majority of investigations focusing on modeling and elicitation in late-talking children have been
conducted in settings reflecting a relatively high degree
of naturalism (e.g., Ellis Weismer et al., 1993; Kouri et
al., 1991).
While the positive outcomes and advantages associated with the use of elicitation and modeling approaches
are numerous, most have been reported for older children with specific language impairment (SLI) beyond the
lexical acquisition stage. With respect to late talkers
embarking upon the early stages of word learning, the
use of elicitation versus modeling holds various clinical
implications. For example, because of a potential inability or unwillingness on the part of some children to respond to imitative prompts or elicitation attempts by a
clinician, a less demanding approach may sometimes be
warranted. Indeed, the effectiveness of certain approaches
in which no responses are elicited has been demonstrated
for late talkers with SLI and DD (Girolametto, Pearce, &
Weitzman, 1996; Wilcox et al., 1991; Yoder et al., 1995).
For the most part however, the research focusing on modeling and imitation procedures for late talkers is limited
and somewhat inconclusive. The need for professionals
to understand best practices for late talkers is driven by
the number of long-term implications associated with
delayed lexical development (e.g., Ellis Weismer et al.,
1994; Paul et al., 1997). In this investigation, elicitation
and modeling procedures were examined with late-talking children who have SELD and mild DD learning the
production of vocabulary items for which receptive knowledge was already demonstrated.

Training Conditions
A primary distinction between treatment approaches was reflected by the level of response demands
placed on a child. A similar type of environmental background was used across training settings in order to alleviate potentially confounding contextual influences.
Both conditions reflected features associated with a naturalistic, interactive type of training context. By controlling the level of "naturalness" across settings, it was believed that the two aspects of elicitation and modeling

could be better isolated, thus demonstrating their relative efficacy for teaching new lexical productions.
The modeling condition incorporated interactive
modeling, an approach developed by Wilcox (described
in Wilcox et al., 1991). Target vocabulary terms were
modeled primarily through one-word labels with no response demands placed on children. Reduced models
were used in order to promote children's focus on target
forms without adding other potentially distracting linguistic information. Use of reduced input has been found
effective in teaching new vocabulary terms to late-talking toddlers (e.g., Girolametto et al., 1996; Wilcox et al.,
1991). Since children in the present study were at the
one-word stage, it was believed that substantial simplification of a clinician's linguistic input would be potentially facilitative.
Another key component of the modeling condition
was the addition of an intensified form of modeled input called auditory bombardment (AB). AB refers to listening to numerous repetitions of words containing target sounds or phonological sequences at a low level of
amplification (Hodson & Paden, 1983, 1991). Implementation of AB is popular in treatment contexts focusing
on reduction of phonological processes. The use of AB
has been observed to trigger spontaneous rehearsal of
bombarded target words by children in the clinic setting (Bowen, 1999). AB was included in the modeling
condition to increase the density of lexical models to
participants and to help balance the frequency of models across lexical targets.
In the elicitation context, a milieu teaching approach
was used (Warren & Kaiser, 1986). The efficacy of milieu or incidental teaching procedures has been widely
established with positive outcomes associated with a
broad gamut of linguistic structures for children at various language stages (e.g., Kaiser & Hester, 1994; Warren & Bambura, 1989; Yoder et al., 1991, 1995). As with
most milieu approaches, targets were preselected, and
response evocations such as mands (i.e., simple questions) and elicited imitations were used. Unlike some
milieu training regimens, however, elicitations and imitative prompts were used with a high frequency, and
specific items and actions were not awarded until a target response was attempted.
Although both treatment conditions in the present
study were largely interactive in nature, each reflected
a number of critical departures from a purely naturalistic training model. These included the addition of AB
and reduced linguistic targets in the modeling condition and the numerous obligatory response demands
placed on children in the elicitation condition. These
particular measures were applied in order to emphasize treatment distinctions and to boost acquisition rates
of new lexical productions.
Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

159

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Of additional interest in the present study was the
degree of generalization that would be reflected in
children's lexical learning. Generalization often presents
a challenge to clinicians working with preschoolers with
language delay and DD, especially those confined to clinical settings removed from home and classroom environments. As indicated by various researchers, naturalistic interventions have proven relatively successful in
producing generalized changes in children's functional
language (e.g., Fey, 1986; Kaiser & Hester, 1994). Although both training procedures in this study were interactive in nature, each was considered rather different in terms of facilitating potential levels of child
productivity during treatment and generating similar
productivity patterns outside the treatment setting.

Treatment by Aptitude Considerations
Sometimes young children will respond more favorably to one type of training strategy than another,
depending on their developmental abilities. This finding has held true for various types of approaches including those that are composed primarily of modeled
versus elicitive types of input (e.g., Yoder et al.,1995).
The different treatment by aptitude findings reported
by various researchers (e.g., Cole, Dale, & Mills, 1991;
Yoder et al., 1991) represent a critical issue with respect to interpreting clinical research findings. The
question of how effective a particular method is may
depend largely on the specific characteristics of a child
undergoing the intervention and the types of goals being targeted. Although it has been established that no
one intervention procedure is superior for all children,
some of the treatment findings regarding child types
and "best-fit" clinical approaches are not clear. For example, milieu teaching procedures have been demonstrated to be more effective for children at earlier stages
of language learning when compared to other more direct, didactic methods, which are more effective for
higher functioning children (Yoder et al., 1991). This
finding may lead one to believe that a structured, didactic approach is better suited for children at relatively higher language levels, a finding also indicated
by Cole et al. (1991). Yet, a rather different trend noted
by Yoder et al. (1995) suggests that higher level children respond more favorably to a less didactic, elicitation-free approach. Based on the few studies presenting treatment by aptitude outcomes, it is apparent that
more research is needed to sort out the number of potential child characteristics predictive of lexical learning success in different treatment settings. A goal of
the present study was to determine if various pretreatment child aptitude measures were systematically associated with lexical learning outcomes for modeling
and elicitation training procedures.
160

To summarize, the purpose of the current study was
to determine if late-talking preschoolers with SELD and
mild DD would (a) learn to produce more lexical forms
for already comprehended words in an interactive setting using primarily modeled versus elicitation types of
input, (b) generalize more target lexical productions as
a function of modeling versus elicitation training procedures, (c) demonstrate consistent lexical learning patterns across treatment and generalization contexts, and
(d) respond differently to modeling or elicitation training procedures as a function of pretreatment language,
cognitive, and developmental aptitude measures.

Method
Participants
Twenty-nine children, age 19-36 months (M =
27.89), served as participants in this study. Children
were recruited from a pool of university speech and hearing clinic referrals, and from volunteers solicited through
public service announcements. Standardized testing of
children included administration of the Sequenced Inventory of Communication Development--Revised
(SICD-R; Hendrick, Prather, & Tobin, 1984), and the
Battelle Developmental Inventory (BDI; Newborg,
Stopck, Wneck, Guidubaldi, & Svinicki, 1988). Participant scores on the SICD-R indicated a delay of 3-26
months (M = 14.0) for expressive language. Eight of the
participants scored at or above their age on the Receptive scale of the SICD-R, while the other 21 participants
scored 2-18 months (M = 8.8) below age level. All participants scored at least 1.5 SDs below the mean for their
chronological age on the Expressive and/or Receptive
subtests of the BDI and at least at least 1.5 SDs below
for total communication. Intellectual abilities were scattered within the subject groups, whereby BDI Cognitive scores ranged from those within an average range
to those 2 or more SDs (M = -2.33) below the mean.
Total BDI scores indicated that many participants were
functioning below average in their overall development
(including motor, adaptive, and personal-social areas).
None of the participants had any diagnosed neurological impairments, and all passed a hearing screening
during pretraining evaluations. Due to the young age of
the participants, many had not been formally diagnosed
with a specific disorder. According to formal testing and
participant profiles, at least 8 of the participants could
be classified as having SLI, and 2 appeared to have pervasive developmental disorder characteristics but had
not yet been diagnosed as such. The others were considered as having mild DD with unknown etiologies. The
major criterion for participation was delayed onset of
talking and reduced vocabulary size given chronological age expectations. All participants demonstrated

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

preintentional communication behaviors and were
deemed appropriate for lexical training.
According to parental report and mother-child language sampling, participants' language abilities were
limited to single-word utterances. Pretreatment sampling sessions lasted 40-45 min and were repeated until a potential participant produced at least 100 utterances (including vocalizations and actual words). All
sessions were audio- and video-recorded for later analyses of each child's expressive vocabulary size and phonetic inventory. Children's mothers were interviewed
and then asked to complete a vocabulary checklist, The
Language Development Survey (Rescorla, 1989), in order to determine additional words not observed during
sampling sessions. Participants' expressive vocabularies ranged from 2-30 words (M = 13.31). No child had
received systematic speech and language services before participation in this study. Each participant was
randomly assigned to either the interactive modeling
with AB (Mod-AB) condition (n = 14) or the mandelicited imitation (MEI) treatment condition (n = 15).
Table 1 lists descriptive data for participants in each
condition, including chronological ages, test scores, and
pretreatment vocabulary sizes. Two-tailed t tests indicated no significant differences between treatment
groups for any of the pretreatment measures.
Following the initial language sampling sessions,
audiotapes were reviewed and phonetic inventories created for each child by listing all consonants and their
frequency of production. Sounds produced accurately or
heard at least 10 times were regarded as "in-phonology" sounds. These particular phonemes were used to

determine target word composition for later training.
Eight words were selected for each participant based on
the following criteria: (a) contained initial in-phonology
sounds, (b) representative of a noun form class, and (c)
represented familiar items that could be functionally
acted on by participants. Following identification of potential target word lists, comprehension and production
probes were administered to determine participants'
knowledge of selected words. If a child produced a correct word during a production probe, it was excluded for
training and a new word selected. Comprehension of all
target items was demonstrated by participants during
preintervention probes.

Intervention Procedures
The training was conducted by six different graduate student clinicians. All children were seen twice weekly
for a total of 10 individual training sessions. Sessions were
approximately 50 min in length with the total intervention phase spanning a 5-7 week period, depending on
child absences. Intervention targets included eight
preselected words that were replaced each time during
the training phase that designated acquisition criteria
were met. According to these criteria, a target word had
to be produced in at least three different contexts of interaction during two consecutive treatment sessions.
Thus, all participants were exposed to eight target lexical items during each intervention session. All new target word selections met previously described guidelines.
Training took place in a large play/group room at a
university speech and hearing clinic. During each

Table 1. Means, standard deviations, and ranges of participants' chronological age, test scores and
productive vocabulary size.
Treatment group
MEI (n = 15)
Measure
Age (months)
SICD-R Rec (months)
SICD-R Exp (months)
BDI-Com (months)
BDI-Com (SS)
BDI-Cog (months)
BDI-Cog (SS)
BDI-Tot (months)
BDI-Tot (SS)
Number of words

Mod-AB (n = 14)

M

SD

Range

M

SD

28.07
22.13
12.80
16.53
-2.33
18.30
-2.09
21.87
-1.80
12.60

4.64
5.63
5.89
3.74
0.00
3.36
0.51
2.70
0.59
8.74

19-36
12-32
4-24
12-25
-2.33 through -2.33
12-25
-0.68 through -2.33
18-27
-0.55 through -2.33
5-30

26.93
20.00
14.29
15.71
-2.33
18.25
-1.94
22.43
-1.03
14.07

5.31
4.71
4.89
2.92
0.00
4.40
0.77
4.27
1.41
9.33

Range
19-36
16-28
8-20
11-20
-2.33 through -2.33
12-29
-0.23 through -2.33
17-31
-0.02 through -2.33
2-30

Note. MEI = mand-elicited imitation; Mod-AB = modeling with auditory bombardment; SICD-R = Sequenced
Inventory of Communication Development--Revised (Rec = Receptive subtest, Exp = Expressive subtest); BDI =
Battelle Developmental Inventory (Com = Communication subtest, Cog = Cognitive subtest, Tot = total score); SS =
standard score.

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

161

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

session, toys and items representing a child's target
words were made available for play. Clinicians generally followed children's leads and participated in parallel or interactive play. If a child failed to focus on any of
the toys or activities provided, the clinician was instructed to independently play with items until the
child's interest was captured, and then to proceed
through the training steps of the particular approach
being implemented. Both training approaches were
embedded within a context of interactive play.
Interactive Mod-AB procedure. The beginning and
end of each interactive Mod-AB session was reserved
for the AB activity. During this time, a participant and
investigator sat at a small table or on the floor of the
therapy room for "listening time." Headphones were
placed on a child's head, and models of the target words
were presented via a Marantz (model PMD 340) cassette tape recorder. While a child listened to recorded
targets, the clinician presented 5-in. x 7-in. picture cards
representing target word referents. These were tracked
by observing a tape counter and referring to a numerical script of target word presentations. The models presented during each AB phase of a treatment session consisted of target words recorded in isolation and short
phrases. Each target word was recorded five times in
isolation, each time followed by the word used in a short
phrase. This sequence was completed for all eight target words and then repeated in its entirety during each
AB phase so that a participant heard a target word 20
times during each AB phase. Since AB was conducted
at the beginning and end of each training session, participants were exposed to a total of 40 AB models for
each target word per session. Each AB phase lasted 3.5-
4.5 min, depending on a child's attention span. If a child
refused to wear headphones on a given day, the clinician encouraged the child to just sit and listen to the
models. In two instances a parent helped a child keep
headphones in place by holding the child on her lap.
Two participants were allowed to manipulate target
objects in order to stay focused during AB presentations.
Following the first AB phase of each session, the
interactive modeling procedure commenced. A description of interactive modeling can be found in Wilcox et
al. (1991). A primary component of this procedure was
the use of repetitive models by the clinician. At no time
were responses required or elicited from a participant.
The models took the form of labels for those target items
on which a child was focused or manipulating. Once joint
attention was established between a clinician and child,
a series of target word models were presented in isolation or in short phrases. For example, if a child was dressing a doll, the clinician would also get a doll, begin dressing it, and say "doll" a number of times to coincide with
various manipulations on the doll. Models often differed

162

in terms of the intonation and intensity with which they
were produced. At least 60% of a clinician's input, per
session, included target lexical forms. Approximately
57% of this input was in the form of one-word labels,
and 42% comprised two- or three-word combinations
(e.g., "pretty doll," "uh-oh, doll fell," "that's Jaimi's doll").
Children's target word productions were responded
to with semantically related two-word expansions. For
example, "doll" might be responded to by a clinician saying "doll eat" or "night-night doll" and then pretending
to feed the doll or place the doll in a bed. If an item was
labeled incorrectly, a correct label was provided. At no
time was a target word production elicited from a child.
At least 10 models of each target word were presented
during a session's interactive play phase; however, this
number usually ranged from 25-35 models (M = 32.6)
per session, depending on a child's attentional focus. The
interactive modeling phase lasted 40-45 min, followed
by the second AB phase.
MEI procedure. The use of elicitations dominated
the clinician's input during the MEI training sessions.
Elicitations took the form of nonverbal (withholding of
objects/activities) and verbal (mands and prompted imitations of lexical terms) responses to children's play behaviors. During MEI sessions, a clinician waited for a
child to focus on a target stimulus item and then attempted to establish a joint routine with the item (e.g.,
clinician blows bubbles and then gives child the wand).
Once an interaction was established and the clinician
had a target item in her possession, she waited for the
child to indicate a request for the item (e.g., by reaching
or pointing to it). Then the clinician would produce a
mand such as "What do you want?" or "What should I
do?" If the child accurately produced the target word, or
its approximation, the clinician would present the child
with the target item or perform a desired activity with
it (e.g., blow bubbles or open the bubble bottle). If the
child did not respond to the clinician's mand or responded
inaccurately, the clinician then elicited an imitation of
the target word, "tell me bubble." If the child produced
the target word, or a phonetic approximation of it (i.e.,
CV, VC, CVC, VCV from adult word), the target object
or activity was then presented. If the child failed to produce a correct response after the clinician's elicited imitation, the elicitation was repeated two or three times
before attempts were abandoned and interactive play
resumed. Participants were not awarded target objects
or manipulations if no attempts to produce target lexical items were made. Successive approximations of target words were shaped throughout training by requiring participants to produce increasingly more accurate
responses in order to obtain reinforcement. For example,
during initial attempts to elicit a target word, a child
might be awarded an item or activity after producing a

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

CV approximation of the word. Subsequently, the clinician might increase the number of elicited imitations in
an attempt to evoke a CVC approximation of the target
word. For the most part, any attempts by participants
to produce a target lexical item were rewarded by an
object or desired action.
Every time a new elicitation sequence was started
(e.g., asking a child "What do you want?"), a new trial
was scored on the data sheet. At any time during a particular MEI trial that a child averted attentional interest, the trial was abandoned and the clinician attempted
to reestablish joint attention through play interactions.
All instances of spontaneous target productions, or those
that occurred before a mand was presented, were recorded on the data sheet. At least 10 trials (M = 14.76)
for each target word (including mand and elicited imitation) were presented per session; however, depending
on a child's focus, some sessions yielded around 15-20
trials per target word, especially those that involved
highly repetitive activities (e.g., eating bear cookies,
blowing bubbles, popping beads).

Treatment Measures
Different acquired words. The primary measure of
participants' progress during treatment was the number of target words meeting acquisition criteria (i.e.,
acquired words). Criteria for an acquired word included
three main parameters. One was that a production had
to meet specified phonetic criteria (i.e., CV, VC, CVC,
VCV from adult word). Another was that the child's target word utterance had to be produced spontaneously
without any preceding models or elicitations by the clinician. This meant that a word had to be produced before a clinician produced it during a given session or
within a new context of play during the session. For instance, whenever a child's focus of play changed to a
new object/activity, the clinician would wait momentarily
before introducing any new mands or models in order to
facilitate potential spontaneous word productions. If the
same contexts of play occurred in a given session, these
had to be interspersed with other contrasting play contexts in order to qualify as a new or different context. A
target word had to be produced in at least three different contexts of interaction during two consecutive training sessions to be credited as an "acquired word."
Different spontaneous words. A number of target
words were produced spontaneously during the treatment
phase without meeting the stringent criteria for acquired
words. For instance, some target words were produced
spontaneously with no preceding models or elicitations
but failed to occur during two consecutive sessions. These
words were recorded separately as spontaneous target
productions not meeting acquisition criteria. They are

referred to as "spontaneous productions" in the treatment analyses.
Different spontaneous plus acquired words. Because
many participants produced target words across both
measurement categories, a measure including the number of different spontaneous plus acquired word productions was computed to reflect overall lexical usage during treatment.
Total treatment productions. This included the total number of target words produced spontaneously (including spontaneous and/or acquired words) during the
treatment phase.
Words trained. Another measure of treatment productivity included the number of target words introduced
to a child during training, thus reflecting the quantity
and rate of lexical learning in each condition.
Sessions before acquired/spontaneous use. In order
to document rate of learning as an isolated variable, the
average number of sessions before target words were
either acquired or used spontaneously was computed for
each participant. This was done by adding together the
number of sessions before a word was used spontaneously or acquired and then averaging across the total
number of spontaneous and acquired words respectively,
for each participant. In the case where a child failed to
show any spontaneous word usage, a total of 13 sessions
(i.e., >12 treatment sessions) were used to compute the
number of sessions before word use.

Generalization Measures
To assess participants' generalization of target word
use, two 50-min child-caretaker language samples were
gathered in children's homes within 2 weeks following
each child's final treatment session. Items representing
each participant's target words were provided for these
sampling sessions, and caretakers were asked to interact with their children in as natural a manner as possible. All sampling sessions were videotaped and transcribed by noting all child word productions and
accompanying nonlinguistic context and maternal behavior. Scripts were examined for target word productions by applying the same criteria for spontaneous use
as that used for treatment data, an acceptable phonetic
match to the adult word and no preceding models by
the caretaker (as explained above). Generalization measures included total and different spontaneous target
word productions in order to reflect not only frequency
of spontaneous word use but lexical variety as well.

Treatment or Generalization Only Measures
A final set of measures included the percentage
of target words produced only in the treatment or

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

163

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

generalization setting. Because training procedures
imposed rather different pragmatic demands, it was
believed that some children's production patterns might
vary across treatment and generalization settings. This
analysis was included to determine whether higher percentages of children's target productions would be demonstrated in treatment or generalization settings as a
function of the Mod-AB or MEI training.

Reliability
Reliability checks were conducted for a portion of
the data gathered during treatment and generalization
sampling for each participant. Twenty percent of each
child's training sessions were randomly selected for review by two independent observers who were graduate
students in the speech-language pathology major, including those who did and did not participate in the training. Videotapes of individual training sessions were
scored on a point-by-point basis using individual score
sheets with coded word usage categories. Before reliability probes were taken, instruction was provided as
to the accurate assignment of target productions to coding categories. Interjudge reliability scores were derived
by dividing the number of agreements by the number of
agreements plus disagreements x 100. Reliability scores
consistently fell within the range of 80-100% as reflected
by the following treatment variables: different number
of acquired words (87.3%), different number of spontaneous productions (89.5%), total treatment productions
(82.5%), mean sessions before spontaneous production
(94.5%), and mean sessions before acquired word use
(91.2%). Procedures for generalization measures included an independent review of 20% of parent-child
samples. Videotapes of generalization sessions were
viewed independently by judges instructed to code all
instances of spontaneous target word usage. Interrater
reliability scores included different words generalized
(93%) and total spontaneous productions (86.5%).

Treatment Fidelity
Student clinicians were each assigned to one treatment condition to facilitate their mastery of a given treatment procedure and to prevent potential confounds
between procedures. A series of videotaped clips demonstrating each treatment approach was viewed by students
prior to training. Specific instruction regarding treatment
procedures was provided during these viewings. Students
were also instructed on the use of sample data sheets
containing coded word categories, and various treatment
scenarios played out through scripted activities. The author attended the first 3-4 treatment sessions for each
child so as ensure optimal arrangement of objects and
items in the environment and to model usage of the
164

various training procedures (e.g., elicitation, modeling).
Assistance was provided clinicians in scoring data from
training sessions. A majority of the treatment sessions
were viewed by the author through a closed circuit television system, and occasional input was provided clinicians about treatment implementation.
Five percent of Mod-AB and MEI treatment sessions
were viewed by graduate students in communicative disorders using a specially designed checklist (see Appendix).
Checklist items included descriptions of predetermined
intervention procedures characteristic of one or both treatment conditions. Each session was scored on all checklist
items to reflect distinctive features as well as overlaps in
treatment procedures. Other than the child-lead interactive nature of the treatment approaches, ratings reflected
no overlap between treatment procedures. The MEI checklist items received zeros when Mod-AB sessions were
scored, and vice versa. Judges were instructed to rate all
items for each session, not knowing beforehand if they were
observing a Mod-AB or MEI session. Point scores were
computed for each intervention procedure with a maximum of 17 points possible for the Mod-AB condition and
21 points for the MEI condition. Scores of 15-17 and 18-
21 were predetermined to be within the high range for
Mod-AB and MEI conditions, respectively. A mean fidelity
score of 16.33 (SD = 0.57) was computed across Mod-AB
sessions, with scores ranging from 16-17. A mean fidelity
score of 19.75 (SD = 0.95) was computed across MEI sessions, with scores ranging from 18-20. Based on these
scores, it was concluded that clinicians closely adhered to
prescribed intervention procedures.

Results
Participant performance across the Mod-AB and
MEI conditions in both treatment and generalization
contexts was examined through a series of multivariate
analysis of variance (MANOVA) and univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) procedures. Significant main
effects were followed by post hoc tests using Tukey's
multiple comparison procedure (Meyer & Krueger, 2001)
with a .05 error rate. The effect sizes for statistically
significant follow-up comparisons were calculated using Cohen's d statistic (Cohen, 1988), indicating a small
effect size as d = 0.2, medium effect size as d = 0.5, and
large effect size as d = 0.8. Finally, a series of treatment
by aptitude regression analyses were conducted for a
number of preintervention assessment measures and
treatment outcomes data.

Treatment Analyses
Children's lexical learning in Mod-AB and MEI
treatment conditions was compared using a MANOVA

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

with training condition as the between-subjects factor
and five different word learning categories serving as
dependent variables (number of target words introduced
for training, different acquired words, different spontaneous word productions not meeting acquisition criteria, different spontaneous plus acquired words, and total treatment productions). A significant main effect for
training condition, F(1, 108) = 5.84, p = .018, and an
interaction between condition and word learning category, F(4, 108) = 3.21, p = .016, were revealed. Followup ANOVAs for each dependent variable indicated that
more target words were introduced to MEI participants
(M = 12.53, SD = 4.19) than to Mod-AB participants (M
= 9.86, SD = 2.51), F(1, 27) = 4.28, p = .048. More target
words were acquired (met acquisition criteria) by MEI
participants (M = 5.33, SD = 4.78) than by Mod-AB participants (M = 2.36, SD = 2.33), F(1, 27) = 4.30, p = .048.
Similarly, MEI participants produced more spontaneous plus acquired target words combined (M = 8.47, SD
= 8.47) than did Mod-AB participants (M = 4.86, SD =
4.59), just short of significance, F(1, 27) = 4.15, p = .051.
Moderate to large effect sizes (e.g., d = 0.73) were yielded
for each of the treatment analyses (see Table 2).
In order to compare rate of lexical acquisition during treatment, an ANOVA was conducted with training
condition serving as the between-subjects factor, and the
mean number of sessions before target word acquisition
and mean number of sessions before spontaneous word
use as the two dependent variables. Results indicated a
significant main effect for condition, F(1, 27) = 6.66, p =
.016, and a significant Condition x Word Type (acquired
vs. spontaneous production) interaction, F(1, 27) = 5.74,
p = .024. Tukey's post hoc analyses indicated that MEI

participants required fewer sessions (M = 6.25, SD =
2.24) to reach acquisition criteria for target words than
Mod-AB participants (M = 7.72, SD = 2.61), reflecting a
small to medium effect size (d = 0.39). See Table 2 for
treatment means, standard deviations, and ranges for
target word productions and rates of lexical learning.

Generalization Analyses
Spontaneous target word usage in the generalization setting was examined using a MANOVA in which
the between-subjects factor was training condition, and
three dependent variables were the number of different
and total spontaneous target words produced during
generalization and the percentage of target words generalized to the home setting. Data for these analyses
were collapsed across the two language samples taken
in the home setting. Results from the MANOVA failed
to indicate a significant training condition effect, so no
further analyses were conducted. See Table 3 for means,
standard deviations, and ranges for target word productions in the generalization setting.

Treatment or Generalization Only Analyses
A final analysis was conducted to compare numbers
of target words used only in treatment or generalization by participants in order to determine whether lexical production was disproportionate across these contexts as a function of training approach. An ANOVA was
conducted with training condition serving as the between-subjects factor, and two dependent variables were
the numbers of different target words used in treatment

Table 2. Means, standard deviations, and ranges for treatment measures.
Treatment condition
MEI (n = 15)

Mod-AB (n = 14)

Treatment measure

M

SD

Range

M

SD

Range

Words trained*
Diff acq words*
Diff spont words
Diff acq + spont**
Tot tx prod
Sessions to acq*
Sessions to spont

12.53
5.33
3.13
8.47
56.70
6.25
5.27

4.19
4.78
1.64
4.93
54.03
2.24
1.83

8-21
0-15
1-6
1-17
5-162
3-13
2-9

9.86
2.36
2.50
4.86
32.30
7.72
5.33

2.51
2.53
2.59
4.59
31.69
2.61
2.93

8-15
0-6
0-8
0-14
0-79
3-13
1-13

Effect size
(d)
0.72
0.73
0.73
0.39

Note. Words trained = the number of target words introduced during treatment; Diff acq words = the number of
target words that met acquisition criteria; Diff spont words = the number of different target words used spontaneously that did not meet acquisition criteria; Diff acq + spont = the number of different acquired plus spontaneous
target words; Tot tx prod = the total number of spontaneous/acquired target words produced during treatment;
Sessions to acq = mean number of sessions before a target word met productivity criteria; Sessions to spont =
mean number of sessions before a target word was produced spontaneously.
*p < .05; **p = .051.

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

165

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 3. Means, standard deviations, and ranges for generalization measures.
Treatment condition
MEI
Generalization measure
Diff spont words
Tot spont words
% words gen

M

SD

7.07
34.30
52.37

4.73
29.28
18.75

Mod-AB
Range
2-18
3-84
33-90

M

SD

Range

6.00
39.40
56.17

4.08
37.45
30.18

0-12
0-104
0-92

Note. Diff spont words = the number of different target words used in the generalization setting; Tot spont words
= the number of total spontaneous target words used in the generalization setting; % words gen = percentage of
target words used in the generalization context.

only and different target words used at home only. Results revealed a significant Condition x Setting (treatment vs. home) interaction, F(1, 18) = 8.22, p = .011.
Post hoc comparisons indicated that participants in the
Mod-AB condition produced more target words limited
to the generalization setting (M = 2.44, SD = 2.13) than
words limited to the treatment setting (M = 0.11, SD =
.33). The effect size for this finding was very large (d =
1.23). See Table 4 for means, standard deviations, and
ranges of numbers of target words used in treatment or
generalization contexts only.

Treatment by Aptitude Analyses
To determine whether pretreatment aptitude measures were predictive of lexical learning performance in
either treatment condition, a series of hierarchical multiple regression analyses were conducted for three different outcomes including a total learning, treatment context, and generalization measure. The total learning
measure was computed by combining the number of different spontaneous words used in both treatment and
generalization contexts. The treatment measure was the
total number of different spontaneous plus acquired word
productions used during training, and the generalization
measure was the percentage of target words used in the
home setting. Six pretreatment variables were used as
predictors: BDI total, Cognitive, and Communication

subtest age equivalencies; SICD-R Receptive and
Expressive age equivalencies; and number of words used
before training. In each regression analysis a child's
pretreatment aptitude measure was entered first, followed by the dummy-coded group variable and then the
interaction term between condition and pretreatment
aptitude measure. Results indicated that none of the 18
interactions were significant. Two main effects indicated
that higher numbers of pretreatment words, F(1, 27) =
5.65, p < .05, and higher BDI Communication scores,
F(1, 27) = 4.86, p < .05, were significant predictors of
better target word generalization. A significant F test
for the BDI total by treatment measure indicated that
higher BDI total scores was associated with increased
treatment performance in the MEI condition, F(1, 14) =
4.46, p < .05.

Discussion
This study was designed to examine the relative
efficacy of two interactive treatment approaches for
teaching lexical productions with late-talking preschoolers who have SELD and mild DD. The Mod-AB
approach incorporated high concentrations of modeling
augmented by the use of AB, whereby no response demands were placed on a child. In contrast, the MEI condition used repetitive elicitations and imitative prompts

Table 4. Means, standard deviations, and ranges for target word usage in treatment or generalization
setting only.
Treatment condition
MEI

Mod-AB

Measure

M

SD

Range

M

SD

Range

Tx only
Gen only

2.00
1.30

0.94
1.83

1-3
0-6

0.11
2.44

0.33
2.13

0-1
0-6

Note. Tx only = target words used only in the treatment setting; Gen only = target words used only in the
generalization setting.

166

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

during interactive play. Results indicated that although
both training approaches were successful in facilitating
lexical production skills, various patterns emerged with
respect to treatment and generalization outcomes. Before discussing outcomes, it is important to emphasize
that the principal dependent measure, production of
comprehended lexical items, reflects a partial preintervention mastery of lexical targets. That is, since
children passed preintervention comprehension probes
for all selected targets, production gains on various
measures rested in part on this initial comprehension.

Treatment and Generalization Performance
In terms of treatment performance, the MEI was
generally the more effective training approach. The number of target words meeting acquisition criteria and the
number of different spontaneous (not meeting acquisition criteria) plus acquired productions were significantly higher for MEI participants. Significantly more
target words were introduced to MEI participants during training because they met acquisition criteria for
target words in fewer sessions than did Mod-AB participants. Three measures failed to distinguish the
groups statistically in treatment: the number of spontaneous target words (i.e., not meeting acquisition criteria), total treatment productions, and the number of
sessions before target words were used spontaneously.
Although MEI participants produced an average of 3.13
different spontaneous words as compared to 2.50 for
Mod-AB participants, this difference was not significant.
Both groups demonstrated comparable time frames for
spontaneous target word usage, averaging 5.30 training sessions before initial spontaneous productions were
observed. Interestingly, a significant difference was not
uncovered for the number of total treatment productions,
although MEI participants learned an average of 24
more target words over the course of treatment than
Mod-AB participants. This lack of significance may be
attributed to the large variation across child performance
for this variable. Based on overall treatment results, it
appears that while Mod-AB participants were indeed
productive learners during the training, they did not
demonstrate the same frequency or consistency of target word use as did MEI participants.
Whereas a number of treatment outcomes reflected
MEI as the more effective training procedure, generalization data presented a rather different picture. Generalization measures such as the number of different and
total target words used spontaneously did not yield significant group differences across generalization samples.
The percentage of target words introduced that subsequently generalized to the home setting also did not distinguish treatment groups. Because MEI participants had
more targets introduced for training and demonstrated

more target word use in treatment, it was predicted that
home samples would also reflect higher levels of lexical
production by these participants. This trend was only
mildly reflected by the finding that MEI participants
generalized a slightly higher number of different target
words to the home setting. Conversely, Mod-AB participants actually produced more spontaneous target words
overall during generalization and generalized a slightly
higher percentage of target words. So although ModAB participants produced fewer lexical items during
treatment, they acquired nearly as many new lexical
items overall as MEI participants, as demonstrated by
generalization data.
Another analysis reflecting specific trends in lexical productivity involved treatment or generalization
only usage. The potential that some words not used in
the training phase would later surface during generalization probes was examined. Indeed, it was found that
Mod-AB participants confined their use of target words
to the generalization setting to a greater extent than
MEI participants whose target word use was more balanced across settings. Of interest was the fact that treatment groups demonstrated opposite trends for this measure. MEI participants used more treatment-only lexical
items, and Mod-AB participants more generalizationonly lexical items. In fact, 96% of the target words that
Mod-AB participants produced in only one context were
used in the generalization setting, as compared to 39%
for home-only use by MEI participants. Thus it appears
that Mod-AB participants reserved the use of most of
the target words they learned for the home setting. A
possible explanation for this trend is based on the different pragmatic demands of each training approach.
The production patterns of child participants across
treatment and home settings was likely a product of the
different conversational environments. Although target
stimulus items were available in the home samples,
children were free to play with other items as well. Furthermore, the nature of input from children's mothers
was rather different from that of clinicians in the treatment setting. As would be expected, the repetitive occurrences of imitative prompting and contingent responding were not as frequent in the home interactions
as in the MEI training setting. The structure of the MEI
training paradigm constituted a form of conversational
scaffolding per se with its frequent use of question
prompts (i.e., mands) and response contingencies. This
likely motivated more productions of target words in the
treatment setting than at home for MEI participants.
High productivity rates during treatment have been
indicated in other studies in which frequent response
prompts and production requests were employed in the
training setting (e.g., Camarata et al., 1994; Connell,
1987). Contrastively, no response obligations or requests

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

167

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were placed on children in the Mod-AB treatment setting, thus providing minimal conversational scaffolding.
In some respects the Mod-AB treatment setting can be
viewed as less demanding than that of a typical mother-
child interaction in which some response evocations are
expected from the adult partner. Given the repetitive
nature of the clinician's models, children in the Mod-AB
setting may have had fewer opportunities for uninterrupted productions than children in the MEI setting or
in the generalization settings. Children were not required or encouraged to talk in the Mod-AB condition
but in fact were obliged to "listen," especially given the
AB exposure at the beginning and end of each treatment session. Yet, when back in the home environment,
Mod-AB participants were more likely to communicate
with caretakers who were not constantly modeling to
them. These results suggest that while both treatment
procedures generated rather distinct profiles of target
word usage, ultimately they were both effective in facilitating lexical production of already comprehended
lexical items.

Comparisons to Other Research
The issue of using modeling versus elicitation treatment procedures with children has been the focus of
numerous studies. A number of these studies have produced rather inconsistent outcomes. It is believed that
the difference in findings between this and other investigations comparing different modeling and elicitation
approaches can be largely attributed to variations in experimental procedure. Such variations are reflected in
the different types of training contexts, target structures,
subject populations, and experimental design that have
been incorporated in this line of research. As an example,
in two well-controlled studies by Camarata et al. (1994)
and Nelson et al. (1996), the use of models, elicitations,
interactive play contexts, and natural reinforcers was a
feature that their conversational recast condition shared
with one or both conditions in the present study. These
overlaps may explain an interesting parallel between this
and Camarata et al.'s and Nelson et al.'s studies, which
found that although their imitative treatment approach
led to a greater number of child productions during treatment, more spontaneous productions and faster rates
of spontaneous learning occurred in the conversational
recast condition. Similarly, MEI participants in the
present study produced more target forms initially in
treatment, whereas Mod-AB participants went on to use
as many or more spontaneous target forms in the generalization setting. Yet, while target productions were
initially high in Camarata's imitative condition, they did
not evolve into spontaneous uses at the rate or degree
that they did in their conversational recast condition,
or in the MEI condition of the present study. This may
168

be attributed to the interactive contexts in which the
two conditions were set, or to the different types of language structures targeted across studies.
One aspect of the present investigation that distinguishes it from other types of studies focusing on modeling procedures was the addition of the AB component
in the Mod-AB condition. The use of AB has undergone
minimal investigation with respect to its usefulness for
lexical training. Unfortunately, the unique contribution
of AB in the present study is difficult to isolate because
of the lack of similarly designed efficacy research. One
study closely resembling the present one was reported
by Kouri et al. in 1991. Mand-model and interactive
modeling procedures were implemented in child-lead
training contexts over 24 sessions, although AB was not
incorporated. Results of that investigation indicated that
children receiving the mand-model procedure produced
more lexical items, not only in the treatment setting but
also in the generalization setting. One could speculate
that AB affected the higher levels of lexical generalization by Mod-AB participants in the current study, however additional research is needed before such conclusions can be drawn about AB and lexical learning.
Although general results of this investigation indicated more treatment productivity by MEI participants
and comparable generalization performance between
groups, variability existed across participants as reflected by the large standard deviations on a number of
lexical measures. As other studies have revealed, different children do demonstrate relatively higher or lower
rates of learning with modeling versus elicitation training practices for no apparent reasons (e.g., Ellis Weismer
et al., 1993; Kouri et al., 1991; Yoder et al., 1991). In the
current study, findings revealed no significant treatment
by aptitude interactions, indicating that children's
preintervention language, cognitive, and overall developmental scores were not predictive of best performance
in one or the other treatment conditions. Based on a
number of other treatment by aptitude investigations
(e.g., Cole et al., 1991; Yoder et al., 1991, 1995), this finding came as a surprise until careful examination of the
research literature.
A number of studies reporting treatment by aptitude interactions have focused on a rather wide range
of linguistic abilities in children from a broad gamut of
developmental stages. For instance, in a study comparing training procedures similar to those of the present
study, Yoder et al. (1995) examined language measures
in children ranging in age from 2-7 years and functioning between 1 and 4 years in cognitive and language
ability. Children in the current study were 19-36 months
old and all limited to the single-word stage. In another
study by Cole and Dale (1986) examining direct (elicited imitation-based) and interactive (modeling-based)

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

language instruction, no treatment by aptitude interactions were found in children 3-5 years old. Although
Cole and Dale's participants were older and more advanced than those in the present study, their range of
language abilities was relatively narrow. This leads to
speculation as to whether the absence of treatment by
aptitude interactions in the Cole and Dale (1986) and
present study was a function of the relatively narrow
ability ranges of participants.
Another potentially crucial difference between this
and other treatment by aptitude analyses is the type of
pre-post language measures examined. In the present
study a specific language ability, lexical production of
comprehended words, was reflected by treatment outcome measures, whereas in other studies, standardized
test scores representing numerous language skills and
modalities constituted such measures (e.g., Cole et al.,
1991; Yoder et al., 1995).
Based on the available research, identification of
specific child characteristics predictive of best treatment
practices merits additional study. Various child characteristics not yet examined in existing studies should also
be explored, such as a young child's disposition or personality. For instance, some of us have observed children who can be totally disenfranchised or "turned off"
when productivity demands are placed on them in the
clinical setting. For this reason, an elicitation procedure
requiring frequent and contingent response demands
may not be the one of choice. Certain children who are
not capable or willing imitators during the early stages
of lexical acquisition may benefit more from the use of a
modeling approach, at least until their productive lexicons evolve. A key finding of the present study is that a
modeling approach providing frequent and repetitive
input can indeed facilitate lexical production and generalization. Furthermore, it may require less effort or
skill on the part of a clinician to implement.
In conclusion, it appears that both modeling and
elicitation are effective training procedures and that
their effects may be enhanced when used in a naturalistic setting. Although both training conditions in this study
were controlled for background context and procedural
consistency, a number of factors still require teasing out
to determine which is most powerful for lexical training.
For example, one may question what aspects of an MEI
procedure impacts lexical production the most: modeling, elicitation, imitative prompting, contingent responding, or the use of natural reinforcers. Some would maintain that verbal imitation is the key component because
it provides verbal practice for language impaired children whose primary challenge is verbal production
(Connell & Stone, 1992). Others have linked the use of
mands in an interactive setting to increased child productions (Alpert & Kaiser, 1992). Another question for

future study concerns the comparative efficacy of modeling and elicitation approaches for training different
linguistic structures. These and other issues point to
the need for clinical efficacy research that yields systematic guidelines for clinicians attempting to match
specific child characteristics and linguistic goals to best
treatment practices.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks go to the following students for their
time and effort with data collection procedures: Jaimi West,
Jaimi Bird, Tanya Haase, Heidi Heiar, Christine Vent, and
Michelle Richardson.

References
Alpert, C. L., & Kaiser, A. P. (1992). Training parents as
milieu language teachers. Journal of Early Intervention,
16, 31-52.
Bowen, C. (1999). Auditory bombardment: Focused stimulation. Retrieved March 6, 2003, from http://
members.tripod.com/CarolineBowen/audbomb-2.htm
Calandrella, A., & Wilcox, M. J. (2000). Predicting
language outcomes for young prelinguistic children with
developmental delay. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 1061-1071.
Camarata, S. M., Nelson, K. E., & Camarata, M. N.
(1994). Comparison of conversational recast and imitative
procedures for training grammatical structures in children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 37, 1414-1423.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cole, K. N., & Dale, P. S. (1986). Direct language instruction and interactive language instruction with language
delayed preschool children: A comparison study. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 29, 206-217.
Cole, K. N., Dale, P. S., & Mills, P. E. (1991). Individual
differences in language delayed children's responses to
direct and interactive preschool instruction. Topics in
Early Childhood Special Education, 11, 99-124.
Connell, P. J. (1987). An effect of modeling and imitation
teaching procedures on children with and without specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 30, 105-113.
Connell, P. J., & Stone, C. A. (1992). Morpheme learning of
children specific language impairment under controlled
instructional conditions. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 35, 844-852.
Courtright, J., & Courtright, I. (1976). Imitative modeling as a theoretical base for instructing language disordered children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
19, 655-663.
Courtright, J., & Courtright, I. (1979). Imitative modeling as a language intervention strategy. The effects of two
mediating variables. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 22, 389-402.

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

169

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

younger language-normal children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 39, 850-859.

Ellis Weismer, S. (2000). Language intervention for young
children with language impairments. In L. Watson, E.
Crais, & T. Layton (Eds.), Handbook of early language
impairment in children: Assessment and treatment.
Albany, NY: Delmar.

Newborg, J., Stopck, J., Wneck, L., Guidubaldi, J., &
Svinicki, J. (1988). Battelle Developmental Inventory.
Allen, TX: DLM Teaching Resources.

Ellis Weismer, S., & Murray-Branch, J. (1989). Modeling
versus modeling plus evoked production training: A
comparison of two language intervention methods.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 54, 269-281.

Nye, C., Foster, S., & Seaman, D. (1987). Effectiveness of
language intervention with the language/learning
disabled. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 52,
348-357.

Ellis Weismer, S., Murray-Branch, J., & Miller, J. F.
(1993). Comparison of two methods for promoting productive vocabulary in late talkers. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 36, 1037-1050.

Paul, R. (1991). Profiles of toddlers with slow expressive
language development. Topics in Language Disorders,
11(4), 1-14.

Ellis Weismer, S., Murray-Branch, J., & Miller, J. F.
(1994). A prospective longitudinal study of language
development in late talkers. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 37, 852-867.
Ezell, H. K., & Goldstein, H. (1989). Effects of imitation on
language comprehension and transfer to production in
children with mental retardation. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders, 54, 49-56.
Fey, M. (1986). Language intervention with young children.
San Diego, CA: College Hill Press.
Girolametto, L., Pearce, P. S., & Weitzman, E. (1996).
Interactive focused stimulation for toddlers with expressive vocabulary delays. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 74-1283.
Hendrick, D., Prather, E., & Tobin, A. (1984). Sequenced
Inventory of Communication Development--Revised.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Hodson, B., & Paden, E. (1983). Targeting intelligible
speech: A phonological approach to remediation. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Hodson, B., & Paden, E. (1991). Targeting intelligible
speech: A phonological approach to remediation (2nd ed.).
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed/College Hill Press.
Irwin, J., Carter, A., & Briggs-Gowan, M. (2002). The
social-emotional development of "late-talking" toddlers.
Journal of the American Academy of Child Adolescent
Psychiatry, 41, 1324-1332.
Kaiser, A. B., & Hester, P. P. (1994). Generalized effects of
enhanced milieu teaching. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 37, 1320-1340.
Kouri, T., Wilcox, M. J., & Caswell, S. (1991, November).
Early language intervention: Elicitation versus modeling
procedures. Poster presented at the annual convention of
the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association,
Atlanta, GA.
Leonard, L. (1975). Modeling as a clinical procedure in
language training. Language, Speech, and Hearing
Services in the Schools, 6, 72-85.
Leonard, L. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Meyer, R., & Krueger, D. (2001). A Minitab guide to
statistics (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nelson, K. E., Camarata, S. M., Welsh, J., Butkovsky, L.,
& Camarata, M. (1996). Effects of imitative and conversational recasting treatment on the acquisition of grammar in children with specific language impairment and

170

Paul, R. (1993). Patterns of development in late talkers:
Preschool years. Journal of Childhood Communication
Disorders, 15, 7-14.
Paul, R., & Jennings, P. (1992). Phonological behavior in
toddlers with slow expressive language development.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 99-107.
Paul, R., Murray, C., Clancy, K., & Andrews, D. (1997).
Reading and metaphonological outcomes in late talkers.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40,
1037-1047.
Prelock, P., & Panagos, J. (1980). Mimicry versus imitative production in the speech of the retarded. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 9, 565-578.
Rescorla, L. (1989). The language development survey: A
screening tool for delayed language in toddlers. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 54, 587-599.
Rescorla, L. (2002). Language and reading outcomes to age
9 in late talking toddlers. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 360-371.
Rescorla, L., Dahlsgaard, K., & Roberts, J. E. (2000).
Late-talking toddlers: MLU and IPSyn outcomes at 3;0
and 4;0. Journal of Child Language, 27, 643-664.
Rescorla, L., & Goosens, M. (1992). Symbolic play
development in toddlers with expressive specific language
impairment (SLI-E). Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 35, 1290-1302.
Robertson, S., & Ellis Weismer, S. (1999). Effects of
treatment on linguistic and social skills in toddlers with
delayed language development. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1234-1248.
Warren, S., & Bambura, L. (1989). An experimental
analysis of milieu language intervention: Teaching the
action-object form. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 54, 448-461.
Warren, S., & Kaiser, A. B. (1986). Incidental language
teaching: A critical review. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 51, 291-298.
Wilcox, M. J., Kouri, T. K., & Caswell, S. B. (1991). Early
language intervention: A comparison of classroom and
individual treatment. American Journal of SpeechLanguage Pathology, 1, 49-62.
Yoder, P., Davies, B., Bishop, K., & Munson, L. (1994).
Effect of adult continuing wh-questions on conversational
participation in children with developmental disabilities.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 193-204.
Yoder, P. J., Kaiser, A. P., & Alpert, C. (1991). An exploratory study of the interaction between language teaching

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 157-171 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

methods and child characteristics. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 34, 155-167.
Yoder, P. J., Kaiser, A. P., Goldstein, H., Alpert, C.,
Mousetis, L., Kaczmarek, L., et al. (1995). An exploratory comparison of milieu teaching and responsive
interaction in classroom applications. Journal of Early
Intervention, 19, 218-242.

Received May 7, 2003
Revision received November 7, 2003
Accepted June 29, 2004
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2004/012)
Contact author: Theresa A. Kouri, University of Northern
Iowa, CAC 230, Cedar Falls, IA 50614-0356. E-mail:
theresa.kouri@uni.edu

Appendix. Treatment fidelity index.
I. Structure
Evidence of a naturalistic play interaction (B)
Yes(2)

Sometimes(1)

No(0)

Evidence of a structured/didactic teaching interaction (B)
Yes(0)

Sometimes(1)

No(2)

Characterization of therapeutic interaction: (B)
Adult Lead

Child Lead

0........1........2........3........4........5
(0)

(1)

(2)

II. Linguistic input
Clinician asks for responses from child ("what is this?"; "what do you want?") (MEI)
Often(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

Clinician elicits imitative responses from child ("tell me ___") (MEI)
Often(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

Clinician's input consists of one and two-word models (MOD)
Usually(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

III. Interaction and feedback
Clinician withholds desired object or activity until child produces a word (MEI)
Often(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

After child produces a word, clinician presents object or performs activity (MEI)
Usually(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

After child produces a word, clinician produces expansion of it (MOD)
Always(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

Input and feedback from clinician are based on child's focus of attention (B)
Usually(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

Clinician attempts to manipulate treatment context to engage child in play and verbal
interactions (e.g., sharing, parallel play, turn-taking, showing) (B)
Often(2)

Sometimes(1)

Never(0)

Note. B = applies to both treatment conditions (not indicated on judges' score sheet); MEI = applies to
mand-elicited imitation condition (not indicated on judges' score sheet); MOD = applies to modeling
with auditory bombardment condition (not indicated on judges' score sheet); numbers in parentheses
(0-2) represent the number of points assigned to each rating.

Kouri: Lexical Training Through Modeling and Elicitation

171

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

