Roles of Initiation and Responsiveness
in Access and Participation for Children
With Specific Language Impairment
Colleen A. Liiva
Patricia L. Cleave
Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada

This study compared the abilities of children with specific language impairment (SLI;
n = 10) and typically developing (TD) children (n = 13) to access and participate in
an ongoing interaction between two unfamiliar peer partners. Results revealed that
all children in the study accessed by either making an unprompted initiation toward
their peers (access initiation) or by responding to a question or play invitation directed
toward them (access response). However, 4 children with SLI were unsuccessful in
achieving successful access initiation during the 10-min play period. Children with
SLI required a longer period of time to achieve access initiation. Following access,
children with SLI were addressed significantly less by their play partners, participated
in less group play, and engaged in more individual play and onlooking behavior.
Among the SLI group, language levels were negatively related to the time children
required to achieve their first successful access and first access initiation. Expressive
language levels were positively related to the percentage of utterances children
produced postaccess and the percentage of utterances they were addressed
postaccess by their play partners. Differences in receptive skills among SLI children
were less strongly related to the time they required in achieving their first access and
were unrelated to their ability to participate in the interaction.
KEY WORDS: specific language impairment, peer interaction, access abilities,
pragmatic skills

T

he ability to interact successfully with peers is an important communicative skill that is critical to the establishment and maintenance of healthy social relationships. In typically developing
(TD) children, good language skills have been shown to mediate children's facility with a variety of important social tasks, including sharing
information, expressing feelings, directing behavior, and negotiating
misunderstandings (Fujiki, Brinton, & Todd, 1996). Children with specific language impairment (SLI) who have weak expressive and receptive language skills as their primary developmental disability often
experience social rejection (Guralnick, Connor, Hammond, Gottman, &
Kinnish, 1996).
Studies that have focused on the peer interactions of children with
SLI present a troubling picture of these children's early social experiences. For example, Fujiki et al. (1996) found that school-age children
with SLI rated themselves as lonelier at school and less satisfied with
their peer relationships than did their TD classmates. Studies using
peer-rating measures have found that school-age children with SLI
tend to experience fewer reciprocal friendships (Fujiki, Brinton, Hart, &
Fitzgerald, 1999) and preschool children with SLI are more likely to be

868

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005  AAmerican Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/05/4804-0868

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

disliked by their peers (Gertner, Rice, & Hadley, 1994).
Observational studies of the free play of preschoolers
with SLI are consistent with findings that children with
SLI experience lower social status. Rice and her
colleagues (Hadley & Rice, 1991; Rice, Sell, & Hadley,
1991) found that children with SLI are less likely to be
addressed in an integrated classroom setting, less likely
to initiate conversation, and more likely to have their
initiations ignored.
Based on these findings, it is not surprising that
researchers have also found that children with SLI are
more likely to show higher levels of withdrawn behavior
as reported by teachers (Fujiki, Brinton, Morgan, &
Hart, 1999; Redmond & Rice, 1998), and observed
during free play settings (Fujiki, Brinton, Isaacson, &
Summers, 2001). Specifically, Fujiki, Brinton, Morgan,
and Hart (1999) found that children with SLI were more
likely to display social reticence, one of three types of
withdrawn behavior. Social reticence includes behaviors such as watching other children play while engaging in little independent activity. This pattern of
behavior is considered to represent a desire to engage
in play with others but an inability to initiate joining
play or becoming a full participant. The higher levels
of withdrawn behavior reported in these children may
also be related to the finding that older children with
SLI are more likely than their TD peers to report low
self-esteem in the domain of social acceptance (Jerome,
Fujiki, Brinton, & James, 2002).
Cumulatively, these findings suggest that children
with language impairments often experience a more
negative peer environment than do their TD classmates
despite the appearance of wanting to engage with others.
One explanation offered for this by researchers is that
children with language impairments are at a disadvantage when participating in basic social tasks that are
strongly dependent on language (e.g., Brinton, Fujiki,
Spencer, & Robinson, 1997).
Recently, investigators have started to explore this
hypothesis by examining the ability of children with SLI
to perform in everyday life situations that appear to
demand good language skills. These studies revealed
that school-age children with SLI did not perform as
well as TD peers in multiple social contexts. These
included resolving conflicts (Stevens & Bliss, 1995),
negotiating (Brinton, Fujiki, & McKee, 1998), participating in group decision making (Fujiki, Brinton,
Robinson, & Watson, 1997), engaging in cooperative
learning activities (Brinton, Fujiki, & Higbee, 1998),
and entering an ongoing interaction (Brinton et al.,
1997). The latter four studies by Brinton, Fujiki, and
their associates examined the triadic interactions of the
same 6 children with SLI (ages 8;10 [ years; months] to
12;5) who displayed both expressive and receptive
language deficits. These studies showed that children

with SLI were unable to achieve equal participation in
their triads across a variety of tasks. Interestingly, this
was true for measures of both verbal and nonverbal
involvement in the activities at hand.
The ability to enter an ongoing interaction may be
considered a social task of particular importance, as
researchers have noted that success at this task is a
prerequisite for further social interaction (Corsaro,
1979; Putallaz & Wasserman, 1990). The complexity
involved in succeeding at this task is suggested by
findings that children are frequently ignored or rejected
following entry attempts (Corsaro, 1979; Dodge,
Schlundt, Schocken, & Delugach, 1983). The critical
nature of this social skill has prompted the extensive
study of the group entry behaviors used by TD preschool
and early school-age children (Putallaz & Wasserman,
1990).
Current theories relating to this topic propose that
the most successful entry strategy involves first establishing a frame of reference common to the members
of the group, and then establishing oneself as sharing
this frame of reference (Putallaz & Wasserman, 1990).
Several studies have found that among early schoolage children the most successful strategies for entering
an ongoing interaction include making verbal bids of
agreement and informational exchange directed to the
group (Black & Hazen, 1990; Dodge et al., 1983; Hazen
& Black, 1989; Putallaz & Gottman, 1981). Children
using these strategies are also more likely to be ranked
as popular by their peers (Dodge et al., 1983; Putallaz &
Gottman, 1981). Unpopular children, who experience
higher levels of rejected access when attempting to enter interactions, are more likely to speak about themselves, ask informational questions irrelevant to the
group activity, disagree with the other group members,
and state their feelings and opinions more often than
other children (Putallaz & Gottman, 1981). Conversely,
neglected children are more likely to use the tactics
of waiting and hovering around the peer group, which
tend to be ignored (Dodge et al., 1983). One possible
explanation of these findings is that children who are
unsuccessful at entering an ongoing interaction are unreceptive to the actions and words of the group they are
trying to enter.
Dodge et al. (1983) have also shown that certain
sequences of group behaviors are associated with higher
levels of success. They found that children who are the
most successful at accessing generally move from using low-risk tactics (i.e., waiting and hovering) to highrisk tactics (i.e., making group-oriented statements) as
initial positive feedback from peers is received. Lowrisk tactics are most likely to receive a neutral response, whereas high-risk tactics are more likely to be
responded to either positively or negatively. Neglected
children, who are often perceived as shy or withdrawn,

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

869

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were more likely to have difficulty moving beyond lowrisk tactics. Rejected children, who are often perceived
as disruptive, were more likely to immediately use highrisk tactics, such as attention-getting behaviors, that
were not related to the group activity. The findings from
this study support the theory of Putallaz and Gottman
(1981) that children must take the time to both establish
a frame of reference and then try to enter this frame of
reference using tactics that are related to what the
group is doing.
Cumulatively, these studies suggest that children
who have weak language skills may be at a disadvantage with regard to many aspects of the peer group entry
task. Children who possess weak receptive language
skills may be less successful in establishing the group's
frame of reference. This may explain why even older
children with both expressive and receptive deficits
demonstrate difficulty with achieving nonverbal participation in basic social tasks (Brinton et al., 1997;
Brinton, Fujiki, & Higbee, 1998; Brinton, Fujiki, &
McKee, 1998; Fujiki et al., 1997). Additionally, children
with weak expressive language skills might be less
successful than TD children in entering the host group's
frame of reference. Specifically, these children may
struggle with formulating verbal initiations such as
informational questions or group-oriented statements
related to the group activity, which tend to be successful. However, it may also be hypothesized that for
younger children who often are able to access interactions using nonverbal behaviors (Corsaro, 1979),
expressive language skills may be less critical than
receptive skills. For example, one might expect that
strategies such as mimicking the peer group activity
would be less problematic for children who only have
expressive language deficits.
Two studies have specifically addressed the ability
of children with SLI to access an ongoing interaction.
Craig and Washington (1993) examined the access
behaviors of 7-year-old TD children and children with
language impairments, as well as those of younger TD
children with similar language skills, when introduced
to a dyad of unfamiliar peers. They found that 3 of the 5
children with SLI were unable to access the interaction
within a 20-min play period, and the remaining 2
children accessed the interaction without speaking.
Conversely, all of the TD children in the study accessed
the interaction using both verbal and nonverbal bids,
and the majority did so quickly. Interestingly, the
authors noted that the 2 children with SLI who did
access the interaction successfully exhibited stronger
receptive language skill profiles than the other children
with SLI. Further, the receptive skills of the TD
children in this study showed a moderate negative
correlation with the amount of time these children
required in entering the ongoing interaction.

870

Brinton et al. (1997) replicated this study's findings with an older group of 8-12-year-old children with
SLI. Using the same access paradigm, these researchers compared the ability of 6 children with SLI, 6 TD
chronological-age-matched children, and 6 younger TD
language-matched children to access and participate
in an ongoing interaction. They found that only 4 of
the 6 children with SLI were able to access an ongoing
interaction between 2 peers, whereas all of the TD
children accessed the interaction. Further, they noted
that whereas 9 of the 12 TD children accessed the
interaction in less than 3 min, none of the children with
SLI accessed the interaction this quickly. Differences in
receptive ability did not differentiate between the
successful and unsuccessful SLI groups. The authors
of this study hypothesized that beyond a certain level,
the degree of receptive language deficit may not
discriminate among differences in performance. Alternatively, it might be interpreted that when children
reach an older age level, verbal participation in conversation may be a more essential component of play
participation. Thus, expressive language ability may
also be a critical component of successfully accessing
and participating in an interaction.
Both studies focusing on the access abilities of
children with SLI used Craig and Washington's (1993)
definition of a successful access episode as one in which
the target child took an unrejected turn in the play that
was acknowledged verbally or nonverbally by one of
the play partners. Brinton et al. (1997) included both
comments and requests for information or action that
extended the play and responses to questions from
partners concerning the ongoing play as potentially
successful bids by the target child. However, there is a
qualitative difference between a newcomer making an
unprompted verbal or nonverbal initiation toward
potential play partners and simply responding to a
direct question from a play partner. The latter strategy
suggests a dependence on potential play partners to
make an overture toward the target child, whereas the
former indicates a degree of independence on the part
of the newcomer in the ability to assess an ongoing interaction and initiate a bid to join the play. The strategy of responding to a question is a low-risk tactic,
whereas making a verbal or nonverbal bid related to
the ongoing play is a high-risk tactic. One might expect
that children with SLI who show an increased propensity to be socially reticent (Brinton, Morgan, & Hart,
1999) would experience increased difficulty formulating
unprompted initiations toward their peers.
The current study attempted to replicate and
extend the findings of previous researchers by exploring
the ability of early school-age children with SLI to
access and participate in an ongoing interaction
between unfamiliar peers. The following two groups of

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

children were included in the study: (a) those with a
diagnosis of SLI based on delayed expressive or expressive and receptive language skills and (b) children with
TD language skills. The first purpose of the study was
to compare the success, style, and duration of access
attempts by TD children and children with SLI.
Successful access attempts were qualitatively examined
to determine if the target child had accessed by making
a response to a peer or forming an unprompted initiation. Further, if a child accessed by making a response, the interaction continued to be analyzed until
the children made an initiation toward the play partner
that was acknowledged. It was hypothesized that children with SLI would take longer to access the interaction and would be more likely to achieve access by
responding to a peer than by making an unprompted
initiation to join the play.
The second purpose of this study was to describe
the participation of children with SLI in the ongoing
interaction following their first successful access. It was
hypothesized that children with SLI would show increased difficulty on measures of verbal participation
in the interaction. Also, given the tendency of children
with SLI to exhibit withdrawn behavior, it was expected
that children with SLI would be more likely to show
passive, low-risk onlooking behavior following access
and less group play.
The final purpose of this study was to examine the
relation between levels of expressive and receptive language skill and measures of time to access and participation in the ongoing interaction. It was hypothesized
that children with better receptive language skills
would be able to better establish the group's frame of
reference and therefore be able to successfully access an
interaction using nonverbal strategies and relevant responses to the initiations of others. It was also hypothesized that children with better receptive skills would
show increased levels of group play, based on measures
of both verbal and nonverbal interaction.

Method
Participants
Sixty-nine children in Grades 1 and 2 participated
in this study. These children formed 23 triads, each
consisting of 1 target child and 2 unfamiliar play partners matched for grade level and gender. The target
participants included 10 children with SLI (3 female,
7 males) and 13 (6 females, 7 males) TD children. A
two-tailed test with participant type (TD or SLI) as a
between-subjects factor revealed no significant differences between the ages of the two groups of target
children, t(21) = 0.615, p = .54. In addition to these

triads, 3 triads (2 TD, 1 SLI) were excluded from the
data analyses because of high levels of background noise
present on their videotaped interactions. A fourth triad
was excluded because the target child did not meet the
test score requirements for placement in the SLI group,
although she was receiving speech-language services in
school. All of the children in the study, with the exception of 1 Asian-Canadian play partner, were Caucasian,
and all children spoke English as their first language.
The data were collected in nine schools across three
school board regions in Atlantic Canada.
Participants with SLI. Participants with SLI were
recruited from the caseloads of school speech-language
pathologists. Clinicians were asked to identify children
with SLI in Grades 1 and 2 who were placed in mainstreamed classrooms and did not have an articulation
disorder, neurological impairment, hearing loss, behavioral problem, or remarkable health history, consistent
with Stark and Tallal's (1981) exclusion criteria. Additionally, it was necessary for target participants with
SLI to meet the following criteria:
1.

A diagnosis of language impairment based on a score
of at least 1 SD below the mean on the expressive, or
both the expressive and receptive, components of the
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals--
Third Edition (CELF-III; Semel, Wiig, & Secord,
1995).

2.

Nonverbal intelligence within normal limits as
indicated by a score above 80 on the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence--Second Edition (TONI-II;
Brown, Sherbenou, & Johnsen, 1990).

3.

Enrollment in speech-language pathology services.

Descriptive data for children with SLI are presented in Table 1.
TD target participants. TD target participants were
drawn from a pool of children identified by teachers
as having no academic problems or enrollment in special services for academic, behavioral, or communication difficulties.
Play partners. Partners were drawn from the same
pool of children as TD target children identified by
teachers as having no academic problems or enrollment
in special services for academic, behavioral, or communication difficulties. For all triads, partners were of the
same sex and at the same grade level as the target
participant within their triad. The 2 play partners in
each triad were drawn from the same core classroom
and their teachers were asked to help in pairing play partners who did not have a history of being best friends or
of not getting along well together.
The target child for each triad was chosen from
another classroom within the same school to promote
the likelihood that the target child would be unfamiliar

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

871

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Descriptive data for children with specific language impairment (SLI).
CELF-III Standard Scoresb
Participants (Gender) Chronological Age TONI-II Standard Scoresa Exp. Score Rec. Score Total Score Language Age Equivalent
1 (M)
2 (F)
3 (F)
4 (M)
5 (M)
6 (F)
7 (M)
8 (M)
9 (M)
10 (M)

6;8
7;2
8;6
7;7
8;2
7;7
6;10
8;1
7;5
8;4

116
103
85
95
88
99
87
91
82
85

78
57
65
78
65
65
72
57
69
57

102
90
90
94
78
82
82
69
61
80

89
76
76
85
70
77
75
61
63
65

5;6
5;9
6;2
5;8
6;1
5;2
4;6
5;8
4;8
6;0

Note. TONI-II = Test of Nonverbal Intelligence--Second Edition; CELF-III = Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals--Third Edition;
Exp. = expressive; Rec. = receptive. Age is in years; months.
a

M = 100, SD = 15.

b

M = 100, SD = 15.

to the play partners. Further, to ensure that play partners did not have previous social interactional histories
with target children outside the classroom, each potential partner was asked two questions taken from the
procedure of Brinton et al. (1997) before the data collection proceeded. Each child was asked if he or she
knew (target child's name) from Ms./Mr. XXX's class.
If the child responded yes, the child was then asked
whether he or she played with the target child at school
or at home. All children who answered ``yes'' to the
second question were excluded as partners in that triad.
However, it is acknowledged that children who did not
play together at school or at home may have previously
interacted in large group activities at school.

Procedure
The procedure used in this study was based on the
access paradigm introduced by Putallaz and Gottman
(1981), as well as the applications of this paradigm by
Craig and Washington (1993) and Brinton et al. (1997).
This paradigm was designed to explore children's access
behaviors through the recorded observation of triadic
interactions. In the first phase, children chosen as play
partners were brought into a room containing a 4  6 ft.
carpet with toys placed on top. The 2 play partners were
seated on the carpet and invited to play with a Playmobil thematic toy set. This set contained male and
female figures, a castle, a catapult, a variety of forest
animals, a waterfall, and many other loose pieces related to the theme. Play partners were asked to stay on
the carpet, with the explanation that the examiner did
not want the toys to become lost around the room. This
play activity was chosen because it was thought to
appeal to both sexes and to encourage cooperative pre-

872

tend play. Additionally, it was intended to be similar to
Craig and Washington's (1993) LEGO activity in that
it was predicted that children would be able to access
this form of play without speaking. Following the introduction to the toys, the examiner announced that she
had some work to do and moved to a different area of
the room, leaving the children to play.
After 10 min passed, the examiner left the room to
collect the target child, telling the play partners she
would be ``back in a minute.'' The target child was told
that he or she would be talking to 2 other children for
about 10 to 20 min and playing with toys. The target
child was then brought into the room and immediately introduced to the 2 play partners. The phrase
``(target child's name), this is (first play partner's name)
and (second play partner's name)'' was used. The target child was told that he or she could play with the toys
but was not instructed about his or her specific role
in the interaction or told that it was necessary to stay
on the carpet. The examiner then returned to the area
in which she was working, leaving the third child to attempt access for 10 min. On several occasions after the
target child was introduced, play partners approached
the examiner to request assistance with assembling a
toy or to ask a question. The examiner provided polite,
minimal answers to questions when this occurred in order to redirect the children back to the activity. None
of the target children approached the examiner during
the 10-min access period or asked what they should be
doing.
All samples of peer interaction were recorded by two
video cameras, a Samsung 2 Lux Low Light Sensitivity
(Model SCF 703) and a JVC camcorder (Model GR AXX31OUVHS-C), which were placed at opposite diagonals of the carpet. Additionally, the interaction was

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

audiotaped using a Marantz audio recorder (Model PM
D222) with a crown microphone (Model PZM-185).
Following the 20 min of interaction, play partners
and TD target children were returned to their classrooms. The target children with SLI were then administered the CELF-III and the TONI-II.

Successful access response was coded whenever the
target child responded to an invitation by 1 of the play
partners to involve him or her in the play and then the
play partner accepted this response. In the following
sequence, TD 1 is given a clear invitation to join the
play:
P1: You wanna play (makes eye contact with the
target child)?

Data Analysis
The 10 min of interaction following the introduction
of the target child to the 2 partners was orthographically transcribed using both videotapes. Utterances
were divided according to the conventions described by
Fujiki et al. (1997). The number of utterances produced
by each member of the triad was calculated for analysis
using the transcripts. Following this, both transcriptions and videotapes were used to code all other aspects
of the data.
Coding utterances addressed. The number of utterances addressed to each target child in the triad
was calculated using the coding conventions created by
Brinton et al. (1997). These conventions involved attending to both the nonverbal and verbal behaviors of
each child in the triad. Utterances could be addressed
to individual members of the triad or to the group as a
whole.
Coding access episodes. This analysis determined
the point at which each target child successfully accessed the interaction between their 2 play partners
and how long it took to achieve access. The definition of
successful access provided by Craig and Washington
(1993), and the interpretation of this definition by
Brinton et al. (1997), was used to code access episodes
into the mutually exclusive categories of successful and
unsuccessful. A successful access episode was defined as
one in which the target child took an ``unrejected turn in
the play and at least one partner was aware of it as
evidenced by the content of the partner's next utterance
or by the partner's watching the subject's action'' (Craig
& Washington, 1993, p. 326). The time period between
the introduction of the target child and the positive
response by 1 or both play partners to the entry bid of
that target child was calculated as the time the participant took to access the interaction.
Successful access attempts were divided into two
categories, access response and access initiation. This
division was based on whether the target child successfully entered the play by responding to a direct invitation from 1 of the play partners or by making an
unprompted verbal or nonverbal initiation toward a
play partner. In each case, 1 of the partners needed to
acknowledge the target child's response or initiation for
successful access to be coded.

T: Yup.
P1: The horses are up here (shows target child
where the toys are located).
If a child first achieved successful access response,
the interaction continued to be analyzed until the child
also achieved access initiation or until the 10-min period
ended. Successful access initiation bids included performing actions related to the ongoing play that were
directed toward the play partners, responses to groupdirected questions or comments, verbal comments
relating to the ongoing play, and requests for information or action from the play partners relating to the play.
In the following sequence, TD 7 indirectly requests information from the play partners and is provided with
a response:
T: I don't see where those go.
P2: They go wherever the holes are (looking at the
target child).
P2: That's why there's so many of them.
T: Do they come off?
P2: Don't know.
Access was also identified in the following episode
when SLI 3 made a comment that was acknowledged by
1 of the play partners.
P1: This is the prince (shows group).
P1: And those two guys are the guards.
T: That's the princess.
P1: Yeah (looks at target child).
P1: Well they're not really princesses.
Access initiation could also be identified in situations where the target child directed an action relating
to the play toward one or both of the play partners and
that action was acknowledged, as in the following
sequence where TD 8 makes an initiation:
P1: Fire.
TD8: AAAHHH (yells and makes an exaggerated
fall backwards as if a cannon ball had hit him and
he'd been wounded).
P2: (looks up at T) I'm gonna fly it [the cannon ball]
to you.
There were also several situations in which access
was not considered successful, following the coding

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

873

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

conventions of Brinton et al. (1997). Successful access
was not identified in cases where the target child's bid
did not continue the play. For example, successful
access was not coded when one of the partners accepted
a toy handed to him or her by the target child without
making eye contact or a comment. Additionally, access
was not identified when the target child's bid was
ignored or overtly rejected by the play partners.
Coding partner inclusion bids. These analyses were
conducted to determine whether one group of target
children was more encouraged by their partners to
join the play. The definition of a partner inclusion bid
created by Brinton et al. (1997) was used in coding the
data. This definition identified ``greetings or responses
to greetings, explicit remarks about entering the
interaction, comments that oriented the target child to
the environment or ongoing activity, requests for
attention, requests for information, remarks about the
target child, or other comments directed to the target
child'' (p. 1015) as partner inclusion bids. Both verbal
and nonverbal partner inclusion bids were accepted.
Coding group play, individual play, and onlooking
behavior. These analyses determined which types of
activity target children engaged in following their first
successful access attempt. The coding scheme used to
examine the target child's postaccess activity was modified from a scheme created by Brinton et al. (1997),
which included consideration of both verbal and nonverbal behaviors.
The behaviors of the target child were coded at 5-s
intervals, following the first point of access, into the
three mutually exclusive categories of group play, individual play, and onlooking behavior. The conventions described by Brinton et al. (1997) for coding the
categories of individual play and group play were used
in coding the current data, with one exception. Brinton
et al. included onlooking behavior under the category of
individual play. For the current analyses, this behavior
was made into a separate category. This category was
coded when the target child watched the partners play
while not engaging in any other form of individual
activity or making a bid to participate in the ongoing
interaction. Onlooking behavior was examined separately because this activity was considered more passive
in nature than individual play. High levels of onlooking
behavior were also thought to reflect a child's desire to
enter the play but inability to formulate an entry bid for
participation. According to the conventions of Brinton
et al., the category of individual play was coded when
the target child engaged in independent play and did
not give or take materials from the partners or ``contribute to the group action'' (p. 1025). Group play was
coded when the target child collaborated verbally or
nonverbally with the partners. Nonverbal collaboration
included ``giving or taking materials from another,

874

performing actions in group activity and responding to
directions from another child'' (p. 1025). Verbal collaboration included producing utterances that were
responded to by the play partners, responding to the
utterances of others, or repeating the utterances of the
play partners.

Reliability
The first author transcribed the 10-min triadic
interactions of children for all data samples and coded
every aspect of the data analyzed. Also, a team of two
coders jointly retranscribed and coded data from two
randomly selected SLI triads and two randomly selected
TD triads. These coders were blind to which target
children had been diagnosed with SLI. Point-by-point
reliability levels were calculated for word level transcription and utterance division, as well as for the
coding of point of access, partner inclusion bids, number
of utterances addressed to each member of the triad,
and the postaccess activity of the target child. Reliability levels ranged from 90% to 100% on coded data.

Results
Analyses were conducted to determine the point at
which the target child was successful at accessing the
ongoing interaction between the two partners. Successful access attempts were then divided into access
response or access initiation. Following the determination of the first successful access point for each target
child, all other analyses were performed either during
the pre-access or postaccess period. One-tailed tests
were used when there were a priori predictions based on
previous studies.
Analyses included comparing (a) the number of
partner inclusion bids target children received prior
to the first access point, (b) the length of time target
children required to achieve their first access either by
responding or initiating, (c) the length of time target
children required to achieve access through initiation,
and (d) the percentage of intervals target children were
involved in group play, individual play, or onlooking
behavior after their first successful access. Additionally,
target children were compared to the partners in their
triad on two measures. These included the postaccess
number of utterances made by each child in the triad
and the postaccess number of utterances addressed to
each child in the triad. For these analyses, comparisons
were made between the performance of the target child
group, Partner Group 1 and Partner Group 2, within
each triad type (TD, SLI). The play partners in each
triad were randomly assigned to Partner Group 1 or 2.
This method of analysis, consistent with that of Brinton

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

et al. (1997), was chosen in recognition of the fact that
each member of the triad had an influence on the style of
the triadic interaction and that a target child's performance should be evaluated in the context of the performance of his or her play partners. For example, the total
number of utterances made by the target child could
have been low but nevertheless equal to the number of
utterances made by each of the play partners.

Access Episodes
All of the target children were successful in
accessing the interaction; however, there was variability across participants in the manner in which
successful access occurred. All of the TD children,
except 1, first accessed the interaction by making an
initiation toward their partners. The single TD participant, who first accessed responsively at 8 s, went on to
achieve successful access initiation 26 s later in the
interaction. In contrast, 6 children in the SLI group
first accessed by responding to a question or play
invitation directed toward them (see Table 2). Four of
these 6 children were unable to go on to achieve
successful access by making an initiation toward their
partners.
It is interesting to note that the 4 children (SLI 1,
SLI 6, SLI 7, SLI 9) who did not achieve access initiation did not necessarily achieve the lowest total language standard scores on the CELF-III (see Table 1).
However, these 4 children received the lowest overall
language-age-equivalent scores among all of the SLI
children, which can be related to these children having
four of the six youngest chronological ages in the group.
Participants SLI 1, SLI 6, SLI 7, and SLI 9 received
language-age-equivalent scores in years and months of
5;6, 5;2, 4;6, and 4;8, respectively. The language-ageequivalent scores of the remaining 6 SLI children
ranged between 5;8 and 6;1.
Successful access initiation attempts included verbal comments and actions relating to the ongoing play,
requests for information or action, verbal responses to
group-directed utterances, or a combination of these
methods. Informal observation revealed that the form of
Table 2. Means and standard deviations for time to achieve first
successful access and first access initiation by typically developing
(TD) children and children with SLI, reported in minutes and
seconds.
First Access Point
Participant Type
TD target
SLI target

First Access Initiation

M

SD

M

SD

1:17
2:23

1:50
2:06

1:22
4:45

1:47
4:29

successful access initiation bids did not differ between
groups. All successful access response bids, except one,
were verbal responses to partner inclusion bids.

Time to Access
The means and standard deviations for the time required by participant groups to achieve their first successful access and their first access initiation are reported
in Table 2. A one-tailed t test with participant type (TD or
SLI) as a between-subjects factor, was performed to compare the length of time required by target children to
achieve their first successful access point, either by responding or initiating. This test revealed that children
with SLI did not take significantly longer to achieve their
first successful access than TD children, t(21) = 1.342, p =
.097. This result, only approaching the set significance
level of .05, was likely due to the wide variability within
groups evident in the large standard deviations for mean
time to access. However, when Participant TD 7 (an
outlier among the 13 TD target children who took almost
7 min to access) was removed from the analysis, a
significant difference in time to first access was found
using a one-tailed t test, t(20) = 2.206, p = .024. As
expected, children with SLI took significantly longer than
TD children to achieve their first access. An effect size of
h2 = .219 was noted, revealing that 22% of the variation in
time to first access could be attributed to group membership (TD, SLI).
A second one-tailed t test was performed to examine
differences between participant groups in the time required to achieve successful access initiation. For this
analysis, a time of 10 min and 1 s was assigned to the
4 children who did not achieve access initiation within
the observation period. This analysis revealed that
children with SLI took significantly longer to achieve
successful access initiation, t(21) = 2.361, p = .018. An
effect size of h2 = .245 was found, indicating that 25% of
the variability in time to achieve access initiation could
be attributed to group membership (TD, SLI).
Correlational analyses were performed to determine whether variability in the time children with SLI
took to access an interaction was related to receptive
and expressive raw language scores, standard language
scores, or nonverbal cognition scores. Raw language
scores were used rather than language age equivalents
because the CELF-III does not provide separate language-age-equivalent scores for receptive and expressive composite scores.
The raw language scores of children with SLI were
correlated with the time children took to achieve their
first access, and with time required to achieve first successful access initiation, using one-tailed Pearson correlation coefficients (see Table 3). Significant negative
relations were found between the time children took to

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

875

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 3. Correlations between raw language scores on the CELF-III
and time to first successful access and first access initiation.

Time to first
successful access
Time to first access
initiation

Raw
Receptive
Score

Raw
Expressive
Score

Raw Total
Language
Score

-.558*

-.747**

-.880**

-.487

-.753**

-.833**

*p G .05 (one-tailed). **p G .01 level (one-tailed).

achieve their first successful access and their absolute
level of expressive (r = -.747, p = .007), receptive (r =
-.558, p = .047), and total language ability (r = -.880, p =
.000). A multiple regression stepwise analysis was then
performed to determine how much of the variability
in time to achieve first access could be attributed to
raw expressive and raw receptive language scores. The
expressive language scores were entered as the first
variable, followed by the receptive language scores. This
order was chosen because all children had delayed
expressive abilities but only 60% of the sample had
delayed receptive abilities. Additionally, when a multiple regression analysis was performed with simultaneous entry of these two variables, the expressive scores
were entered first into the equation. Therefore, only
the results of the stepwise analysis are reported. The
results of these analyses are presented in Table 4. They
indicated that a large portion of the variability in time to
achieve first access could be attributed to raw expressive
language scores (R2 = .558). Raw receptive language
scores significantly accounted for an additional (R2 =
.193) portion of the variability when entered second
into the analysis.

Similarly, significant negative relations were found
between the time children required to achieve their first
successful access initiation and their absolute level of
expressive (r = -.753, p = .006) and total language ability
(r = -.833, p = .001). Also, a negative trend was found
between the time children with SLI took to achieve their
first successful access and their absolute level of
receptive language ability (r = -.487, p = .077). Multiple
regression stepwise analysis was performed to determine whether expressive and receptive language scores
uniquely explained portions of the variability in time to
achieve access initiation. The expressive language
scores were entered as the first variable, followed by
the receptive language scores. As with the previous
analysis, when a multiple regression analysis was
performed with simultaneous entry of these two variables, the expressive scores were entered first into the
equation. Therefore, only the results of the stepwise
analysis are reported. The results of these analyses are
also presented in Table 4. They indicated that a large
portion of the variability in time to achieve first access
initiation could be attributed to raw expressive language scores (R2 = .568). A trend was noted suggesting
that raw receptive language scores also explained a
small portion of the variability (R2 = .134) when the
effects of raw expressive language scores were removed.
However, this result failed to reach significance (t =
-1.773, p = .120). No significant relations were found
between standard language scores or cognitive scores
and time to first access or first access initiation.

Partner Inclusion Bids
The number of partner inclusion bids each target
child received prior to his or her first successful access
was counted for comparison. A one-tailed t test with

Table 4. Stepwise regression: Raw receptive and expressive language scores as predictors of time to first
access and first access initiation.
Model 1
Prediction and Predictors

t

b

Predicting time to first access from raw receptive and expressive scores
Step 1: raw expressive scores
-3.511**
Step 2: raw receptive scores
-2.326*
(R 2 = .193)

-.672
-.445

Predicting time to first access initiation from raw receptive and expressive scores
Step 1: raw expressive scores
-3.302*
Step 2: raw receptive scores
-1.773
(R2 = .134)

-.691
-.371

*p G .05 level (one-tailed). **p G .01 level (one-tailed).

876

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

participant type as a between-subjects factor revealed
the difference between the number of bids received by
the two groups to be significant, t(13.58) = 1.735, p = .05.
This is not surprising given that the target children
with SLI took longer to access on average. However, an
effect size of h2 = .141 revealed that only 14% of the
variance in number of bids received could be attributed
to group membership. Children in the SLI group
received an average of five (M = 5.3, SD = 4.11) bids
prior to their first successful access, and the TD group
received an average of three bids (M = 2.76, SD = 2.38).
However, there was significant variability within each
group in the number of bids received, as indicated by the
standard deviations reported above.

Number of Utterances Produced by
Each Member of the Triad
The means and standard deviations for the number
of utterances produced by each member of the TD and
SLI triads before and after the first successful access
point are presented in Table 5. In the analyses conducted, each target child's performance was compared
to that of his or her 2 partners.
TD triads. A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA;
Participant Type  Point of Access) with repeated
measures on point of access was conducted. No significant differences were found between the number of
utterances produced by each member of the triad,
F(2, 36) = 1.561, p = .224. As anticipated, participants
produced a significantly greater number of utterances
following access, F(1, 36) = 98.96, p = .000. The interaction between variables was not significant, F(2, 36) =
0.004, p = .996.
SLI triads. A two-way ANOVA (Participant Type 
Point of Access) with repeated measures on point of ac-

Table 5. Mean number of utterances spoken by partners and target
children in TD and SLI triads before and after the first point of
successful access.
Pre-Access
Participant Type

Postaccess

M

SD

M

SD

TD triads
Partner 1
Partner 2
Target

9.23
10.38
2.15

12.53
22.86
1.14

61
61.62
52.84

29.17
16.63
28.88

SLI triads
Partner 1
Partner 2
Target

19.8
17.7
2.3

22.73
17.76
2.87

63
57.1
26.4

29.59
22.37
31.69

cess was performed. A significant difference between the
number of utterances produced by members of the triad
was found, F(2, 27) = 11.33, p = .000. An effect size of h2 =
.456 was found, indicating that 46% of the variability in the
number of utterances made by each member of the triad
could be attributed to group membership (target, Partner
1, Partner 2). Post hoc Tukey honestly significant difference (HSD) tests revealed that target children produced
fewer utterances than those in Partner Group 1 ( p = .000)
and Partner Group 2 ( p = .001). There was no difference
between the partner groups. A significant difference was
also found between the number of utterances spoken prior
to and following access, F(1, 27) = 27.21, p = .000. As
expected, there were fewer utterances spoken by members
of the triad prior to access. The interaction between
variables was not significant, F(2, 27) = 0.733, p = .490.
Correlational analyses of variation within the SLI
group. The relation between children's raw receptive,
expressive, and total language scores and the percentage
of the total group utterances produced by each target
child with SLI was examined using one-tailed Pearson
correlation coefficients. A significant positive relation was
found between the percentage of utterances produced
by target children with SLI and their raw expressive
language score on the CELF-III (r = .576, p = .041). This
indicated that among the SLI group, children who
produced higher proportions of talk within the triad had
better absolute expressive language abilities. No significant relations were found between the percentage of
utterances a child produced and his or her raw receptive
language score or raw total language score.

Number of Utterances Addressed to
Each Member of the Triad
The number of utterances directed toward each
member of the triad was calculated for before and after
the first successful access point. The means and standard deviations for the number of utterances directed
toward each member of the triad are presented for
TD-SLI triads in Table 6. The performance of each target child was examined in the context of the triad and
the same analyses were performed as in the previous
section.
TD triads. A two-way ANOVA (Participant Type 
Point of Access) with repeated measures on point of access was performed. This confirmed that there were no
significant differences between the number of utterances
directed toward each member of the triad, F(2, 36) =
0.047, p = .954. A significant difference was found
between the number of utterances addressed to members of the triad pre- and postaccess, F(1, 36) = 85.87, p =
.000. As expected, fewer utterances were addressed to
each member of the triad prior to access. The interaction

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

877

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 6. Mean number of utterances addressed to partners and
target children in TD and SLI triads before and after the first point
of successful access.
Pre-Access
Participant Type
TD triads
Partner 1
Partner 2
Target
SLI triads
Partner 1
Partner 2
Target

M

6.08
4.46
2.62
10
11.3
5.2

Post access
SD

M

SD

Group Play
Participant
Type

Individual Play

Onlooking
Behavior

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

57.78
23.37

20.19
19.63

37.67
59.81

18.54
18.16

4.55
16.65

5.67
13.51

14.67
7.73
2.18

29.38
31.69
31.92

14.57
12.73
14.57

TD target
SLI target

10.57
16.01
3.99

29.3
36.1
15

11.35
13.93
12.06

Participation in group play, individual play, and
onlooking behavior postaccess. The means and standard deviations for the percentage of intervals target
children spent engaged in group play, individual play,
and onlooking behavior are presented in Table 7. A
one-tailed t test with participant type (TD, SLI) as a
between-subjects factor was performed to determine
differences between target children in the percentage
of intervals they spent engaged in each of these activities following their first successful attempt. This test
revealed that children in the SLI group engaged in significantly less group play, t(19.78) = 4.11, p = .000, and
significantly more onlooking behavior, t(11.44) = 2.657,
p = .011, and individual play, t(21) = 2.864, p = .005.
Effect sizes for group play (h2 = .445), onlooking behavior (h2 = .290), and individual play (h2 = .280) revealed that 45%, 29%, and 28% of the variability in
each respective activity category could be attributed to
group membership (TD, SLI). In general, TD children
spent approximately 57% of the observation period
engaged in group play, which was almost triple the
amount of time children with SLI spent in group play
(23%). In the remaining time, TD children spent approximately 4% of their time engaged in onlooking
behavior and 37% of their time engaged in individual
play activity. In contrast, children with SLI spent four
times as many intervals engaged in onlooking behavior
(17%) and a third more intervals engaged in other forms
of individual play (60%).

between variables was not significant, F(2, 36) = 0.375,
p = .69.
SLI triads. A two-way ANOVA (Participant Type 
Point of Access) with repeated measures on point of access revealed a significant difference in the distribution
of utterances addressed within SLI triads, F(2, 27) =
7.974, p = .001. An effect size of h2 = .371 was found,
suggesting that 37% of the variability in the number of
utterances directed to each member of the triad could be
attributed to group membership (target child, Partner
1, Partner 2). Post hoc Tukey HSD tests revealed that
target children were addressed fewer times than children in Partner Group 1 ( p = .014) and Partner Group 2
( p = .001). There was no difference between partner
groups. As expected, significantly fewer utterances were
addressed to each member of the triad prior to the first
point of access as compared to postaccess, F(1, 27) =
29.92, p = .000. The interaction between variables was
not significant, F(2, 27) = 1.779, p = .188.
Correlational analyses of variation within the SLI
group. The relation between children's raw receptive,
expressive, and total language scores and the percentage of the total utterances addressed to the target child
with SLI was examined using one-tailed Pearson
correlation coefficients. A significant positive relation
was found between the percentage of utterances
addressed to target children with SLI and their raw
expressive language scores on the CELF-III (r = .580, p
= .039). This indicated that among the children with
SLI, those with better absolute expressive language
abilities had a higher percentage of the total number of
utterances addressed to them. No significant relations
were found between the percentage of utterances
addressed to the target child with SLI and their raw
receptive language score or raw total language score.
Interestingly, the percentage of utterances a child
produced was positively related to the percentage of
utterances addressed to him or her (r = .784, p = .004).

878

Table 7. Mean percentages and standard deviations of intervals
spent engaging in group play, individual play, and onlooking
behavior by TD and SLI target children.

Correlational analyses of variation within the SLI
group. The relation between children's raw receptive,
expressive, and total language scores and the percentage of intervals they spent engaged in group play,
individual play, and onlooking behavior was examined using Pearson correlation coefficients. No significant relations were found between any of these
measures.

Discussion
The ability to enter and become an equal participant
in an ongoing interaction between two unfamiliar peers is

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

a basic social skill that children use everyday both on the
playground and in the classroom. This study examined
the ability of children with SLI, as well as TD children, to
succeed at this task. The play materials provided were
successful in stimulating pretend play, a form of play that
may include both verbal and nonverbal participation and
that is frequently engaged in by children in the early
school-age years. All children indicated interest and
enjoyment in exploring the toys and adapting them to
typical play scripts. However, target children varied in
the way they accessed the play of their peers and the
extent to which they became a participant.

The Ability of Children With SLI to
Access an Ongoing Interaction
The first purpose of this study was to compare the
ability of TD children and children with SLI to access an
ongoing interaction. Initial observations of children's
access behaviors revealed that some children accessed
by responding to a question or play invitation directed
toward them (access response), while others accessed
by making an unprompted initiation toward their peers
(access initiation). These two styles of access were
thought to represent differences in passivity on the part
of the newcomer. Consideration of these variations in
style revealed an interesting pattern of findings. All of
the TD children in the study, except 1, achieved their first
successful access by making an initiation toward their
peers. In general, TD children did not wait to be invited
into the play by their partners. Instead, they tended to
quickly form bids such as verbal comments, questions, or
actions related to the ongoing interaction. Nine of the 13
TD children achieved access initiation in less than 1 min,
and only 1 child required more than 3 min.
In contrast, results revealed that children with SLI
indicated difficulty with accessing the interaction
between their unfamiliar play partners. Six of the 10
children with SLI achieved their first access by responding to a play invitation or question from their peers. Four
of these 6 children required more than 3 min to achieve
this initial form of access. These same 4 children were
unable to achieve successful access initiation during the
10-min play period. Of the remaining 6 children with
SLI, 2 required more than 3 min to achieve accessinitiation, and 4 accessed in less than a minute.
In general, results revealed that children with SLI
tended to wait for an invitation to play from their partners. Further, these children demonstrated difficulty
formulating successful verbal and nonverbal initiations
even after receiving positive initial feedback from their
peers during the achievement of access response. The
finding that children with SLI received an average of

five partner inclusion bids prior to access also suggested
that these children were given ample encouragement to
join the play. The difficulties children with SLI experienced even under these favorable conditions were congruent with the findings of previous studies showing
that children with SLI are slower to access interactions
and more socially reticent than TD children (Brinton
et al., 1997; Craig & Washington, 1993; Fujiki et al.,
2001). One interpretation of the current findings is that
children with SLI had difficulty shifting from low-risk
strategies, such as waiting to be invited into the play, to
high-risk strategies that involved making an initiation
toward their peers.
Interestingly, the 4 children in the SLI group who
did not achieve access initiation were not the most
severely language impaired as measured by their standard test scores. Rather, these children had the lowest
language-age-equivalent scores among the SLI group.
These scores represented the median age at which TD
children achieved a particular raw score on language
tasks, whereas standard scores represented how well
children performed in comparison to their same-age
peers on language tasks.
Children with higher total language raw scores took
less time to achieve their first successful access and first
access initiation. More detailed examination indicated
that among the SLI group, expressive language skills
were the most important factor in predicting how long
children required in achieving their first successful
access and first successful access initiation, explaining
approximately 56% of the variability in each case.
Children in the SLI group who had better absolute levels
of expressive language ability took less time to access.
Receptive language skills only accounted for an additional 20% of the variance in children's ability to achieve
their first successful access when the effects of expressive
skills were removed. Further, receptive scores did not
account for a significant portion of the variance in the
time children required to achieve access initiation.
Children's standard language scores, which measured
impairment severity, were not significantly related to the
time children required to access interactions. Together,
these findings confirmed that among the group of
children with SLI, language impairment severity was a
less critical determinant of access ability than absolute
levels of expressive and, to some extent, receptive language skill. In other words, a certain degree of expressive
language ability was most predictive of successful access
for this particular task. The 4 children in the sample who
were unable to achieve access initiation had raw
expressive scores below 32, while the remaining children
had raw expressive scores ranging from 39 to 49.
It is interesting then to reconsider the suggestion of
Craig and Washington (1993) that receptive language

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

879

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

ability may be the most critical factor in determining
children's risk for difficulty with accessing free play
interactions. Although receptive language skills were
important in explaining children's success at achieving
their first access, it was expressive language skills that
emerged as the strongest overall predictor of time to
access. This suggested that verbal participation was an
important part of the play interactions observed, and the
most commonly used and accepted method of access for
the age group tested in this study. This was congruent
with results from studies of TD children's access behaviors. These studies have indicated that prosocial verbal
forms are the most successful access strategies at all
ages and that these forms increase in frequency during
the early school-age years (Corsaro, 1979; Ramsey &
Lasquade, 1996). In this study, expressive language
abilities were determined using the CELF-III. However,
it is recognized that the expressive language subtests
included on the CELF-III do not examine connected
discourse skills and therefore may not be the most
representative of true expressive language ability. The
three subtests of expressive language skill focus exclusively on language form and do not examine syntax or
lexical expression in a meaningful context. Nevertheless,
significant relations were found between raw expressive
scores and measures of time to access and participation
following access.

ing the variability in access skills among SLI children.
The access task used in this study may not have heavily
stressed children's comprehension skills. The play materials provided were familiar objects (trees, animals, castle)
and characters (knights, fairies, kings, and princesses)
and they stimulated typical play scripts. Additionally,
many children became involved in straightforward action play, which centered on use of the catapult, for large
portions of their play interaction. It is well accepted in
the literature that children with language impairments
perform better in the context of familiar routines and
scripts (Hadley & Schuele, 1998). It is possible that children with SLI were on an ``even playing field'' in terms of
their level of comprehension of the task at hand. Differences in receptive skills may play a greater role in distinguishing the access performance of children with SLI
on cooperative learning tasks such as those children frequently encounter in the classroom. Specifically, children
with poor receptive skills may experience significant difficulty when trying to enter a rule-based game where
they must correctly interpret instructions to be perceived
as competent partners.
The implications of this study are a cause for
concern as the skill of accessing an interaction is
necessary for succeeding in many unstructured social
contexts. As previous investigators using the same
access paradigm have noted (Brinton et al., 1997; Craig
& Washington, 1993), children will likely experience
much greater difficulty accessing interactions in reallife situations. The context of this study was designed
to optimize the success of the target child. Newcomer
children were formally introduced to their play partners, the majority of whom invited the target child to
play with them. It is less likely that on a playground,
with multiple activities and play partners available,
children with SLI would receive the same repeated
attention from their partners. The task of accessing
the interaction may have been more difficult for target
children in this study because the two play partners
were not unfamiliar to each other, as compared to previous studies of access ability where all three members
of the triad were unfamiliar to each other (Brinton et al.,
1997; Craig & Washington, 1993). However, this additional challenge did not pose any difficulty to target
children without SLI who accessed the interaction
quickly and easily and participated as fully as the two
play partners following access.

Although expressive skills were the most significant
predictor of time to access, the results of this study suggested that children with better receptive skills had a
somewhat greater advantage in interpreting bids directed at them by their peers. This was indicated by
the faster access-response times of children with higher
raw receptive language scores. However, better receptive
skills did not ensure a greater likelihood of successful
access in initiating toward peers. Instead, a certain level
of expressive language skill was critical for enabling
children to respond to partner inclusion bids and formulate unprompted bids for participation. One hypothesis
might be that children with only expressive language
deficits would be able to compensate for their lack of
verbal skills by accessing using nonverbal actions. This
was clearly not true for the children with SLI participating in this study, which confirmed the results of Brinton
et al. (1997). However, it is possible that a study of
preschool children would have revealed receptive language skills to be more predictive of successful access,
as TD children tend to access nonverbally at this age
(Corsaro, 1979). Further, as previously noted, prosocial
verbal forms are most strongly associated with successful
access and increase during the school-age years (Ramsey
& Lasquade, 1996).

The Ability of Children With SLI to
Participate in an Ongoing Interaction

It is likely that a different interactional context
would have resulted in a different outcome for the relative importance of receptive language skills in explain-

The second major purpose of this study was to
examine how well the three groups of target children
participated in the interaction between their peers after

880

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

their first successful access. It was possible that once
children with SLI overcame the difficulty of accessing the
interaction, they would have become full participants in
the play. This question was explored by analyzing how
much talk children in both SLI subgroups produced after
access, how often they were addressed by their play
partners, and how much of their time they spent engaged
in group play, individual play, and onlooking behavior.
Analyses of children's verbal participation in the
interaction following access revealed that children with
SLI talked significantly less and were addressed significantly less often than their play partners. In contrast,
there were no differences on these measures between TD
children and their play partners. Correlational analyses
revealed that among the SLI group raw expressive
language scores were strongly positively related to the
percentage of utterances children produced and the
percentage of utterances they were addressed. These
findings were anticipated as expressive language skills
were expected to relate to the level of verbal participation
children achieved. However, this study did not take into
account the relevance of the utterances produced by
target children, or how play partners responded to these
utterances. It is likely that variability in receptive
language skills would be related to the relevance of
comments produced by children with SLI.
Lastly, target children with SLI were found to
engage in significantly less group play and significantly
more onlooking behavior and individual play than TD
children. The low levels of participation in the play
shown by target children with SLI did not reflect a
disinterest in playing with others. The higher levels of
onlooking behavior shown by children with SLI suggested these children wanted to engage with their peers
in play. However, the low levels of group play reported
indicate that even after being accepted into the interaction, children with SLI were unable to successfully act
on these desires. Overall, the findings from these measures suggested that children with SLI behaved as peripheral figures during play with their peers, even after
achieving some form of access. In this sense, it could be
interpreted these children never truly achieved access
to these interactions.
It was also found that within the SLI group, both
standard and raw receptive language scores were
unrelated to participation in play. Again, it is likely
that the task presented did not stress the comprehension skills of children with SLI to the extent of producing
a difference in performance based on receptive language
ability. Ramsey and Lasquade (1996) noted in their
review of the literature that constructive and symbolic
games, as well as games with rules, become increasingly
frequent during the early school age years. They note
that play also tends to become more participatory in this

age group. Conversely, sensorimotor and exploratory
play, which is the most common form of play during the
preschool and kindergarten years, declines in this
period. The findings of this study indicated that
expressive language ability was critical for successful
participation in the pretend play that was engaged in by
the triads in this study. This was likely a reflection of
the increasing importance of verbal participation during play in this age group.
The finding that children with SLI experienced
significant difficulty with participating in an interaction is also a cause for concern. Hadley and Schuele
(1998) argued that it is not sufficient to create more
opportunities for children with language impairment to
interact with TD peers if these children do not engage
in group play when exposed to these opportunities. The
findings of this study indicated that children with SLI
show difficulty with participating in group play even
after being welcomed into the group, accessing the interaction, and receiving positive feedback. This study
therefore supports the suggestion of Hadley and Schuele
that intervention should include a focus not only on improving children's social abilities but also on the verbal
skills they use during social interactions.

Possible Determinants of the Difficulties
Experienced by Children With SLI
in Accessing and Participating
in an Ongoing Interaction
Previous researchers focusing on the ability of
children with SLI to access and participate in an
ongoing interaction have speculated on reasons these
children experience difficulty with this task. Brinton
et al. (1997) proposed two possible explanations for their
findings that older children with SLI struggled with
accessing and participating in an interaction. They
suggested first that children's difficulty could be attributed to the effect of their language impairment on
carrying out a social task that is heavily dependent on
language ability. Secondly, they suggested that children's difficulties may have been due to an underlying
social skills deficit that was independent, or possibly
linked to, their language impairment.
The results of this study provided additional evidence for the first hypothesis that children's language
skills influence their ability to perform on social tasks.
This view is primarily supported by findings that variation in language abilities among the SLI group was
related to performance on the task of accessing and participating in an ongoing interaction. Specifically, linear
relations were found between children's raw language
scores and the time they required in achieving their first

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

881

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

successful access. This made sense with regard to studies
of TD children indicating the importance of establishing
a frame of reference relating to an ongoing interaction,
and then entering this frame of reference through related
verbal or nonverbal actions. Receptive language skills
would have been important for children's establishment
of a frame of reference, while expressive skills would
have strongly contributed to children's ability to enter
this frame of reference. Additionally, among the SLI
group, children with better absolute expressive language
abilities produced more utterances after access, participated in higher levels of group play, and were faster in
achieving their first successful access initiation. These
relations between level of language ability and task performance suggest a direct effect of language impairment
on social performance.
Recent longitudinal findings by Redmond and Rice
(2002) also converged strongly with those of the current
study. These authors found that the social, emotional,
and behavioral symptoms of children with SLI did not
remain stable over a period of time spanning children's
progression from kindergarten to the second grade. A
decline in teacher concern over withdrawn, internalizing behavior was noted for children with SLI by the time
they reached second grade, although group differences
were still evident. However, children with SLI showed
elevated levels of difficulty with peer acceptance at all
sampling times. These authors suggested that the
teacher-reported behavior problems associated with
SLI at kindergarten and first grade might be the
socioemotional response of these children to verbally
demanding contexts. Therefore, these authors hypothesized that children's performance on variables measuring socioemotional well-being would change over time
as the compensatory strategies they develop to cope
with various academic and social contexts ``erupt and
recede'' (p. 196). This might explain why absolute
language ability was more predictive of successfully
accessing and participating in an interaction than
impairment severity, as well as the lack of correlation
found between severity of language impairment and
level of social performance in other studies (Fujiki,
Brinton, & Clarke, 2002; Fujiki, Brinton, Morgan, &
Hart, 1999). It could be hypothesized that changes in
the absolute language ability of a child over time would
result in improvements in his or her ability to succeed at
the access task and to participate in an interaction, even
if the level of their impairment severity remained
stable. It is likely that the performance of children with
SLI on social tasks fluctuates over time and across
contexts as the verbal demands of situations increase
with age and the language skills of children catch up to
these demands and then fall behind.
The second hypothesis proposed by Brinton et al.
(1997) was that children with SLI performed poorly on

882

access and participation tasks due to social skill deficits
independent of their language impairment. For example, preliminary research suggested that a child's emotional regulation style may also play a role in social
performance (Fujiki et al., 2002). This hypothesis also
cannot be ruled out by the results of the current study
and remains a topic for future research.
In conclusion, the ability to access and participate in
an ongoing interaction is a difficult skill for most children
with SLI even in contexts presenting favorable conditions. The children with SLI in this study showed
difficulty forming initiations toward their peers to access
a play interaction even after being invited to join the
play. These difficulties tended to be mediated by children's level of language skill and the linguistic demands
of the peer group context, rather than impairment severity. In this study, expressive language skills emerged
as critical for accessing and participating in scripted play
interactions during the early school years. Together, the
findings of this study contribute to other research suggesting that clinicians need to consider all children who
have difficulty with language form and content as being
at risk for social difficulties. It is important for these
social difficulties to be addressed in order to increase
children's feelings of well-being in peer environments
and decrease their risk of being neglected.

Acknowledgments
This research was generously supported by a grant from
the Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation.

References
Black, B., & Hazen, N. (1990). Social status and patterns of
communication in acquainted and unacquainted preschool
children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 379-387.
Brinton, B., Fujiki, M., & Higbee, L. M. (1998). Participation in cooperative learning activities by children with
specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1193-1206.
Brinton, B., Fujiki, M., & McKee, L. (1998). Negotiation
skills of children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41,
927-940.
Brinton, B., Fujiki, M., Spencer, J. C., & Robinson, L. A.
(1997). The ability of children with specific language
impairment to access and participate in an ongoing
interaction. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 40, 1011-1025.
Brown, L., Sherbenou, R. J., & Johnsen, S. K. (1990).
Test of Nonverbal Intelligence--Second Edition. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Corsaro, W. A. (1979). We're friends right?: Children's use of
access rituals in nursery school. Language and Society, 8,
315-336.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  868-883  August 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Craig, H. K., & Evans, J. L. (1993). Pragmatics and SLI:
Within-group variations in discourse behaviors. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 777-789.

Hazen, N., & Black, B. (1989). Preschool peer communication skills: The role of social status and interaction
context. Child Development, 60, 867-876.

Craig, H. K., & Washington, J. A. (1993). Access behaviors
of children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 322-337.

Jerome, A., Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., & James, S. (2002).
Self-esteem in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45,
700-714.

Dodge, K., Schlundt, D., Schocken, I., & Delugach, J.
(1983). Social competence and children's sociometric status:
The role of peer group entry strategies. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 29, 309-336.

Putallaz, M., & Gottman, J. (1981). An interactional model
of children's entry into peer groups. Child Development, 52,
986-994.

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., & Clarke, D. (2002). Emotional
regulation in children with specific language impairment.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 33,
102-112.

Putallaz, M., & Wasserman, A. (1990). Children's entry
behavior. In S. R. Asher & J. D. Coie (Eds.), Children's
status in the peer group (pp. 60-89). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., Hart, C. H., & Fitzgerald, H.
(1999). Peer acceptance and friendship in children with
specific language impairment. Topics in Language
Disorders, 19, 34-48.

Ramsey, P. G., & Lasquade, C. (1996). Preschool children's
entry attempts. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 17, 135-150.

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., Isaacson, T., & Summers, C.
(2001). Social behaviors of children with language impairment on the playground: A pilot study. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools, 32, 101-113.
Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., Morgan, M., & Hart, C. (1999).
Withdrawn and sociable behavior of children with language
impairment. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 30, 183-195.

Redmond, S., & Rice, M. (1998). The socioemotional
behaviors of children with SLI: Social adaptation or social
deviance? Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 41, 688-700.
Redmond, S., & Rice, M. (2002). Stability of behavioral
ratings of children with SLI. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 190-201.
Rice, M. L., Sell, M. A., & Hadley, P. A. (1991). Social
interactions of speech- and language-impaired children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 34, 1299-1307.

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., Robinson, L. A., & Watson,
V. J. (1997). The ability of children with specific language
impairment to participate in a group decision task. Journal
of Children's Communication Development, 18, 1-10.

Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. A. (1995). Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals--Third Edition.
San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., & Todd, C. M. (1996). Social skills
of children with specific language impairment. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 27, 195-201.

Stark, R., & Tallal, P. (1981). Selection of children with
specific language deficits. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 46, 114-122.

Gertner, B. L., Rice, M. L., & Hadley, P. A. (1994).
Influence of communicative preferences in a preschool
classroom. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37,
913-923.

Stevens, L. J., & Bliss, J. S. (1995). Conflict resolution
abilities of children with specific language impairment and
children with normal language. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 38, 599-611.

Guralnick, M. J., Connor, R. T., Hammond, M. A.,
Gottman, J. M., & Kinnish, K. (1996). The peer relations
of preschool children with communication disorders. Child
Development, 67, 471-489.

Received May 11, 2004

Hadley, P. A., & Rice, M. L. (1991). Conversational
responsiveness of speech-and language-impaired
preschoolers. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 34, 1308-1317.
Hadley, P., & Schuele, C. (1998). Facilitating peer
interaction: Socially relevant objectives for preschool
language intervention. American Journal of SpeechLanguage Pathology, 7, 25-36.

Revision received November 12, 2004
Accepted December 28, 2004
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2005/060)
Contact author: Colleen Liiva, Learning Disabilities
Association of Nova Scotia, 2476 Argyle Street, Suite
705, Halifax, NS, Canada B3J 3N8.
E-mail: cliiva.ldans@ns.sympatico.ca

Liiva & Cleave: Ability of Children With SLI to Access

883

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

