Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Phonology impacts segmentation in online speech processing q
Luca Onnis a,*, Padraic Monaghan b, Korin Richmond c, Nick Chater d
a

Department of Psychology, Cornell University, 14850 Ithaca, NY, USA
Department of Psychology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK
c
Institute for Applied Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
Centre for Speech Technology Research, Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
b

d

Received 19 March 2004; revision received 21 February 2005
Available online 19 April 2005

Abstract
Pena, Bonatti, Nespor, and Mehler (2002) investigated an artificial language where the structure of words was determined by nonadjacent dependencies between syllables. They found that segmentation of continuous speech could proceed on the basis of these dependencies. However, Pena et al.Os artificial language contained a confound in terms of
phonology, in that the dependent syllables began with plosives and the intervening syllables began with continuants.
We consider three hypotheses concerning the role of phonology in speech segmentation in this task: (1) participants
may recruit probabilistic phonotactic information from their native language to the artificial language learning task;
(2) phonetic properties of the stimuli, such as the gaps that precede unvoiced plosives, can influences segmentation;
and (3) grouping by phonological similarity between dependent syllables contributes to learning the dependency. In a
series of experiments controlling the phonological and statistical structure of the language, we found that segmentation
performance is influenced by the three factors in different degrees. Learning of nonadjacent dependencies did not occur
when (3) is eliminated. We suggest that phonological processing provides a fundamental contribution to distributional
analysis.
O 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Artificial language learning; Statistical learning; Segmentation; Phonology

q
Part of this work was carried out while Luca Onnis and
Padraic Monaghan were at the University of Warwick. L.
Onnis, and N. Chater were supported by the European
Commission Project HPRN-CT-1999-00065. P. Monaghan
was supported by a Human Frontiers of Science Grant
RGP0177/2001-B. K. Richmond was supported by EPSRC
Grant No. GR/R94688/01. Thanks to Marjolein Mercx for
data collection, and to Morten Christiansen, Rebecca Gomez,
and Friederike Schlaghecken for helpful comments. We also
thank James Morgan, Letitia Naigles, and an anonymous
reviewer.
*
Corresponding author. Fax: +1 607 255 8433.
E-mail address: lo35@cornell.edu (L. Onnis).

Introduction
Artificial language learning (ALL) provides a methodology for a highly controlled analysis of how learners
can learn to extract structure from speech-like stimuli.
By using small-scale artificial languages, the structure
of which can be learned during the course of a brief
experimental session, it is possible to put learning processes under the experimental microscope. Yet when
ALL studies are conducted with adult participants, there
is inevitably a substantial possible complication--that
the adultsO knowledge of their native language may influ-

0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2005.02.011

226

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

ence their processing of the artificial language. In particular, the phonological structure of the ALL stimuli, and
its relation to the phonological structure of the native
language of the participants, provides a potentially rich
source of information that learners may draw upon in
performing experimental tasks (Brent & Cartwright,
1996; Friederici & Wessels, 1993; Mattys, Jusczyk, Luce,
& Morgan, 1999).
In this paper, we investigate some of the phonological properties of ALL stimuli that may contribute to
performance; and we suggest that taking account of
these phonological properties may lead to a reinterpretation of some ALL findings. In particular, we focus on a
series of segmentation experiments that assessed learnersO ability to detect nonadjacent dependencies, i.e.,
dependencies between syllables that are not directly
adjacent in connected speech. Currently, there are contradictory results in the literature. Pena, Bonatti, Nespor, and Mehler (2002) found that nonadjacent
dependencies between syllables could be learned in an
ALL task, and that this learning contributed to segmenting a pause-free stream of sounds into words. By contrast, Newport and Aslin (2004) obtained the opposite
result--learners were not able to segment similar stimuli
accurately. We attempt to reconcile these opposing data
by looking at the contribution of phonological properties in Pena et al.Os experimental materials.
The results from Pena et al. (2002) were taken to support a separation between different types of computational processing in language learning. Their claims
have contributed to the debate on the extent to which
language acquisition is dependent on the statistical
structure of the language environment, or on algebraic,
rule-like computations (Hahn & Chater, 1998; Marcus,
1999; McClelland & Plaut, 1999). This question has been
central to debates about language acquisition, and is
ubiquitous at different levels of description of language
structure. Pena et al. (2002) argued that statistical and
algebraic computations could be reconciled: speech segmentation operates on the basis of statistical learning,
whereas entirely separate algebraic computations are
necessary for learning grammatical structure. In this paper, we present a series of experiments to show that the
line of ALL evidence that they have pursued does not
yet support this segregation of computational processes.
We explore phonological confounds in the materials
used by Pena et al. which reveal a complex but systematic interaction between phonological and structural
information in ALL experiments.
Contributions of phonology to language learning
Adults, young children, and infants readily find relations between adjacent items in sequences of stimuli,
such as syllables (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996),
tones (Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport, 1999), or

visual items (Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002). In
contrast, evidence for learning the relations among nonadjacent items is scarce, and seems to occur only under
specific circumstances, such as when intervening material is highly variable (Gomez, 2002). Yet, computing
adjacent information in a sentence like [the books on
the shelf are dusty] would fail to detect the correct
noun-verb agreement between books and are, instead
producing [*The books on the shelf is dusty] with agreement between the adjacent noun shelf and the verb is.
Nonadjacent dependencies are therefore an essential feature of language structure that must be available to the
language user.
Pena et al. (2002) provided a set of intriguing ALL
studies that seemed to suggest that nonadjacent dependencies can be learned, but that this learning can only
be applied selectively. Specifically, they argued that
knowledge of nonadjacent dependencies can be used
for segmentation (which they take to be a statistical
computation), although they cannot simultaneously be
used for learning rules in the language (which they take
to be an algebraic computation).
Here we focus on Pena et al.Os (2002) experiments on
segmentation, and how far participantsO segmentation
performance provides evidence for the learning of nonadjacent dependencies. Seidenberg, MacDonald, and
Saffran (2002) suggested that phonological properties
of the stimuli might be a crucial confound.
Pena et al.Os participants were presented with continuous streams of syllables comprised of words of the
form AiXBi, where there were three such Ai_Bi pairs,
and X was one of three syllables that randomly intervened between the Ai_Bi pair. The artificial language
generated three sets of nine words altogether: the first
set (A1XB1) was [pu-li-ki], [pu-ra-ki], [pu-fo-ki]; the second set (A2XB2) was [be-li-ga], [be-ra-ga], [be-fo-ga]; and
the third set (A3XB3) was [ta-li-du], [ta-ra-du], [ta-fo-du].
In a subsequent forced-choice task, participants demonstrated a preference for words as they were construed
(e.g., A1X2B1, [pu-li-ki]) over part-words, i.e., sequences
that spanned word boundaries (e.g., X2B1A3, [li-ki-ta],
or B3A1X2, [du-pu-li]). Both word and part-word sequences had appeared in the training phase. In the absence of acoustic cues to word boundaries in the
training stream, preference for words is presumed to
be made on the basis of distributional information. Specifically, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) suggest that
segmentation is determined by low transitional probabilities--word boundaries are presumed to be conjectured
at points where the next syllable is particularly difficult
to predict given the previous syllable.
In Pena et al.Os experiments, adjacent transitional
probabilities between any Ai and X and any X and Bi
(within-word) were .33, while transitional probabilities
between a Bi syllable and an Ai syllable (between-word)
were .5 (words belonging to the same nonadjacent

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

1
Newport and AslinOs results are not entirely negative,
because they found successful nonadjacent learning of phonetic
segments, such as consonants and vowels, e.g. [p_g_t] or
[_a_u_e]. Here, we are interested in their findings of unsuccessful segmentation with nonadjacent syllables, because they
contrast directly with Pena et al.Os.

may develop implicit knowledge of the distributional
regularities of sounds in order to bootstrap the basic
units of language. For instance, in the second half of
their first year children begin to distinguish strings of
sounds containing legal sequences in their language from
illegal sequences (Jusczyk, 1999a, 1999b), and this might
help them segment words correctly (e.g. [penguins.would] versus [*penguin.swould]). Likewise, in
adult language processing, where speech segmentation
has to be resolved online, McQueen (1998) has shown
that Dutch listeners spot a word more easily when it is
aligned phonotactically (e.g., pil in [pil.vrem] in Dutch)
than when it is misaligned with a boundary (e.g., pil in
[pilm.rem]).
Such phonotactic constraints can be absolute or
probabilistic. Absolute constraints produce sentences
that are illegal, as the ones mentioned above: for instance /zw/ and /v / never appear at the beginning of
words in English, although they do in Dutch2. In contrast, probabilistic phonotactic constraints provide
information about the likelihood of certain sounds
occurring in certain positions within words, such as at
word onset, word offset, or within the word. Kessler
and Treiman (1997), in an extensive examination of English consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC) monomorphemes, found that not all consonant sounds were
equally good word onsets in English. Mattys and Jusczyk (2001) found that infants listened to CVC words
longer when the stimulus previously appeared in a sentential context with good phonotactic cues than when
it appeared without such cues. They found that good
cues to word boundaries were associated with high between-word probability as obtained from a corpus of
child-directed speech. For example, in English, the between-word sequence /ng/ and [fh] are good cues, respectively, for onset and offset position ([bean gaffe hold. . .]),
whereas [Ng] and [ft] are bad cues respectively at onset
and offset ([..fang gaffe tine. . .]). Mattys and Jusczyk
also found that effective segmentation also resulted
when good phonotactic cues occurred only at the onset
or the offset of the target words in the utterances.
Several studies in infant and adult speech perception
have documented the potential impact of speech cues in
detecting word-like units. Johnson and Jusczyk (2001)
found that in the presence of speech cues conflicting with
distributional cues for word boundary assignment, the
former were preferred by 8-month-olds in segmenting
an artificial stream of sounds. The authors concluded
that coarticulation and stress override distributional statistics, perhaps because this information is more readily
available or perceptually more salient. Although there
may be several types of speech cues involved in natural
speech segmentation such as syllable lengthening
(Quene, 1992), and metrical information (Norris,
r

family did not follow one another). The nonadjacent
dependencies between the Ai and the Bi were always 1,
while nonadjacent dependencies across word boundaries
were lower, Pr(Ai|Xprevious) = .33, Pr(X|Bprevious) = .33.
Pena et al.Os experiments tested two alternative hypotheses: If participants are segmenting using the lowest transitional probabilities of adjacent items, as argued by
Saffran, Newport, et al. (1996), they would prefer partwords, because the least predictable point in the strings
is between the Ai and X. Alternatively, if participants are
sensitive to the Ai_Bi nonadjacent probabilities they
would prefer words. Hence, in order to segment the
speech stream correctly learners had to disregard adjacent probabilities and detect the nonadjacent ones. The
results showed that nonadjacent dependencies of the syllables were learned and contributed towards segmentation. However, this result contrasts with findings from
an experiment using a very similar artificial grammar,
by Newport and Aslin (2004). They found no learning
of nonadjacent syllables:1 in one version of their study
(Experiment 2: Language A) they used three nonadjacent syllable frames ([di_tae], [po_ga], and [te_bu]) and
2 intervening syllables ([ki] and [gu]), so that transitional
probabilities between nonadjacent syllables were 1.0 and
all other adjacent and nonadjacent transitional probabilities were .5 or lower. So far, these two different results have not been reconciled.
Seidenberg et al. (2002) pointed out that in each
experiment in Pena et al.Os (2002) study, syllables in
the same positions were used for all participants: all initial and final syllables began with a plosive consonant
and all medial syllables began with a continuant. This
phonological structure in Pena et al.Os study may have
contributed to learning to segment speech for several
reasons, considered below. However, if segmentation
can be based on distributional information alone, as
Pena et al. claim, then the phonological properties of
their stimuli should not be crucial. If so, then learners
should be able to segment an artificial language with
the same nonadjacent dependencies as Pena et al.Os original experiment, but with no confounding phonological
structure. After replicating Pena et al.Os segmentation
experiment in Experiment 1, we test this in Experiment 2.
The first hypothesis about the role of phonology in
speech segmentation in Pena et al.Os study is that knowledge of phonotactic constraints (whether absolute or
probabilistic) derived from the participantOs own language may be recruited to segment the experimental
stimuli. It has been proposed that very young children

227

2

Though the phoneme is realized as /R/ in Dutch.

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

McQueen, Cutler, & Butterfield, 1997), these were eliminated by Pena et al. by creating a synthesized stream of
concatenated syllables of the same duration, pitch,
amplitude, and characterized by the absence of stress
or other prosodic features. However, the presence of
probabilistic phonotactic constraints, i.e., the skewed
distribution of specific sounds in specific contexts, might
not have been controlled thoroughly. It is therefore possible that probabilistic phonotactic information about
the specific onsets of initial, medial, and final position
syllables used by Pena et al. exerted an influence on
the results, rather than participants learning the statistical or algebraic properties of the stimuli. In this case, an
experiment with the same phonological structure as
Pena et al.Os original experiment but with no nonadjacent structure ought to result in good segmentation performance. We test this in Experiment 3.
Another influence of phonology in ALL experiments
may be due to the phonetic properties of speech stimuli,
particularly when produced by speech synthesizer programs. Perruchet, Tyler, and Galland (in press) investigated the output of the MBROLA speech synthesizer
in producing the continuous French speech in Pena et
al.Os experiments, and found that unvoiced plosives were
preceded by silent gaps unusually longer than those
occurring in French natural speech. In MBROLA the silence gaps preceding unvoiced plosives are proportional
to the length of the whole phoneme. The duration of
phonemes in Pena et al. was considerably longer
(116 ms) than the mean duration of unvoiced plosives
in French (Perruchet et al. report a range of 60-120 ms
with a median around 75 ms in speech samples of
French). In consequence, there were silent onsets preceding the articulation of plosive sounds generated by
MBROLA which were longer than in natural speech.
Two out of three words in Pena et al. began with unvoiced plosives (/p/ and /t/), hence these words would
be preceded by a gap in the speech stream, which Perruchet et al. (in press) suggested would contribute to segmentation before these consonants. To test this, we
constructed speech stimuli with continuants in word initial position, and plosives in medial and final positions
in the words (Experiment 4). If Perruchet et al. were correct then this would result in preference for part-words
over words--part-words now beginning with plosives
more often than words.
A third possible role of phonology in ALL experiments is that items in the speech stream may be assigned
to the same word because they are grouped by phonological similarity. In Pena et al.Os materials, the first
and the third syllable begin with a plosive, and are distinct from the continuant property of the intervening
syllables. Thus, the role of the plosive in word onset position may only be effective when the final syllable also
begins with a plosive, an issue which is addressed in
Experiments 5 and 6.

Finally, note that it is possible that distributional
information can be extracted and used in segmentation;
but that the process of extracting this information operates in consort with phonological cues. Braine (1987)
claimed that learning of grammatical structure could
not be achieved unless there was phonological coherence
among words of the same category. Similarly, Morgan
and Newport (1981) showed that dependencies are more
readily learned when learners are provided with phonological cues that link the stimuli between which the
dependencies hold. This possibility is also explored.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we replicated Pena et al.Os study of
segmentation based on nonadjacent dependencies within
words in continuous speech, except that we used English
speech stimuli and English participants.
Method
Participants
Fourteen undergraduate and postgraduate students
at the University of Warwick participated for 1. All
participants spoke English as a first language and had
normal hearing.
Materials and design
We used the same nine word types from Pena et al. to
construct the training speech stream in Experiment 1.
The set of nine words was composed of three groups
(Ai_Bi), where the first and the third syllable were paired,
with an intervening syllable (X) selected from one of
three syllables. The first set (A1XB1) was: [pu-li-ki],
[pu-ra-ki], [pu-fo-ki]; the second set (A2XB2) was: [beli-ga], [be-ra-ga], [be-fo-ga]; and the third set (A3XB3)
was: [ta-li-du], [ta-ra-du], [ta-fo-du]. In IPA format, the
Ai_Bi pairs were /pu__ki/,/be__gae/, and /tae__dV/,and
the intervening syllables were / ae/, /fEu/, and /li/.
We used the Festival speech synthesizer (Black, Taylor, & Caley, 1990) using a voice based on British-English
diphones at a pitch of 120 Hz, to generate a continuous
speech stream lasting approximately 10 min. All syllables
were of equal duration, and were produced at a rate of
4.5 syllables/second. The speech stream faded in for the
first 5 s, and faded out for the last 5 s, so there was no
abrupt start or end to the stream. Words were selected
randomly, except that no Ai_Bi pair occurred twice in
succession. The speech stream was constructed from
900 word tokens, in which each word occurred approximately 100 times. Examples of the speech stream for each
Experiment are shown in Table 1. Adjacent transitional
probabilities were as follows: within words, Pr(X|Ai)
and Pr(Bi|X) = .33; between adjacent words Pr(Aj|Bi)
= .5 (the greater predictability across word boundaries
r

228

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

229

Table 1
Training and test samples for each of the six experiments
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6

Training sample

Test sample (word)

..PURAKI-BELIGA-TAFODU-PULIKI-TARADU-BEFOGA..
As 1 but with syllables assigned differently to each participant,
e.g., ..BEPURA-GATADU-LIKIFO-BEGARA-GAKIDU..
..PURAGA-BELIKI-TAFOGA-PULIDU-TARAKI-BEFODU..
..RAPUKI-LIBEGA-FOTADU-LIPUKI-RATADU-FOBEGA..
..ZEPUVO-THITASHU-FOGISA-ZETAVO. . .
..ZEPUSHU-THITASA-FOGIVO-ZETAVO. . .

Test sample (part-word)

PURAKI
BEPURA

RAKIBE
PURAGA

PURAGA
RAPUKI
ZEPUVO
ZEPUSHU

RAGABE
PUKILI
PUVOTHI
PUSHUTHI

The first column lists the experiment, the second column lists a sample of the speech stream played during training. The third and
fourth columns list a sample forced choice pair at test. Hyphens individuating word boundaries are added in this table for ease of
reading, but no word boundary cues were present in the training.
Table 2
Adjacent and nonadjacent transitional probabilities between syllables in the speech stream of each Experiment
Experiment

Adjacent transitional probabilities
Within-word Pr(X|Ai) and
Pr(B|X)

Nonadjacent transitional probabilities

Between-word
Pr(Aj|Bi)

Within-word
Pr(Bi|Ai)

Between-word Pr(Ai|Xprevious)
Pr(X|Bprevious)

1

.33

.5

1

.33

2

Pr(X|Ai) = .5 hi-freq, .25 lo-freq
Pr(Bi|X) = .5 hi-freq, .25 lo-freq

.5

1

Pr(Ai|Xprevious): .25 if X in hi-freq
.375 if X in lo-freq
Pr(X|Bprevious): .33

3

.33

.33

.33

.33

4

Pr(X|Ai) = .5 hi-freq, .25 lo-freq
Pr(Bi|X) = .5 hi-freq, .25 lo-freq

.5

1

Pr(Ai|Xprevious): .25 if X in hi-freq
.375 if X in lo-freq
Pr(X|Bprevious): .33

5

.33

.5

1

.33

6

.33

.33

.33

.33

arises because of the constraint that no Ai_Bi pair is
immediately repeated). Nonadjacent transitional
probabilities within words were Pr(Bi|Ai) = 1, whereas
between words they were Pr(Ai|Xprevious) = .33,
Pr(Xj |Bprevious) = .33. Table 2 summarises the transitional probabilities between syllables for every
Experiment.
For the test stimuli, part-words were formed from the
last syllable of one word and two syllables from the following word (BiAjX), or from the last two syllables of
one word and the first syllable from the following word
(XBiAj). Participants were seated in a sound-proof room
and were trained and tested separately. E-prime software was used to present training and test speech, which
was played through centrally positioned loudspeakers.
Procedure
In the training phase, participants were instructed to
listen to continuous speech and try and work out the
words that it contains. They then listened to the training
speech. In the test phase, participants were requested to
respond which of two sounds was a word in the language they had listened to. They were then played a

word and a part-word separated by 500 ms, and
responded by pressing 1 on a computer keyboard if
the first sound was a word, or 2 if the second sound
was a word. After 2 s, the next word and part-word pair
were played. In half of the test trials, the word occurred
first. Seven participants heard a set of test trials with one
set of words first, and the other seven participants heard
the other set of words first.
Results and discussion
The results--illustrated in Fig. 1--replicated those of
Pena et al. (2002). Participants preferred words over
part-words, with a mean score of 28.2 (78%), standard
deviation (SD) of 5.4, from a possible 36, where chance
performance was 18. There was a significant preference
for words over part-words: t (13) = 7.084, p < .0001. In
addition, participants preferred words significantly more
when they had to make a decision against part-words of
the form XBiAj (e.g. [li-ki-be] mean score 15.4 from a
possible 18, SD = 2.4) as opposed to part-words of the
form BiAjX_(e.g. [ki-be-li], mean score 12.9 from 18,
SD = 3.6), t (13) = 3.194, p < .01.

230

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

Fig. 1. Mean percentage preference for words over part-words in each segmentation task experiment. Experiment 1: original
segmentation task replicating Pena et al. Experiment 2: segmentation task with randomized phonology. Experiment 3: segmentation
task with no nonadjacent dependencies. Experiment 4: segmentation task with nonadjacent dependencies and continuant-plosive-
plosive sound pattern. Experiment 5: learning from language with nonadjacent dependencies and with continuant-plosive-continuant
phonological similarity. Experiment 6: performance with continuant-plosive-continuant phonological similarity but no nonadjacent
dependencies. Error bars illustrate standard error of the mean. The dotted line represents chance level at 50%.

The replication of Pena et al.Os first experiment was a
prerequisite to ensure direct comparison between the
task being carried out on English and French participants. Even though the language and the synthesizer differed from those for the experiments on French, the
same strong preferences for words over part-words were
found in our study. Given the similarity between the distribution of plosives in English and French--plosives
occur word-initially more than continuants--there remains the possibility that participants are guided in their
responses by phonological properties of the language
rather than by the statistical structure of the artificial
language. Additional evidence for the impact of phoneme distribution comes from the significant preferences
for words over XBiAj part-words compared to words
over BiAjX part-words--the former beginning with a
continuant while the latter beginning with a plosive.
Decisions on forced choice pairs were harder when both
word and part-word began with a plosive sound.
To test the possibility that word over part-word preferences were due to preferences for plosives in first position, we ran a control version of this study that broke the
link between certain phonemes occurring in initial, medial, or final positions in Experiment 2. An additional
source of preference for words over part-words was that
words occurred approximately twice as frequently in the
training speech corpus as part-words. We also controlled
for this potential influence on the results in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we controlled for preference of phonemes occurring in certain positions within words. We

maintained the nonadjacent-dependency structure of
the language from Experiment 1, but for each participant we randomly assigned each of the nine syllables
from the first experiment to three Ai_Bi pairs and three
Xs. Each participant was therefore exposed to a training
corpus that had the same AiXBi structure as Experiment
1, but with phonemes assigned to different positions.
Method
Participants
Fourteen students from the same population as in
Experiment 1, but who had not participated in any other
experiment reported here, participated for a 1 payment.
Materials and design
For each participant, we randomly assigned the 9 syllables from the first experiment to the Ai, Bi, and X positions. Thus, each participant listened to speech with the
same structure containing the nonadjacent dependencies, but with syllables assigned to different positions.
For instance, the sequence A1XB1 was instantiated as
[li-ki-pu] for one participant but as [be-ga-ra] for another. Once the syllables had been assigned to the positions within the words they remained in those positions
for the duration of the experiment.
In addition, because part-words were half as frequent
as words in the training phase in Experiment 1, we doubled the frequency of one of the words in each Ai_Bi
family. Transitional probabilities were .5 between Ai
and the X syllables in high-frequency words, and .25 in
the low-frequency words; and .5 between X and Bi in
high-frequency words, and .25 in the low-frequency Bi
syllables; and .33 between Bi and Ai syllables. The train-

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

ing speech was composed from concatenated words such
that consecutive words were from different classes. There
were approximately 150 instances of high-frequency
words, and 75 of low-frequency words. The manipulation of the training stimuli equalizes the frequency of
part words and words, in the test stimuli.3
Test items were composed of one of the lower-frequency AiXBi words and either a XBiAj or a BiAjX partword, where either X and Bi or Aj and X were from a
high-frequency word. Both word and part-word sequences at test had then been heard with the same
frequency during training. All 12 possible word and
part-word pairs were used, and participants responded
to 24 pairs, 12 of which had the word preceding the partword, and 12 in which the part-word preceded the word.
Procedure
The training and testing procedure were identical to
that for Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
The results are shown in Fig. 1. The mean response
correct was 11.86 (49%), SD = 2.3, from a total of 24,
which was not significantly different from chance,
t (13) = .228, p = .824.
The results for Experiment 2 contrast with those of
Experiment 1. The key change that we made between
Experiments 1 and Experiment 2 was to reassign syllables to different roles for each participant. The structure
of the language was identical for both Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2, however the strong preferences for words
over part-words observed in Experiment 1 were completely absent from Experiment 2. That is, when the correspondence between plosives occurring word-initially
and word-finally was removed there was no indication
of learning the nonadjacent dependencies in the speech
signal.4 The results of Experiment 2 indicate that phono3
A further difference between Experiments 1 and 2 is that
Experiment 2 controls for frequency of words versus partwords. However, this difference is unlikely to account for the
size of the difference in preferences between these experiments.
Pena et al. (2002) report a frequency-controlled version of their
Experiment 1 where preferences decline by only 2.8%. Hence,
controlling for frequency between part-words and words at test
seems to make little difference in these experiments.
4
Pena et al. (2002) repeated their Experiment 1 by interchanging part-words for words during the training phase, and
found a reduced, but significant, preference for words over partwords. However, if their control words were of the form
plosive-plosive-continuant rather than continuant-plosive-
plosive then their significant effect can still be attributed to a
preference for words beginning with a plosive over part-words
beginning with a continuant. We suggest that testing a single
control is not sufficient for removing any preferences for
phonemes in particular positions.

231

logical structure has a profound effect on learning nonadjacent structure, when there is no sharing of
phonological properties between first and third syllable
then there is no evidence of segmentation.
Yet, is preference for phonemes in particular positions sufficient alone to result in preference for words
over part-words? We tested this in Experiment 3, where
the nonadjacent dependency structure was removed
from the language, but the original positions of syllables
from Experiment 1 were maintained.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we maintained the order of phonemes from Experiment 1, but broke the dependency between the first and the third syllable in each word. So,
any first syllable was followed by any second syllable,
which could be followed by any third syllable. This
means that nonadjacent transitional probabilities between Ai and Bi syllables was reduced from 1.0 to .33.
Method
Participants
Fourteen students (who had not participated in any
other experiment reported here) at the University of
Warwick participated for 1.
Materials and design
The speech stream was constructed in the same way
as for Experiment 1, except that the 9 syllables of Experiment 1 maintained their relative positions within words,
but any combination of A, X, and B could occur within
a word. For instance, whereas in Experiment 1 the first
syllable [pu] was always paired with the last syllable
[ki], generating a nonadjacent frame [pu-X-ki], now it
generated two more frames [pu-X-ga], and [pu-X-du];
likewise for the other syllables. Hence, the speech stream
was comprised of 27 word types, and each word occurred approximately 33 times in the speech stream in
randomized order with the constraint that no two adjacent words shared first, second, or third syllable. All
transitional probabilities were now .33, including nonadjacent ones (see Table 2). Hence, there were no distributional cues for segmentation.
The test phase consisted of all 27 words, compared to
part-words that were composed of either the last two syllables of the word followed by the first syllable of another
word, or the last syllable of the word and the first two syllables of another word (e.g., the word AiXBj was compared to the part-word BjAiX or XBjAi). There were 13
comparisons between words and XBjAi part-words, and
14 comparisons between words and BjAiX part-words.
Equal numbers could only have been achieved if a word
had been repeated, or not all words had been used.

232

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

Procedure
The training and testing procedure was identical to
that for Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
The results are shown in Fig. 1. Participants in this
Experiment preferred words over part-words with a mean
of 17.0 (63%), SD = 2.4, from a total of 27, which was significantly greater than chance, t (13) = 5.416, p < .001.
When words were compared to part-words that began
with a continuant (AiXBi versus XBiAj), there was a significant preference for words (mean correct 9.8 out of
14, SD = 1.8), t (13) = 5.643, p < .001. There was no significant preference when words were compared to partwords beginning with a plosive (AiXBi versus BiAjX),
when mean correct was 7.2 out of 13, SD = 2.1,
t (13) = 1.261, p = .229. Proportion correct scores for
AiXBi over XBiAj part-words were greater than scores
for AiXBi over BiAjX part-words, t (13) = 2.456, p < .05.
Though performance was significantly better than
chance in Experiment 3, the overall preference for words
over part-words was significantly lower than that for
Experiment 1 (see Fig. 1), t (26) = 3.313, p < .01. This
may be due to the language being more complicated in
Experiment 3 than Experiment 1--there were 27 words
compared to the 9 words of Experiment 1. Another
alternative explanation is that the results of Experiment
1 indicate influences both of phonological preferences
and learning of the nonadjacent dependencies. We return to this point in Experiment 5.
The results of Experiment 3 indicate that, even
though there was no nonadjacent structure in the artificial language, participants still exhibited a preference for
words over part-words, as defined by positions of phonemes. Experiments 1-3 suggest that preference for
words over part-words is impacted by biases about word
onsets that learners bring with them into the laboratory.
It also seems that there is a bias against assigning word
status to candidate strings that begin with a continuant
sound, both in Experiment 1 and Experiment 3. In
Experiment 4 below, we tested this bias by keeping the
nonadjacent statistical relations of the original grammar
as in Experiment 1, but having words beginning with
continuant onsets and all part-words beginning with
plosives. In line with the results of Perruchet et al. (in
press), we predicted that learners would prefer partwords over words, even though this went against the
nonadjacent-dependency structure of the language.

Experiment 4
In Experiment 4, we maintained the same underlying
AiXBi structure as in Experiments 1 and 3, but used the
syllables beginning with continuants as A syllables and

the syllables beginning with plosive consonants as X syllables. This created words that began with continuant
sounds and part-words that started with a plosive sound.
If learners dispreferred continuant sounds as onsets they
would prefer part-words (e.g. [be-li-pu] or [pu-ki-ra])
over words (e.g. [li-pu-ki]). In addition, this preference
for part-words would indicate that phonological preferences overwhelm any effect of learning nonadjacent
structure.
Method
Participants
Fourteen students (who had not participated in any
other experiment reported here) at the University of
Warwick participated for 1.
Materials and design
The grammar used was the same as for Experiment 1:
AiXBi. The speech stream was composed of 9 words
as in Experiment 1, but this time A syllables were
instantiated as [li], [ra], and [fo], while X syllables were
instantiated as [pu], [ta], [be]. The 9 words were [li-puki], [li-ta-ki], [li-be-ki], [ra-pu-ga], [ra-ta-ga], [ra-be-ga];
and [fo-pu-ga], [fo-ta-ga], [fo-be-ga]. The training corpus
was generated in the same way as for Experiment 1, except that frequency of words versus part-words was controlled as in Experiment 2, by doubling the frequency of
one word in each of the three nonadjacent pairs.
The test phase was constructed in the same way as
Experiment 1, and consisted of the lower-frequency
words heard during training, compared to part-words
that were composed of two syllables of one high-frequency word and one syllable of another high-frequency
word. There were 24 test-pairs.
Procedure
The training and testing procedures were identical to
those for Experiment 2.

Results
The results are shown in Fig. 1. There was a significant preference for part-words (which began with a plosive) over words (which began with a continuant), with a
mean of 10.6 (44%), SD = 1.6, from a total of 24,
t (13) = -3.33, p < .01. There was no significant preference for words (e.g. [li-pu-ki]) over XBjAi part-words
(e.g. [pu-ki-ra]), mean correct words chosen over partwords 5.6 out of 12, SD = 1.5, t (13) = 1.104,
p = .290, but there was a significant preference for BjAiX
part-words (e.g. [be-li-pu]) over words, mean words chosen over part-words 5.0 out of 12, SD = 1.0,
t (13) = 3.606, p < .005. These analyses confirm that

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

participants rejected words in the language when they
began with continuants, preferring instead to segment
the speech at plosive onsets.
The results from Experiments 1 to 4 provide at the
very least very weak evidence for learning of nonadjacent dependencies to drive segmentation, derived from
the difference in scores between Experiments 1 and 3.
However, Experiment 4 showed that nonadjacent-dependency learning could be over-ruled by preferences
for words beginning with a plosive. The results of these
four experiments are compatible with all three explanations of the role of phonology in segmentation. Syllable
strings that begin with plosives might be preferred because of a bias for plosives at the onset of words in English and French, but also perhaps because of Perruchet
et al.Os explanation in terms of the gap in speech prior
to the expression of an unvoiced plosive. In addition,
the third potential role of phonology--that syllables
may be grouped by phonological similarity between
dependent syllables--is still compatible with the results.
Indeed, in Experiment 4, there was a stronger preference
for part-words that had plosives in first and third position over words than part-words that had plosives in
first and second position.
It is difficult to distinguish the first two accounts of
the contribution of phonology to the learning task, but
the third possibility can be tested in isolation. If the phonological similarity hypothesis holds, then segmentation
should occur when Ai_Bi nonadjacent dependencies are
instantiated as continuants and the intervening syllable
is from a different category, such as a plosive. Experiment 5 tests this idea. Such an effect would indirectly account for why Newport and Aslin (2004) obtained no
learning of nonadjacent syllables, because in their stimuli
2 out of 4 word frames were not phonologically similar
([pu_ra]and [lo_ki]), and all other syllables (word-initial,
middle, and word-final) began with a plosive sound. This
created an uninformative pattern plosive-plosive-plosive
for 16 out of 20 words in the training set; and four words
with a plosive-plosive-continuant pattern ([pi-di-ra], [piku-ra], [pi-to-ra], [pi-pa-ra]) where phonological similarity is inconsistent with word boundaries.

Experiment 5
Method
Participants
Fourteen students (who had not participated in any
other experiment reported here) at the University of
Warwick participated for 1.
Materials and design
As in Experiment 1, the speech stream was composed
of the 9 words respecting the AiXBi grammar. However,

233

syllables beginning with a continuant were assigned to
the A and B positions, and syllables in the X position
had plosive onsets. The three A_B pairs were [ze_vo],
[thi_shu], [fo_sa], and the X syllables were [pu], [ta],
[gi]. The continuants were chosen such that they were
all fricatives, and pairs had different places of articulation. The training corpus was generated in the same
way as for Experiment 1. In particular, as in Experiment
1, part-word and word frequencies in test are not equalized in the training stimuli. As noted in Footnote 3, this
factor does not appear to make a substantial difference
to the results.
The test phase was constructed in the same way as
Experiment 1, and consisted of each word compared
to XBiAj and BiAjX part-words. There were 36 test pairs.
Procedure
The training and testing procedures were identical to
those for Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
The results are shown in Fig. 1. Participants preferred
words over part-words with mean 22.6 times out of a
maximum 36 (62.7%), SD = 5.2, which was significantly
above chance, t (13) = 3.318, p < .01. Preference for
words over BiAjX part-words was significantly greater
than chance, 12.3 from 18, SD = 3.0, t (13) = 4.101,
p < .001, and preference for words over XBiAj partwords was marginally significantly greater than chance,
10.3 from 18, SD = 2.6, t (13) = 1.840, p = .089. Performance for BiAjX part-words was better than for XBiAj
part-words, t (13) = 3.321, p < .01, indicating that continuant-continuant-plosive patterns were preferred less
than plosive-continuant-continuant part-words.
These results suggest that segmentation can occur on
the basis of nonadjacent dependencies but only under
certain circumstances where there is phonological similarity between the first and the third syllable. In Experiment 2, when there was no sharing of phonology
between syllables, then nonadjacent dependencies were
not accessed for the segmentation task. The results suggest that access to computing statistical nonadjacent
dependencies requires that the dependencies are phonologically similar.
However, performance in Experiment 5 is significantly worse than Experiment 1, which combined
word-initial plosives and nonadjacent structure,
t (26) = 1.662, p < .05. This result suggests that there is
some combination of preference for plosives in first position and sharing of first and third syllable that contributes to segmentation performance. However, it remains
a possibility that the continuant-plosive-continuant
phonological structure is sufficient on its own to drive
preferences for words over part-words, and that the nonadjacent structure is irrelevant to performance on the

234

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

task. To test this we ran Experiment 6 below, which has
no nonadjacent structure but maintains the phonological property sharing between first and third syllable.

Experiment 6
Method
Participants
Fourteen students (who had not participated in any
other experiment reported here) at the University of
Warwick participated for 1.
Materials and design
Materials were created using the continuant-plosivecontinuant pattern for syllable onsets in words, as used
in Experiment 5. However, the dependency between particular first and third syllables was removed. Thus, in
first position were the syllables [ze], [thi], [fo], in second
position were [pu], [ta], [gi], and in third position [vo],
[shu], [sa]. The training corpus was created in the same
way as Experiment 3, with no syllable repeated in an
adjacent word. Similarly, the test phase was constructed
in the same way as Experiment 3, and consisted of all 27
words, compared to part-words that were composed of
either the last two syllables of the word followed by
the first syllable of another word, or a last syllable from
another word and the first two syllables of the word
being tested.
Procedure
The training and testing procedures were identical to
those for Experiment 3.
Results and discussion
The results are shown in Fig. 1. Participants preferred
words to part-words with mean 14.7 out of 27 (54%),
SD = 4.5. This was not significantly different from
chance, t (13) = 1.010, p = .331. Preference for words
was not observed when compared against XBiAj partwords, mean 7.1 out of 13, SD = 3.1, t (13) = .684,
p = .506. Nor was there a preference for words over
BiAjX part-words, mean 7.6 out of 14, SD = 2.3,
t (13) = 1.042, p = .316. Unlike for Experiment 5, there
was no significant difference for proportion correct on
XBiAj compared to BiAjX part-words, t (13) = .031,
p = .976. Participants were not able to distinguish words
from part-words when the phonological pattern involved
continuants in first and third position but when there
was no nonadjacent dependency structure. This pattern
of results contrasts with the effect seen in Experiment
3, where a preference for plosives in first and third position was observed after training, even when there was no
nonadjacent structure in the language.

General discussion
In this paper, we have investigated the potential role
of phonological processing in an ALL task. We found
that, in the processing of nonadjacent dependencies for
use in a segmentation task, the phonological properties
of the dependent syllables within words were critical
for learning to take place. Segmentation can take place
on the basis of adjacent dependencies in sequences of syllables (Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1996), tones (Saffran
et al., 1999), or visual items (Kirkham et al., 2002).
Yet, finding nonadjacent dependency learning has
proved elusive in several studies (e.g., Morgan & Newport, 1981; Newport & Aslin, 2004), and the data presented in this study helps to define the conditions
under which such learning is possible.
Table 3 provides a summary of the six experimental
designs. Experiment 1 replicated Pena et al.Os (2002)
study in English: segmentation could proceed on the basis of nonadjacent dependencies. However, Experiment
2, which maintained the nonadjacent structure but altered the order of syllables from the first experiment,
did not find evidence of learning, and indicated that nonadjacent dependencies cannot be used for segmentation
under all circumstances. Indeed, Experiment 3 showed
that segmentation could proceed on the basis of order
of syllables only, though performance was not as good
as when syllable order and nonadjacent structure was
in place as in Experiment 1. Experiment 4 further showed
that learning nonadjacent structure could be over-ruled
by particular orders of syllables. These first four experiments provide evidence that plosives in initial position
in words have a large contribution toward segmentation
performance in Pena et al.Os experiments. These studies
supported the claims that ALL performance was influenced either by phonotactic biases, or by latent preferTable 3
Summary of the design of the experiments
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6

Syllable positions

Nonadjacent
structure

p-value

P-C-P
Randomised
P-C-P
C-P-P
C-P-C
C-P-C

Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N

<.0001
ns
<.001
< .01*
< .01
ns

The first column lists the experiment, the second column lists
the experiment number in Pena et al.Os study. Syllable positions
indicate the order of syllables within words in the Experiment,
P-C-P: plosive-continuant-plosive; C-P-P: continuant-plosive-plosive; C-P-C: continuant-plosive-continuant. The
Structure column indicates whether the language contained
nonadjacent dependencies or not, and the effect indicates the
statistical result. The asterisk (*) indicates a significant preference for part-words.

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

ence for plosives in first position due to their phonetic
properties, or by a combination of the two.
To further assess the contribution of phonotactic
biases in artificial speech stimuli, we conducted two measures of the distribution of phonemes in French and
English. The first counted the percentage of words in a
corpus that began with each consonant in the onset of
the syllables in Pena et al.Os experiments. This was to
measure the extent to which certain phonemes were
more likely than others to begin words in French and
in English. The second measure was the conditional
probability that each phoneme was the onset of a word.
This measure determines whether each phoneme in syllable onset position is an informative cue for the beginning
of a word. Some phonemes may occur more frequently
than others in all positions within the word, but this
would not be reflected in the first measure that assesses
the percentage of words with that phoneme as the onset.
For French, we used the LEXIQUE corpus (New, Pallier, Ferrand, & Matos, 2001) and we used the CELEX
corpus for English (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Gulikers,
1995). The results are shown in Table 4, for token frequencies of words, as well as type frequencies in parentheses. For the proportion of words beginning with each
phoneme, more words in French begin with initial (/p/,
/b/, /t/) and final (/k/, /g/, /d/) phonemes than with medial (/R/, /f/, /l/) phonemes (column 3), where initial, medial, and final refer to positions in the syllables that make
up the artificial grammar used by Pena et al. (2002). In
English more words begin with the initial phonemes than
with medial or final phonemes (column 5). Using the second measure, in French the initial and final phonemes
were more likely than medial phonemes to begin words
(column 4). In English, the initial phonemes were more
likely than medial and final phonemes to begin words.

235

We tested the consequence of forming a preference
for words over part-words based only on the likelihood
of the initial phoneme in word-initial position. If an initial phoneme occurs more often initially than a medial
phoneme, then the word beginning with the initial phoneme is taken to be preferred over the part-word beginning with the medial phoneme. For instance, puraki
would be preferred over rakibe as /p/ occurs more often
initially than /R/ in French. From the 36 tests of word/
part-word in the segmentation experiment in Pena et
al.Os study, in the token frequency analysis in French
18 cases (50.0%) produced a preference for a word over
a part-word. In English, 32 out of 36 words (88.9%) were
preferred over part-words. For the second measure, for
French again 18 words (50%) would be preferred over
part-words, and 24 words (66.7%) in English would be
preferred. For the type frequency analysis, in French
the first measure resulted in preference for 20 words over
part-words and 20 for the second measure. In English,
there was a preference for 22 words over part-words
for the first measure and 24 for the second measure.
A more conservative decision rule for selection of the
preferred word is based on a Luce choice ratio (Luce,
1963) in which the probability of selecting the sequence
beginning with say, /b/ rather than /R/ is
Pr=b= 1/4

freq=b=
:
freq=b=  freq=R=

For token frequencies, for the first measure in
French this choice ratio results in 46.6% preference
for words, and 60.1% in English. The Luce choice ratio
for the second measure results in preference for 48.8%
of words in French and 54.8% in English. For the type
frequency analysis, in French there is a 52.5% preference for words in the first measure, and 51.9% for the

Table 4
Percentage of words beginning with each consonant for syllables in initial/medial/final word position in Pena et al.Os studies, and
conditional probabilities of consonants beginning a word in French and English
Position in AiXBi words

Phoneme

French

Initial

/p/
/b/
/t/

Medial

French /R/, English / /
/f/
/l/

Final

/k/
/g/
/d/

English

% words beginning
with phoneme

Word-onset
probability

% words beginning
with phoneme

Word-onset
probability

8.2 (8.7)
1.7 (4.7)
3.5 (4.7)
Total: 13.4 (16.9)
2.9 (9.1)
2.7 (4.4)
9.1 (2.4)
Total: 14.7 (15.9)
7.2 (9.2)
0.9 (2.5)
13.0 (8.2)
Total: 21.1 (19.9)

.67 (.40)
.44 (.35)
.21 (.11)
Overall: .44 (.32)
.11 (.13)
.59 (.36)
.43 (.08)
Overall: .37 (.19)
.55 (.32)
.40 (.29)
.79 (.42)
Overall: .58 (.34)

3.1 (8.4)
4.4 (6.8)
4.9 (4.6)
Total: 12.4 (19.8)
2.2 (6.7)
4.4 (5.2)
2.3 (3.7)
Total: 8.9 (15.6)
3.7 (9.4)
1.5 (3.0)
3.0 (6.7)
Total: 8.2 (19.1)

.44 (.34)
.65 (.44)
.20 (.09)
Overall: .43 (.29)
.20 (.21)
.64 (.36)
.19 (.12)
Overall: .34 (.23)
.35 (.30)
.53 (.35)
.19 (.16)
Overall: .36 (.27)

r

Token frequency analysis, with type frequency analysis in parentheses.

236

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

second measure, and in English for the first measure
there is a 54.3% preference for words and 50.5% for
the second measure.
The corpus analyses provide mixed evidence of bias
in terms of the distribution of the phonemes beginning
syllables in Pena et al.Os stimuli. The preferences we
found in the corpus analyses were very weak, resulting
in no preference in French for words over part-words
in the token frequency analysis, and a slight preference
for words in the type frequency analysis. The biases
for initial phonemes beginning words in English were
stronger, but still much less than the observed preferences in the experimental results of Pena et al. and ours,
and this suggests that additional contributions to preference result from other sources, such as phonological
similarity between nonadjacent dependencies.
Experiment 5 indicated that nonadjacent dependencies could be learned if supported by a correspondence
between dependent syllables in terms of phonological
properties (Morgan & Newport, 1981), even though
there were no plosives in first position--words in this
experiment began and ended with continuants in the onset of the syllable. This result also ruled out the hypothesis by Perruchet et al. (in press) that the speech
synthesizer alone was responsible for inducing segmentation at word-boundaries. Even if the Festival speechsynthesizer, as well as the French MBROLA synthesizer,
produced unvoiced plosives at the beginning of words
preceded by a silence before the onset, the results of
Experiment 5 show that successful segmentation can occur with continuants as word onsets, outweighing this
synthesizer bias.
Finally, Experiment 6 showed that phonological similarity is not sufficient on its own to drive segmentation,
as performance was at chance level when there was no
nonadjacent structure but only continuant-plosive-continuant phonological structure. Table 5 summarises the
design of each Experiment and the resultant effects.
The phonotactic bias and the phonological similarity
bias appear to interact in an additive way to segmentation performance (see Table 5). Experiment 1 with nonadjacent structure, plosive onset, and phonological
similarity between dependent syllables resulted in the
highest preference for words over part-words (28%

above chance). Experiment 2, with plosive onset but
no nonadjacent structure, and Experiment 5, with phonologically similar nonadjacent dependencies but with
continuant onsets, resulted in segmentation performance
at equivalent levels. Each was approximately half the level above chance that was found for Experiment 1. Absence of either plosive onset or phonological similarity
was sufficient for performance to return to chance levels
(Experiment 6), or even below if phonological preferences were violated, as in Experiment 4.
We performed an ANOVA on the combined results
of Experiments 1, 3, 5, and 6, with presence/absence of
nonadjacent structure and presence/absence of plosive
as word-onset as factors. There was a main effect of
structure, F (1, 52) = 9.915, p < .005, with presence of
structure resulting in better performance. There was also
a main effect of presence of plosive as first sound,
F (1, 52) = 10.365, p < .005, with better performance
when plosives were initial. There was no significant
interaction between structure and initial plosive, F < 1.
The influence of phonological properties on learning
language structure is not entirely surprising, given that
there is a strong correspondence between phonological
properties and phonotactic and grammatical structure
in natural language. There is coherence among grammatical categories in terms of phonological properties
(Kelly, 1992), which may well be a crucial contributor
to the learnability of such grammatical structure
(Braine, 1987). Monaghan, Chater, and Christiansen
(in press) found that category learning in an ALL was
significantly improved when words in the same category
shared phonological information, for instance. Similarly, Brooks, Braine, Catalano, Brody, and Sudhalter
(1993) found that learning of a gender-like classification
in an ALL was only possible when words shared phonological properties.
The results from Pena et al.Os (2002) study indicate
that segmentation can take place on the basis of nonadjacent transitional probabilities, but we have shown this
only occurs when there is phonological similarity between the dependent syllables within words. When the
contribution of phonology is removed no learning takes
place, as in Newport and AslinOs (2004) studies, where a
similar artificial grammar was employed. Pena et al.Os

Table 5
The additive contribution of phonological and nonadjacent dependency structure in Experiments 1-6
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6

Statistical structure
present?

Words have plosive
onset?

Phonological pattern brackets
statistical structure?

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No

Percentage performance
above chance (%)
28
0
13
4
14
4 (ns)

L. Onnis et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 225-237

(2002) conclusions regarding separable processing for
segmentation and for learning to generalize the structure
of the language are therefore premature, given that segmentation only occurs under certain conditions precipitated by phonological properties of the speech. The
conditions under which generalization may also occur require additional testing. The results of these experiments
indicate that phonological factors in ALL experiments
need careful experimental control, given the sensitivity
of learners to both the phonological and distributional
structure of artificial language learning materials.

References
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month old infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania.
Black, A. W., Taylor, P., & Caley, R. (1990). The Festival
Speech Synthesis System. Available from http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival.html, Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR), University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.
Braine, M. D. S. (1987). What is learned in acquiring word
classes: A step toward an acquisition theory. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition
(pp. 65-87). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brooks, P. B., Braine, M. D. S., Catalano, L., Brody, R. E., &
Sudhalter, V. (1993). Acquisition of gender-like noun
subclasses in an artificial language: The contribution of
phonological markers to learning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 32, 79-95.
Brent, M. R., & Cartwright, T. A. (1996). Distributional
regularity and phonotactic constraints are useful for segmentation. Cognition, 61, 93-125.
Friederici, A. D., & Wessels, J. M. I. (1993). Phonotactic
knowledge and its use in infant speech perception. Perception & Psychophysics, 54, 287-295.
Gomez, R. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant
structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Hahn, U., & Chater, N. (1998). Similarity and rules: distinct.
exhaustive? empirically distinguishable? Cognition, 65,
197-230.
Jusczyk, P. (1999a). How infants begin to extract words from
speech. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 323-327.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1999b). How infants begin to extract words
from speech. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 323-328.
Johnson, E. K., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Word segmentation
by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count more than
statistics. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 1-20.
Kelly, M. H. (1992). Using sound to solve syntactic problems:
The role of phonology in grammatical category assignments. Psychological Review, 99, 349-364.

237

Kessler, B., & Treiman, R. (1997). Syllable structure and the
distribution of phonemes in English syllables. Journal of
Memory and Language, 37, 295-311.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy: Evidence of a domain general
learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35-B42.
Luce, R. D. (1963). Detection and recognition. In R. D. Luce,
R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. New York: Wiley.
Marcus, G. F. (1999). Do infants learn grammar with algebra
or statistics? Science, 284, 436-437.
Mattys, S. L., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Phonotactic cues for
segmentation of fluent speech by infants. Cognition, 78,
91-121.
Mattys, S. L., Jusczyk, P. W., Luce, P. A., & Morgan, J. L.
(1999). Phonotactic and prosodic effects on word segmentation in infants. Cognitive Psychology, 38, 465-494.
McClelland, J. L., & Plaut, D. C. (1999). Does generalization in
infant learning implicate abstract algebra-like rules? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 3(5), 165-201.
McQueen, J. M. (1998). Segmentation of continuous speech
using phonotactics. Journal of Memory and Language, 39,
21-46.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (in press).
The differential role of phonological and distributional cues
in grammatical categorisation. Cognition.
Morgan, J. L., & Newport, E. L. (1981). The role of constituent
structure in the induction of an artificial language. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 67-85.
New, B., Pallier, C., Ferrand, L., & Matos, R. (2001). Une base
de donnees lexicales du francais contemporain sur internet:
LEXIQUE. LOAnnee Psychologique, 101, 447-462.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance I.
Statistical learning of nonadjacent dependencies. Cognitive
Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1997).
The possible-word constraint in the segmentation of continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 34, 191-243.
Pena, M., Bonatti, L., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2002). Signaldriven computations in speech processing. Science, 298,
604-607.
Perruchet, P., Tyler, M. D., Galland, N., & Peereman R. (in
press). Learning nonadjacent dependencies: No need for
algebraic-like computations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Quene, H. (1992). Durational cues for word segmentation in
Dutch. Journal of Phonetics, 20(3), 331-350.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L.
(1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by human
infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27-52.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Seidenberg, M. S., MacDonald, M. C., & Saffran, J. R. (2002).
Does grammar start where statistics stop? Science, 298,
553-554.

