Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Persuading and dissuading by conditional argument q
Valerie A. Thompson a,*, Jonathan St. B.T. Evans b, Simon J. Handley b
a

Department of Psychology, University of Saskatchewan, 9 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5A5
b
University of Plymouth, UK
Received 7 May 2004; revision received 22 February 2005
Available online 6 April 2005

Abstract
Informal reasoning typically draws on a wider range of inferential behaviour than is measured by traditional inference tasks. In this paper, we developed several tasks to study informal reasoning with two novel types of conditional
statements: Persuasions (e.g., if the Kyoto accord is ratified, greenhouse gas emissions will be reduced) and dissuasions
(e.g., if the Kyoto accord is ratified, there will be a downturn in the economy). For these statements, the consequent
event, q, is offered as an incentive or disincentive for undertaking action p. Forty-eight university students reasoned
about the statements from the point of view of the writer; another forty-eight reasoned from their own perspective.
We found that reasoning about these statements involves a sophisticated chain of implicit inferences (e.g., a downturn
in the economy should be avoided; ratifying the accord will produce a downturn; in order to avoid a downturn the
accord should not be ratified) in support of an implicit conclusion (i.e., the accord should not be ratified). When generating arguments to either support or refute a position, reasoners relied on two main strategies: addressing the truth of
the conditional or arguing the merits of undertaking action p (i.e., ratifying the Kyoto accord). Finally, using a traditional conditional arguments task, we found that reasoners were more likely to adopt a deductive strategy when reasoning from the writerOs point of view than their own point of view, even though we did not include any instructions to
reason logically. We discuss the relevance of these findings for formal and informal models of reasoning, the writerOs
theory of mind, and the role of pragmatic implicatures in reasoning.
 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Conditional reasoning; Pragmatics; Informal reasoning; Deduction; Argument; Persuasion; Dual process theory

Introduction
Psychological accounts of conditionals have strongly
favoured semantic-level arguments, typified by the popq

This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, and by the Economic
and Social Research Council of Great Britain. The authors
thank Jamie Campbell, Stephen Newstead, Kealee Playford,
and Jody Shynkaruk for the thoughtful comments they
provided on an earlier version of this manuscript.
*
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Valerie.Thompson@Usask.ca (V.A. Thompson).

ular mental model theory of conditionals (JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991, 2002). In this approach, peopleOs
representation of conditionals and consequent reasoning
with them is a function of the set (or extension) of logical
possibilities that they allow. Pragmatic influences are
then dealt with as add-on influences that modify these
representations (as in the ``pragmatic modulation''
mechanisms of Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
In contrast, however, some theorists are calling for a
much stronger emphasis on pragmatics in the account of
conditional reasoning (Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004; Evans
& Over, 2004; Sperber, Cara, & Girotto, 1995; Thomp-

0749-596X/$ - see front matter  2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2005.03.001

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

son, 2000). For example, Evans and Over (2004) advance a suppositional theory of conditionals in which
they argue that the function of a conditional is to elicit
a process of hypothetical thinking in the listener, which
is relevant to their current goals and those of the speaker. This process is strongly influenced by pragmatic
implicature; according to this view, much of what we
have assumed to be reasoning behaviour is, instead,
the result of pragmatic interpretations (Thompson,
2000). Take for example, the following conditional
statement:
If the Kyoto accord is ratified, then there will be a severe
downturn in the economy.
This statement appears to form part of a largely
implicit argument regarding the merits of ratifying
the Kyoto accord. To recover this argument, the
reader must make an assumption about the goals of
the speaker (e.g., the speaker meant to imply that a
downturn in the economy was undesirable and should
be avoided), as well as a number of invited inferences
(e.g., if one wants to avoid a downturn in the economy, one should not ratify the accord; thus, the accord should not be ratified). The reader must also
evaluate whether or not she finds this argument persuasive. Thus, much of the inferences generated by
the reasoner can be attributed to pragmatic or interpretive processes. Although it may be possible to represent the output of these interpretive processes using
the extensional semantics of Mental Models Theory
(Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004; Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
2002; Thompson, 2000; but see Evans & Over, 2004
for a different view), it is clear that much of the
inferential ``work'' has taken place prior to this stage,
and many of the inferences generated by the reasoner
can be attributed to mechanisms that are outside the
boundaries of the mechanisms defined by Mental
Models Theory (or Mental Logic theory for that matter, see Thompson, 2000). Thus, we argue that people
can construct chains of implicit inferences that go
well beyond the information given, and that much
of the complexity and variability of ordinary reasoning derives from these processes, rather than from the
pragmatic modulation of a set of core logical
possibilities.
In this paper, we endorse the pragmatic approach
and to that end, we also go well beyond the confines
of the deduction paradigm (Evans, 2002; Evans &
Thompson, 2004) in the methods that we used to investigate informal reasoning. To do so required us to develop tasks that go beyond the limitations imposed by
traditional tasks of deductive reasoning. Even the modified deductive tasks that have been designed to allow a
role for pragmatic and informal influences cannot capture the range and flexibility of ordinary reasonersO
informal inferences (Evans & Thompson, 2004). On a

239

traditional task, for example, reasoners might be provided with the following premises:
If the Kyoto accord is ratified, there will be a severe
downturn in the economy. There has been a severe
downturn in the economy.
Reasoners might then be asked to make an inference about whether or not the accord was ratified.
Even when participants are not instructed to put aside
their pragmatic knowledge (i.e., when not required to
assume the truth of the premises or to draw only necessary inferences), this paradigm appears to capture
very little of the pragmatic and inferential work that
is undertaken by the reasoner. Specifically, this paradigm does not address how reasoners understand the
elocutionary goals of the writer (i.e., to change the
readersOs mind and to persuade him or her to a certain
point of view), nor does it reflect the processes engaged
by the reasoner in recovering the writerOs largely implicit argument. In this paper, we develop a number of
novel tasks for studying how conditionals are used as
arguments.
Persuasions and dissuasions: Description
To this end, we focus on two heretofore unidentified
types of conditionals, which will be referred to as persuasions and dissuasions. A persuasion is a conditional
statement in which the consequent, q, refers to a desirable outcome, and the antecedent, p, refers to a hypothetical course of action that is asserted to produce the
outcome (e.g., if the Kyoto accord is ratified, greenhouse
gas emissions will be reduced). A dissuasion is a conditional statement in which the consequent refers to an
undesirable outcome, and the antecedent again refers
to a hypothetical course of action that is asserted as
the cause of the outcome (e.g., if the Kyoto accord is ratified, there will be a severe downturn in the economy).
They are often, although not always, used together to
argue the merits of doing p and the potential drawbacks
of failing to do p, as the following example illustrates.
This example is paraphrased from a Canadian newspaper, and concerns the ongoing tensions involved in a
land claims dispute between a local First Nations group
and the federal government:
If Brad Morris (the federal negotiator) agrees to set
aside a significant amount of time to resume talks, there
is hope that things will remain calm.
But if he delays negotiations, supporters (of the First
Nations band) will launch a series of demonstrations
both nationally and internationally.
Clearly, these statements are pragmatically rich: They
appear to be uttered as part of an argument whose goal
is to change the listenerOs mind and to persuade her to a

240

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

certain point of view. They are also very common: A
survey of the conditional statements in a newspaper will
show that a large proportion of them are used as persuasions and dissuasions. However, they have not to our
knowledge been studied in the psychological literature,
despite extensive theorising on the pragmatic properties
of a variety of thematic conditionals (see Evans & Over,
2004, for a review).
Persuasions and dissuasions are examples of a broader classification of conditional statements that assert a
relationship between an action and a valenced outcome
(Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004). These include inducement
conditionals (e.g., if you mow my lawn, I will pay you
$10.00), advice conditionals (e.g., if you work overtime,
you will impress the boss), and consequential conditionals (e.g., if Sue goes to the party, she will have a good
time). These statements have many things in common.
For example, all appear to invite an inference about
the antecedent event (i.e., I want you to mow my lawn,
you should work overtime, Sue will go to the party).
These inferences change with the valence of the consequent, such that when the consequent describes a negative outcome, the antecedent inference is also negative
(e.g., a warning such as ``if you arrive late for work,
you will be fired'' invites the inference ``you should
not arrive late for work'').
They also differ along a number of dimensions, for
example, with respect to who has control over the antecedent and consequent events. For inducements and advice, the consequent event is under the control of the
listener, and the antecedent event is under the control
of either the speaker (inducements) or listener (advice).
In contrast, for consequential conditionals, persuasions,
and dissuasions, the antecedent event is under control of
a third party, whereas control of the consequent event is
not under the direct control of that agent. For example,
SueOs enjoyment of the party, the slowdown of the
economy, and the occurrence of strikes and protests
are only indirectly under the control of the agents mentioned in p.
The statements also differ with respect to the recipient of the consequent action. In the case of inducements and advice, the consequences described in q
accrue to the listener (i.e., the listener potentially
receives $10.00 or impresses the boss). In the case of
a consequential conditional, the consequences are experienced by the agent in p (e.g., Sue). In contrast, the
consequences of a persuasion or dissuasion are directed
more globally, and may or may not include either the
speaker, the listener, or the agent of the conditional.
For example, it is society in general who will experience
a slowdown in the economy, strikes, etc. In other
examples, the consequences may be experienced by
non-human entities, as in, ``If global warming continues, there will mass extinctions on a scale not seen since
the last Ice Age.''

Finally, the conditionals differ with respect to the implied goals of the speaker. Along with inducements and
advice, persuasions and dissuasions share the illocutionary goal of persuasion: Inducements and advice attempt
to persuade the listener to undertake a course of action,
whereas persuasions and dissuasions attempt to persuade the listener to a point of view. In this respect, persuasions and dissuasions differ from consequential
conditionals, whose illocutionary goal is predictive,
rather than persuasive.
In sum, we define persuasions and dissuasions as having the following five defining features (adapted from
Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004, p. 29):
1. P refers to a hypothetical action of a third party or
agent, who is neither the speaker nor listener of the
conditional and whose agency may be implied rather
than stated explicitly.
2. The action p is as yet hypothetical, and is under the
control of the third party.
3. Q is a consequential outcome of taking action p.
4. Q is valenced, representing either a desirable or undesirable outcome of action p.
5. The consequences of this outcome do not accrue specifically to the listener, the speaker, or the agent of the
conditional.
Thus, in our Kyoto example, p, ratification of the accord, is under the control of a third party, in this case
the body or bodies who are in a position to sign the
Kyoto accord. Q, the downturn in the economy, is a
consequence of that action. Q is valenced, in that it is
clearly undesirable, and the undesirability of these consequences are not directed personally to the listener,
but will be experienced by society at large. As is apparent in this example, agency is often implied, rather than
stated directly, in this instance the implied agent is the
``government'' at whose discretion the accord will be
signed.
Persuasions, dissuasions, and invited inferences
Our working hypothesis was that conditional persuasions and dissuasions are advanced by the speaker as the
initial premise in a largely implicit argument, and that
the listener is expected to fill in the necessary assumptions, make the invited inferences, and come to the expected conclusion. As per Bonnefon and Hilton (2004),
we proposed that these invited inferences are based on
a principle of consequentialism, namely that the desirability of an action can be evaluated by the nature of
the consequences that it engenders (see also Manktelow
& Over, 1991; Over, Manktelow, & Hadjichristidis,
2004). Thus, actions having a negative outcome should
be avoided; actions having a positive outcome should
be encouraged. Consequently, statements that assert

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

the positive outcome of an action should invite an
inference about the desirability of that action, and statements that assert the negative outcome of an action
should invite an inference about the undesirability of
that action.
In the case of persuasions, we proposed that the conditional statement invites an implicit argument of the
following form:
(1) The stated outcome, q, is desirable (implicit
assumption).
(2) This desirable outcome will occur if the action, p,
is undertaken (given).
(3) Thus, if one wants to achieve the desired outcome,
q, the stated action, p, should be undertaken
(invited inference).
(4) The action, p, should be undertaken (conclusion
follows from 1 and 3).
For example, in the negotiations scenario, the implicit argument would be as follows: It is desirable for
things to remain calm (implicit assumption). Things will
remain calm if the negotiator sets aside time (given).
Thus, if one wants things to remain calm, the negotiator
should set aside time (invited inference). Therefore, the
negotiator should set aside time (p should happen).
The argument begins with an assumption about the
desirability of the outcome, and ends with a deontic conclusion about a specific course of action.
In the case of dissuasions, we propose that the implicit argument has the following form:
(1) The stated outcome, q, is undesirable and should
be avoided (implicit assumption).
(2) The undesired outcome will occur if the action, p,
is undertaken (given).
(3) Thus, if one wants to avoid the undesired outcome, one should not undertake the stated action
(invited inference).
(4) The action, p, should not be undertaken (conclusion follows from 1 and 3).
In the negotiations scenario, the implicit argument
would be: Demonstrations are undesirable, and should
be avoided (implicit assumption). There will be demonstrations if the negotiations are delayed (given). Thus, if
one wants to avoid demonstrations, the negotiations
should not be delayed (invited inference). Therefore,
the negotiations should not be delayed (p should not
happen).
Although the chain of inference that we propose appears complex, it is not farfetched to believe that listeners will spontaneously assemble such an argument. For
example, we know that reasoners routinely make invited
inferences from certain classes of conditional statements,
such as conditional promises and counterfactual condi-

241

tionals (e.g., Fillenbaum, 1974; Geis & Zwicky, 1971;
Thompson & Byrne, 2002). We also know that understanding other types of conditional statements, such as
inducements (e.g., if you do not give me your wallet, I
will shoot you; if you clean your room, you may have
ice cream), requires an initial assumption about the
desirability of q, similar to the first step we have
proposed for the comprehension of persuasions and
dissuasions (see Fillenbaum, 1986, for a review). Similarly, Bonnefon and Hilton (2004) found that consequential conditionals with a positive consequent (e.g.,
``if Mary goes to the party, she will meet up with
all her best friends'') invite an inference about the truth
of the antecedent (i.e., Mary will go to the party),
whereas negative consequents (e.g., ``if Mary goes to
the party, she will only meet with people she dislikes'')
invite an inference about the falsity of the antecedent
(i.e., Mary will not go the party). The invited inferences
that we have proposed differ somewhat from those
investigated previously in that they are deontic in nature; however, their general form and overall complexity
are roughly comparable. Thus, it seems reasonable to
suggest that reasoners are both capable of, and predisposed to, making invited inferences of the type that we
have proposed.
In sum, the purpose of this study was to examine
how persuasions and dissuasions are understood and
treated as part of arguments. We hypothesised that a
writer asserts a conditional persuasion or dissuasion
as part of an argument whose goal is to persuade the
reader regarding the potential merits or drawbacks of
p. In addition, we posit that much of the argument is
implicit, requiring the reader to make a number of
assumptions and invited inferences to reason to a deontic conclusion.
To test these predictions, participants in the current
study were provided with three scenarios: a persuasion,
a dissuasion, and a neutral (control) statement. We predicted that relative to neutral statements and persuasions, reasoners would indicate that the writer of a
dissuasion meant to imply that ``if one wants to avoid
q, one should not do p,'' and that ``p should not happen.'' In contrast, relative to dissuasions and neutral
statements, the writer of a persuasion was predicted to
imply that ``if one wants q to happen, one should do
p,'' and that ``p should happen.''
Perspective effects and dual process theory
For both persuasions and dissuasions, we propose
that the implicit argument begins with an assumption
about the merits of the consequent, q, and ends with
a deontic conclusion about whether or not p should
be undertaken. Consequently, it seems apparent that
these statements can be understood on two separate
levels. On the one hand, one understands the persua-

242

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

sive message communicated by the author; on the
other hand, however, one may or may not be convinced by the argument. That is, the chain of argument suggested by the author may be understood
and interpreted quite independently of whether or
not one actually agrees with the argument. Thus, we
propose that the reader understands these statements
simultaneously from two perspectives, such that she
understands the argument advanced by the writer independently of, and in addition to, her own position on
the matter.
To test this hypothesis, we asked reasoners to think
about the problem scenarios from one of two perspectives: the writerOs or their own. Those reasoning from
the writerOs perspective were asked to determine what
the writer meant to imply, those reasoning from the personal perspective were asked to indicate what they believed followed from the writerOs assertion. We
anticipated that readers would differentiate between
the writerOs intended implicature (e.g., that p is a desirable or undesirable state of affairs) and their own beliefs,
and that this differentiation would affect their predisposition to draw the invited inferences.
Further, we argue that this shift in perspective from
the writerOs to the personal requires a shift in thinking
style. Thinking from the writerOs perspective requires
the listeners to divorce themselves from their perspective and to consider the goals and intentions of someone else. In terms of dual-process theory (e.g., Evans
& Over, 1996; Klaczynski & Robinson, 2000; Sloman,
2002; Stanovich, 1999), deriving the writerOs intended
meaning requires the reader to shift from contextualised, belief-based, System 1 reasoning to decontextualised, hypothetical, System 2 thinking. Thus, we
hypothesised that reasoning from the writerOs perspective would be more likely to induce a decontextualised,
logical approach than thinking from a personal perspective, which should invite contextualised, beliefbased reasoning. To test this hypothesis, reasoners were
asked to complete a traditional conditional arguments
task. If reasoning from the writerOs perspective requires
reasoners to engage in analytic thinking, one should observe a higher rate of normatively correct responses in
this condition, even in the absence of instructions to accept the premises as true or to draw only valid
inferences.
The current study
Participants were asked to complete three groups of
tasks. One set of tasks was designed to determine
whether or not they drew the hypothesised invited inferences. For this task, participants were provided with the
putative inferences, and asked to indicate the degree to
which these inferences coincided with their interpretation of the conditional scenarios. The second task was

more open-ended, and asked participants to list arguments that supported or refuted the writerOs (or their)
position. The goal of this task was to examine how reasoners evaluated the persuasive impact of persuasions
and dissuasions, and allowed us to corroborate the conclusions derived from the first task. The third task, as described above, measured reasoning on a traditional
conditional inference task.
The remainder of the paper is organised into four sections. The Method section provides a detailed description of the three groups of tasks. Following that, there
are three Results and discussion sections; each section
reiterates the predictions for each group of tasks, and
then presents findings and extensive discussions for each
task. A brief overview of our major conclusions forms
the basis of the final section.

Method
Participants
Ninety-six students from the University of Plymouth
were paid a small sum for their participation.
Materials
Three scenarios were developed for the purposes of
this study (see Appendix A); these involved the potential
closure of a railway line, the re-organisation of a hospital board, and a proposed increase in university tuition
fees. The scenarios were developed from current news
items. Each scenario provided a general context, which
was followed by a conditional statement of the generic
form, ``if p, then q.'' For each scenario, we created three
conditional statements by adding one of three consequents (q) to the antecedent portion (p) of the statement.
This produced a change in the valence of the statement,
such that one consequent entailed a positive outcome,
another a negative outcome, and the third a neutral outcome. The three versions of the railway scenario are
illustrated below:
Canada is a vast country which is very sparsely populated. Recently, there has been some debate regarding the viability of several of the smaller railway
lines. These lines primarily service rural communities
for the purpose of transporting agricultural products
to market. In a recent edition of a Canadian newspaper, a writer made the following statement: If the
railway line is closed, then the taxpayers will save millions of dollars (positive)/If the railway line is closed,
then the highways will be damaged by heavy trucks
moving grain north and south (negative)/If the railway
line is closed, then the grain will be shipped to market
using trucks (neutral).

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

Procedure
The positive, negative, and neutral endings produced a persuasion, a dissuasion, and a neutral statement for each scenario. Participants received one
version of each of the three scenarios, i.e., each participant received the railway scenario, the hospital scenario, and the tuition scenario. One scenario was
presented as a persuasion, one as a dissuasion, and
one as a neutral statement. The assignment of valence
to scenarios was counterbalanced, so that each scenario
was presented equally often as a persuasion, a dissuasion, and a neutral statement. The order in which the
scenarios was presented was also counterbalanced, such
that each scenario occurred equally often in the first,
second, and third position.
Instructions
For each scenario, participants performed several
tasks; the tasks were presented on three pages. Half of
the participants were asked to respond based on what
they thought the writer intended to communicate; the
remaining half were asked to answer based on their
own interpretation. At the top of the first page, participants were presented with a brief paragraph that provided general instructions; these differed slightly for
those asked to reason from a personal and a writerOs perspective, as illustrated below:
The questions on the next three pages concern the following paragraph. This paragraph is repeated for you
at the top of each page. The paragraph contains a statement that appeared in a recent newspaper. Answer the
questions based on your interpretation of the italicised
statement (i.e., what do you believe about the situation
described?)/Answer the questions based on your interpretation of the writerOs intended meaning (i.e., what
do you think that the writer of this statement meant to
convey?).
This was followed by the scenario, which was presented as illustrated above with the railway example.
The scenario was repeated at the top of each page.
Tasks
Participants completed three tasks for each scenario.
One task asked participants to interpret the conditional
statement by answering six questions. The first two questions asked participants to rate the necessity and sufficiency of the conditional statement; these questions
were included to evaluate the statements along a dimension that has been repeatedly shown to influence how
people reason with them (e.g., Bindra, Clarke, & Shultz,
1980; Byrne, Espino, & Santarmaria, 1999; Markovits,
1985; Staudenmayer, 1975; Thompson, 1994, 1995,
2000). The next two questions asked reasoners about
the two invited inferences that we had hypothesised were

243

part of the argument chain. These four questions were
always presented in the same order, and had the same
canonical form for each scenario (examples are presented in Appendix B):
(a) Doing p will ensure that q will happen
(sufficiency).
(b) Not doing p will ensure that q will not happen
(necessity).
(c) If one wants q to happen, one should do p (wantq).
(d) If one wants to avoid q happening, one should not
do p (avoid-q).
Participants were asked to make their responses by
circling the appropriate number on the following seven
point scale, which was presented following each
statement:
Strongly
disagree
3
2

Neither agree
or disagree
1
0
1

Strongly
agree
2 3

Following these four questions, participants were
asked two additional questions, again in a fixed order.
The concern question was included as a manipulation
check to ensure that reasoners interpreted persuasions
and dissuasions (but not neutral statements) to express
controversy about p and q. For this, participants were
asked to identify the primary concern outlined in the
scenario (p, q, p and q, neither p nor q, cannot tell;
see Appendix B for examples). As the data from this
question confirmed the manipulation to be successful
(i.e., persuasions and dissuasions were seen to be concerned with p and q, whereas responses to neutral
statements were equally distributed among the categories), further discussion of this question will be
omitted.
The position question was designed to test our
hypothesis that the intent of a persuasion or dissuasion
is to provide an argument about why p should or
should not happen, respectively. This question was
phrased somewhat differently, depending on whether
the participant was asked to reason from the writerOs
perspective or their own perspective; again, this question appeared in the same canonical format for all
items:
Which of the following best describes your position/
the writerOs position on p?
P should
happen
3

2

It does not matter
whether p
happens or not
1
0
1

P should not
happen
2

3

A second task, called the argument listing task, asked
participants to list up to four arguments that supported
their position (or the writerOs position, as appropriate),

244

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

and four arguments that contradicted that position. Participants were asked identify the most convincing argument by placing a check mark next to it. The goal of
the argument listing task was to examine how participants evaluated the persuasive impact of persuasions
and dissuasions.
The third task was a conditional arguments task
(see Appendix B for a complete example). For this
task, participants were presented with four inferences
corresponding to the Modus Ponens (MP), Modus
Tollens (MT), Affirming the Consequent (AC), and
Denying the Antecedent (DA) forms. For the MP
and DA forms, participants were told to suppose
that p either happened or did not happen, respectively. They were then asked to indicate whether it
followed that q happened, did not happen, or may
or may not have happened. For the AC and MT
questions, participants were told to suppose that q
either happened or did not happen, respectively,
and were then asked to indicate whether it followed
that p happened, did not happen, or may or may
not have happened.
Participants reasoning from a personal perspective
were told to make the inferences based on the conclusions that they believed followed from the italicised
statement; participants reasoning from the writerOs
perspective were told to answer the questions based
on the conclusions that followed from the writerOs
assertion. In neither case were participants told to endorse only necessary or valid inferences (see Appendix
B).
Presentation of tasks
One-half of the participants received the conditional arguments task first; the remainder received
the conditional arguments task last. This task was presented on a single, separate page. The scenario was
presented at the top of the page; the conditional sentence was italicised, and was followed by the four
inferences. The sufficiency, necessity, want-q, avoid-q,
and concern questions were presented, in that order,
on a single page; again, the scenario was presented
at the top of the page. The position question and
the argument listing task were presented on a subsequent page, again in that order, with the scenario at
the top of the page.
Design
Perspective was a between-subjects variable, with
half the participants reasoning from the writerOs perspective, and half reasoning from their own perspective. Valence was a within subjects variable, such that
each participant reasoned about a persuasion, a dissuasion, and a neutral statement. This produced a 2 * 3
mixed design.

Results Part 1: Persuasions and dissuasions as implicit
arguments
Invited inferences and assumptions
Mean rating for the five Likert-scales (position, wantq, avoid-q, necessity, and sufficiency), are presented in
Table 1. The data were analysed using the appropriate
ANOVA model; where the assumption of sphericity
was violated for the ANOVA, the df were adjusted using
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction, such that the reported df may be less than expected. Some of the data
for three participants in the writerOs condition were not
available because of a technical error in composing their
booklets. a for all analyses was set at .05.
The first two sections below report analyses computed to test the hypothesis that persuasions and dissuasions are asserted as part of an implicit argument whose
goal is to support a conclusion about the merits of p.
Our predictions applied only to interpretations made
from the writerOs perspective (i.e., they were hypothesised to be part of the writerOs intended meaning, which
the reasoner may or may not agree with). Thus, these
analyses were computed only for participants in the writerOs condition; a comparison of the writerOs and personal perspectives is presented in the remaining sections.
The writerOs position
As shown in Table 1, both the dissuasions and the
persuasions strongly implied that the writer had a position on the issue. Recall that for this question, reasoners
were asked to indicate what they thought the writerOs position was on a scale of 3 (p should happen) to +3 (p
should not happen). These data were analysed using a
single factor (valence) within-subjects ANOVA. The
main effect of valence was significant (F (2, 88) = 91.6,

Table 1
Ratings of sufficiency, necessity, implied inferences (want-q and
avoid-q), and position as a function of valence and perspective
Rating type

Perspective

Valence
Persuasion

Dissuasion Neutral

Position

Personal
Writer

0.46
2.18

1.50
2.18

1.28
0.22

Want-q

Personal
Writer

0.77
2.07

1.06
1.64

0.23
1.00

Avoid-q

Personal
Writer

0.40
0.60

1.27
1.42

1.23
1.07

Sufficiency

Personal
Writer

0.58
2.07

1.19
2.02

0.90
1.62

Necessity

Personal
Writer

0.27
0.82

0.38
0.69

0.15
0.24

Note. Range =

3 to +3.

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

MSE = 2.31, p < .001); follow-up t tests indicated that
all pairwise comparisons were significant (t (44) P 6.14,
p < .001). Thus, dissuasions were clearly interpreted to
indicate that the writerOs position was that p should
not happen; persuasions were interpreted to indicate
that the writerOs position was that p should happen,
and neutral statements were interpreted to imply neither
(this latter value did not differ from 0, t < 1).
The want-q and avoid-q inferences
The second set of analyses were performed to test our
hypothesis that persuasions and dissuasions are used to
invite inferences about the consequences of taking an action, p. To test this hypothesis, we compared ratings for
the want-q and avoid-q scales for persuasions, dissuasions, and neutral statements. We predicted that when
reasoning from the writerOs perspective, reasoners would
be more likely to endorse these inferences for persuasions and dissuasions respectively, relative to neutral
statements.
To test this hypothesis, the want-q and avoid-q ratings were analysed using a 2 (rating) * 3 (valence) within-subjects ANOVA. Overall, the main effect of valence
was non-significant (F (2, 88) = 2.25, MSE = 2.53,
p = .11); the want-q ratings were higher than the
avoid-q
ratings
(F (1, 88) = 7.88,
MSE = 2.50,
p = .007), and the two-way interaction was significant
(F (2, 88) = 6.01, MSE = 2.49, p = .004). Planned comparisons were computed to test our hypotheses and to
decompose the interaction.
In the case of persuasions, we predicted that these
statements would invite inferences of the sort ``if you
want to achieve q, you should do p.'' Thus, we should
observe that reasoners are more likely to endorse the
want-q inference for persuasions than for the other
two types of statements. Paired-difference t tests (onetailed) confirmed that the invited inference (want-q)
was endorsed more often for persuasions than either dissuasions or neutral statements (t (44) = 1.77, p = .042
and t (45) = 3.04, p = .002); it was also endorsed more
often for dissuasions than neutral statements
(t (44) = 1.72, p = .047). A corollary to this hypothesis
is that the ``want-q'' interpretation should be predominant for persuasions; that is, reasoners should be more
likely to endorse the want-q than avoid-q interpretation
for these items. Consistent with this hypothesis, participants rated the want-q interpretation higher than the
avoid-q interpretation (t (46) = 4.88, p < .001). The data
from the persuasion condition was entirely consistent
with our hypothesis; these statements clearly invited an
inference of the form ``if one wants q, one should do p.''
In the case of dissuasions, we predicted that these
statements would invite an inference of the sort ``if
you want to avoid q, you should not do p.'' Paired-difference t tests confirmed that the avoid-q ratings were
higher for dissuasions than persuasions (t (44) = 2.28,

245

p = .014), but not neutral statements (t (44) = 1.18,
p > .10); we had adequate (.8) power to detect a difference of .91 between these latter conditions. Also, the
want-q ratings were unexpectedly high for the dissuasion
statements, such that reasoners were equally likely to endorse the want-q and avoid-q interpretations (t (44) < 1)
for these statements.
We speculate that the want-q interpretation of dissuasions may be counterfactual. That is, a dissuasion
may invite an inference of the form, ``if it were the case
that one (unwisely) chose to do p, q would be the result.''
Such an interpretation arises in a straightforward manner from the Modus Ponens inference (p, therefore q).
The counterfactual inference contrasts the positive aspect of avoiding p (i.e., that q is avoided) with the negative aspect of doing p (i.e., q results). Such a device is
often use in related situations, such as threats (e.g., if
you want to be grounded for the rest of the week, go
ahead and do that again).
Invited inferences
In sum, when reading a conditional persuasion, reasoners understood that the author intended them to
draw inferences of the form ``if you want q to happen,
you should do p'' and ``p should happen''; moreover,
they were more likely to perceive that this was the
authorOs intended message for persuasions than either
dissuasions or neutral statements. In contrast, when
reading a conditional dissuasion, reasoners understood
that the author intended them to draw inferences of
the form ``if you want to avoid q happening, you should
not do p'' and ``p should not happen''; moreover, they
were more likely to perceive that this was the authorOs intended message for dissuasions than persuasions.
Want-q, avoid-q, and position: The effects of perspective
The want-q, avoid-q, and position variables were
analysed using 2 (perspective) * 3 (valence) mixed ANOVAOs to determine whether interpretations differed for
those reasoning from the writerOs or the personal perspective. For the position variable, we observed a main
effect of perspective (F (1, 89) = 43.71, MSE = 1.80,
p < .001), suggesting that reasoners took a different position on the issue in the two perspective conditions.
This variable interacted with valence (F (2, 178) =
16.77, MSE = 3.16, p < .001), so we computed t tests
to elucidate the pattern of differences across the three
statement types. Differences were observed between the
writerOs and the personal perspective for all three statement types (t (90) P 1.94, p 6 .027). For persuasions
and dissuasions, reasoners made more extreme endorsements when reasoning from the writerOs position than
their own; that is, they judged the writer to have a stronger position on the issue than they did. For neutral statements, reasoners endorsed a position that was more
negative (i.e., they judged that p should not happen)

246

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

when reasoning from a personal perspective than the
writerOs perspective.
These data have two clear implications. First, they
supported our hypothesis that persuasions and dissuasions would be interpreted from two different perspectives. There should also be implications for the invited
inferences that reasoners drew in the personal perspective condition; that is, invited inferences that were endorsed should reflect the position that people adopted
on an issue.
We performed follow-up analyses to confirm that
reasoners tended to interpret both the dissuasions and
neutral statements somewhat negatively, that is, to imply that p should not happen (both ratings differed from
0; t (46) P 3.95, p < .001). Persuasions were interpreted
neutrally; this rating did not differ from 0
(t (46) = 1.573, p > .10). From the personal perspective,
therefore, neutral statements and dissuasions were interpreted as dissuasions, whereas the persuasions were
interpreted to be neutral statements. On this basis, we
would predict that reasoners in the personal perspective
position should endorse the avoid-q inference for dissuasions and neutral statements, and neither inference for
the persuasions.
To test these predictions, t tests for the personal perspective condition were computed. Reasoners were more
likely to endorse the avoid-q inference for neutral and
dissuasion than persuasion statements (t (47) P 2.57,
p 6 .013); the former two did not differ. In contrast, reasoners were no more likely to endorse the want-q inference for persuasion than either neutral or dissuasion
statements (t (47) 6 1.63, p P .11). As was the case for
the writerOs perspective, the want-q ratings for dissuasions were unexpectedly high, and differed from the neutral statements (t (47) = 2.28, p = .028).
In sum, reasoners clearly differentiated between the
writerOs and their own perspective. From the writerOs perspective, persuasion, dissuasion, and neutral statements
were perceived as intended: Persuasion and dissuasion
statements were perceived to convey a position that p
should or should not happen, respectively, and to invite
the appropriate inferences about the desirability of q.
From the personal perspective, reasonerOs took a different position on the issues; nonetheless, their endorsement of the invited inferences followed their position
closely. That is, statements that elicited the position that
p should not happen, also invited the inference that ``if
one wants to avoid q, one should avoid p.''
Necessity and sufficiency
The sufficiency and necessity variables were included
because these are variables known to have a reliable
influence on reasoning judgments. Thus, we thought it
important to be able to rule these variables out as a potential source of differences among our persuasions, dissuasions, and neutral statements. Neither the sufficiency

nor the necessity rating differed as a function of valence
(F (2, 182) 6 1.84, MSE = 2.04 and 1.99, respectively,
p > .05), and valence did not interact with perspective
(F (2, 182) 6 1.91, p > .05). Thus, the three types of statements were perceived to be roughly comparable with respect to sufficiency and necessity. These findings mean
that interpreting differences among dissuasions, persuasions, and neutral statements should be relatively
unproblematic, in that any differences that are observed
to occur between them cannot be attributed to differences in perceived necessity and sufficiency.
On the other hand, those reasoning from the writerOs
perspective perceived all of the statements to be more
sufficient (F (1, 91) = 17.22, MSE = 4.17, p < .001) than
those reasoning from a personal perspective; the effect
of necessity was non-significant (F (1, 91) = 1.27,
MSE = 5.67, p > .05). This is further evidence for our
hypothesis that these statements are comprehended on
two different levels: on one level, the reasoner understands what the writer meant to imply (i.e., that p is sufficient to bring about q). On another level, reasoners
interpret the statement in light of their own beliefs and
viewpoints, and when asked to do so, expressed doubt
about the sufficiency of the conditional relationship.
Summary
Taken together, these data provide broad support for
our hypotheses regarding the elocutionary use of persuasions and dissuasions. At a most fundamental level, they
are viewed as part of an argument intended to persuade
the reader to a particular point of view. In addition, the
specific pattern of responses on the want-q, avoid-q, and
position questions conformed to our predictions that
persuasions and dissuasions are offered as part of a complex chain of argument for which some of the links are
explicit, and others are implicitly invited by the conditional assertion. The conditional statement asserts a
relationship between two propositions, p and q; for persuasions, q is offered as a positive outcome, and for dissuasions, q is offered as a negative outcome. As
confirmed by the want-q and avoid-q ratings, persuasions invite an inference of the form that ``if one wants
the positive outcome, q, to happen, one should take action p''; in the case of dissuasions, the inference has the
form that ``if one wants to avoid the negative outcome,
q, one should not take action p. Moreover, because one
either wants to achieve or avoid q, one should undertake
or avoid p.''
Finally, reasoners clearly differentiated between the
intentions of the writer and their own beliefs. We observed several differences in responses made by those
reasoning from a personal perspective versus those
asked to reason from the writerOs perspective. When reasoning from a personal perspective, reasoners were more
likely to doubt the sufficiency of the conditional relation,
and clearly expressed a different position on the issue

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

than the one attributed to the writer. Their endorsement
of the invited inferences mirrored these differences.
These findings clearly support our hypothesis that conditional arguments are understood on two distinct levels.
Argument listing task
Recall that on this task, reasoners were asked to generate up to four arguments that supported and four that
contradicted their position/the writerOs position. These
arguments were analysed to provide corroborating evidence regarding the role of persuasions and dissuasions
in argument. Specifically, in keeping with the hypothesis
that persuasions and dissuasions are asserted as part of
an argument for the merits or drawbacks of p, we expected that reasoners should attempt to bolster or refute
these statements on those grounds.
Scoring
To this end, the arguments were classified into eight
categories by two independent raters, neither of whom
were aware of the purpose of the study. After the coding
was complete, discrepancies between the two coders
were identified and resolved by discussion (the initial
rate of agreement between the two coders was 73%). A
summary of the categorisation scheme is presented in
Table 2. The first two categories reflect arguments about
the merits of p, the next about the merits of q, the next

247

address the truth of the statements, and the final categories reflect arguments that could not be easily categorised into one of the other six. The mean number of
arguments belonging to each category per statement
(maximum = 4) is summarised in Table 3. The data were
analysed using the appropriate non-parametric model
(unless otherwise indicated the Mann-Whitney U test
for paired or independent samples) with a set at .05.
Arguing the harms and benefits of p
Consistent with our hypothesis that persuasions and
dissuasions are asserted as part of an argument regarding the benefits or detriments of undertaking action p,
just over half (55%) of the arguments generated addressed the potential harms and benefits associated with
taking action p (e.g., railway transport is quicker than
roads, it is environmentally friendly to use trains, railway employees may be forced out of jobs, closing the
line means the end of a tradition, etc.). A more detailed
depiction of the use of this argument type as a function
of valence is presented in Fig. 1. Note that these data
pertain only to the writerOs position, because, as reported
above, reasoners in the personal perspective condition
frequently indicated that their position on the issue differed from the nominal classification of the statements
as persuasions or dissuasions.
Consistent with our hypothesis that persuasions
argue the merits of undertaking action p, reasoners

Table 2
Descriptions of the categories used to classify arguments and examples from the ``railway'' scenario
Category
p is a good thing

p is harmful

q is a good thing
q is harmful
pfiq
p fi not-q
Irrelevant
Misc.

Description
The argument described the benefits of p, why the
absence of p would be detrimental, or provided
reasons justifying why p should be undertaken
The argument described potential harms
associated with p, or why the absence of p would
be beneficial
The argument described why q would be beneficial
The argument described why q would be
detrimental
The argument affirmed the link between p and q,
or offered q as a reason
The argument denied the link between p and q, or
argued that q could happen for another reason
The argument described why p or q is irrelevant
A number of miscellaneous arguments types were
used relatively infrequently: The reasoner affirmed
or doubted the trustworthiness of the speaker,
made a statement that was not an argument either
for or against the identified position, or expressed
an incomplete thought

Example
The railway line wastes fuel and probably causes more
pollution than the trucks would.
The highways are already congested with cars and do not
need extra vehicles.
A fleet of trucks might be more reliable than a small
railway line.
More will have to be spent on the upkeep of the roads.
To ensure that the roads are not damaged by trucks.
The highways will eventually be damaged by heavy trucks
carrying grain south anyway.
There is an alternative form of transport.
Stated in newspaper--could feasibly be correct; Canada is
sparsely populated; Tradition? Does it still exist?

Note. For the ``railway'' scenario, the conditional statement read: ``if the railway line is closed, then the highways will be damaged by
heavy trucks moving grain north and south (negative)/taxpayers will save millions of dollars (positive)/the grain will be shipped to
market using trucks (neutral).

248

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

Table 3
Mean number of ``for'' and ``against'' arguments generated in
each category per statement as a function of perspective
Type of argument

p is good
For
Against
p is harmful
For
Against
q is good
For
Against
q is harmful
For
Against
pfiq
For
Against
p fi not q
For
Against
Irrelevant
For
Against
Miscellaneous
For
Against
Total
For
Against
Total

Perspective
Personal

WriterOs

% of total

.56 (.60)
.61 (.56)*

.53 (.59)
.21 (.36)

14
11

1.12 (.68)*
.34 (.48)

.41 (.43)
.43 (.47)

20
10

.03 (.11)
.08 (.17)*

.02 (.11)
.01 (.08)

1
1

.07 (.16)
.01 (.06)

.04 (.17)
.05 (.17)

1
1

.19 (.25)
.13 (.20)

.43 (.37)*
.01 (.05)

8
2

.15 (.31)*
.14 (.24)

.02 (.08)
.35 (.46)*

2
6

.08 (.20)
.12 (.20)

.11 (.21)
.10 (.29)

3
3

.36 (.49)
.30 (.42)

.34 (.55)
.28 (.43)

9
8

2.56 (.84)
1.73 (.94)
4.29 (1.66)

1.91 (.96)
1.43 (.95)
3.34 (1.76)

59
41

Note. Maximum number of ``for'' or ``against'' arguments = 4.
Standard deviations are in parentheses.

attempted to reinforce the idea that ``p is good'' when
supporting a persuasion, and argued that ``p is bad''
when refuting it. That is, when arguing for a persuasion,
reasoners were more likely to argue that ``p is good''
than they were to argue that ``p is harmful'' (z = 4.78);
in contrast, when arguing against a persuasion, they
were more likely to argue that ``p is harmful'' than ``p
is good'' (z = 4.69). Consistent with our hypothesis that
dissuasions argue the merits of avoiding action p, reasoners reinforced the idea that p is bad when arguing
for a dissuasion, but took the opposite position when
arguing against a dissuasion. Thus, when arguing for a
dissuasion, reasoners were more likely to provide reasons why p is harmful than good (z = 4.41); when arguing against a dissuasion, reasoners were more likely to
provide more reasons why p is good than harmful
(z = 2.41). When arguing about neutral statements, the
distribution of arguments was much more evenly divided
(Friedman test, v2 (3) = 7.44, p = .06; largest pairwise
z = 1.74, p = .08).

Fig. 1. Mean number of arguments classified asserting the
harms and benefits of taking action p as a function of valence.

Arguing the harms and benefits of q
Somewhat surprisingly, reasoners did not focus on
the desirability of q, which we hypothesised can be
viewed as either an incentive or a disincentive for undertaking action p. Overall, less than 5% of the total arguments addressed the desirability of q. One reason for this
may have been that our ``position'' question focussed
peopleOs attention on p, in that we asked reasoners to
identify the writerOs position on whether p should happen. Alternatively, reasoners may have assumed that
the desirability or undesirability of q could be taken
for granted, and was thus not a debatable issue. For
example, saving millions of dollars (the incentive offered
in the ``railway'' scenario) is obviously good, and one
would be hard pressed to think of a scenario in which
this was not desirable. Thus, it may be more profitable

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

to centre oneOs arguments around whether or not action
p will actually result in the offered incentive or disincentive, or around whether or not p is really a good thing or
not.
Arguing the truth of the conditional
Overall, about 20% of the arguments addressed the
truth of the conditional statement either by affirming
the link between p and q or by denying that link (see Table 3). These arguments are reminiscent of the ``assertion-based'' reasoning observed by Shaw (1996), and
support her conclusion that many arguments involve belief-based attempts to support or rebut the premises.
When reasoners affirmed the truth of the conditional,
they often restated or paraphrased the original statement (e.g., closing the line may make the highway damaged from large trucks). Strategies for refuting the
conditional were more varied, and included semi-factual
arguments (e.g., even if the rail line is closed, the highways might not be damaged; the highways might be
damaged, even if the rail line is kept open), mitigating
factors for why p might not lead to q (e.g., the population is sparse, so there are few trucks that might damage
the highways), as well as flat denials (e.g., the highways
will not be damaged). As is apparent in Table 3, reasoners were more likely to support the truth of the conditional (i.e., by reinforcing the link between p and q)
when arguing for a position than against it (z = 4.91);
conversely, reasoners were more likely to rebut the truth
of the conditional (i.e., by arguing that p and q were not
necessarily linked) when arguing against a position than
for it (z = 3.11).
The effects of perspective
In total, reasoners generated more arguments when
reasoning about their own than about the writerOs position. When reasoning about their own position, reasoners generated an average of 4.3 arguments per scenario,
compared to 3.3 arguments per scenario when reasoning
about the writerOs position (z = 2.96). These findings
replicate those of others (Baron, 1995; Perkins, 1989)
who have noted a ``myside'' bias, in that reasoners tend
to be better at generating arguments for their own position than against it. In addition, more arguments were
generated ``for'' the stated position (59%) than
``against'' the stated position (41%; z = 6.81).
Follow-up pairwise tests were conducted; significant
differences between the writerOs and personal perspective
condition are denoted by asterisks in Table 3 (all
zOs P 2.79, p 6 .005, two tailed). ReasonerOs were more
likely to make arguments based on the harms and benefits of p or q when arguing from their own than from the
writerOs position. In contrast, with only one exception,
they were more likely to generate arguments about the
truth of the conditional when reasoning from the writerOs than from a personal perspective. Perhaps the latter

249

is a relatively easy strategy to use, one that does not require a great deal of cognitive effort and so is employed
under circumstances where there is not much at stake. In
contrast, when analysing their own position, reasoners
were more likely to make a substantive case that addressed the underlying structure of the argument.
Persuasions and dissuasions as argument: Discussion
The pragmatic richness of these scenarios is striking:
The mere attachment of a desirable or undesirable consequent, q, constitutes an argument for or against the action described in the antecedent, p. In contrast, neutral
consequents are much less likely to be interpreted as
implying an argument about p. Also striking is the fact
that much of the argument is implicit, and that reasoners
piece together a sophisticated argument from such meagre clues. They also differentiate between the inferences
that they believe the writer wants them to draw and
the inferences that they, themselves, are prepared to
endorse.
Related types of conditional statements
Earlier, we argued that persuasions and dissuasions
share many properties with inducement, advice, and
consequential conditionals. Given the similarities
among these conditionals, it seems reasonable to predict
that they will be pragmatically similar. In all cases, negatively valenced consequents are used to decrease the
desirability of p, and positively valenced ones are used
to increase the desirability of p. Thus, all of these conditionals appear to invite an inference about the desirability of the antecedent, although to date, there is
only data regarding consequential conditionals (Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004). It also seems probable that these
inferences about the desirability of p should be reached
via a chain of inference similar to the one that characterises persuasions and dissuasions. As an example, take
an advice conditional (e.g., if you work overtime, you
will impress the boss). This conditional invites an inference about the desirability of p (i.e, I should work overtime), and this appears to be reached via a chain of
assumptions and invited inferences (e.g., impressing
the boss is desirable; the boss will be impressed if I work
overtime; thus, if I want to impress the boss, I should
work overtime).
Perspective effects
It is clear that arguments phrased as persuasions and
dissuasions are understood on two levels, and that the
inferences that reasoners draw about the scenarios vary
according to whether they are reasoning from their own
or the writerOs perspective. This observation is reminiscent of the perspective effects described by Manktelow
and Over (1991, see also Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992). Manktelow and Over (1991) observed that conditional

250

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

inducements are understood differently from the perspective of the speaker and the listener, and that these
differences in perspective constrain the number and
types of inferences that reasoners are willing to endorse.
For example, suppose a mother says to her child, ``If you
tidy your room, you may watch TV.'' From the childOs
point of view, the important contingency is between
tidying the room and watching TV, such that if room
is tidied, TV watching should be permitted; in contrast,
if TV watching is denied after the room is tidied, the
child would likely feel deceived. From the parentOs point
of view, however, the important contingency is the inverse: if TV is being watched, then the room must have
been tidied; from this perspective, a violation would be
perceived should the TV occur without the room having
been tidied.
Our findings are similar, save that they suggest that
perspective is not a matter of taking either one or the
other view, but instead, understanding the situation
simultaneously from both views. In case of a conditional
inducement, both parties need to understand both perspectives in order for the inducement to be effective:
The parent holds out television-watching as means to
get the room tidied, and so must understand that this
incentive is diminished if TV watching is arbitrarily given or withheld regardless of the state of the room. Similarly, the child must understand that the only way that
TV-watching can occur is for the room to be tidy; if not,
again, the statement loses force.
Persuasions and dissuasions have a similar duality.
Whereas readers understand the writerOs intentions,
and can draw the implicit inferences that the writer intended, they clearly differentiate between the writerOs
and their own point of view. It is less certain that the
writer is sensitive to this gap, or that the writer tailors
her communication towards narrowing the difference
in perspectives. On the one hand, the writer presumably
expects the reader to draw the invited inferences and to
arrive at the intended conclusion. On the other hand, the
writer may or may not appreciate the discrepancy between her intended communication and its persuasive effect. Indeed, the available evidence suggests that
reasoners are often not very sophisticated in their assessment of arguments for anotherOs point of view, and fail
to appreciate what would be a compelling argument for
an alternative view (Baron, 1995; Kuhn, 1989; Perkins,
1989), or downgrade the soundness or validity of arguments that run contrary to their beliefs (e.g., Newstead,
Pollard, Evans, & Allen, 1992; Stanovich & West, 1997;
Thompson, Striemer, Riekoff, Gunter, & Campbell,
2003).
Pragmatic implicatures
When a writer asserts a persuasion or a dissuasion,
she expects the reader to draw, and the reader succeeds
in drawing, a fairly sophisticated implicit argument from

relatively meagre clues. For example, a writer who asserts that ``if the Kyoto accord is ratified, there will be
a downturn in the economy'' expects the reader to infer
that: (a) a downturn in the economy is undesirable and
should be avoided; (b) an undesirable downturn will
occur if the accord is ratified; (c) if the economy is to
remain stable, the accord must not be ratified, and (d)
consequently, the accord must not be ratified.
What triggers readers to begin this chain of inference? The contextual cues are relatively sparse; indeed,
it appears that the mere attachment of a desirable or
undesirable consequent suffices to cue this implicit chain
of events. This suggests that both communicants are
relying on pragmatic implicatures to guide their interpretation. There are at least two such heuristics that
may guide this interpretation: relevance (Sperber et al.,
1995) and informativeness (Politzer, 1986).
According to Sperber et al. (1995), an utterance is
relevant if the combination of the utterance and the
context, which includes an implicit context of beliefs
and background knowledge, produce cognitive effects,
such as a new belief, that would have been unavailable
from either the utterance or the context alone. Utterances normally convey a presumption of relevance;
thus, the fact that a writer has made an assertion is sufficient for the reader to make the cognitive effort necessary to determine how it is relevant. According to
Sperber et al., a conditional statement achieves relevance in one of three ways: (a) by licensing the MP
inference, (b) by affirming the existence of instances
of p and q, or (c) by contradicting the assertion of p
and not-q.
Thus, a persuasion or dissuasion achieves relevance
by supporting a belief (namely that p should or should
not happen) that is not available from either the conditional statement or the implicit context (i.e., q is desirable or undesirable). In the case of persuasions, this
belief is obtainable via the MP inference: the conditional
asserts that ``if p, then q,'' and the context indicates that
q is desirable. From the MP inference, the desirable outcome is obtainable if p is done, and from that it follows
that p should happen. In the case of dissuasions, relevance may be achieved by the third option, namely that
a statement of the form ``if p, then q'' contradicts the
assertion of ``p and not-q.'' In other words, it is not possible for both p to happen and the undesirable action q
to be avoided, thus, p should be avoided. The relevant
line of inference is triggered by the valence of q: For persuasions, q is desirable, and cognitive effort is devoted to
finding a way to bring it about. For dissuasions, q is
undesirable; thus, cognitive effort is devoted to finding
a means to avoid this outcome.
Why not just say ``should p'' or ``should not p''?
Asserting the conditional is a roundabout way of making the point that p should or should not happen, and
runs the risk that the reader misses it. Indeed, relevance

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

theory suggests that the greater the effort required to
achieve a cognitive effect, the lesser the relevance (Sperber et al., 1995), such that one might diminish the relevance of a statement by obscuring the desired point.
However, there is additional information available from
the implicit chain that is not available from the assertion
of either ``should or should not p'' that justifies the extra
processing effort, namely the reason for why p should or
should not be done. This additional information justifies
the additional cognitive effort entailed by the conditional
assertion relative to the propositional one.
A similar analysis is available from Politzer (1986).
The principle of informativeness suggests that speakers
have a conversational goal to make their contributions
as informative as required, but no more informative than
required. In the case of a conditional, if the speaker believes that ``If p, then q'' is true, she should not limit
her statement to not-p in order to convey the conditional.
That is, because ``if p, then q'' does not follow from the
assertion of not-p, if the writer believes that ``if p, then
q'' is the case, then the latter is more informative than
the former, even when both are true. Thus, if the speaker
believes that ``if the Kyoto accord is ratified, then there
will be a downturn in the economy,'' then she should
make this assertion rather than simply asserting not-p
(that the Kyoto accord should not be ratified), because
the former conveys more information than the latter.
Theory of mind
A writer who asserts a persuasion or dissuasion is
clearly acting on a set of beliefs about the mental life
of the reader. Thus, the assertion of a persuasion or dissuasion may tell us something about the writerOs theory
of the mind of the reader. For example, the writer must
assume that the reader has both the requisite ability and
necessary motivation to recover a sophisticated chain of
inferences. Our data shows that this assumption seems
justified, at least in the population that we have studied
here: Our participants clearly recovered the writerOs intended meaning and assumptions.
Other elements of this theory, however, may be less
well-grounded. For example, one might ask why the writer would choose to leave the recovery of the implicit
chain of inference to chance, rather than spell out all
of the implicit links. As we argued above, it is possible
that spelling out all of the links may violate a conversational principal (e.g., minimal informativeness, Politzer,
1986). However, the assertion of a persuasion or dissuasion has a higher goal than good conversational strategy, namely to convince the reader of a certain point
of view. Presumably, therefore, the writer advances an
argument with an implicit conclusion supported by an
implicit chain of inferences because she believes this to
be a convincing strategy.
A writer might believe that implicit arguments are
more convincing than explicit ones for a number of rea-

251

sons. For example, a writer may believe that specifying
the links in the argument would invite scrutiny and
thereby court rejection, or that having the reader work
out the inferences for themselves is more convincing
than spelling them all out (OOKeefe, 1998). Similarly,
making a conclusion explicit may make the writer seem
insulting or aggressive (OOKeefe, 1997). Alternatively,
perhaps the process of working the line of argument
out for oneself is believed to increase the degree of confidence one has in the soundness of the chain.
However, although the writer may believe that implicit
arguments are more credible, the evidence suggests otherwise. Explicating both the links in the argument and the
conclusion has a positive impact on persuasiveness
(OOKeefe, 1997, 1998), although the overall gain in credibility may be relatively small. Just as importantly, however, it seems that making an argument explicit does not
damage the credibility of the argument. Thus, there is little
to lose, and possibly something to gain, by being explicit.
Argument and counter-argument
Above, we speculated that a writer may choose to assert ``if p, then q'' rather than either ``should p or not-p''
because the former is either more relevant or more informative than the latter. However, asserting the conditional, rather than the simple proposition, comes with
a danger: it provides additional opportunity to defeat
the writerOs argument. For example, if one could show
that ratifying the Kyoto accord will not necessarily produce a downturn in the economy, or alternatively, that
ratification may produce benefits that potentially outweigh the costs associated with slow economic growth,
then the force of the argument is significantly weakened.
Indeed, these are the strategies that our participants
adopted when attempting to rebut the writerOs argument.
Oddly, our participants seldom chose to address the
contextual belief that q is either desirable or undesirable.
For example, the argument against ratifying the Kyoto
accord is weakened if one were able to show that a
slower economy is not, in fact, an undesirable state of affairs. Instead, our participants opted to address the links
in the implicit chain of inference, or to deny the link between p and q by arguing that there are other factors in
place that might prevent a downturn in the economy, or
that the economy is slowing down regardless of the Kyoto accord. We speculate that this may have been because
the examples that we chose were such that the outcome
described in q was unambiguously good or bad, so that
attempting to construct a counter-argument based on
the desirability or undesirability of q was not going to
be an effective strategy. Perhaps if the outcomes described by q were more ambiguous, they would elicit
rebuttals that addressed the desirability or undesirability
of q; similarly, providing reasoners with counter-arguments to the perceived desirability or undesirability of
q should lessen the persuasiveness of the argument.

252

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

Conclusions
In asserting a persuasion or a dissuasion, it appears
that the writer achieves a certain economy of style,
and communicates a fairly complex argument in a succinct manner. In so doing, the writer presumes both
the competence and motivation of the reader to put
the implicit links of the chain together. Our data indicate
that this presumption is justified, and that readers succeed in piecing together the implicit argument. It is less
clear, however, whether this brevity is attained by sacrificing one of the primary goals of the communication,
namely to convince the reader of a particular point of
view. Indeed, our data show a clear gap between the
point of view attributed to the writer and the one endorsed by the reasoner, suggesting that the persuasive
impact of these statements may be limited.

Results Part II: The conditional arguments task
This task was included for two reasons. First, it allowed us to test our hypothesis that reasoning from
the writerOs perspective would invoke a decontextualised,
analytic reasoning style. Thus, we should observe more
``logically correct'' inferences in the writerOs than the personal perspective condition. The second goal was to
demonstrate the limits of traditional reasoning tasks.
Thus, whereas we observed large and robust differences
between persuasions, dissuasions, and neutral statements in terms of the inferences they invited, based on
the fact that these statements were similar with respect
to perceived necessity and sufficiency, we expected there
to be few differences among the statements on this task
(see for e.g., Thompson, 1994, 1995).
Scoring
For this task, reasoners were asked to indicate
whether each of four inferences followed from the conditional statement. For the purpose of the analysis, the MP
inference (p ) ?) was scored as accepted when reasoners
indicated that q followed; the DA inference (not-p ) ?)
was scored as accepted when reasoners indicated that
not-q followed. Similarly, the AC (q ) ?) and MT
(not-q ) ?) inferences were scored as accepted when reasoners indicated that p and not-p followed, respectively.
Omnibus analysis
The proportion of each inference accepted as a function of valence and perspective is reported in Fig. 2.
These data were analysed using a 4 (inference type) by
3 (valence) by 2 (perspective) mixed ANOVA with inference type and valence as within-subjects variables, and
perspective as a between-subjects variable. As before,
when the sphericity assumption was not met, degrees

Fig. 2. Proportion of inferences (mp, mt, da, and ac) accepted
as a function of valence and perspective.

of freedom were adjusted using the Greenhouse-Geisser
correction.
The ANOVA revealed a significant effect of inference
(F (3, 241) = 13.13, MSE = .20, p < .001), replicating the
oft-reported differences in rates of acceptance among the
four inferences. There was also a significant effect of perspective (F (1, 91) = 24.15, MSE = .90, p < .001), indicating that reasoners accepted more inferences when
reasoning from the writerOs than from the personal perspective. Finally, these two variables interacted
(F (3, 273) = 3.81, MSE = .20, p = .011). Several fol-

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

low-up analyses were computed to decompose the interaction between perspective and valence.
The effects of perspective
First, we computed t tests for each inference, comparing rates of acceptance in the writerOs and the personal perspective conditions, and observed that
reasoners accepted more inferences of all types when
reasoning from the writerOs than a personal perspective
(t (92) P 2.40, p 6 .02). We interpreted this finding to
mean that when asked to reason from the writerOs perspective, participants were more willing to accept the
truth of the premises they were provided, and to draw
inferences based on that information. In contrast, when
asked to reason from a personal perspective, participants appeared to treat the information provided as
uncertain, and were more reluctant to endorse inferences
based on that information. These findings are consistent
with those reported earlier, namely that participants appeared to doubt the sufficiency of the conditional relationship when asked to reason from a personal
perspective. They are also consistent with other reported
findings indicating that reasoners are unwilling to draw
inferences from premises whose veracity they doubt
(e.g., Liu, Lo, & Wu, 1996; Stevenson & Over, 1995;
Thompson, 1996).
Acceptance rates for the four inferences
Second, we examined differences among the four
inferences within each perspective condition using single-factor ANOVAOs, and observed a very clear pattern.
When reasoning from their personal perspective, reasoners accepted the four inferences at the same rate
(F (3, 141) = 2.06, MSE = .06, p > .10); however, when
reasoning from the writerOs perspective, reasoners clearly
differentiated among the four inferences, accepting them
at different rates (F (2, 105) = 13.67, MSE = .09,
p > 001). From the writerOs perspective, reasoners accepted the two valid inferences (MP and MT) more often than the two invalid inferences (AC and DA,
t (44) P 2.01, p 6 .051), and the MP inference more often than the MT inference (t (44) = 4.00, p < .001). In
other words, when reasoning from the writerOs perspective, reasoners were more likely to treat the task as a logical enterprise and to make an effort to discriminate
between logically necessary and non-necessary inferences. In contrast, when reasoning from a personal perspective, reasoners may have adopted an alternative
strategy (i.e., a belief-based approach), which did not
discriminate between valid and invalid inferences. Consistent with this hypothesis, other researchers have reported that instructions or tasks that emphasise
pragmatic reasoning narrow the gap between the acceptance of valid and invalid inferences (George, 1997;
Newstead, Ellis, Evans, & Dennis, 1997; Stevenson &
Over, 2001), whereas instructions to draw necessary or

253

valid conclusions often result in reasoners discriminating
between valid and invalid inferences, even for pragmatically rich materials (Thompson, 1994, 2000).
The effects of valence
The final finding worthy of note is that, in contrast to
the results reported with the want-q, avoid-q, and position tasks, none of the effects or interactions involving
the valence variable were significant (p > .1). Although
this may be an issue of statistical power, as the data in
Fig. 1 shows, the means for the three types of statements
are indeed, very similar; they ranged from .57 for the
neutral condition to .63 for the negative valence condition. This finding reinforces the need to move beyond
the deductive paradigm and its variants (Evans, 2002;
Evans & Thompson, 2004) to study reasoning performance, given that none of the striking differences that
were observed in the preceding section emerged on this
more traditional task.
Discussion: Formal versus informal reasoning
Our findings speak to the ongoing debate concerning
the applicability of formal models of reasoning to everyday inference. Several writers have argued that formal
models of deduction do little to explain ordinary deductive competence (see Evans, 2002; Evans & Thompson,
2004, for review). Previous evidence overwhelmingly
indicates that reasoners do not base their judgments
on formal, deductive criteria. Instead, they reason on
the basis of what they know and believe (e.g., Cheng
& Holyoak, 1985; Newstead et al., 1992; Thompson,
1995, 2000), and endorse inferences that are consistent
with, rather than necessitated by, the premises (Evans,
Handley, Harper, & Johnson-Laird, 1999; Newstead,
Thompson, & Handley, 2002; Torrens, Thompson, &
Cramer, 1998). It is, moreover, difficult to change this
behaviour and to persuade reasoners to accept the task
as one of strict deductive reasoning. Even elaborate
instructions defining the concept of logical necessity,
and asking reasoners to ignore their beliefs can have little effect (Evans et al., 1999; Evans, Newstead, Allen, &
Pollard, 1994; Newstead et al., 1992).
Our findings, in contrast, suggest that it may be premature to discard the notion that reasoners do not reason deductively. Simple instructions to reason about the
scenario from the writerOs point of view had a large impact on reasoning performance, unlike instructions
exhorting logical necessity. Specifically, when asked to
indicate what they thought the writer meant to imply,
reasoners endorsed a ``logical'' pattern of inferences,
whereby the valid MP and MT inferences were accepted
more often than the indeterminant DA and AC inferences. Importantly, reasoners made this discrimination
in the absence of any type of instruction to reason logically or to endorse only necessary inferences.

254

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

We propose that asking reasoners to adopt the perspective of the writer requires them to assume for the
sake of argument the truth of the premises that they
are provided. This, in turn, engages reasoners in System
2 reasoning (e.g., Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 2002;
Stanovich, 1999). Specifically, asking reasoners to assume an argument that they would normally consider
to be false may require them to engage hypothetical, abstract forms of thought, and to promote a logical analysis of the premises. In contrast, reasoning in the
personal perspective condition may engage the pragmatic, contextually driven processes that characterise
System 1 reasoning, and promote a reliance on heuristic,
belief-based processes.
Of equal interest is the fact that the writer who asserts a conditional persuasion or dissuasion appears to
rely on the readerOs logical competence and ability to
make logical deductions. As argued above, conditional
persuasions and dissuasions invite a complex chain of
inference that requires readers to make supposedly difficult inferences, such as MT, and chain them together in
a coherent sequence. Thus, the writer assumes the necessary competence on the part of the reader, who in turn
must make similar attributions about the writer.
Having said that, it is also true that formal approaches to measuring reasoning capture very little
about the interpretive processes entailed in everyday
inference. Informal reasoning relies on conversational
pragmatics and implicatures, the application of relevant
background knowledge and beliefs, and assumptions
about the goals and views of others. Paradigms that direct reasoners to make a minimal commitment to the
premises, or to endorse only logically necessary inferences limit our understanding of comprehension-based
reasoning competence, and direct our attention away
from issues of fundamental importance. Indeed, one
could argue that the processes of comprehension, in
which additional information is recruited from memory
and applied to the current context, are the heart of most
sophisticated reasoning skills (Thompson, 1997).

Conclusions
Conditional persuasions and dissuasions are used as
part of a largely implicit argument whose goal is to persuade another person about the merits or drawbacks of
undertaking a course of action (p). This chain of inference is triggered by a very simple device, namely the
attachment of a desirable or undesirable consequent
(q). In contrast, neutral statements were less likely to
be perceived as part of an argument, and did not elicit
the same chain of invited inferences. In other words,
the interpretation of these conditionals takes place in
the context of the goals and position attributed to the
writer of the statement; these processes differ when the

conditional is perceived to form part of a more neutral
communication.
Our findings also speak to the utility of using traditional reasoning tasks, such as the conditional arguments task. On these tasks, reasoners are asked to
deduce what follows necessarily from the conditional;
the processes revealed on such tasks form a small, but
vital link in the complex inferential and comprehension
processes that come into play when the conditionals
form part of an argument. That is, the writer assumes
a sophisticated logical capacity on behalf of the reader,
and this assumption is justified, in that the reader is able
to piece together the links of the argument and to arrive
at the wanted conclusion, using inferences of the sort
measured on traditional tasks.
It is less clear, however, the extent to which other aspects of the writerOs assumptions are justified. The writer
presumably asserts a persuasion or dissuasion with the
goal of convincing the reader to adopt her point of view.
However, both the point of view and much of the argument that supports it are left implicit. Although this implicit form of argumentation may satisfy the etiquette of
good communication (i.e., by adhering to the conversational principles of relevance and informativeness), it
may not be maximally persuasive. That is, explicit arguments may be more persuasive than implicit ones
(OOKeefe, 1997, 1998). Alternatively, arguments that
violate basic pragmatic principles may lose some of their
persuasive edge; thus, it is an open question whether the
persuasive impact is greater for the implicit than the explicit versions of these arguments.
Our findings also reveal the importance of asking
participants to adopt a point of view when reasoning
about conditional statements. Even when reasoning
about neutral items on a traditional task, reasoners endorsed different inferences when reasoning about their
own than the writerOs point of view. In contrast to those
reasoning from the writerOs perspective, those reasoning
from their own point of view endorsed few inferences,
and did not discriminate between valid and invalid inferences. Moreover, differences between the two perspectives emerged on all of our tasks. Consequently, failing
to specify the point of view to be taken on a task might
conceivably lead to data that reflects a noisy blend of the
writerOs and personal perspective, and provides a misleading view of reasonerOs competence.
Finally, we have shown that the application of deductive logic is a small part of deductive reasoning, and, in
fact, is an optional element of the process. Reasoning
about conditional statements, and indeed, reasoning
about propositional connectives in general, may more
profitably be understood as part of a much larger set of
processes, the goals of which are to manipulate the behaviour and beliefs of other people (Sperber, 2001). Thus, it
seems unlikely that an adequate understanding of deductive processes will be achieved in the absence of an under-

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

255

standing of the role that deductive premises play in persuasive communications, and how these premises are
interpreted and analysed as part of an argument.

interpretation of the writerOs intended meaning (i.e., what do
you think that the writer of this statement meant to convey?)/
Answer the questions based on your interpretation of the italicised statement (i.e., what do you believe about the situation
described?).

Appendix A. Scenarios

Canada is a vast country which is very sparsely populated.
Recently there has been some debate regarding the viability
of several of the smaller railway lines. These lines primarily service rural communities for the purpose of transporting agricultural products to market. In a recent edition of a Canadian
newspaper, a writer made the following statement: If the railway
line is closed, then the highways will be damaged by heavy trucks
moving grain north and south.

The railway, hospital, and tuition-fee scenarios are presented below. For each scenario, a negative, positive, and neutral version was produced by changing the consequent portion
of the conditional statement. This scenario was reproduced at
the top of every page.

A.1. Railway scenario
Canada is a vast country which is very sparsely populated.
Recently there has been some debate regarding the viability of
several of the smaller railway lines. These lines primarily service
rural communities for the purpose of transporting agricultural
products to market. In a recent edition of a Canadian newspaper,
a writer made the following statement: If the railway line is closed,
then the highways will be damaged by heavy trucks moving grain
north and south/the taxpayers will save millions of dollars in maintenance costs/grain will be shipped to market using trucks.

A.2. Hospital scenario
Over the past several years, there has been ongoing debate
about the organisation of several local hospital trusts. In a recent newspaper, one writer observed that: If the hospital reviews
its administration, then public money will be wasted by yet another lengthy review process/one will be certain of a reasonable
quality of health care/the hospital departments will be
reorganised.

A.3. Tuition-fee scenario
The ministry of education is currently debating an increase
in tuition fees for higher education. In a recent newspaper, a
writer made the point that: If tuition fees are increased, then
there will be a drop in student recruitment/there will be more resources available to fund studentsO education/the student loan system will be extended.

Appendix B. Examples of questions for the negative
version of the railway scenario
An example of a complete set of questions is provided below. The example used is the negative version of the ``railway''
scenario. Examples are provided for both the writerOs and personal perspective instructions.

B.1. General instructions (appeared on the top of the first
page)
The questions on the next three pages concern the following
paragraph. This paragraph is repeated for you at the top of
each page. The paragraph contains a statement that appeared
in a recent newspaper. Answer the questions based on your

(1) The writer intended to convey that/do you believe that (circle the appropriate number for each question):
(a) Closing the railway line is enough to ensure that the
highways will be damaged by heavy trucks moving
grain north and south.
Strongly
disagree
3
2

Neither agree
or disagree
1 0 1

Strongly
agree
2 3

(b) Keeping the railway line open will ensure that the highways are not damaged by heavy trucks moving grain
north and south.
Strongly
disagree
3
2

Neither agree
or disagree
1 0 1

Strongly
agree
2 3

(c) If one wants the highways to be damaged by heavy
trucks moving grain north and south, one should close
the railway line.
Strongly
disagree
3
2

Neither agree
or disagree
1 0 1

Strongly
agree
2 3

(d) If one wants to avoid having the highways damaged by
heaving trucks moving grain north and south, one
should not close the rail line.
Strongly
disagree
3
2

Neither agree
or disagree
1 0 1

Strongly
agree
2 3

(2) What do you think is the writerOs primary concern/is the
primary concern? (Circle the appropriate letter.)
(a) He/she is very concerned about the preservation of
the railway line, and less concerned about the highways/The primary concern is the preservation of the
railway line and there is less concern about the
highways.
(b) He/she is very concerned about the highways, and less
concerned about the preservation of the railway line/
The primary concern is the highways and there is less
concern about the railway line.
(c) He/she is very concerned about both the highways and
the preservation of the railway line/The highways and
the railway line are of equal concern.

256

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257

(d) He/she is not very concerned about either the highways
or the railway line/Neither the highways nor the preservation of the railway line are of concern.
(e) One cannot tell what the writer is concerned about/One
cannot tell what is of concern.
(Newpage, scenario repeated)
(3) What of the following best describes the writerOs position/
your position on the closing of the railway line? (Circle
the appropriate number.)
The
railway
line should
be closed
3
2

It does not
matter whether
the railway line
is closed
1 0
1

The railway
line should
not be closed
2

3

(4) List up to four reasons that support the writerOs/your position. Please place a check mark next to the one(s) you think
are most convincing.
(5) List up to four reasons that contradict the writerOs position.
Please place a check mark next to the one(s) you think are
most convincing.
(Newpage, scenario repeated)
Answer the following questions based on the conclusions
that follow from the writerOs assertion/you believe to follow
from the italicised statement.
(1) Suppose that the railway line is closed. According to the
writerOs argument/Do you believe it follows that:
(a) the highways will be damaged by heavy trucks moving
grain north and south
(b) the highways will not been damaged by heavy trucks
moving grain north and south
(c) the highways may or may not be damaged by heavy
trucks moving grain north and south
(2) Suppose that the railway line is not closed. According to the
writerOs argument/Do you believe it follows that:
(a) the highways will be damaged by heavy trucks moving
grain north and south
(b) the highways will not been damaged by heavy trucks
moving grain north and south
(c) the highways may or may not be damaged by heavy
trucks moving grain north and south
(3) Suppose that the highways have been damaged. According
to the writerOs argument/Do you believe it follows that:
(a) the railway line was closed
(b) the railway line was not closed
(c) the railway line may or may not have been closed
(4) Suppose that the highways have not been damaged. According to the writerOs argument/Do you believe it follows that:
(a) the railway line was closed
(b) the railway line was not closed
(c) the railway line may or may not have been closed

References
Baron, J. (1995). Myside bias in thinking about abortion.
Thinking and Reasoning, 1, 221-236.

Bindra, D., Clarke, K. A., & Shultz, T. R. (1980).
Understanding predictive relations of necessity and sufficiency in formally equivalent ``causal'' and ``logical''
problem. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
109, 422-443.
Bonnefon, J. F., & Hilton, D. J. (2004). Consequential
conditionals: Invited and suppressed inferences from valued
outcomes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 28-37.
Byrne, R. M. J., Espino, O., & Santarmaria, C. (1999).
Counterexamples and suppression of inferences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 347-373.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2002). Logic and human reasoning: An
assessment of the deduction paradigm. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 978-996.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., Harper, C. N. J., & JohnsonLaird, P. N. (1999). Reasoning about necessity and possibility: A test of the mental model theory of deduction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 25, 1495-1513.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., Allen, J. L., & Pollard,
P. (1994). Debiasing by instruction: The case of belief
bias. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 6,
263-285.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford University
Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Thompson, V. A. (2004). Informal
reasoning: Theory and method. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 69-74.
Fillenbaum, S. (1974). Information amplified: Memory for
counterfactual conditionals. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102, 44-49.
Fillenbaum, S. (1986). The use of conditionals in inducements
and deterrents. In E. C. Traugott, A. ter Meullen, J. S.
Reilly, & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), On conditionals
(pp. 179-196). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Geis, M. L., & Zwicky, A. M. (1971). On invited inferences.
Linguistic Inquiry, 2, 560-566.
George, C. (1997). Reasoning from uncertain premises. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 161-240.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain specific reasoning,
social contracts, and perspective change. Cognition, 43,
127-171.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals: a
theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological
Review, 109, 646-678.
Klaczynski, P. A., & Robinson, B. (2000). Personal theories,
intellectual ability, and epistemological beliefs: Adult age
differences in everyday reasoning biases. Psychology and
Aging, 75, 400-416.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists.
Psychological Review, 96, 674-689.
Liu, I., Lo, K., & Wu, J. (1996). A probabilistic interpretation
of ``If-Then''. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 828-844.

V.A. Thompson et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 53 (2005) 238-257
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social utilities and
reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition, 39, 85-105.
Markovits, H. (1985). Incorrect conditional reasoning among
adults: Competence or performance? British Journal of
Psychology, 76, 241-247.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, C., Evans, J. B. T., & Dennis, I. (1997).
Conditional reasoning with realistic material. Thinking and
Reasoning, 3, 49-76.
Newstead, S. E., Pollard, P., Evans, J. B. T., & Allen, J. L.
(1992). The source of belief bias effects in syllogistic
reasoning. Cognition, 45, 257-284.
Newstead, S. E., Thompson, V. A., & Handley, S. J. (2002).
Generating alternatives: A key component in human
reasoning? Memory & Cognition, 30, 129-137.
OOKeefe, D. J. (1997). Standpoint explictness and persuasive
effect: A meta-analytic review of the effects of varying
conclusion articulation in persuasive messages. Argumentation and Advocacy, 34, 1-12.
OOKeefe, D. J. (1998). Justification explicitness and persuasive
effect: A meta-analytic review of the effects of varying
support articulation in persuasive messages. Argumentation
and Advocacy, 35, 61-76.
Over, D. E., Manktelow, K. I., & Hadjichristidis, C. (2004).
Conditions for the acceptance of deontic conditionals.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58(2), 96-105.
Perkins, D. N. (1989). Reasoning as it is and could be: An
empirical perspective. In D. M. Topping, D. C. Crowell, & V.
N. Kobayashi (Eds.), Thinking across cultures: The third
conference on thinking. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Politzer, G. (1986). Laws of language use and formal logic.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 15, 47-92.
Shaw, V. (1996). The cognitive processes in informal reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 2, 51-80.
Sloman, S. A. (2002). Two systems of reasoning. In T. Gilovich
& D. Griffin (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of
intuitive judgment (pp. 379-396). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance theory
explains the selection task. Cognition, 57, 31-95.
Sperber, D. (2001). An evolutionary perspective on testimony
and argumentation. Philosophical Topics, 29, 401-413.

257

Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational: Studies of individual
differences in reasoning. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1997). Reasoning independently of prior belief and individual differences in actively
open-minded thinking. Journal of Educational Psychology,
89, 342-357.
Staudenmayer, H. (1975). Understanding conditional reasoning with meaningful propositions. In R. J. Falmagne (Ed.), Reasoning representation, and process in
children and adults. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Stevenson, R. J., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 613-643.
Stevenson, R. J., & Over, D. E. (2001). Deduction from
uncertain premises: Effects of expertise and conversational
contexts. Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 313-392.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional
reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 22, 742-758.
Thompson, V. A. (1995). Conditional reasoning: The necessary
and sufficient conditions. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 49, 1-60.
Thompson, V. A. (1996). Reasoning from false premises: The role
of soundness in making logical deductions. Canadian Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 50, 315-319.
Thompson, V. A. (1997). On interpreting inferences: Comment
on Evans and Over. Current Psychology of Cognition, 16,
230-237.
Thompson, V. A. (2000). The task-specific nature of domaingeneral reasoning. Cognition, 76, 209-268.
Thompson, V. A., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Reasoning
counterfactually: Making inferences about things that didnOt
happen. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 1154-1170.
Thompson, V. A., Striemer, C., Riekoff, R., Gunter, R., &
Campbell, J. I. D. (2003). Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
10, 184-189.
Torrens, D., Thompson, V. A., & Cramer, K. M. (1998).
Individual difference and the belief bias effect: Mental
models, logical necessity, and abstract reasoning. Thinking
and Reasoning, 5, 1-28.

