Lexical and Phonological
Organization in Children:
Evidence From Repetition Tasks
Benjamin Munson
Cyndie L. Swenson
Shayla C. Manthei
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis

This study examined the structure of children's mental lexicons through performance on 2 short experimental tasks, 1 in which children repeated familiar
monosyllabic real words varying in neighborhood density and 1 in which they
repeated CVC nonwords varying in phonotactic probability. Two groups of
typically developing children with mean ages of 4;3 (years;months; n = 16) and
7;2 (n = 15) participated. In the group of younger children, offset-to-onset
response latencies were not systematically affected by lexicality, phonotactic
probability, or neighborhood density. Onset-to-onset latencies showed an effect of
phonotactic probability on nonword repetition. Children in the older group
repeated high-density real words with longer latencies than low-density real
words. They also repeated high-probability nonwords with shorter latencies than
low-probability nonwords. This was true for both the onset-to-onset and offset-toonset repetition latencies. Children in both age groups repeated vowels embedded in high-probability nonwords with shorter durations than vowels embedded
in low-probability nonwords. These findings suggest that lexical competition and
phonological facilitation emerge in development and that the rate of development
is different for different dependent measures.
KEY WORDS: phonological neighborhood density, phonotactic probability,
nonword repetition, real-word repetition, children

R

ecent psycholinguistic investigations have converged on two conclusions regarding lexical and phonological representations in
memory. The first is that the lexicon is organized systematically,
based on the similarity of individual lexical items (e.g., Pisoni, Nusbaum,
Luce, & Slowiaczek, 1985). This lexical organization is highly dimensional: Lexical items are organized in terms of semantic similarity,
morphosyntactic similarity, and phonological similarity, among others.
The second notion is that phonological representations in memory comprise multiple, parallel levels of structure. That is, a representation of a
monosyllabic CVC word comprises a representation of the entire word
shape, as well as its individual phonemes and diphone sequences.
The belief that the lexical items are organized in terms of phonological similarity has arisen from studies examining the influence of
phonological neighborhood density on lexical processing. Neighborhood
density refers to the number of real words that can be created by adding, deleting, or changing one sound in a real-word target (Pisoni et al.,
1985). Words can range in neighborhood density from high (e.g., pill,
which has 32 neighbors, including pit, spill, ill, will, and pole) to low

108

JournalofofSpeech,
Speech,Language,
Language,and
andHearing
HearingResearch
Research* *Vol.
Vol.4848* *108-124
108-124* *February
February2005
2005 * (c)American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Journal
1092-4388/05/4801-0108

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(e.g., choice, which has 3 neighbors, including voice and
chase). Across a range of experimental methodologies,
it has been shown that words that reside in highdensity neighborhoods are processed differently than
words that reside in low-density neighborhoods. Items
in high-density neighborhoods are less audible than
those in low-density neighborhoods (Dirks, Takayanagi,
& Moshfegh, 2001). Pictures whose names reside in highdensity neighborhoods are named more quickly than
those in low-density neighborhoods (Vitevitch, 2002).
Words with high neighborhood densities are produced
with more expanded acoustic vowel spaces than words
with low neighborhood densities (Munson & Solomon,
2004; Wright, 2004). Finally, words' neighborhood density affects the rate of naming errors in typically developing children and children with word-finding problems
(Newman & German, 2002).
Recently, Vitevitch and Luce (1998, 1999) examined
the influence of neighborhood density on the processing
of real words. They found that real words that were high
in neighborhood density were repeated more slowly than
words that were low in neighborhood density. In the
same studies, Vitevitch and Luce examined the influence of manipulations of phonotactic probability, a parameter that is very similar to neighborhood density, on
the processing of nonword sequences. Phonotactic probability is a measure of the frequency of occurrence of
the sequences of sounds making up a word or nonword
(Frisch, Large, & Pisoni, 2000; Vitevitch & Luce, 1998,
1999). For example, the nonword [dZoUm] has a lower
phonotactic probability than the nonword [peIk], as the
sequences [dZoU] and [oUm] occur in fewer real English
words than the sequences [peI] and [eIk]. In contrast to
neighborhood density, phonotactic probability has a facilitatory effect on the processing of nonwords. Nonwords
that are high in phonotactic probability are repeated
more quickly than those that are low in phonotactic probability. The asymmetric effects of neighborhood density
and phonotactic probability on real-word and nonword
repetition led Vitevitch and Luce to posit that phonological representations in memory comprise at least two
levels of representation. At the lexical level, items are
subject to competition. Real words that are phonologically similar to other real words are more difficult to
process than those that are not. At the phonological level,
items are subject to facilitation. Nonwords that are phonologically similar to real words are easier to process
than those that are not.
Other studies have shown that phonotactic probability influences performance on a variety of tasks. For
example, children learn high-probability nonwords more
quickly than low-probability nonwords (Storkel, 2001).
Frisch et al. (2000) found that individuals' immediate
and long-term memory for high-probability nonwords is
more accurate than that for low-probability nonwords.

Pitt and McQueen (1998) found that listeners perceive
acoustically ambiguous phoneme sequences to be members of high-probability sequences rather than low-probability ones. Hay, Pierrehumbert, and Beckman (2004)
found that listeners misperceive low-probability phoneme sequences as high-probability sequences more often than the reverse. Finally, Munson (2001) found that
both adults and children repeat high-probability phoneme sequences with shorter and less variable durations than low-probability sequences.
Phonotactic probability and neighborhood density
are correlated. A word or nonword with a high
phonotactic probability will always be high in neighborhood density. A word or nonword that is high in neighborhood density may or may not be high in phonotactic
probability. The real word cat and the nonword [koek]
are high in both phonotactic probability (because the
component diphone sequences [koe], [oek], and [oet] occur
in many other real words) and neighborhood density
(because of their similarity to such words as keep, cap,
kick, sack, and cake). In contrast, the real word cook
and the nonword [koIk] are low in phonotactic probability (because the component sequences [kU], [koI], [Uk],
and [oIk] occur in relatively few real English words) but
high in neighborhood density (because of their similarity to such real words as coy, look, cake, coke, and kick).
Phonotactic probability can be calculated for real words,
and neighborhood density can be calculated for
nonwords. Indeed, at least two recent investigations have
examined these variables separately. Bailey and Hahn
(2001) found that neighborhood density and phonotactic
probability predicted variance in metalinguistic judgments of wordlikeness of nonword sequences independently, although neighborhood density measures predicted more variance than phonotactic probability. Luce
and Large (2001) examined the influence of neighborhood
density and phonotactic probability on speeded same-
different judgments of real words and nonwords. They
found independent facilitative effects of phonotactic probability and inhibitory effects of neighborhood density for
reaction times to real-word stimuli.
The subject of this investigation is the development
of the lexical and phonological levels of representation
in typically developing children. Previous research has
found that both levels of representation are subject to
development. Munson (2001) examined development of
the phonological level of representation. Munson found
that young children repeated nonword-embedded
diphone sequences occurring in few or no lexical items
(i.e., /mk/, /Sp/) less accurately and with longer and more
variable durations than diphone sequences occurring in
many words (i.e., /mp/, /st/). Older children and adults
demonstrated a smaller effect. Edwards, Beckman, and
Munson (2004) and Munson, Edwards, and Beckman
(2005) replicated these findings with a larger age range
Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

109

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of participants and a larger set of diphone sequences.
These results suggest that children do not have access
to robustly abstracted units at the phonological level of
representation. That is, young children's nonword repetition is heavily biased by their knowledge of sound
sequences at the lexical level of representation. When
these children are required to utter unfamiliar sequences
of phonemes, they do so inaccurately and with poorer
speech motor control, as they cannot use a motor scheme
from a known lexical item or a robustly abstracted phonological representation to do so. In addition, Edwards
et al. and Munson et al. found that an estimate of lexicon size predicted the difference in accuracy between
children's production of high- and low-frequency diphone
sequences. These investigators interpreted this as evidence for a relationship between lexical development and
the development of phonological representations. As
children acquire more lexical items, they begin to develop robust representations for phonological units, such
as phonemes and phoneme sequences. These phonological units can be combined into novel sequences in nonsense words fluently, accurately, and consistently.
Other investigators have studied the development
of the lexical level of representation. Computational
studies of children's lexicons have shown that neighborhood density increases with development (Charles-Luce
& Luce, 1990, 1995; Dollaghan, 1994; Logan, 1992).
Children's early lexicons contain fewer similar sounding words than do those of adults. Consequently, children are less likely than adults to know a cohort of similar sounding words that would constitute a high-density
phonological neighborhood. As children learn more words,
the number of words in dense neighborhoods increases.
Storkel (2002) provided empirical evidence that lexical
neighborhood structure influences children's phonological processing. Storkel measured preschool children's tacit
perceptual similarity judgments for CVC words in sparse
neighborhoods and in dense neighborhoods using a standard-word/test-word comparison paradigm. She found
that children's tacit similarity judgments for words in
dense neighborhoods were sensitive to the similarity of
the phonemes in both the CV and the VC sequences.
Tacit similarity judgments for words in sparse neighborhoods were based on the similarity of the phonemes
in the CV sequence but on similarity of the manner of
articulation of sounds in the VC sequence. This result
suggests that children's phonological representations of
words that reside in high-density neighborhoods are
more detailed than representations of words in low-density neighborhoods. Lexical factors have been shown to
influence children's performance on other experimental
measures of nonword repetition and spoken word recognition (Garlock, Walley, & Metsala, 2001; Metsala,
1997, 1999), providing additional evidence that lexical
development influences phonological development.
110

This article builds on past research by using two
repetition tasks to measure competition and facilitation
at the lexical and phonological levels of representation
in preschool children and early-elementary-school-age
children. In one task, children repeated real words varying in neighborhood density; in the other task, children
repeated nonsense words varying in phonotactic probability. As in Vitevitch and Luce (1998), we assumed the
influence of phonotactic probability on nonword repetition latency could be used to measure the organization
of items at the phonological level of representation. Similarly, we used the influence of neighborhood density on
real-word repetition latency to measure the organization of items at the lexical level of representation.
This study differs from previous studies in a number of ways. First, no previous research has examined
children's processing of real words varying in neighborhood density and nonwords varying in phonotactic probability in the same experiment. The key evidence arguing for the existence of lexical competition and
phonological facilitation in adults has come from studies comparing the effects of probability and density on
real-word and nonword repetition. To date, no comparable study has been completed with children. This study
examines real-word and nonword repetition in preschool
children and early-elementary-school-age children, both
to determine whether lexical competition and phonological facilitation effects are present in children and to assess whether the magnitude and direction of these effects change throughout development.
Second, this study differs from previous research
on children in the dependent measures that are examined. Previous research on phonotactic probability and
neighborhood density in children has used measures of
spoken word recognition accuracy (i.e., Garlock et al.,
2001); nonword repetition accuracy (i.e., Edwards et al.,
2004; Munson et al., 2005); nonword repetition duration (Munson, 2001); and perceptual similarity judgments (Storkel, 2002). In this study, two measures are
made from children's correct responses. The first is response latency. Previous studies on adults have shown
that nonwords are repeated with longer latencies than
real words; that real words that are high in neighborhood density are repeated with longer latencies than
those low in neighborhood density; and that nonwords
that are low in phonotactic probability are repeated with
longer response latencies than those that are high in
phonotactic probability. These differences in response
latencies have been used to argue for the existence of
lexical competition and phonological facilitation. In this
study, we examine whether children's responses show
the same patterns as adults' responses have in previous
research. Specifically, we examine whether children have
longer response latencies for real words than for

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

nonwords, whether they show lexical competition effects
in real-word repetition tasks, and whether they show
phonological facilitation in nonword tasks. We also examine whether the influences of lexicality and probability change with age.

For duration, we predict that both groups of children will repeat vowels in high-probability nonwords
with shorter durations than for those in low-probability
nonwords. Following Munson (2001), we reason that
children will experience difficulty generalizing correct
vowel production to nonword-embedded low-probability
phoneme sequences and that this will be reflected by
longer vowel durations in those tokens. Finally, we predict that the effect of probability on duration will be
larger for younger children than for older children, in
keeping with previous studies on phonotactic probability and speech-sound duration (Edwards et al., 2004;
Munson, 2001; Munson et al., 2005). The predictions
regarding real words are similar: Children will produce
vowels embedded in high-density real words with shorter
durations than low-density ones, and this effect will attenuate with age. These hypotheses are tested through
a study of the latency and duration of children's realword and nonword repetitions.

The second dependent measure examined in this
experiment is response duration. Specifically, we examine whether phonotactic probability and neighborhood
density influence children's production of vowels embedded in real words and nonwords and whether this
changes as a function of age. Previous research has
shown that this segment duration is influenced by
phonotactic probability in nonwords (Edwards et al.,
2004; Munson, 2001) and neighborhood density in real
words (Munson & Solomon, 2004).
The predictions for this study are presented in Table
1. For latency, we predict that younger children will
demonstrate smaller effects of lexicality than older children, as younger children have less experience in perceiving and producing real words than older children.
We also predict that lexical competition effects will be
smaller for younger children than for older children, as
the smaller vocabularies of the younger children make
it less likely that their lexicons will contain high-density neighborhoods. We predict that phonological facilitation effects will be present in both groups of children
but that they will be larger in the older group of children. Previous research has shown phonological facilitation effects to be present in production at an early age
(e.g., Munson, 2001); hence, we predict that they are
present in processing as well. However, we predict that
they will be stronger in older children, as these children's
robustly abstracted representations of phonemes will facilitate their ability to use high-probability phoneme
sequences to process nonwords efficiently.

Method
Participants
Thirty-one children participated in the experiment.
The younger group (n = 16) had a mean age of 4;3
(years;months; SD = 10 months). The older group (n =
15) had a mean age of 7;2 (SD = 9 months). Children
completed the Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation-2
(GFTA-2; Goldman & Fristoe, 2000) and the Expressive
Vocabulary Test (EVT; Williams, 1997). No child received
a standard score of less than 85 on the EVT or a GFTA2 percentile rank less than 17, which would indicate
performance greater than 1 SD below the mean of the
normative sample of children in their age range. None

Table 1. Experimental predictions.
Experimental factor
Dependent measure
Response latency

Response duration

Lexicality

Probability/density

Age

Real words will be repeated
with shorter latencies than
nonwords.

High-density real words will be
repeated with longer latencies
than low-density real words;
high-probability nonwords
will be repeated with shorter
latencies than low-probability
nonwords.

Younger children will repeat
items with longer latencies
than older children.

The effects of lexicality and
probability/density will be
larger for the older children.

High-probability and highdensity items will be repeated
with shorter durations than
low-probability/low-density
ones.

Younger children will
repeat items with longer
durations than older
children.

The effects of lexicality and
probability/density will be
larger for the older children.

--

Interaction

Note. There were no predictions for lexicality in relation to response duration.

Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

111

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of the children had a history of speech, language, or hearing impairment, or chronic otitis media; and all were
progressing normally through school, as reported by
parents. All children were native, monolingual speakers of English. Children were rewarded with stickers
for their participation.
The younger children had a mean EVT standard
score of 113 (SD = 12); the older children had a mean
score of 109 (SD = 11). This difference was not significant, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. As expected, raw scores on
this test did differ significantly, F(1, 29) = 30.5, p < .01.
The younger children had an average raw score of 52
items (SD = 11); the older group had an average raw
score of 77 items (SD = 12). The younger children had a
mean GFTA-2 percentile ranking of 66 (SD = 32); the
mean score for the older children was 52 (SD = 32). This
difference was not significant, F(1, 29) = 2.2, p > .05.
Children passed an air-conduction hearing screening at
20 dB HL bilaterally at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz (American
National Standards Institute, 1989).
Children's phonetic repertoires were calculated
based on their performance on the GFTA-2. For the purposes of assessing phonetic inventories, all of the stimulus words on the GFTA-2 were phonetically transcribed
in their entirety, rather than just the target phonemes.
Measures of overall accuracy on the GFTA (as measured
for both target and nontarget consonant sounds) found
that the younger children demonstrated more errors than
the older children (M = 15, SD = 20, for the younger children; M = 3, SD = 3, for the older children). Errors in
both groups were not normally distributed; hence, a nonparametric Wilcoxon test was used to examine group differences. This test indicated that the group difference was
significant (T = 160, z = -3.1, p < .01). Children had between zero and five phonemes consistently in error across
word positions. Children's consistent residual errors were
either place-of-articulation substitutions (i.e., f/T) or /r/
distortions (i.e., age-appropriate misarticulations of /r/
that were perceptually distinct from /w/). No children
evidenced consistent deletion errors or manner-of-articulation substitutions, with the exception of 1 child who
demonstrated a b/v substitution that was inconsistent
across words and word positions.

Stimuli
The real words used in this experiment were a subset of the words from the Lexical Neighborhood Test
(Kirk, Pisoni, & Osberger, 1995). The high- and low-density words were chosen to be as phonetically similar as
possible, so that performance differences between the
two lists could not be attributed to the phonetic characteristics of the stimuli. The real words are presented in
Table 2. Each low-density real word was matched with

112

Table 2. Real-word and nonword stimuli.
Nonword
High probability
bis
dis
seId
teIn
dAp
rAp
hoUk
noUl
tup
bus
wId
pIp
hEs
dEs
moek
boep

Real word

Low probability
giv
jiT
tSeIdZ
veIz
sAtS
wAf
voUtS
dZoUm
wuk
duT
zIs
SIf
kET
kEf
tSoetS
foeS

Low density

High density

stop
sit
fish
good
white
cow
dance
give
hurt
friend
home
foot
catch
gray
food
time

cap
cut
kick
bed
fight
grow
hand
pink
hot
thumb
bone
cook
bath
high
dad
ride

Note. Stimuli used in the onset-to-onset latency analysis are underlined.

a high-density real word for syllable structure and approximate intrinsic duration of the vowel. Multiple chisquared tests showed that the two lists did not differ
significantly in the place, manner, or voicing of the consonants comprising the real-word stimuli. The neighborhood size of the words constituting the two lists was
calculated based on the Hoosier mental lexicon (Pisoni
et al., 1985). The mean number of neighbors for the highdensity words was 19 (SD = 6). The mean number of
neighbors for the low-density words was 12 (SD = 6).
The two lists differed significantly in this variable, F(1,
30) = 8.3, p < .01, partial 2 = .21. In addition, the log
frequency of the words constituting the two lists was
measured. The average log frequency for the high-density words was 4.1 (SD = 1.1). The average log frequency
for the low-density words was 4.9 (SD = 1.1). This difference approached significance, F(1, 30) = 3.8, p = .06,
partial 2 = .11. Phonotactic probability for the real-word
stimuli was measured using the method described in
Frisch et al. (2000). The two lists did not differ in this
variable, F(1, 30) < 1, p > .05. The average phonotactic
probability for the high-density words was -10.4 (SD =
2.2). The average for the low-density words was -11.1
(SD = 2.6). Previous research had shown that age of acquisition (AoA) mediates the influence of neighborhood
density on children's spoken word recognition (Garlock
et al., 2001). AoA of the high- and low-density words
was measured using the values in Bird, Franklin, and
Howard (2001). This corpus does not report AoA values
for all of the words in this study. It does, however, provide AoA estimates for 13 of the low-density words and

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

7 of the high-density words. The two lists did not differ
(T = 131.5, z = -0.400, p > .05). The mean AoA for the
high-density words was 245 (SD = 36); that for the lowdensity words was 240 (SD = 41).
As in previous research (Edwards et al., 2004;
Munson, 2001; Munson et al., 2005), high- and low-probability nonwords were created based on the frequency
of diphone sequences in the Moe, Hopkins, and Rush
(1982) database of the 6,366 most frequent words in the
speech of typically developing first-grade children. This
database was created by making an online version of
the words from Moe et al.'s (1982) database and then
taking the words' phonetic transcriptions from the
Carnegie Mellon University Pronouncing Dictionary
(http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict). The
Moe et al. database contains a mix of both spontaneous
speech and structured conversations on familiar topics.
The nonword stimuli are presented in Table 2. All of the
nonsense words had a CVC structure. The high- and
low-probability nonwords were balanced for vowel quality. Multiple chi-square tests indicated that the lists did
not differ significantly in the place, manner, and voicing of the consonants constituting the nonwords. The
phonotactic probability of each stimulus was calculated
using the method in Frisch et al. (2000), as the sum of
the log-transformed probabilities of the diphone sequences constituting the nonwords. The mean phonotactic probability for the low-frequency sequences was
-11.4 (SD = 1.7). The mean phonotactic probability for
the high-frequency nonwords was -8.3 (SD = 1.0). The
two lists differed significantly in phonotactic probability, F(1, 30) = 40.2, p < .01, partial 2 = .58. The two lists
also differed in their neighborhood density, based on
their similarity to words in the Hoosier mental lexicon.
The average number of neighbors for the high-probability words was 16 (SD = 3). The average number of neighbors for the low-probability words was 6 (SD = 2.4).
A phonetically trained adult female student in
speech-language pathology recorded the real-word and
nonword production prompts. These were recorded using an AKG C420 head-mounted microphone attached
to a Roland VS-890 digital workstation through a Rolls
phantom power source. A 44.1-kHz sampling rate and
16-bit quantization were used. The larger digital file was
divided into individual files containing each word. The
peak amplitude of each word was normalized. Five repetitions of each word were recorded. A group of five adults
listened to all of the tokens in a sound-treated booth,
played from a pair of high-quality speakers at a level of
approximately 60 dB SPL. The real-word tokens used in
the experiment were identified correctly by at least four
of these listeners, and most of the stimuli were identified
correctly by all five listeners. The nonword tokens used
in the experiment were repeated correctly by at least four

of these listeners, and most were repeated correctly by
all five. By choosing items that were highly intelligible to
normal hearing listeners at a presentation level slightly
lower than that used in the experiment, we hoped to minimize the chance that the participants would misperceive
the items during the experiment.
Whole-word durations and vowel durations were
measured for the stimuli. Vowel durations were measured from digitized waveforms, using standard criteria for segmentation. Two, two-factor between-subjects
analyses of variance (ANOVAs) examined whether the
stimulus duration and stimulus vowel duration differed
as a function of lexicality and probability. Vowel durations were not found to differ as a function of lexicality,
probability, or the interaction between them. In contrast,
the entire stimuli differed as a function of lexicality, F(1,
60) = 11, p < .01: Real-word stimuli were longer than
nonword stimuli. Stimuli also differed as a function of
probability/density, F(1, 60) = 10, p < .01: Low-probability stimuli were longer than high-probability stimuli.
There was no interaction between these two factors. The
potential influence of differences in stimulus duration
on children's performance is considered in the Results
section.

Data Collection
Data collection took place in a quiet room at the
child's day care center or in the first author's laboratory. Stimuli were blocked by lexicality. In addition, the
nonwords were blocked by phonotactic probability, and
the real words were blocked by neighborhood density.
Experiment order was randomized across participants,
and stimuli were randomized within blocks. Equal numbers of children participated in the eight experiment
orders. For the real-word repetition experiment, participants were told that they would be hearing words they
know played by the computer; for the nonword repetition experiment, they were told that they would be hearing "silly, made-up words" played by the computer. Participants were instructed to repeat the words and
nonwords immediately, "just like the computer said it."
For 2 s before the presentation of a stimulus, children
were shown a cartoon picture of a police officer cupping
his ear, to cue them to listen for the next word. After
they repeated the word, participants were presented
with a reinforcement picture of an unfamiliar cartoon
animal. Each session began with two practice words in
which the participant repeated the experimenter's livevoice productions and four digitized practice words that
were presented from the computer. None of the practice
items were included in the experiment.
During the last training phase and the entire experimental phase, stimuli were output from a Dell

Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

113

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Pentium III laptop computer through Audix powered
speakers. The stimuli were played at a level of approximately 65 dB SPL, as calibrated before the experiment
using the slow, dB-A scale of a portable sound-level meter
located approximately 2 ft from the speakers (i.e., at the
approximate location of the participant's head during
the experiment). Children's speech was recorded directly
on to the hard drive of a Dell Pentium III laptop, using
a table-mounted microphone (Sony ECM 220t) placed
approximately 15 cm from the participant's mouth.
Speech was digitized at a sampling rate of 22.05 kHz
with 16-bit quantization and low-pass filtered at 11.025
kHz to remove aliasing.

Analysis
Before completing acoustic analyses, items repeated
incorrectly were removed from the analysis. The range
of usable tokens for individual participants was 53 to
the full set of 64 (M = 62, SD = 3, mode = 64). The eliminated tokens were distributed evenly between the two
age groups. Moreover, the incorrectly repeated items did
not differ as a function of lexicality or probability/density. These effects were confirmed by a three-factor
mixed-model ANOVA. The dependent measure in this
analysis was arcsine-transformed proportion of items
correctly repeated. The within-subjects factors were lexicality and probability; the between-subjects factor was
age. No effect was found of probability/density, F(1, 29)
< 1, p > .05; lexicality, F(1, 29) = 1.6, p > .05; or age, F(1,
29) < 1, p > .05.
All of the temporal measures reported in this article were made using the Praat signal-processing software (Boersma & Weenink, 2002). A display containing
a spectrogram and a waveform was generated. The first
author marked the offset of the stimulus, the onset of
the response, the offset of the response, and the onset
and offset of the vowel within the response on that display. Durations were extracted from the file containing
these labels automatically.
Reliability was gauged by having a second researcher (either the second or the third author) make
the same measures independently for a large proportion of the data. Cases in which the differences exceeded
25 ms were measured a third time. Pearson product-
moment correlations between measurements made by
the first rater and those made by the second raters were
.94 for response latency and .92 for response vowel duration, when pooled across the two participant groups
and the four experimental conditions. When examined
separately by group and condition, Pearson coefficients
ranged from .89 (for young children's response latencies
for low-probability nonwords) to .96 (for young children's
vowel durations in high-probability nonwords). The

114

average absolute difference, pooled across the two participant groups and four experimental conditions, was
8 ms for response latency (range = -25 to 10 ms) and 10
ms for vowel duration (range = -17 ms to 9 ms).

Response Latency
In a number of previous studies using this paradigm (i.e., Vitevitch & Luce, 1999), response latencies
have been made from the onset of the stimulus to the
onset of the response (onset-to-onset latencies). Thus, the
duration of the different types of stimuli is a potential
confounding factor. Munson (2001) and Munson and
Solomon (2004) found that duration differs as a function of the phonotactic probability of nonwords and the
neighborhood density of real words. The stimuli in this
study showed this expected pattern. Indeed, we had
anticipated this, as the stimuli in this article were also
used in a parallel study examining children's ability to
mimic stimulus duration in real-word and nonword repetition tasks (Munson, 2003). The design of that study
required that the stimuli vary in duration. In the current study, we chose to measure the interval between
the offset of the stimulus and the onset of the response
(offset-to-onset latencies), so that the stimulus duration
would not confound the repetition latency measures.
Before calculating mean offset-to-onset latencies,
outlying data were removed. Responses that occurred
greater than 2.5 SD above the mean for that participant were removed from the analysis. No responses occurred greater than 2.5 SD below the mean, and no responses began before stimulus offset. This was done to
minimize the influence of poor attention on latency measures. Outliers occurred in less than 1% of the data and
were distributed approximately evenly among the different stimulus types. In addition, latencies were not
analyzed for items that were subsequently produced
incorrectly or disfluently. For the purposes of this article, correct production was defined as any production
in which the child did not delete a sound or make a
manner- or place-of-articulation substitution. Some of
the children produced age-appropriate /r/ distortions (i.e.,
errored productions of /r/ that were perceptually distant
from /w/); these responses were included. For each participant, mean response latencies were calculated separately for high- and low-probability nonwords and for
high- and low-density real words.

Response Duration
Before completing the regression analyses of wholeword duration and vowel duration, outlying data were
removed, as were data from incorrect responses. There
were fewer outlying data points for response durations

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

than for response latencies. In general, outliers occurred
when the child was not attending to the task or was
affecting a highly stylized speaking mode. For each participant, mean vowel durations were calculated separately for high- and low-probability nonwords and for
high- and low-density real words.

This difference did not achieve significance in a post hoc
test of significant main effects, F(1, 15) < 1, p > .05. In
contrast, there was a large difference in repetition latencies between nonwords (M = 508 ms, SD = 144 ms) and
real words (M = 416 ms, SD = 119 ms) in older children.
This difference did achieve significance in a post hoc test
of significant main effects, F(1, 14) = 5.4, p < .05.

Results

The next ANOVA examined the influence of age
group and phonotactic probability on nonword repetition latencies. Again, the ANOVA revealed no significant effect of age group, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. In addition, there was no significant main effect of phonotactic
probability, F(1, 29) = 1.8, p > .05. However, there was a
significant interaction between age group and phonotactic probability, F(1, 29) = 6.2, p < .05, partial 2 = .18.
In the older children, high-probability nonwords were
repeated with shorter latencies (M = 486 ms, SD = 146
ms) than low-probability nonwords (M = 530, SD = 146
ms). This achieved significance in a post hoc test of significant main effects, F(1, 14) = 10.4, p < .01. This pattern was also true for the younger children (M = 462
ms, SD = 97 ms, for low-probability nonwords; M = 475
ms, SD = 102 ms, for high-probability nonwords). However, a post hoc test of simple main effects showed that
this difference did not achieve statistical significance,
F(1, 15) < 1, p > .05.

A series of mixed-model ANOVAs was used to analyze the influence of lexicality, probability or neighborhood density, and age group, on response latency
and response vowel duration. As indicated above, the
stimuli did not vary in both phonotactic probability
and neighborhood density: The low-density real words
were not lower in phonotactic probability than the
high-density real words. Therefore, we could not analyze the data with a series of three-factor ANOVAs
examining probability/density as a single factor, as
had been done in research in which probability and
density varied together (e.g., Vitevitch & Luce, 1999).
For each dependent measure, three separate ANOVAs
were conducted. The first was a two-factor mixedmodel ANOVA examining the influence of age group
(the between-subjects factor) and lexicality (the
within-subjects factor) on the dependent measure. In
this ANOVA, measures for high- and low-probability
nonwords and high- and low-density real words were
averaged together. The other two ANOVAs were twofactor mixed-model ANOVAs examining real-word repetition and nonword repetition performance separately. In these analyses, the between-subjects factor
was age group, and the within-subjects factor was either phonotactic probability (for the nonwords) or
neighborhood density (for the real words).

Response Latency
Offset-to-onset latencies. The ANOVA examining the
influence of lexicality on response latencies revealed a
significant main effect of lexicality, F(1, 29) = 4.3, p <
.05, partial 2 = .13. Real words were repeated with
shorter latencies (M = 442 ms, SD = 123 ms) than
nonwords (M = 481 ms, SD = 141 ms). No main effect of
age group was found, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. The older
children repeated items 10 ms faster than younger children, but this difference was not statistically significant
(M = 460 ms, SD = 147 ms, for older children; M = 470
ms, SD = 107, for younger children). There was a significant interaction between lexicality and age group,
F(1, 29) = 4.5, p < .05, partial 2 = .14. Real words and
nonwords were produced with nearly identical latencies
by the younger children (M = 469 ms, SD = 93 ms, for
nonwords; M = 470 ms, SD = 111 ms, for real words).

The third ANOVA examined the influence of age
group and neighborhood density on real-word repetition
latencies. Once again, no significant main effect of group
was found, F(1, 29) = 1.7, p > .05. There was no significant main effect of neighborhood density, F(1, 29) = 1.2,
p < .05. However, there was a significant interaction
between age group and neighborhood density, F(1, 29) =
4.3 , p < .05, partial 2 = .12. Post hoc tests of significant
main effects showed no effect of neighborhood density
on younger children's repetition latencies, F(1, 15) < 1,
p > .05. However, a significant effect was found for older
children, F(1, 14) = 5.2, p < .05, who repeated high-density real words with longer latencies (M = 431 ms) than
low-density real words (M = 400 ms).
Response latencies are illustrated in Figure 1. As this
figure shows, the older children performed similarly to
adults in previous research. Nonwords were repeated with
longer latencies than real words. High-density real words
were repeated with longer latencies than low-density real
words. Low-probability nonwords were repeated with
longer latencies than high-probability nonwords. In contrast, there was no systematic effect of lexicality, probability, or neighborhood density in the younger children.
Onset-to-onset latencies. A surprising finding of the
analysis of response latency was the lack of an effect of
phonotactic probability on younger children's response
latencies. Research had shown an effect of phonotactic
probability on nonword repetition accuracy and duration
Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

115

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Mean offset-to-onset response latency (+ 1 SEM) for
nonword (top) and real-word (bottom) repetitions.

in children (e.g., Munson, 2001), as well as effects on
processing times in adults (e.g., Vitevitch & Luce, 1998,
1999). Studies on adults' processing times had used onset-to-onset response latencies. To examine whether the
differences between our finding and that of earlier studies was due to the use of offset-to-onset measures, we
completed a parallel set of analyses examining the onset-to-onset latencies. The duration of our stimuli differed
as a function of lexicality and probability. Therefore, onset-to-onset latencies could not be measured for the entire set of 64 stimuli. Instead, 8 stimuli were chosen from
each condition. These 8 stimuli did not differ significantly in duration as a function of either lexicality or
density, nor did these factors interact, F(1, 30) < 1, p >
.05, for all three tests. The stimuli used in this analysis
are underlined in Table 2.1
As in the analysis of offset-to-onset latencies, three
separate ANOVAs were used to examine these data. The
first analysis examined the influence of age group and
lexicality. A significant main effect of lexicality was

116

found, F(1, 29) = 5.2, p < .05, partial 2 = .15. Nonwords
were repeated with longer response latencies (M = 1,005
ms, SD = 114 ms) than real words (M = 960 ms, SD =
113 ms). No significant effect of age was found, F(1, 29)
< 1, p > .05. Lexicality also interacted with age group,
F(1, 29) = 6.6, p < .05, partial 2 = .19. Older children
repeated nonwords with longer latencies than real words
(M = 1,033 ms, SD = 134 ms, for nonwords; M = 941 ms,
SD = 106 ms, for real words). Younger children produced
very similar latencies for both types of stimuli (M = 979
ms, SD = 88 ms, for nonwords; M = 985 ms, SD = 117
ms, for real words).
The next ANOVA examined the influence of
phonotactic probability and age group on nonword repetition latencies. A significant main effect of phonotactic
probability was found, F(1, 29) = 19.4, p < .01, partial 2
= .40. High-probability nonwords were repeated with
shorter latencies (M = 968 ms, SD = 124 ms) than lowprobability nonwords (M = 1,042 ms, SD = 125 ms). No
significant main effect of age group was found, F(1, 29) =
1.7, p > .05. Age group and phonotactic probability interacted, F(1, 29) = 4.4, p < .05, partial 2 = .13. Both groups
of children repeated high-probability nonwords with
shorter response latencies than low-probability nonwords
(for older children, M = 977 ms, SD = 139 ms, for highprobability nonwords; M = 1,088 ms, SD = 147 ms, for
low-probability nonwords; for younger children, M = 959
ms, SD = 111 ms, for high-probability nonwords; M = 999
ms, SD = 85 ms, for low-probability nonwords). This result stands in contrast to the results for the offset-toonset latencies, in which a significant influence of
phonotactic probability was found for older children only.
The effect of phonotactic probability on nonword repetition latencies achieved statistical significance in post
hoc tests for both groups, t(15) = -2.2, p < .05, for younger
children; t(14) = -4.3, p < .01, for older children). Note
that the raw difference was larger for older children (111
ms) than for younger children (40 ms). That is, this
analysis had in common with the earlier analysis that
it found an increase in phonotactic probability effects
from younger to older children.
A two-factor ANOVA examined the influence of
neighborhood density and age group on onset-to-onset
response latencies in real-word repetition. Again, no effect of age group was found, F(1, 29) = 1.6, p < .05. No
significant main effect of neighborhood density was
1

When onset-to-onset latencies were used for all 64 stimuli, the only
significant main effects were for phonotactic probability and neighborhood density. However, the effect of neighborhood density was in the
opposite-than-predicted direction: High-density real words were repeated
with shorter onset-to-onset latencies than low-density real words. In
addition, there was a significant interaction between lexicality and age,
F(1, 29) = 5.6, p < .05, which arose because there was a larger effect of
lexicality for the older children than for the younger. However, these
results likely reflect the confounding influence of stimulus duration on
response latency.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

found, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. While there were small differences in the raw response latencies for the two word
types (M = 977 ms, SD = 134 ms, for high-density real
words; M = 958 ms, SD = 106 ms, for low-density real
words), this difference did not achieve statistical significance. For both groups, high-density real words were
repeated with longer response latencies than low-density real words (for older children, M = 952 ms, SD =
112 ms, for high-density real words; M = 929 ms, SD =
112 ms, for low-density real words; for younger children,
M = 999 ms, SD = 151 ms, for high-density real words;
M = 985 ms, SD = 100 ms, for low-density real words).
However, in post hoc tests, this difference achieved statistical significance for the older group of children only,
t(14) = -2.1, p < .05.
The onset-to-onset response latencies are shown in
Figure 2. As this figure shows, both groups of children
showed patterns of response latencies that were similar
to those demonstrated by adults in previous research.
Figure 2. Mean onset-to-onset response latency (+ 1 SEM) for
nonword (top) and real-word (bottom) repetitions.

However, the effect of neighborhood density on real-word
repetition latencies was significant for the older group
of children only. Moreover, larger differences in raw latencies across conditions were found for both stimulus
types for the older group of children.

Vowel Duration
Finally, three ANOVAs examined the influence of
lexicality, phonotactic probability, and neighborhood
density on vowel duration. The first was a two-factor
mixed-model ANOVA examining the influence of age
group and lexicality on duration. A significant main effect of lexicality was found, F(1, 29) = 58.1, p < .001,
partial 2 = .67. Vowels in nonwords were significantly
shorter than vowels in real words (M = 206 ms, SD = 34
ms, for nonwords; M = 244 ms, SD = 44 ms, for vowels
in real words). However, no significant effect of age group
was found, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. Moreover, these factors
did not interact. The lack of an effect of age was inconsistent with some previous research on children's speech
development but consistent with the performance of this
cohort of children on two other real-word/nonword repetition tasks (Munson, 2004; Munson & Babel, in press).
The next ANOVA examined the influence of agegroup and phonotactic probability on the duration of
vowels embedded in nonwords. A significant main effect of phonotactic probability was found, F(1, 29) = 17.6,
p < .01, partial 2 = .38. There was no significant effect
of age, F(1, 29) < 1, p > .05. Moreover, the two factors
did not interact. In both groups of children, vowels in
high-probability nonwords were repeated with shorter
durations than vowels in low-probability nonwords (M
= 198 ms, SD = 32 ms, for vowels in high-probability
nonwords; M = 216 ms, SD = 34 ms, for vowels in lowprobability nonwords, pooled across groups). A post hoc
test of significant main effects found this difference to
be statistically significant in both groups of children.
The finding regarding nonwords supports previous investigations (Edwards et al., 2004; Munson, 2001) that
found that children produce longer speech-sound durations when sounds are embedded in low-probability sequences. This reflects a difficulty in generalizing fluent
production of vowels to sequences that are unattested
or infrequently attested in the lexicon.
Finally, a two-factor ANOVA examined the influence
of neighborhood density on vowel duration. In this
ANOVA, neither of the main effects was significant, F(1,
29) < 1, p > .05, for neighborhood density; F(1, 29) = 1.7,
p < .05, for age group), nor did they interact significantly.
Vowels in high-density real words were repeated with
longer durations than vowels in low-density real words
(M = 248 ms, SD = 41 ms, for high-density real words,
M = 241 ms, SD = 41 ms, for low-density real words,

Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

117

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

pooled across groups); however, this difference did not
achieve significance in post hoc testing, either for the
group as a whole or for either group when examined
separately. Vowel duration data are shown in Figure 3,
which plots data separately for nonwords (top) and real
words (bottom).

Relations Among Measures
The final analysis examined relations among the
experimental measures of lexical competition and phonological facilitation and standard measures of the participants' phonological and lexical development. In this
section, we present two analyses. First, we examined
correlations between measures of lexical competition and
phonological facilitation to determine whether these two
processes were independent or related. Second, we used
hierarchical multiple regression analysis to examine
relationships between experimental measures and the
Figure 3. Mean duration of vowels (+ 1 SEM) in nonwords (top)
and real words (bottom).

two clinical measures: EVT raw scores and GFTA-2 raw
scores. By examining relations between the experimental measures and the clinical measures of vocabulary
size and phonological accuracy, we hoped to infer the
source of developmental changes in phonological facilitation and lexical competition. For example, previous
research (Edwards et al., 2004; Munson et al., 2005)
found that phonotactic probability effects are related to
vocabulary size: Children with larger vocabularies show
smaller effects of phonotactic probability on nonword
repetitions, even when the effects of age, phonological
accuracy, and speech perception are statistically controlled. This result suggests that developmental changes
in phonotactic probability are related to increases in
vocabulary size.
For these analyses, six summary measures were
created from the reaction time and vowel duration measures. The goal was to create measures that would reflect the degree to which high-probability nonwords
showed more facilitation than low-probability nonwords
and the degree to which high-density real words showed
more inhibition relative to low-density real words. For
each measure (offset-to-onset reaction time, onset-toonset reaction time, and vowel duration), a measure of
the degree of lexical competition was created by dividing each participant's average performance on the highdensity real words by their performance on the low-density real words. Higher values of this variable indicated
greater lexical competition. Three measures of phonological facilitation were also calculated by dividing average
performance on the high-probability nonwords by their
average performance on the low-probability nonwords.
Higher values on this measure indicated greater phonological facilitation. Simple correlations (Pearson's r) were
calculated between these variables, the EVT standard
score, and the GFTA-2 percentile rankings. An a level of
.01 was used to evaluate significance.
When the entire group of participants was examined together, no significant correlations were found,
either among the experimental measures or between the
experimental measures and the EVT/GFTA-2. When the
groups were examined individually, one significant correlation was found between two experimental measures
for the younger group of children. The lexical competition measure based on the onset-to-onset response latency
was significantly correlated with the phonological facilitation measures based on the same measure. Children
who evidenced more lexical competition (i.e., a larger difference in response latency between high- and low-density real words) also evidenced more phonological facilitation (i.e., a larger difference in response latency between
high- and low-probability nonwords). This same relationship held true for the measure of vowel duration and
the measure of onset-to-onset latency, although these

118

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

were only significant at the .05 level. No other correlations were significant for this group, and none were significant for the older children. The correlation coefficients are presented in Tables 3, 4, and 5.

were highly accurate: Many participants performed perfectly on both tasks. Consequently, there were no significant effects of lexicality, probability/density, or age
on repetition accuracy. The stimuli for this study were
chosen because they were highly intelligible to normal
adult listeners when presented at a level 5 dB SPL below the level used for the experiment. This finding provides indirect evidence that accuracy on repetition tasks
in which phonotactic probability and neighborhood density are manipulated may be related to the audibility of
the stimuli in the different categories, as has been proposed by some researchers (e.g., Dirks et al., 2001). Moreover, the high rate of accurate repetitions minimized the
number of tokens that needed to be eliminated from the
latency and duration analyses.

With a series of six hierarchical multiple regression
analyses, we examined predictors for the six derived
measures of phonological facilitation and lexical competition. In each of these regressions, age was forced as
the first variable. Raw score on the GFTA-2 and the EVT
were entered in the second step if they accounted for a
significant proportion of variance ( < .05). None of the
independent measures predicted a significant proportion of variance in any of the six dependent measures.
This result stands in contrast to the results of Edwards
et al. (2004) and Munson et al. (2005), who found that
measures of vocabulary size predicted a significant proportion of accuracy in the difference in repetition accuracy between high- and low-probability nonwords. That
measure was roughly analogous to the phonological facilitation measures presented in this article, in that it
was a measure of the extent to which phonotactic probability facilitated nonword repetition.

The first measure taken from children's correct responses was offset-to-onset response latency. Here, it was
found that younger children showed no difference in
response latencies as a function of lexicality, phonotactic
probability, or neighborhood density. In contrast, the
older group of children demonstrated response latencies similar to those of adults in previous research. Real
words were processed more quickly than nonwords.
High-probability nonwords were processed more quickly
than low-probability ones, and high-density real words
were processed more slowly than low-density ones. In a
follow-up to this finding, onset-to-onset latencies were
examined for a subset of the stimuli matched in stimulus duration. Here, it was also found that only the older
group of children showed an effect of phonological neighborhood density on real-word repetition latencies. In this
analysis, however, both groups of children showed an

Discussion
Summary
This article examined two measures taken from preschool and school-age children's real-word and nonword
repetitions. This study examined correct repetitions only.
One unexpected observation that we made of these data
was that children's real-word and nonword repetitions
Table 3. Correlations among measures for entire group of participants.
1
1. Age
EVT
2. Standard score
3. Raw score
GFTA-2
4. Percentile rank
5. Raw score
Offset-to-onset latencies
6. Lexical competition
7. Phonological facilitation
Onset-to-onset latencies
8. Lexical competition
9. Phonological facilitation
Vowel duration
10. Lexical competition
11. Phonological facilitation

2

3

4

5

-.12
.82**

--
.30

--

-.33
-.47**

.13
-.20

.14
-.20

6

7

-.36*
-.40*

--
-.56**

--

-.26
.30

.04
-.15

-.35
.27

.07
-.20

.10
.24

.00
-.25

-.19
-.21

.21
-.08

-.12
-.04

8

9

.16
-.05

--
.16

--

-.08
.22

.01
-.02

.64**
.18

.38
.69*

--
.27

--

-.07
-.05

.20
.12

.22
.18

.26
.08

.36*
.02

.10
-.16

10

11

--
.27

--

--

Note. EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test; GFTA-2 = Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation-2; GFTA raw score = number of errors.
*p < .05. **p < .01.
Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

119

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 4. Correlations among measures for the younger group.
1
1. Age
EVT
2. Standard score
3. Raw score
GFTA-2
4. Percentile rank
5. Raw score
Offset-to-onset latency
6. Lexical competition
7. Phonological facilitation
Onset-to-onset latencies
8. Lexical competition
9. Phonological facilitation
Vowel duration
10. Lexical competition
11. Phonological facilitation

2

3

--
.31

--

4

5

--
-.88**

--

6

7

8

9

--
.50*

--

.58*
.13

.18
-.52*

10

11

--
.47*

--

--
.04
.69**
-.47
-.05

.45
-.53*

-.12
-.08

.15
.33

-.19
.32

.02
.17

-.46
.17

.56*
-.29

--
.70**

--

.03
-.08

.29
.41

.02
-.27

.08
.11

.07
-.15

.70**
.23

.71**
.71**

-.19
-.09

.21
-.35

-.18
.00

-.04
.06

.17
.08

.39
.27

.28
-.03

Note. EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test; GFTA-2 = Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation-2; GFTA raw score = number of errors.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

effect of phonotactic probability on nonword repetition
latency. The size of the effect was slightly larger in older
children. The pattern of responses shown by the older
children is the same as the pattern that has been demonstrated by adults in previous research (e.g., Vitevitch
& Luce, 1998, 1999). The longer response times associated with high-density words have been attributed to
lexical competition. When listeners hear words that are
phonetically similar to other real words in the lexicon,
those other words compete as potential responses, and

this competition slows processing. In contrast, the
shorter response times associated with high-probability nonwords have been attributed to phonological facilitation. Nonwords that contain sequences of phonemes
occurring in many other real words are processed more
rapidly than ones containing infrequent sequences of
phonemes. The results of the latency analysis suggest
that the influence of lexical competition and phonological facilitation on processing time increases during development.

Table 5. Correlations among measures for the older group.
1
1. Age
EVT
2. Standard score
3. Raw score
GFTA-2
4. Percentile rank
5. Raw score
Offset-to-onset latencies
6. Lexical competition
7. Phonological facilitation
Onset-to-onset latencies
8. Lexical competition
9. Phonological facilitation
Vowel duration
10. Lexical competition
11. Vowel duration

2

3

4

5

6

7

--
-.01

--

8

9

.05
.47

--
.86

--

.17
-.38

-.52
.13

-.46*
-.08

--
-.74*

-.48*
.54*

-.27
.13

-.35
.39

-.10
.21

.17
-.42

-.28
.39

-.21
-.04

-.32
.17

-.22
.24

.47*
-.40

.56*
.32

-.24
.59*

--
.05

--

-.15
-.22

.19
.10

.17
.17

-.29
-.27

.07
.06

.04
.18

.06
.09

-.22
-.08

-.19
.03

10

11

--
.01

--

--

--

Note. EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test; GFTA-2 = Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation-2; GFTA raw score = number of errors.
*p < .05.

120

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

The two reaction time analyses have in common that
they both found an effect of phonological neighborhood
density on real-word repetition latencies for the older
children only. However, significant effects of phonotactic
probability on the younger children's nonword repetition
latency were only found when an onset-to-onset latency
measure was used. This difference highlights the methodological importance of the choice of onset-to-onset versus onset-to-offset latencies. Previous investigations of
real-word and nonword repetition (e.g., Vitevitch & Luce,
1998, 1999) have used onset-to-onset response latencies.
One constraint associated with this measure is that
stimuli in the different conditions (real words vs.
nonwords, high-probability/density vs. low-probability/
density) must be matched for duration, or the stimulus
duration will confound the response latency measure.
However, research has shown that phonological neighborhood density and phonotactic probability influence
real-word and nonword duration (e.g., Munson, 2001;
Munson & Solomon, 2004): High-probability phoneme
sequences and high-density words are produced with
shorter acoustic durations than low-probability/low-density ones. The stimuli in this study showed this pattern.
Indeed, this variation was part of the design of a parallel
study examining the extent to which children are able to
mimic the durations of real-word and nonword stimuli
(Munson, 2003). Because the stimulus durations were not
equivalent across different stimulus types, neighborhood
densities, and phonotactic probabilities, offset-to-onset
latencies were used instead of onset-to-onset latencies.
However, the results from the analysis of offset-to-onset
latencies were somewhat different from an analysis of
onset-to-onset latencies for a subset of stimuli matched
in duration. Specifically, measurement sensitivity seemed
better for the onset-to-onset analysis, in that it showed
phonological facilitation in even the youngest group, as
might be predicted based on previous studies of children's
perceptual development. Taken together, these findings
highlight the importance of using onset-to-onset measures
in stimuli that are matched for duration, even though
such stimuli are not representative of the high- and lowdensity stimuli that listeners encounter during naturalistic language processing.
One surprising aspect of the analyses of response
latencies was the lack of a significant age effect. Research
(e.g., Kail, 1991) had found developmental increases in
speed of processing across different cognitive, linguistic, and motoric tasks. While the older group of children
did repeat words and nonwords an average of 10 ms
faster than children in the younger group, this did not
achieve statistical significance. When examining individual conditions independently, none of the individual
conditions showed a significant age-related difference in
response latency, although one age-related change in repetition latency did approach significance: Older children's

repetitions of low-density real words were 70 ms faster
than younger children in the offset-to-onset latency analysis, t(29) = 1.8, p = .08. That is, in the one condition in
which age had a marginally significant effect on response
times, that difference was in the expected direction. One
potential explanation for this null result is that limitations in statistical power may have resulted in the nonsignificant effect of age. The response times in both
groups of participants were highly variable, and a larger
group of participants may have been needed to observe
a significant effect of age on performance.
When examining repetition duration, both groups of
children were found to produce vowels in low-probability
nonwords with longer durations than vowels in high-probability nonwords. The nonwords were designed so that
each of the two diphone sequences constituting the
nonword were approximately equal in probability; thus,
the vowels were members of either two low-probability
diphone sequences or two high-probability diphone sequences. In keeping with Munson (2001) and Edwards et
al. (2004), we can interpret this finding as evidence that
children experienced difficulty generalizing fluent, rapid
vowel production to sequences of phonemes that occurred
in few known words. This effect was similar in size for
both groups of participants, in contrast to previous studies, which had found developmental decreases in
phonotactic probability effects on production. This finding supports previous claims (Edwards et al., 2004;
Munson, 2001; Munson et al., 2005) that children's productive control over phonemes independent from the
words in which they occur increases in development.
Finally, this study did not find a statistically significant relationship between vocabulary size measures and
measures of lexical competition or phonological facilitation. At least two other studies (Edwards et al., 2004;
Munson et al., 2005) had found a relationship between a
measure of phonological facilitation and measures of
vocabulary size. However, the measure of phonological
facilitation in both of these studies was a measure of
repetition accuracy rather than measures of response
duration or latency, as were used in the current article.
The vocabulary measures used as predictors in this study
and in previous research are relatively static estimates
of the sizes of children's vocabularies. It may be that a
predictive relationship would have been found in this
study if our measure of lexical knowledge had been a
more dynamic measure, such as a measure of processing speed during a confrontation naming task, rather
than a static estimate of vocabulary size. That is, the
static measure of vocabulary size may not have the measurement sensitivity needed to detect the relationship
between vocabulary growth and developmental changes
in lexical competition or phonological facilitation. Indeed,
the results of one recent investigation (Kurtz, Munson,

Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

121

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

& Windsor, 2004) suggest that static measures of vocabulary size might not have the measurement sensitivity needed to predict the magnitude of phonological
facilitation effects across different tasks and different
age ranges. Kurtz et al. examined predictors of a measure of phonological facilitation (the difference in repetition accuracy between high- and low-probability
nonwords) in typically developing children and children
with language impairment age 5-13 years. In that study,
static measures of vocabulary size predicted the magnitude of phonological facilitation effects. However, a dynamic measure of linguistic knowledge--performance
on a test of morphology, semantic knowledge, and syntactic knowledge--predicted a far greater proportion of
variance in the same measure. Kurtz et al.'s result suggests that dynamic measures of linguistic knowledge
might have greater sensitivity than static measures of
vocabulary size to predict developmental changes in
phonological facilitation.

General Discussion
Overall, there were two major findings in this study.
The first was that the effect of phonological neighborhood
density on real-word repetition times increases with age.
In both the offset-to-onset and onset-to-onset analyses,
this effect was present for the older group of children only.
One possible interpretation of this effect can be found in
research on the development of lexical neighborhoods in
children (e.g., Charles-Luce & Luce, 1990, 1995). Young
children's lexicons are smaller than those of older children and are not likely to contain high-density neighborhoods. For these children, lexical processing is not subject to competition. As children learn more lexical items,
their lexicons are increasingly likely to contain a cohort
of phonetically similar words constituting a high-density
neighborhood. The words residing in these high-density
neighborhoods would be subject to competition effects.
This finding fits well with a growing body of literature
showing effects of lexical growth and lexical neighborhood structure on children's linguistic processing. For
example, both Garlock et al. (2001) and Storkel (2002)
showed an effect of phonological neighborhood density
on phonological processing. In both studies, children
appeared to have more detailed phonological representations of words in dense phonological neighborhoods
than in sparse neighborhoods.
The second principal finding in this study was that
phonological facilitation in nonword repetition reaction
times increases with development. Previous research on
nonword repetition in children (Edwards et al., 2004;
Munson, 2001; Munson et al., 2005) found that even very
young children show evidence of phonological facilitation in production: Children in these studies repeated
high-probability sequences of phonemes more accurately
122

and with shorter durations than low-probability sequences. Indeed, this effect was replicated in the analysis of vowel duration in the current study. Given that
phonological facilitation effects can be found in early
production, we might have expected them to be present
in processing and to be indicative of a more general phonological facilitation effect pervading both perception
and production. However, these previous studies have
interpreted these developmental decreases in phonotactic-probability effects as indicative of the development
of representations of phonemes as separate from the
word shapes in which they occur. Perhaps phonological
facilitation in nonword processing, which we observed
to increase during development, is related to children
having developed robustly abstracted phonological representations. That is, phonotactic probability can only
affect processing times after children have begun to develop robustly abstracted representations for phonemes.
The phonotactic probability effects in production, however, may reflect children's ability to use familiar articulatory patterns in producing novel phoneme sequences and novel words. A related finding was that the
interaction between lexicality and processing times increased with age. In younger children, repetition latencies for real words and nonwords were similar. In older
children, as in adults (e.g., Vitevitch & Luce, 1998, 1999),
repetition latencies for words were shorter than those
for nonwords. This developmental change may be related to the differences in rate of word learning in the
two groups of children. Preschool children are highly
engaged in the process of word learning. Indeed, children are typically able to form associations between a
novel phonological form and a referent even with only
minimal exposure (e.g., Carey, 1978). Older children
continue to learn words, but their word learning is more
likely than younger children's to involve making new
morphologically complex derivations from known forms
(e.g., Anglin, 1993). The lack of an asymmetry between
real words and nonwords in young children may reflect
the fact that they are actively learning words; hence,
they are more accustomed to hearing and processing
novel forms. Older children's word learning is less likely
to involve associations between novel words and referents; therefore, they process novel words less rapidly
than known words.
Future research in this area should explore the predictors of developmental changes in phonological facilitation and lexical competition in production and processing, to better understand the relationship between
lexical and phonological development. In particular, future research should examine a larger cohort of children in the same age range, to determine whether lexical competition and phonological facilitation develop in
tandem or independently. This study found some evidence that the two develop in tandem: Children in the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

younger group who showed evidence of greater phonological facilitation also showed great lexical competition.
A finding that these develop in tandem in a larger cohort of children would suggest that they both reflect the
effects of lexical growth. Specifically, this would suggest
that lexical growth leads to children developing cohorts
of phonetically similar words that compete with each
other during processing and that these neighborhoods
are represented by phonological units that facilitate the
processing of nonwords. Future research should also
examine relations between measures of phonological
facilitation and a variety of measures of lexical knowledge and lexical processing, to examine whether these
measures predict developmental changes in phonological facilitation and lexical competition.

Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. (1990). Similarity neighborhoods of words in young children's lexicons. Journal of
Child Language, 17, 205-215.

Acknowledgments

Frisch, S. A., Large, N. R., & Pisoni, D. B. (2000).
Perception of wordlikeness: Effects of segment probability
and length on processing of nonwords. Journal of Memory
and Language, 42, 481-496.

Portions of this research were presented at the 2002
annual convention of the American Speech-LanguageHearing Association in Atlanta, Georgia; at the 2003 annual
Child Phonology Meeting in Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada; and at invited colloquia in the Northwestern
University Department of Linguistics, the Chinese University of Hong Kong Department of Psychology, and the
Language and Mind series at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. This research was supported by a New Investigator Award from the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Foundation, by a Grant-in-Aid of Research, Scholarship, and
Artistry from the University of Minnesota Graduate School,
and by National Institutes of Health Grant R03 DC05702.
We thank Molly Babel and Nancy DeBoe for assistance with
participant recruitment and data collection. We gratefully
acknowledge audiences at those venues for their helpful
comments and feedback. In addition, we thank Mary
Beckman, Jan Edwards, Julia Evans, Stefan Frisch, and
Kathryn Kohnert for comments on this research.

References
American National Standards Institute. (1989).
Specifications for audiometers. Washington, DC: Author.
Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 58(10, Serial No. 238).
Bailey, T., & Hahn, U. (2001). Determinants of wordlikeness: Phonotactics or lexical neighborhoods. Journal of
Memory and Language, 44, 568-591.
Bird, H., Franklin, S., & Howard, D. (2001). Age of
acquisition and imageability ratings for a large set of
words, including verbs and function words. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 33, 73-79.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2002). Praat 4.0.7 [Computer
software]. Amsterdam: Institute of Phonetic Sciences.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as a word learner. In M. Halle, J.
Bresnan, & G. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and
psychological reality (pp. 264-293). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. (1995). An examination of
similarity neighborhoods in young children's receptive
vocabularies. Journal of Child Language, 22, 727-735.
Dirks, D., Takayanagi, S., & Moshfegh, A. (2001). Effects
of lexical factors on word recognition among normalhearing and hearing-impaired listeners. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 12, 233-244.
Dollaghan, C. (1994). Children's phonological neighborhoods: Half empty or half full? Journal of Child Language,
21, 257-272.
Edwards, J., Beckman, M. E., & Munson, B. (2004). The
interaction between vocabulary size and phonotactic
probability effects on children's production accuracy and
fluency in nonword repetition. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 421-436.

Garlock, V., Walley, A., & Metsala, J. (2001). Age-ofacquisition, word frequency, and neighborhood density
effects on spoken word recognition by children and adults.
Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 468-492.
Goldman, R., & Fristoe, M. (2000). The Goldman-Fristoe
Test of Articulation-2. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hay, J., Pierrehumbert, J., & Beckman, M. (2004).
Speech perception, well-formedness, and the statistics of
the lexicon. In J. Local, R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.),
Papers in laboratory phonology VI. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Kail, R. (1991). Processing time declines exponentially
during childhood and early adolescence. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 259-266.
Kirk, K., Pisoni, D., & Osberger, M. (1995). Lexical effects
on spoken word recognition by pediatric cochlear implant
users. Ear and Hearing, 16, 470-481.
Kurtz, B. A., Munson, B., & Windsor, J. (2004, June).
Vocabulary size, phonotactic probability, and nonword
repetition in children with language impairments. Poster
session presented at the Symposium for Research on Child
Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Logan, J. (1992). A computational analysis of young
children's lexicons (Tech. Rep. No. 8). Bloomington:
Indiana University, Speech Research Laboratory.
Luce, P., & Large, N. (2001). Phonotactics, density, and
entropy in spoken word recognition. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 16, 565-581.
Metsala, J. (1997). An examination of word frequency and
neighborhood density in the development of spoken-word
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 23, 47-56.
Metsala, J. (1999). Young children's phonological awareness
and nonword repetition as a function of vocabulary
development. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 3-19.
Moe, S., Hopkins, M., & Rush, L. (1982). A vocabulary of
first-grade children. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.

Munson et al.: Repetition and Organization

123

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Munson, B. (2001). Phonological pattern frequency and
speech production in adults and children. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 778-792.

Storkel, H. (2002). Restructuring of similarity neighborhoods in the developing mental lexicon. Journal of Child
Language, 29, 251-274.

Munson, B. (2003). Phonological and lexical processing in
children: Evidence from repetition tasks. Poster presented
at the annual Child Phonology Conference, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Vitevitch, M. (2002). The influence of phonological similarity neighborhoods on speech production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 735-747.

Munson, B. (2004). Variability in /s/ production in children
and adults: Evidence from dynamic measures of spectral
mean. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 58-69.

Vitevitch, M., & Luce, P. (1998). When words compete:
Levels of processing in perception of spoken words.
Psychological Science, 9, 325-329.

Munson, B., & Babel, M. E. (in press). The sequential
cueing effect in children's speech production. Applied
Psycholinguistics.
Munson, B., Edwards, J., & Beckman, M. E. (2005).
Relationships between nonword repetition accuracy and
other measures of linguistic development in children with
phonological disorders. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 48, 61-78.
Munson, B., & Solomon, N. P. (2004). The effect of
phonological neighborhood density on vowel articulation.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47,
1048-1058.
Newman, R., & German, D. (2002). Effects of lexical
factors on lexical access among typical language-learning
children and children with word-finding difficulties.
Language and Speech, 45, 285-317.
Pisoni, D. B., Nusbaum, H. C., Luce, P. A., &
Slowiaczek, L. M. (1985). Speech perception, word
recognition and the structure of the lexicon. Speech
Communication, 4, 75-95.
Pitt, M., & McQueen, J. (1998). Is compensation for
coarticulation mediated by the lexicon? Journal of Memory
and Language, 39, 347-370.

Vitevitch, M., & Luce, P. (1999). Probabilistic phonotactics
and neighborhood activation in spoken word recognition.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 374-408.
Williams, K. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test. Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Wright, R. (2004). Factors of lexical competition in vowel
articulation. In J. Local, J., R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.),
Papers in Laboratory Phonology VI (pp. 26-50). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Received June 25, 2003
Revision received November 24, 2003
Accepted June 22, 2004
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2005/009)
Contact author: Benjamin Munson, PhD, Department of
Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of
Minnesota, 115 Shevlin Hall, 164 Pillsbury Drive, SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455. E-mail: Munso005@umn.edu
Cyndie L. Swenson is currently affiliated with Minnesota
School District 196, Apple Valley, MN. Shayla C. Manthei is
currently affiliated with Courage Center, Burnsville, MN.

Storkel, H. (2001). Learning new words: Phonotactic
probability in language development. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 1321-1338.

124

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 108-124 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

