A Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging Investigation of Verbal
Working Memory in Adolescents With
Specific Language Impairment
Susan Ellis Weismer
University of Wisconsin --
Madison

Elena Plante
University of Arizona,
Tucson

Maura Jones
University of Wisconsin --
Madison

J. Bruce Tomblin
University of Iowa,
Iowa City

This study used neuroimaging and behavioral techniques to examine the claim that
processing capacity limitations underlie specific language impairment (SLI). Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to investigate verbal working memory in
adolescents with SLI and normal language (NL) controls. The experimental task
involved a modified listening span measure that included sentence encoding and
recognition of final words in prior sets of sentences. The SLI group performed
significantly poorer than the NL group for both encoding and recognition and
displayed slower reaction times for correct responses on high complexity encoding
items. fMRI results revealed that the SLI group exhibited significant hypoactivation
during encoding in regions that have been implicated in attentional and memory
processes, as well as hypoactivation during recognition in regions associated with
language processing. Correlational analyses indicated that adolescents with SLI
exhibited different patterns of coordinating activation among brain regions relative to
controls for both encoding and recognition, suggesting reliance on a less functional
network. These findings are interpreted as supporting the notion that constraints in
nonlinguistic systems play a role in SLI.
KEY WORDS: neuroimaging, specific language impairment (SLI),
language processing, memory, attention

V

arious models of language processing have been proposed that
incorporate the notion of a limited capacity system (e.g., Baddeley,
1986, 1998, 2003; Gathercole & Baddeley, 1993; Just & Carpenter,
1992; Just, Carpenter, & Keller, 1996). The major premise of these models
is that there is a limited pool of operational resources available to perform computations and when demands exceed available resources, the
processing and storage of linguistic information are degraded. According
to this view, success in comprehending and producing language is
dependent on the ability to actively maintain and integrate linguistic
material in working memory. Behavioral research has indicated direct
associations between working memory capacity and language abilities
(including spoken language and reading) for both adults and children
with normal language functioning (e.g., Baddeley, 2003; Baddeley,
Gathercole, & Papagno, 1998; Caplan & Waters, 2002; Carpenter,
Miyake, & Just, 1994; Gathercole, Service, Hitch, Adams, & Martin,

James Montgomery (AJSLP) served as guest associate editor on this article.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005  A American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/05/4802-0405

405

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

1999; Gathercole, Willis, Emslie, & Baddeley, 1992;
King & Just, 1991; Swanson, 1996).
Based on findings from behavioral tasks, a number
of investigators have proposed that children with
specific language impairment (SLI) have processing capacity limitations that involve restrictions in working
memory (Ellis Weismer & Thordardottir, 2002; Ellis
Weismer et al., 2000; Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990;
Gillam, 1998; Montgomery, 1995, 2000, 2003). Various
behavioral tasks have been used to assess verbal
working memory skills in SLI, including adaptations of
measures that were originally developed to examine
working memory in adults, such as nonword repetition
(Baddeley, 1986, 1998) and listening span measures
(Daneman & Carpenter, 1980). Ellis Weismer and colleagues have found that elementary school-age children with SLI perform significantly more poorly than
normal language (NL) controls on these measures (Ellis
Weismer & Thordardottir, 2002; Ellis Weismer, Evans,
& Hesketh, 1999). Based on results from a hierarchical multiple regression analysis, Ellis Weismer and
Thordardottir (2002) reported that performance on
three verbal working memory measures (nonword repetition, listening span, and dual processing sentence comprehension) combined with nonverbal cognitive scores
predicted children's performance on a standardized measure of language comprehension and production (r2 = .41,
p G .05). After the contribution of nonverbal cognition was
accounted for (21% of the variance), each of the verbal
working memory measures added significant unique
variance in language scores, but the listening span measure accounted for substantially more variance than the
other tasks.
If the pattern of deficits exhibited by children with
SLI is due to capacity limitations in a broad sense, as
opposed to linguistic deficits in a narrow sense, then
we need to consider how linguistic and nonlinguistic
systems contribute to language processing and the extent to which capacity limitations in this population
are a product of nonlinguistic constraints or some combination of linguistic and nonlinguistic constraints.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (f MRI) offers
an advantage over behavioral methods for examining
these issues. When behavioral methods are used to assess language processing, we can accurately measure decrements in processing without being clear about what
components of processing contribute to processing problems. This is because factors such as attention or memory are often intimately tied to linguistic difficulty. The
technique of f MRI offers an alternate approach. By identifying areas of activation known to be part of language,
memory, and attention networks, f MRI can provide a
brain-based framework for examining the relative contribution to these regions to language processing and
establish whether they are functionally different in

406

children with SLI. In addition, physiologic patterns of
activation can reveal differences even in cases when
behavioral performance is highly accurate in both
controls and individuals with language impairment
(Plante, Van Petten, & Senkfor, 2000). Therefore, f MRI
offers the possibility of examining residual inefficiencies
or compensatory mechanisms in a way that is not possible with behavioral methods.
In this study, we present findings from functional
imaging of adolescents with SLI during a verbal working
memory task in order to examine the relative contribution
of cortical regions associated with linguistic processing
as well as regions that reflect more general processing
capacities that support working memory. Verbal working
memory tasks provide the advantage of permitting an
explicit examination of factors beyond language in verbal
processing. One difficulty with this approach is the lack
of agreement on the definition of working memory. In
its basic form, Baddeley's multiple-component model of
working memory (Baddeley, 1986, 2003; Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974) comprises a central executive and modalityspecific slave systems for rehearsal of visual or phonological information. This model differentiates between
working memory, which is the process by which information is held in conscious awareness, and long-term
memory, which stores information on a long-term basis.
The amount of operational resources available within
the rehearsal subsystems and from the central executive dictates the capacity limitations for working memory. This view of working memory contrasts with other
definitions. Cowan's (1999) embedded-processes model
suggests that working memory is not distinct from
long-term memory, but instead reflects information
within the long-term memory store that is actively the
focus of attention. In this model, attention is specified as
a key ``operational resource'' in working memory and
maintenance of attentional focus, rather than rehearsal,
is key to maintaining items in working memory. In
contrast, attentional control of working memory is a
function of the central executive in Baddeley's model, and
long-term memory is distinct from working memory
(though the more recent addition of the episodic buffer
to the model blurs this distinction to some extent;
Baddeley, 2003). Similar to Cowan's model, the capacity
theory of comprehension proposed by Just, Carpenter,
and colleagues (Just & Carpenter, 1992; Just, Carpenter,
& Keller, 1996) considers active processing of information as central to their notion of working memory. Within
this view, capacity--which is presumed to vary across
individuals--is defined as the maximum amount of
activation available in working memory to support information maintenance and computation. Attentional control processes, attributed to the central executive within
Baddeley's model, are incorporated within working memory in Just and Carpenter's model. Resource allocation

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

schemes are thought to take effect when demand exceeds
available resources such that trade-offs occur between
storage and processing of information.
Each of these models is supported by empirical
data, and as of yet, none of these models is considered
definitive. It has been suggested that neuroimaging
data may serve to validate constructs represented in
different models that are difficult to distinguish by behavioral methods alone (Chein, Ravizza, & Fiez, 2003).
For example, all working memory tasks have encoding
and recall or recognition phases. However, factors that
affect encoding (e.g., word frequency and length, sentence complexity) are only inferred based on recall performance. Our strategy was to use a working memory
task that is generally consistent with the definition of
working memory across models (although it is most
closely aligned with the models espoused by Just and
Carpenter and by Cowan). This involved use of a task
that entailed both memory for verbal stimuli and processing of information during the time that verbal stimuli are to be encoded and remembered. We can then use
fMRI to illuminate the processes during both encoding
and recognition phases that may contribute to verbal
working memory deficits for individuals with SLI by
examining activation within brain systems that support
verbal working memory.

Brain Systems Supporting Verbal
Working Memory
In all theoretical models, verbal working memory
presupposes some level of processing of verbal information, whether that is phonological, semantic, or syntactic. Numerous neuroimaging studies of language
functioning have examined each of these components
of language processing (e.g., Buschbaum, Hickok, &
Humphries, 2001; Caplan, 2001; Friederici, Meyer, &
von Cramon, 2000; Giraud & Price, 2001). Two areas
critical to language processing are the superior temporal
gyrus (STG) and the inferior frontal gryus (IFG); (see
summary by Gernsbacher & Kaschak, 2003). Both of
these regions have also been implicated in maintenance
of verbal information based on lesion data (Frisk &
Milner, 1990). Furthermore, increased processing load
during language tasks tends to increase activation
within classic language areas (Just, Carpenter, Keller,
Eddy, & Thurborn, 1996), as well as additional cortical
areas such as middle frontal and inferior parietal sites
(Keller, Carpenter & Just, 2001). This is consistent with
the notion that more capacities, including memory, may
contribute to linguistic performance.
fMRI studies of working memory abilities in adults
have provided insights into brain regions mediating
components of memory and have also demonstrated

differential patterns/ levels of activation for differing
processing loads (e.g., Braver et al., 1997; Crosson et al.,
1999; Rypma, Berger, & D'Esposito, 2002; Rypma,
Prabhakaran, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1999).
Various investigations have shown that the dorsal
lateral prefrontal cortex is predictably involved in
working memory (Braver et al., 1997; Crosson et al.,
1999; Wagner et al., 1998), though findings reported by
D'Esposito and colleagues indicate that prefrontal cortex supports processes in addition to working memory
(D'Esposito, Ballard, Aguirre, & Zarahn, 1998). Recent
results from memory studies suggest that frontal
activations contribute to many types of memory tasks
rather than to working memory specifically (Cabeza
et al., 2003; Nyberg et al., 2003; Ranganath, Johnson, &
D'Esposito, 2003). Likewise, Cabeza et al. (2003) have
shown that activation patterns typically attributed to
memory processes (episodic memory retrieval) also occur
during attention tasks, suggesting that both attention
and mnemonic processes are involved in these tasks.
This overlap might be accounted for as reflecting the
central role of attention in working memory (Cowan,
1999) or the contribution of central executive processes to
working memory under Baddeley's multiple-component
model of working memory.
In any case, it is difficult to conceive of verbal memory performance in the absence of attention to the information to be remembered. Indeed, attention is a basic
resource that is drawn upon for most processing tasks
(see Shaywitz et al., 2001). Although attention has been
viewed in terms of a single, limited cognitive resource
(Kahneman, 1973), most current theoretical frameworks
conceptualize attention as being comprised of multiple
systems that are associated with different aspects of
controlled processing (e.g., Posner & Dehanene, 1994).
Within this type of functionalist account, Shaywitz and
colleagues (2001) used f MRI to examine the neural architecture of components of attention in the context of
verbal processing (word recognition) tasks in neurologically normal adults. Findings from this study indicated
that attentional control mechanisms associated with
perceptual selectivity (selective attention and divided
attention) primarily involved parietal and inferior frontal sites, whereas executive function (involving complex
decision making) engaged prefrontal regions. Thus,
Shaywitz et al. (2001) concluded that particular functional aspects of attentional control in language processing involve cortical systems that are widely distributed
but yet distinctive from classic language cortex.
There has been considerable investigation of working memory in SLI (see overview by Ellis Weismer, 2004),
with this group generally performing poorly compared
with their typically developing peers. However, there
is relatively little research in the area of attention in
SLI. Research that has referred to attention in the SLI

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

407

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

population has dealt primarily with the comorbidity of
attention deficit disorder (ADD) rather than attentional
control mechanisms per se. However, some investigators
have pointed to attention as a possible explanation for
behavioral findings in SLI (Helzer, Champlin, & Gillam,
1996). At the present time, there is a lack of data to
address whether attentional constraints that may be
inherent to SLI, and existing independent of ADD,
contribute to verbal processing deficits.

Neuroimaging in SLI
Neuroimaging investigations of children with SLI
are relatively few and largely limited to reports of anatomical differences (Gauger, Lombardino, & Leonard,
1997; Jackson & Plante, 1997; Jernigan, Hesselink,
Sowell, & Tallal, 1991; C. Leonard et al., 2002; Plante,
1991; Plante, Swisher, Vance, & Rapcsak, 1991).
Although anatomical differences suggest brain function
may also be altered, only one recent study has used f MRI
techniques to examine language processing in SLI.
Hugdahl and colleagues (Hugdahl et al., 2004) investigated differences in brain activation in 5 members of a
Finnish family who expressed SLI (ages 11-70) compared with a control group of 6 individuals with intact
language development (ages 15-61). The family with SLI
showed reduced activation compared with controls during a task that involved passive listening to vowels,
pseudowords, and real words. Differences were greatest
in the anterior-ventral areas around the middle temporal
gyrus (MTG) and superior temporal sulcus (STS).
Hugdahl et al. concluded that SLI is characterized by
reduced activation in brain regions (MTG/STS) that are
critical for speech perception and phonological awareness according to a model proposed by Binder and Price
(2001). Of further interest to the present study, the
control participants, in contrast to those with SLI, also
activated an area in the right inferior frontal lobe
thought to reflect working memory and attention effects
(Demonet, Price, Wise, & Frackowiak, 1994).
The purpose of the present study was to examine
the claim that the language deficits of children with SLI
are a reflection of more general processing capacity limitations (Ellis Weismer, 1996; Ellis Weismer, Evans, &
Hesketh, 1999; Montgomery, 2000; Lahey & Edwards,
1996). Specifically, we used a verbal working memory
task to test the claim that limitations in processing
capacity play a role in SLI. This type of task maximizes
our ability to consider the contribution of systems that
support language as well as systems that support more
general capacities including memory and attention. In
keeping with this view, specific regions of interest that
have been associated with semantic and syntactic
language processing, working memory, and attention
were examined.

408

Although there is not a one-to-one association
between activation patterns and task difficulty, there
is evidence that increased levels of activation, spread of
activation, or recruitment of homologous areas in the
right hemisphere is linked to increased task complexity
in typical participants (Braver et al., 1997; Just,
Carpenter, Keller, et al., 1996; Keller et al., 2001; Rypma
et al., 2002). However, previous studies of individuals
with language disorder in combination with ADD or
apraxia have reported hypoperfusion during resting
states (Denays et al., 1989; Lou, Henriksen, & Bruhn,
1984), which suggests that the SLI group may be
characterized by less activation than their NL peers.
Based on these studies, we predicted that the SLI group
would demonstrate hypoactivation and /or less clear
lateralization than NL controls on this verbal working
memory task, particularly under more complex task
conditions. We further predicted that individuals with
SLI may exhibit a reliance on ineffective neural networks involving both classic language areas and areas
associated with more general processing capacities.

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 16 adolescents
drawn from a large, well-defined sample of children who
have been participating in a longitudinal, epidemiological investigation of developmental language impairment (Collaboration on Specific Language Impairment,
J. Bruce Tomblin, Director). This included 8 adolescents
who had typical language development and 8 adolescents with SLI. The adolescents who composed the sample for the current study were among randomly selected
individuals whose families were recruited and agreed
to travel from Iowa to the University of Wisconsin--
Madison, where the neuroimaging was conducted.
Written informed consent to participate was obtained
from parents, along with written assent from the adolescents (institutional review board approvals were
obtained from all three universities represented in this
collaborative research project). Data were collected from
a total of 19 adolescents. In 2 cases the data were not
usable due to excessive head motion. The data from a
3rd participant with a history of language impairment
were not included because subsequent behavioral testing conducted shortly after the neuroimaging was completed (as part of the larger longitudinal investigation)
did not reveal persistent language delay.
The participants were originally identified as having either NL development or SLI at kindergarten based
on the EpiSLI diagnostic criteria established by Tomblin,
Records, and Zhang (1996). That is, they scored 1.25 SDs
or more below the mean on at least two of five composite

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Group means and standard deviations on the second grade cognitive and language
diagnostic testing for the adolescents with normal language (NL) and with specific language
impairment (SLI).
NL (N = 8)

SLI (N = 8)

Measure

M

SD

M

SD

Nonverbal cognitiona*
Receptive Language: Concepts and Directionsa
Expressive Language: Recalling Sentencesb*
Receptive Language: Sentence Structureb
Expressive Language: Word Structureb*
CELF-3 compositec*
Receptive/expressive vocabularyd
Receptive vocabularye*
Nonword repetitionf*
Listening spang*

105.50
9.13
10.00
11.13
12.13
0.25
104.75
114.25
88.63
63.00

6.40
2.95
2.83
3.27
2.95
0.99
19.96
15.05
6.99
11.60

95.38
6.50
5.50
8.25
7.63
j1.28
87.50
88.75
74.50
44.60

8.50
2.07
2.00
3.11
1.92
0.58
12.87
13.16
16.77
14.70

a

Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children--Third Edition: Performance scale. bClinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals-3: subtest. cClinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-3: composite
z score. dComprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test. ePeabody Picture Vocabulary
Test--Revised. f Nonword Repetition Task: percentage phonemes correct. gCompeting Language
Processing Test: Word Recall.
*Significant difference between groups at p G .05.

scores representing comprehension, expression, vocabulary, grammar, and narrative skills. Additional language
and cognitive testing was conducted during the grade
school period and during middle school (see Tables 1 and
2 for a summary of these results for second and eighth
grade, respectively). At the time of this study (eighth
grade assessments), the group with SLI was comparable

to the NL group in terms of nonverbal cognition based
on the Performance scale score from the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children--Third Edition (Wechsler,
1991) but scored significantly worse on each of the measures of receptive and expressive language abilities. The
eighth grade language measures included the Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals--Third Edition

Table 2. Group means and standard deviations on the eighth grade cognitive and language
diagnostic testing for the adolescents with normal language (NL) and with specific language
impairment (SLI).
NL (N = 8)

SLI (N = 8)

Measure

M

SD

M

SD

Nonverbal cognitiona
Receptive Language: Concepts and Directionsb*
Expressive Language: Recalling Sentencesb*
CELF-3 compositec*
Receptive/expressive vocabularyd*
Receptive vocabulary e*
Nonword repetitionf*
Listening spang*

101.75
10.00
9.63
j0.07
104.25
111.25
93.63
81.38

14.02
2.73
2.67
0.96
15.44
15.75
2.92
9.81

99.37
6.00
5.00
j1.73
80.75
94.88
83.00
60.88

12.82
2.72
2.07
0.70
10.22
13.03
9.12
15.07

a

Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children--Third Edition: Performance Scale. bClinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals-3: subtest. c Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-3: composite
z-score. dComprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test. ePeabody Picture Vocabulary
Test--Revised. f Nonword Repetition Task: percentage phonemes correct. gCompeting Language
Processing Test: Word Recall.
*Significant difference between groups at p G .05.

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

409

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 1995), the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test--Revised (Dunn & Dunn, 1981), and
the Comprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test (Wallace & Hammill, 1997). Furthermore, the
group with SLI scored significantly more poorly than the
NL group on two measures of verbal working memory,
the Nonword Repetition Task (Dollaghan & Campbell,
1998) and the Competing Language Processing Task
(Gaulin & Campbell, 1994). In addition to having persistent spoken language deficits, 2 of the adolescents
with SLI demonstrated reading disabilities in eighth
grade.
Clinical assessments documented that all children
included in the present study exhibited nonverbal
cognitive abilities in the normal range, normal hearing
acuity, no emotional/social disturbance, or sensory/
motor deficits. Parent ratings of attention problems on
the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991)
obtained at eighth grade indicated that the groups did
not differ significantly, though the average attention
deficit percentile score for the group with SLI was
somewhat higher than that for the normal language
(NL) group (SLI: M = 74.4, SD = 22.2; NL: M = 64.13,
SD = 16.51), t(14) = j1.048, p = .312. There was a wide
range of performance in both groups and participants
were not excluded on the basis of attention problems.
Two participants (1 NL, 1 SLI) scored more than 2 SDs
above the mean and 2 others (2 SLI) scored more than
1.5 SDs above the mean on the Attention Problems scale
of the CBCL; 2 of the SLI adolescents had a clinical
diagnosis of ADD/ADHD. With respect to ethnic,
socioeconomic, and linguistic background, the 16
participants were Caucasian and were native speakers of Standard American English who came from
middle-class families. At the time of this study, the
NL group had a mean chronological age of 14 years, 1
month (SD = 6 months). The mean age of the group
with SLI was 13 years, 10 months (SD = 7 months).
There were 6 males and 2 females in the NL group and
5 males and 3 females in the SLI group. All participants were right-handed, except for 1 control and 1
adolescent with SLI.

General Procedure
Data were collected during a 1O-hr session conducted at the Waisman Center Keck Imaging Laboratory
on the University of Wisconsin--Madison campus. Each
session consisted of metal screening, training on the
experimental task outside the scanner, and practice in a
simulator (mock scanner) to acclimate the participant
to the testing environment. The total time required to
collect the structural and functional scans in the magnet
was approximately 30 min.

410

Design and Experimental Task
Overview
The activation task consisted of a verbal working
memory task adapted from Daneman and Carpenter's
(1980) listening span measure. This task entailed
sentence encoding (Encoding), as well as recalling the
final word of each sentence within the sets of sentence
stimuli (Recognition). Eight cycles that made up the
experiment were equally divided into four cycles of low
complexity sentences and four cycles of high complexity
sentences (described below); the reason for including
both simple and complex sentences was to attempt to
vary the cognitive load of the task. The activation task
was interspersed with a brief (21 s) control task involving recognition of a target tone that the child had
been trained to identify. During these intervals, the
participants were engaged in appropriate control activities (involving auditory processing, decision making,
and button pressing), as described below. The experimental task was created and delivered using E-Prime
(Psychology Software Tools, Inc.), a Windows-based
software program designed for generating and running
psychological experiments. E-Prime randomizes stimulus delivery within blocks and records responses for both
accuracy and reaction time (in milliseconds).
Drawing on the capacity theory of comprehension
and the assumptions underlying the listening span task
on which the experimental task in this study was based
(Daneman & Carpenter, 1980; Just & Carpenter, 1992),
the processing component of working memory is tapped
by sentence encoding, and the storage component is
tapped by word recognition performance. This is the
classic view of listening span measures, as typically
interpreted on the basis of behavioral responses (see
discussion by Montgomery, 2003). However, it is important to note that moment-to-moment processing cannot
be so clearly delineated. The combined demands of the
task mean that the encoding portion entails cognitive
processes in addition to those devoted to sentence processing. That is, there is a competing requirement to
attend to final words in sentences and maintain these
words while completing the comprehension task. Thus,
activation patterns during the encoding phase of this
task are presumably different than what would be observed for a sentence processing task in which there
were no concurrent memory demands. In addition to the
memory demands, this task also draws on attention.
Using a functionalist framework of attention in language processing adopted by Shaywitz et al. (2001), our
task can be viewed as involving attentional control
mechanisms associated with perceptual selectivity,
namely, selective attention and divided attention. It was
not the intent of this study, however, to address the role

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of specific attentional mechanisms within verbal working memory. In order to accommodate an f MRI block
design in this study, a brief control (tone) task was
inserted between the encoding and recognition phases of
the verbal working memory task. Although an intervening task might be assumed to disrupt the contents of
items temporarily stored in a rehearsal buffer according
to Baddeley's multiple-component model of working
memory, this would not be the case according to other
models of working memory as long as the material
was being actively refreshed to maintain it for retrieval
(e.g., Cowan, 1999).

Experimental Structure of Stimuli
fMRI is used to identify brain regions that show
changes in blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal
that correspond to changes in the experimental and
control tasks. This signal is an indirect index of neural
activity (Thompson, Peterson, & Freeman, 2003). In order to quantify these changes in BOLD signal, we used
a block design common to fMRI studies. This design
alternates cycles or ``blocks'' of stimuli corresponding to
experimental or control conditions, which allows for a
statistical evaluation of the amount of change in BOLD
signal that can be accounted for by the periods of time
during which participants are asked to perform experimental and control conditions.
In this experiment, eight cycles of stimuli were
presented following a 12-s period that began the scan.
This period was primarily used to allow the magnet to
reach equilibrium before stimuli were presented and data
collected. The cycle of blocks began with an encoding task
followed by a control task (a tone detection task). This was
followed by a recognition task and a repetition of the
control task. These cycles were repeated eight times during the course of the scan. For half the participants, the
first four cycles included low complexity encoding and recognition conditions, and the second four cycles included
high complexity conditions. The other half received low
and high complexity conditions in reverse order. These
conditions were completed during a single scan.
Because the block design requires participants to
switch between experimental and control tasks, we also
introduced a 3-s cue period before each block. This
period allowed us to present prompts concerning the
upcoming task to facilitate participant performance.
The prompts were as follows: encoding prompt--``Answer
these questions''; tone prompt--``Listen for your sound'';
recognition prompt--``Did you hear the wordI?'' The
specific structure of each cycle consisted of the following
four-block sequence each preceded by their cue period:
encoding block (6 sentences), tone block (6 tone sequences), recognition block (9 target/foil words), and tone
block (3 tone sequences). For the four cycles in-

volving low complexity sentences, each block was 21 s
long, with the exception of the last tone block, which was
12 s. In the cycles with high complexity sentences, the
encoding block was 27 s long (in order to accommodate the
same number of longer, more grammatically complex
sentences). A set response window of 1.0 s was used for
the activation and control intervals. Half of the participants heard low complexity encoding stimuli during
the first four cycles followed by high complexity stimuli
in the last four cycles; the other half heard the high
complexity stimuli first, followed by low complexity.

Verbal Stimuli
Two types of encoding stimuli were created (both
involved yes-no questions); one set consisted of low
complexity sentences and the other was comprised of
high complexity sentences. The low complexity sentences were 7-8 syllables and 2.5 s long. Examples include
Do people ride on horses? and Can a farmer grow dollars?
High complexity stimuli were 10-11 syllables and 3.5 s
long. These sentences were similar to those in the other
condition, but included a relative clause that modified
the subject of the sentence. Examples include Do cats
that are furry live in the ocean? and Can a person who is
hungry eat an apple? It should be noted that the length
and grammatical complexity of the experimental sentences (in both the low and high complexity conditions)
were designed to be more challenging than the simple
three-word sentences (e.g., Water is dry) comprising the
Competing Language Processing Task (CLPT; Gaulin
& Campbell, 1994) administered before the fMRI protocol. Experimental stimuli were specifically designed
with adolescent participants in mind, whereas the CLPT
was intended for children ages 6-12 years. The final
words in each of the experimental sentences were carefully selected and balanced across the lists in terms of
their frequency of occurrence based on the American
Heritage Word Frequency Book (Carroll, Davies, &
Richman, 1971). These sentence-final words were all
two-syllable singular or plural nouns, with stress on the
first syllable (e.g., apple, dollars). There were an equal
number of questions requiring yes-no responses within
each trial block. Recognition stimuli consisted of a list
of words that included sentence-final words from the
encoding sentences (targets), as well as foils that were
semantically and phonetically dissimilar from the
target words for a given set of sentences. The foil items
were matched to the target items with respect to word
frequency, syllable length, and stress pattern. Each
recognition stimulus word was approximately 1 s in
duration. The number of yes-no responses for recognition items was evenly divided across the trial blocks
of the experimental task.
Verbal stimuli were recorded using a Sony Minidisk
recorder and lapel microphone in a sound-treated booth.

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

411

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

The recordings were then digitized and edited using Cool
Edit 2000 such that the signal energy was adjusted to
fill the range of the D/A converter without clipping the
signal. Pilot testing with an adult listener during the
collection of a scan indicated near perfect levels of performance in response to the auditory stimuli used in this
study. Experimental stimuli were presented to listeners
under nonferromagnetic headphones designed to attenuate ambient noise in the scanner.

Tone Stimuli
A tone detection task was selected as a control task.
Participants were asked to listen to a series of tones and
indicate whether each was their target tone (introduced
to them during prescan practice). A control task that
required participants to attend to auditory stimuli and
make responses was preferred over a passive ``resting''
interval for several reasons. First, we wanted to prevent
explicit rehearsal of the verbal stimuli between the
encoding and recognition period by providing an alternate task for participants to complete. Requiring additional processing while items must be held in memory
also increased the computational demand, which was
desirable under the assumption that capacity limitations influence verbal memory performance. In addition,
a control task that required a response from participants
provided evidence that they were complying with task
demands during the control blocks as well as for the
encoding and recognition blocks. Note that the task
demands of the tone tasks (i.e., listening to auditory
stimuli, making decisions, motor movements for responses) mirrored aspects of the experimental tasks
that were not directly related to the constructs of primary interest (i.e., verbal memory). However, we elected
not to parallel the experimental tasks with a verbal or
phonological control task because we did not wish to obscure any activation related to language processing during the encoding and recognition blocks. Because these
task demands were common to both the encoding and
recognition blocks, we were able to use a single control
task as a contrast for both aspects of the verbal memory
task. This also facilitated performance of the participants because it minimized the number of tasks they
had to perform during the course of a scan.
Tone stimuli were 2.5 s long, followed by a 1-s response interval. The first 2 s of each stimulus consisted
of a sequence of pure tone segments, with each segment
0.25-0.5 s long. Half of the sequences ended with the
target tone, a 1000 Hz warble tone that was 0.5 s long.
The other sequences ended with pure tones of various
frequencies (ranging from 100 to 5000 Hz) that were also
0.5 s long. The amplitudes of the tones were manipulated
as necessary to create stimuli that were perceptually
equivalent in loudness across the sequences. As noted
previously, participants were trained prior to the actual

412

experiment to listen for the target tone and to press the
``yes'' button if they heard the target or the ``no'' button if
they did not. The number of items for which the correct
response was yes or no was evenly divided across the
experimental blocks.

Imaging Protocol and Analysis
Procedures
Structural and functional scans were obtained on
a 3 Tesla GE magnet. The protocol included two T1weighted structural scans. The first was obtained with
the slice placement and thickness used in the functional
images (FSE sequence, repetition time [TR] = 500, echo
time [TE] = minimum full, number of excitations [NEX] =
1, field of view [FOV] = 24  24 cm, matrix = 256  128,
twenty-six 5 mm contiguous slices in the axial plane over
the full brain volume, scan time: 2 min 24 s) and was
used to identify neuroanatomical regions on the lower
resolution functional image. The second structural scan
was a high-resolution three-dimensional image (SPGR
sequence, TR = min full, TE = 1, NEX = 1, FOV = 24 
24 cm, matrix = 256  192, one hundred twenty-four
1.5 mm slices in the sagittal plane, scan time: 8 min 40 s)
and was used for display purposes. A single functional
echo-planar scan (Epibold sequence, TR = 3,000, TE =
30, FOV = 24  24 cm, matrix = 64  64, time points: 212,
twenty-six 5 mm contiguous slices in the axial plane over
the full brain volume, scan time: 10 min 36 s) was obtained while participants performed the encoding and
recognition portions of the verbal memory task.
Functional images were analyzed using AFNI (Cox,
2002). Individual images from each scan were reconstructed into three-dimensional (length  width  height)
data sets for structural scans and four-dimensional
(length  width  height  time) data sets for the functional scan. Scans from individual participants were
registered to a base image to minimize the effects of
minor amounts of movement, such as that associated
with breathing and heartbeats. During these two processes, AFNI provides graphic and numerical data that
can be used to evaluate the integrity of the data. The
functional image data from 2 children were found to
have unacceptable movement artifacts and these participants were excluded from the data set. Following
these analyses, slow-changing linear trends in the data
were removed through a regression procedure. Finally,
the signal variations in the functional images were
correlated with a set of numerical models of the hemodynamic response that had been convolved with
the periods of time during which participants were engaged in the behavioral or control tasks. Because the
onset of the hemodynamic response can vary from individual to individual, and from brain region to brain
region, multiple models that lagged the onset of the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

response from 0 to 3 s after stimulus onset were
provided. The analysis program iteratively correlated
each of the models to the functional image data and
retained the results from the model that best fit the
data. The percentage change in the hemodynamic response, the baseline level on which the percentage change
was based, and the time lag of the hemodynamic model
that best fit the functional data were calculated and
retained for statistical analysis.

tion, voxels that did not occur in a cluster of at least
three suprathreshold voxels (173.4 mm) were disregarded. Furthermore, it can be expected that some clusters of activation that meet the correlational threshold
will be idiosyncratic to specific individuals. Therefore,
clusters of voxels were retained for analysis that exceeded this threshold in at least half (n = 4) the NL
participants or half the SLI participants. This maximized the likelihood of identifying regions of functional
neuroanatomy for further analysis that best reflected
the patterns common to both groups.

Given the nature of the tasks used in this study, a
priori predictions could be made about brain systems
that were of interest for specific analysis. This prevented the problem of alpha slippage that would occur
if a voxel-by-voxel search for activation were conducted
across the full volume of the brain. Regions of interest
(ROIs) were identified in a two-step procedure. First,
anatomical areas were identified from the literature
that corresponded to components of the tasks used in
this study (frontal-memory regions, parietal-attention
regions, frontal and temporal language regions). Then,
clusters of voxels within these anatomical areas that
showed reliable activation both within and across subjects were identified. For voxels to be included within
an ROI, they had to show reliable covariation with the
hemodynamic response (r2 > .10). This criterion reflects
a minimum acceptable effect size for the BOLD signal
that is based on signal fidelity corresponding to the blocks
of the experiment. We used this metric of signal fidelity
to judge activation rather than signal amplitude because
the latter can be high even when signal fidelity is low.

Results
Behavioral Analyses
A summary of the behavioral data for the verbal
working memory task is provided in Table 3, including
means and standard deviations for the accuracy and
reaction time (RT) responses broken down by group,
condition, and complexity. Accuracy and RT data were
analyzed separately using a mixed model, repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) in which group
(SLI and NL) was the between-subjects variable and
condition (encoding and recognition) and complexity
(low and high syntactic complexity) were the withinsubjects variables. Only correct responses were analyzed for RT. An a priori alpha level of p G .05 was set for
the detection of significant effects. Partial eta squared
(hp2) was used as a measure of effect size; this measure
reflects the proportion of the effect plus error variance
that is attributable to that effect.

To increase the likelihood that voxels thus identified
represented true activation rather than chance varia-

Table 3. Behavioral data for the verbal memory task reported in terms of percentage
accuracy (means and standard deviations) and reaction times (RTs) in milliseconds for
correct responses.
Group
NL
Task

SLI

M

SD

M

SD

Low complexity encoding
Accuracy
RT

89.06
309.66

8.31
88.10

71.88
360.90

19.51
108.18

High complexity encoding
Accuracy
RT

77.60
295.40

18.22
126.42

68.23
405.29

12.97
128.49

Low complexity recognition
Accuracy
RT

87.85
296.10

6.11
68.23

71.88
334.43

13.40
135.84

High complexity recognition
Accuracy
RT

88.19
310.02

8.62
76.86

75.69
320.20

9.00
121.09

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

413

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Results of the 2 (group)  2 (condition)  2 (complexity) ANOVA for accuracy indicated a significant main
effect for group, F(1, 14) = 10.12, p G .05, hp2 = .42. As
expected, the overall performance of the NL group was
better than that of the SLI group on this verbal working memory measure (86% accuracy compared to 72%
accuracy). The relatively large effect size indicates the
robust nature of this effect. No other main or interaction
effects were significant for the accuracy data. Because
the RT data were not normally distributed, an ANOVA
was conducted using the log transformation of these
data. The results of this analysis were statistically
equivalent to that of an ANOVA using untransformed
RT scores. Analysis of the log transformed RT data for
correct responses (using the same analysis as for the accuracy data), revealed a significant Group  Condition 
Complexity interaction effect, F(1, 14) = 5.71, p G .05,
hp2 = .29. Pairwise comparisons indicated that the group
with SLI exhibited longer RTs for high encoding items
compared to the other group or conditions. There were
no other significant main or interaction effects for RT.
A one-way ANOVA revealed that accuracy performance of the groups on the tone (control) task was not
significantly different, F(1, 14) = 2.31, p = .15, though
the group with SLI exhibited a somewhat lower mean
percentage correct and more variability than the NL
group (SLI: M = 81, SD = 17; NL: M = 90, SD = 6). When
data from 1 participant (from the SLI group) who performed at chance level on this task was removed from
the analysis, differences in the groups' performance remained nonsignificant, F(1, 13) = 1.14, p = .305 (SLI: M =
85, SD = 14; NL: M = 90, SD = 6). There was also no
significant difference between the two groups with respect to RT on correct items for the tone task, F(1, 14) =
0.21, p = .651 (SLI: M = 346.16, SD = 83.85; NL: M =
323.99, SD = 106.73).

Preliminary Imaging Analyses
The procedure for identifying ROIs for analysis in
this study (described above) assumed that there is no
major difference in the location of regions activated by
the NL and SLI groups. If it were the case that NL and
SLI participants used fundamentally different regions to
perform the same tasks, this would have to be accounted
for in the statistical analysis. We identified clusters
of active voxels as described above for the individual
participants within both groups. We then superimposed
these participants' activation maps to determine
whether there were any regions unique to each group.
There were no anatomical regions (defined by gyral
boundaries) for which 4 or more members of one group
showed activation and at least 2 members of the other
group did not. Indeed, the degree of difference between
these two groups is consistent with the amount of

414

variation that is associated with multiple f MRI scans
within individuals (Cohen & DuBois, 1999; Rutten,
Ramsey, van Rijen, & van Veelen, 2002). Figure 1 displays the regions that were identified as active for each
group. In this figure, the color gradient represents the
number of participants within each group for whom activation occurred at a particular site. Therefore, the consistency of regional activation within and between
groups can be seen.
The regions of overlap among participants seen in
Figure 1 also correspond to the regions of interest selected a priori for analysis. These regions included the
IFG (BA 44/45), STG (BA 22), dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex including regions centered on the middle frontal gyrus and precentral sulcus (BA 6/8/9/45), and parietal
lobe (BA 7/40). As described above, clusters of voxels that
reached threshold (r > .31) in at least half of all participants defined the functional regions of interests within
each of these areas. When clusters of active voxels were
close to the margins of anatomical regions that comprised
separate systems (e.g., inferior frontal and middle frontal
gyri), the boundaries of the underlying anatomy from the
individual participants' structural scans guided classification of the activation. Although these broad ROIs
reflected the functional systems related to our task demands, inspection of the data suggested functionally
independent subregions existed within two of the four
broader regions. Previous imaging studies have indicated
that the lateral portions of the IFG and a region at the
junction of the pars opercularis of the IFG and the anterior insula (hereafter referred to as the insular portion
of the IFG) can activate differentially in language tasks
(e.g., Buckner, Raichle, & Petersen, 1995; Friederici,
Opitz, & von Cramon, 2000; Morro et al., 2001; Roskies,
Fiez, Balota, Raichle, & Petersen, 2001). Data from our
participants likewise indicated that there were two spatially distinct areas of activation within the IFG. One is on
the lateral surface of the gyrus (BA 44/45) and one is
within the insular portion of this gyrus (BA44). Similarly,
activation within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex could
be subdivided into an area along the precentral sulcus
(BA 6) and activation falling within the margins of the
middle frontal gyrus (BA8/9/46). Inspection of the patterns
of activation across these subregions in the NL group
suggested differential contribution to different task conditions (i.e., encoding vs. recognition). This can be seen in
Figure 2, which shows the mean percentage change for
each of the four ROIs along with the subregions for the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the IFG. Given this
pattern of differential activation within subregions of the
larger ROIs, we targeted both the combined regions (IFG,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and their subregions for
analysis. In contrast, the anterior and posterior aspects of
the STG might activate differentially given that the anterior regions contain primary auditory cortex and the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Activation within study regions of interest for the normal language (NL) and specific language impairment (SLI) groups during
encoding and recognition conditions. Colors from blue (n = 2) to red (n = 8) indicate increasing numbers of participants with activation (r > .32)
at that location. The values represent the specific locations on the inferior (I) to superior (S) axis of Tailarach space.

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

415

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Percentage change activation in the left hemisphere for the specified regions of interest for the normal
language (NL) and specific language impairment (SLI) groups during encoding (top panel) and recognition
(bottom panel). DLPC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; PRCS = precentral sulcus; MFG = middle frontal gyrus;
IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; IFG-L = lateral portion of the IFG; IFG-I = insular portion of the IFG; STG = superior
temporal gyrus; PAR = parietal region.

posterior aspects of this gyrus include Wernicke's area,
which is classically associated with speech processing.
However, functional imaging data indicate that both anterior and posterior temporal cortex show activation for
auditory sentence comprehension (Humphries, Willard,
Buchsbaum, & Hickok, 2001). Because the anterior and
posterior regions of the STG showed similar patterns of
activation in our participants, these regions were combined. In addition to the a priori regions of interest,
additional activation was noted for both groups in the regions of posterior cingulate gyrus and precuneous gyrus
medially (BA23/31) and dorsomedial (BA9) and ventromedial (BA10) portions of the superior frontal gyrus. All
of these regions have been noted in memory studies, but we
lacked a particular reason to predict their activation
a priori given the specific demands of the task we used.

416

Because we used percentage change from the
participant's baseline intensity as the dependent variable for analysis, we wanted to ensure that this metric
was not affected significantly by group differences in the
average baseline intensity from which the percentage
change was calculated. In this case, the baseline intensity reflects the signal obtained during the control task.
We conducted a series of t tests on each system, including those of subregions that composed the systems analyzed above. The probability levels associated with these t
tests were not alpha-corrected for multiple comparisons
(in order to err on the side of detecting any possible
differences that might exist). There were no significant
group differences for any of the systems or subregions in
either hemisphere under either encoding or recognition
conditions.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Intensity of Activation
The verbal memory and tone detection components
of the task can be expected to produce some differential
patterns of activation across the left and right hemispheres (see Zatorre, Evans, & Meyer, 1994). Our data
indicated that the left hemisphere ROIs all showed
activation to the verbal memory task, whereas right
hemisphere ROIs often were associated with activation
to the tone task. Therefore, our first analysis of the
group differences in BOLD response involved only left
hemisphere regions. In a preliminary analysis, a mixed
ANOVA with group as the between-subjects variable and
condition, complexity, and ROI as within-subjects variables confirmed the lack of a complexity main effect or
interaction effects on the percentage change in the BOLD
response. In this case, the absence of a physiological effect for complexity in the f MRI data was consistent with
the limited effect associated with sentence complexity
manipulations in the behavioral data. Consequently, all
subsequent analyses were performed by calculating the
BOLD response collapsed across high and low complexity
stimuli. In the primary analysis, the percentage change
in the BOLD signal was analyzed with a mixed ANOVA,
with group as the between-subjects variable and condition (encoding vs. recognition) and ROI (dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, IFG, STG, and parietal region) as
within-subjects variables. This analysis revealed a significant three-way interaction of Group  Condition 
ROI, F(3, 42) = 3.03, p = .040, hp2 = .18. The means and
standard errors associated with this effect are displayed in
Figure 2. Post hoc testing of group effects within each of
the major ROIs (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, IFG,
STG, parietal region) revealed a significant group difference for the parietal region in the encoding condition
(Tukey's honestly significant difference, p G .05). Additional t-test analysis of the subregions within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and IFG revealed a significant
group difference for the precentral sulcus region during
encoding, t(14) = j1.83, p G .05, d = 0.89, and the insular
portion of the IFG during recognition, t(14) = j2.06, p G
.05, d = 0.89. For descriptive purposes, and to guide future
research, effect sizes for between-group comparisons for
each of the ROIs are reported in Table 4.
Additional significant effects from the ANOVA
included the Condition  Group interaction, F(1, 14) =
5.02, p G .05, hp2 = .27; the main effect for ROI, F(3, 42) =
8.11, p G .05, hp2 = .37; and the ROI  Condition
interaction, F(3, 42) = 5.80, p G .05, hp2 = .29. The main
effects for group, F(1, 14) = 0.88, p = 0.36, and condition,
F(1, 14) = 0.00, p = .98, and the interaction effects for
ROI  Group, F(3, 42) = 2.24, p = .097, were all statistically nonsignificant.
It is possible that the SLI group offset underactivation seen in left hemisphere structures by recruit-

Table 4. Effect sizes (d) for group differences (between adolescents
with normal language and adolescents with specific language
impairment) in intensity of activation for each region of interest,
on the encoding and recognition portions of the task.
Region of interest

Encoding

Recognition

Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
Precentral sulcus
Middle frontal gyrus

0.502
0.894
0.162

0.015
0.150
0.093

Inferior frontal gyrus (total)
Lateral portion
Insular portion

0.256
0.115
0.640

0.377
0.042
0.889

Superior temporal gyrus

0.220

0.315

Parietal region

1.034

0.166

Note.

d indicates differences in units of standard deviation.

ing right hemisphere structures. To examine this
possibility, we conducted a follow-up analysis of right
hemisphere activation for the ROIs examined above,
using a mixed ANOVA with group as the betweensubjects variable and condition and ROI as withinsubject variables. This analysis revealed a significant
Condition  ROI effect, F(1, 14) = 4.97, p G .05, hp2 = .26,
with no other significant effects. The Condition  ROI
effect was due to significant differences during encoding
versus recognition for the right frontal and parietal
region ROIs. Both of these ROIs activated to the tone
task in the encoding condition but showed a weak activation to the language task during recognition. Note
that difference in activation during the recognition task
could either reflect minimal right hemisphere engagement for the language task or relatively equal engagement of the right hemisphere for both the language and
tone tasks. The design and present results do not allow
us to disambiguate these two possibilities.
Given that the regions within the frontal lobe can
contribute differentially to task performance, we further analyzed the subregions that made up the dorsolateral prefrontal and inferior frontal ROIs. There was a
significant group difference for the area of the lateral
portion of the right IFG, t(14) = 2.09, p = .028. As
predicted, the direction of this effect suggested greater
recruitment of the right hemisphere for the SLI group
than for the NL group. However, this result did not
remain significant after alpha correction ( p = .0125) to
account for the multiple comparisons made within the
frontal ROIs.

Timing of Activation
It is possible that brain systems will work less
effectively not due to underactivation but due to the fact
that areas do not activate in a timely manner, preventing

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

417

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

coordination among systems. We tested this possibility
by running t tests on each system, including those of
subregions that composed the systems analyzed above.
The probability levels associated with these t tests were
not alpha-corrected for multiple comparisons because
Type II error was a larger concern than Type I error
in this analysis. In the left hemisphere, no significant
timing difference was found for any system or subregion
within a system. During the encoding task, the BOLD
response for the right parietal region had a later onset in
the SLI group than in the NL group, t(14) = j2.57, p G .05,
d = 1.25 (two-tailed test). All other comparisons in the
right hemisphere were nonsignificant.

Exploratory Correlational Analyses
Since the systems we targeted do not work in isolation, we examined the correlations among them (see
Figure 3). There are no existing data for individuals with
SLI to motivate specific hypotheses related to these
comparisons; therefore, this analysis is considered to be
exploratory. However, such correlations can provide insight into how these ROIs interacted for the participants
of this study. Pearson product-moment correlations were
calculated for left hemisphere activation in the designated regions. Correlations in bold above solid arrows in
Figure 3 indicate significance at p G .05. The exploratory
nature of this analysis was intended to identify interesting
phenomena for later follow-up; therefore, we used a more
lenient alpha level (not adjusting for multiple correlations) in order to detect possible differences between the
groups. Given the small effects (small differences in
amount of activation) and the limited number of particFigure 3. Correlation patterns for the normal language (NL) and
specific language impairment (SLI) groups during encoding and
recognition. FRT = frontal region; IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; STG =
superior temporal gyrus; PAR = parietal region. *Significant at the
p G .05 level.

418

ipants per group, the power to detect existing group
differences was small even with an alpha of .05.
These exploratory findings revealed differential correlational patterns for the SLI and NL groups during
both the encoding and recognition phases of the task.
During encoding, the group with SLI demonstrated relatively less coactivation between the IFG and the STG
than the NL group (r = .69 and r = .82, respectively).
On the other hand, the SLI group showed significant
correlations between activation in the parietal (PAR)
and frontal (FRT) memory regions and the PAR and
STG, which were less strongly associated during encoding for the NL group (PAR:FRT r = .80 compared
to r = .57; PAR:STG r = .84 compared to r = .64). For
recognition, the only significant correlation for the SLI
group occurred between the IFG and the FRT memory
regions (r = .79). Compared to the NL group's activation
patterns during recognition, the SLI group demonstrated a weak association between the STG and FRT
region (r = .31 compared to .71) and the STG and PAR
region (r = .48 compared to .73).

Discussion
Behavioral Results
For the behavioral data, the main finding was that
the group with SLI was significantly less accurate for
both the encoding and recognition phases of this verbal
working memory task. Additionally, the adolescents
with SLI exhibited slower RTs for correct responses on
the high complexity encoding items compared to the controls. Although there was a general tendency for the SLI
group to exhibit somewhat longer RTs than the controls,
this difference was not statistically significant for three
out of the four conditions. Thus, the RT data from this
study do not provide overall support for the generalized slowing account of SLI (Kail, 1994; L. Leonard,
1998; Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin, 2001). It is
important to note, however, that the RT results (which
only included analysis of correct responses) were likely
impacted by the large group differences in accuracy in
this study. Prior research has typically focused on RT
differences on tasks for which both the SLI and NL groups
demonstrated high levels of accuracy (e.g., Miller et al.,
2001). The age level of participants in the published
studies examining the generalized slowing account of
SLI has also been considerably younger than the age of
participants in the current study. This factor does not
appear to explain these discrepant findings, however,
since recent findings by the same investigators suggest
that adolescents with SLI continue to exhibit slower
RTs than controls on the measures used in that study
(personal communication, C. Miller and L. Leonard, presentation at the annual meeting of the Collaboration on

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Specific Language Impairment project, October 2003).
It is further noteworthy that the experimental design
of this f MRI task constrained the range of possible RTs by setting a specific time interval for all responses.
When a participant did not respond within the specified
response window, that item was recorded as incorrect.
Therefore, it was impossible to discern from the behavioral data the extent to which inaccurate responses reflected inefficient or slower rates of responding. However,
evidence from the physiologic data (discussed below), also
did not suggest substantial timing differences between the
groups.
The adolescents with SLI in this study were
exhibiting the type of difficulty on this verbal working
memory measure that has been reported in other behavioral research; children with SLI have been found
to demonstrate poorer word recall than NL controls on
listening span measures, even when sentence comprehension was equivalent or statistically controlled (Ellis
Weismer et al., 1999; Ellis Weismer & Thordardottir,
2002). For the present study, an analysis of covariance
revealed that the SLI group demonstrated significantly
poorer word recognition than the NL group when level of
sentence comprehension was controlled, F(1, 13) = 6.46,
p G .05, hp2 = .332. Thus, the poorer recognition performance of the SLI group was not simply a reflection
of their generally lower linguistic abilities. It should be
noted that the behavioral findings from the experimental task were consistent with the results from the eighth
grade clinical assessments that documented poor verbal working memory abilities for these same participants on two different tasks. That is, the group with
SLI scored significantly worse than the controls on a
measure of phonological working memory (Nonword
Repetition Task; Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998) and on
word recall from a listening span measure (Competing
Language Processing Task; Gaulin & Campbell, 1994).
The two types of sentences (low and high complexity)
were designed to vary cognitive load of the experimental task. However, sentence complexity manipulations
resulted in minimal differences in performance on this
task, contrary to expectations based on pilot data with
these particular stimuli. Both groups performed well
above chance level during encoding of low complexity
(72%-89% accuracy) and high complexity (68%-77%
accuracy) sentences. Accuracy differences in the predicted direction were observed across sentence types,
but these did not reach statistical significance. The only
significant effect for complexity was the three-way
interaction, which revealed that the group with SLI
demonstrated slower RTs than the NL group on high
complexity encoding. Neuroimaging studies of adult
language processing have demonstrated effects of manipulating sentence complexity using stimuli such as
conjoined active sentences versus object-relative construc-

tions (Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, & Thulborn, 1996;
Keller et al., 2001). Our ongoing research (Ellis Weismer
and colleagues) with the larger sample from which these
participants were drawn indicates that at eighth grade,
the type of complex sentence that most clearly differentiates adolescents with SLI from those without language disorder is the object-cleft construction (based on a
complex sentence processing task developed by Naucler,
Wulfeck, & Bates, 1998). In designing the task used in the
present study, we did not want to make the linguistic
demands so difficult for the encoding portion for complex
sentences that adolescents with SLI were unable to complete the word recognition (storage) portion. We apparently underestimated the impact of this particular linguistic manipulation involving the addition of a relative
clause. Despite the fact that the processing complexity/
cognitive load factor did not work as expected, the task
allowed us to examine the interplay of brain systems
during the verbal working memory task.

fMRI Data
Preliminary analyses of the imaging data revealed
that the group with SLI was similar to the control group
in several fundamental ways. Adolescents with SLI were
comparable to NL adolescents with respect to the areas
of activation for this task. It was not the case that the
SLI group was activating regions that were not being
activated by the NL group or failing to activate areas
seen in the NL group. Both groups exhibited patterns
that would be expected based on the adult language
processing and working memory literature with respect
to ROIs activated and left hemisphere bias for verbal
stimuli (Gernsbacher & Kaschak, 2003; Jonides, 2000).
With regard to timing of activation, there was no indication that the SLI group showed a slower physiologic
response relative to the NL group. In fact, the hemodynamic models that best fit the two groups' data were
quite comparable. If the adolescents with SLI had been
exhibiting substantially slower physiologic response patterns than the controls, different hemodynamic models
would have been required to account for the two groups'
data.
The percentage change activation analysis revealed
no overall laterality differences between the SLI and NL
groups. In other words, the SLI group did not disproportionately draw on right hemisphere structures for
language processing compared to the NL group, even
though one might have predicted this to be the case
for several reasons. One might expect to find functional evidence that individuals with SLI are not as well
lateralized as individuals with typical language development, given the structural imaging findings of a rightward asymmetry in SLI (Plante et al., 1991). However,
Hugdahl et al. (2004) reported findings that are similar

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

419

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

to those of the present study in that individuals with SLI,
like controls, exhibited a leftward activation bias (even
though bilateral activation was observed) for the language
processing tasks in that investigation. Just, Carpenter,
Keller, et al. (1996) have reported increases in adults'
activation of right hemisphere homologues in regions
activated for sentence processing under conditions of
increased task difficulty; they attributed this effect to
the resource-intensive nature of processing complex
sentences. One might assume that the adolescents with
SLI in the present study would show increased recruitment of resources in order to complete the task. Although
analysis of subregions within the frontal lobe indicated
that the SLI group demonstrated more activation in the
lateral portion of the right IFG during encoding than
controls, this effect did not survive alpha correction.
The group differences in the imaging data that did
emerge shed light on the nature of processing in SLI
that is not those readily accessible by behavioral methods alone. In behavioral studies, inferences about processing are linked to group differences in participant
responses; this necessarily confounds both encoding and
response phases of the task. In contrast, imaging studies
make visible the contributions of various processes that
are not otherwise readily apparent. The results of this
study suggest that processing differences during both
the encoding and recognition phases of the task lead to
group differences in behavioral performance.
During the encoding phase, significant activation
differences occurred for both an area centered on the
precentral sulcus and in the parietal region. These areas
are routinely activated in tasks that target memory. The
frontal region in particular modulates with memory load
manipulations (e.g., Barch et al., 1997; Braver et al.,
1997; Goldberg et al., 1998). Furthermore, activation
in the frontal region is not specific to verbal material or
to working memory versus long-term memory tasks
(Cabeza, Dolcos, Graham, & Nyberg, 2002; Ranganath
et al., 2003). Parietal regions typically also show activation during tasks that require memory but appear
to modulate with the attentional demands inherent to
the tasks (Shaywitz et al., 2001; Sylvester et al., 2003).
The group differences in frontal and parietal regions
in this study suggest that performance differences on
this type of task might be mediated more by these
nonlinguistic factors (i.e., memory and attention) that
influence overall processing capacity than by strictly
linguistic ones.
Differences in the insular portion of the IFG were
noted during the recognition phase of the task. This
region activates with a variety of language tasks. However, when elements of language are isolated or emphasized by task demands, activation tends to occur in tasks
that target semantic processing (Binder et al., 1997),

420

recognition of semantically encoded words (Buckner,
Koutstaal, Schacter, Wagner, & Rosen, 1998), and detection of semantic rather than syntactic anomalies
(Kang, Constable, Gore, & Avrutin, 1999). However, it
appears that this area is not specific to semantic processing in that activation has also occurred with syntactic judgement of sentences (Ni et al., 2000) even when
those sentences were composed of psuedowords (Morro
et al., 2001). Thus, it appears that this region may be
active with several aspects of language processing but
is more likely to appear when semantic processing is
emphasized. The fact that the words in the recognition
phase of our task had been embedded in a sentence
context during encoding is likely to have promoted semantic encoding along with encoding of their lexical
forms. During recognition of semantically encoded words,
neurologically normal adults increase activation of
this region with retrieval effort (Buckner et al, 1998).
However, in the SLI group studied here, this region
showed a pattern of hypoactivation. This occurred despite the fact that the performance data indicated this
task was more difficult for the SLI group than for the NL
group. Thus, the SLI group did not appear to ``step up''
activation when task demands proved difficult.
In addition to regional differences between groups,
there was evidence that the SLI group was not coordinating activation between regions during both encoding
and recognition phases. Encoding in the NL group was
characterized by correlations between the STG, dorsolateral prefrontal regions, and the IFG. This suggests
that receptive language processing (the STG) was
coordinated with processes involving the IFG that are
associated with later successful recall of encoded information (Buckner, Wheeler, & Sheridan, 2001; Casasanto
et al., 2002; Clark & Wagner, 2003; Wagner et al., 1998).
Activation in each of these areas correlated with that
in the dorsolateral prefrontal gyrus, which has been
associated with memory processes. However, in the SLI
group, the pattern of processing during encoding was
characterized by a weaker association between the superior temporal and inferior frontal regions. Thus, part
of the encoding network most closely associated with
later success in memory recall appears to be less efficient
both in terms of strength of activation and coordination
among relevant regions. In addition, the SLI group
showed stronger than expected correlations for frontal
and temporal regions with the parietal region. This is
unlikely to reflect compensation given that the parietal
region showed less activation in the SLI group than
in the NL group during encoding. One might hypothesize that contributions by this hypoactivated area were
unlikely to have improved later performance. The
pattern of hypoactivation in the parietal region, combined with anomalous correlations with frontal and
temporal regions, suggests an overreliance on a less

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

functional network by the SLI group during the encoding
phase of this task. A similar phenomenon has been
described for poor readers (compared with good readers)
who have an overreliance on the dorsal reading circuit
rather than the ventral reading circuit (Pugh et al.,
2000).
Differences in the coordination of activation during
the recognition phase were also noted. In the NL group,
activation in the STG, frontal, and parietal ROIs showed
a pattern of intercorrelation. This suggests coordination
between regions important for language processing with
regions that modulate attention to the word stimuli and
memory performance. However, the SLI group showed
less correlation among these structures and greater correlation among dorsolateral prefrontal and inferior frontal regions. Again, this pattern included a region that
showed significantly less activation by the SLI group.
This pattern indicates an overdependence on a relatively
underactive region, instead of on regions that were more
similar in their level of activation to that seen in the NL
group. Given that these patterns of activation were also
associated with poorer performance by the SLI group,
it can be concluded that these patterns did not reflect
successful compensation. If this were the case, one
might expect similar behavioral performance despite different patterns of activation (see Plante et al., 2000).
The findings from the present investigation can be
compared to the results from the Hugdahl et al. (2004)
study of language processing in SLI; however, conclusions
must be tempered in the light of the differences between
the studies with respect to task, design, and age range
of participants. Similar to the present results, Hugdahl
and colleagues reported that both the SLI and control
group demonstrated a leftward bias in activation during language processing. The experimental and control
groups in both studies generally activated ROIs similar to each other; however, Hugdahl et al. reported
that the controls in their study produced a small area of
activation in the right inferior frontal lobe, thought to
reflect working memory and attention effects, that was
not observed for the group with SLI. In both studies,
participants with SLI displayed hypoactivation compared
with controls, despite differences in task difficulty/
performance levels. In the Hugdahl et al. study, all participants performed at ceiling during a separate condition (conducted after the passive listening task) in which
behavioral responses were collected to determine if they
could correctly detect the auditory stimuli, but these
investigators noted that the underactivation exhibited
by the SLI group would be expected to correspond with
poorer response patterns on a more cognitively demanding task.
Differences in the particular ROIs in which hypoactivation was found for the individuals with SLI are

likely due to the differing nature of the tasks within the
present study and the study by Hugdahl et al. (2004).
Hugdahl and colleagues concluded that individuals
with SLI primarily demonstrated reduced activation in
brain areas critical for speech processing and phonological awareness (MTG/STS) based on their examination
of activation patterns in the temporal and frontal lobes
during passive listening to vowels, pseudowords, and
real words. Although the SLI group in the present study
tended to exhibit reduced activation in the temporal
lobe region during encoding, significant group differences were found only in the parietal and frontal lobes
for this verbal working memory task in which participants were asked to process sentences and retain target
words within those sentences.
In summary, the poor performance on this verbal
working memory measure by adolescents with SLI was
associated with both similarities and differences in neural
functioning compared to typically developing adolescents.
The f MRI data revealed that the two groups activated
similar brain regions in response to the experimental
task within the ROIs that were examined, showed comparable timing of activation (as indexed by the latency of
the optimal hemodynamic models), and did not display
significant differences in laterality. However, the group
with SLI displayed hypoactivation of the left PAR and
the precentral sulcus (PCS) during encoding, as well as
hypoactivation of the insular portion of the IFG during
recognition. Findings from the correlational analyses
suggest that adolescents with SLI exhibit atypical
coordination of activation across brain regions during
encoding and recognition. Thus, differences were observed in regions associated with attentional control
mechanisms (PAR) and memory processes (PCS), as well
as language processing and retention of verbal information (IFG).

Limitations and Future Directions
This study provides an initial neuroimaging investigation of processing capacity limitations in SLI.
One obvious limitation of the current study is the relatively small sample size, which may have resulted in a
lack of significant group differences where they actually existed. Studies with larger samples are needed to
confirm the present findings and further characterize
language processing and recall in SLI. Also, a wider developmental range should be examined, starting with
younger children with language impairment, in order
to gain a broader understanding of the neural circuitry
underlying language functioning in this population.
This study included participants who exhibited a wide
range of attentional skills. Further studies are needed
to tease apart the role of attention deficits in verbal

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

421

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

working memory for children with and without language
impairment. In the current study, we used an adapted
listening span task that could be compared to prior
behavioral results for children with SLI; performance
on this task was compared to that for a tone task using
a block design. Future fMRI investigations might use
tasks (such as the n-back task) that have been well established with adults and utilize event related designs
to more precisely detail the nature of verbal working
memory processes associated with both successful and
unsuccessful item performance. In the light of the present results, additional research utilizing measures like
those used by Shaywitz et al. (2001) is also warranted
to specifically examine attentional mechanisms during
language processing by individuals with SLI.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this study was provided by National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development Grant P30 HD03352
(Waisman Center core grant), University of Wisconsin
Graduate School Research Committee Award, Project #020856,
and National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders Grant P50 DC02746 (Collaboration on Specific
Language Impairment). We would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the adolescents and their families for their
willingness to travel from Iowa to Wisconsin in order to
participate in this study. We give special thanks to Marlea
O'Brien and Paula Buckwalter for their assistance with
recruiting participants from the Iowa epidemiological study
and to Xuyang Zhang for his help in providing summary
information from the Collaboration on Specific Language
Impairment database. Finally, we want to thank Keck
Laboratory research specialists Michael Anderle and Ron
Fisher and MR physicist Andy Alexander for their assistance
in the collection of the imaging data.

Barch, D. M., Braver, T. S., Nystrom, L. E., Forman,
S. D., Noll, D. C., & Cohen, J. D. (1997). Dissociating
working memory from task difficulty in human prefrontal
cortex. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1373-1380.
Binder, J. R., Frost, J. A ., Hammeke, T. A ., Rao, S. M.,
Cox, R. W., Rao, S. M., & Prieto, T. (1997). Human brain
language areas identified by functional MRI. Journal of
Neuroscience, 17, 353-362.
Binder, J., & Price, C. (2001). Functional neuroimaging of
language. In R. Cabeza, & A. Kingstone (Eds.), Handbook
of functional neuroimaging of cognition (pp. 187-251).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Braver, T., Cohen, J., Nystrom, L., Jonides, J., Smith,
E., & Noll, D. (1997). A parametric study of prefrontal
cortex involvement in human working memory.
NeuroImage, 5, 49-62.
Buckner, R. L., Koustaal, W., Schacter, D. L., Wagner,
A . D., & Rosen, B. R. (1998). Functional-anatomic study of
episodic retrieval using f MRI: II. Selective averaging of
event-related f MRI trials to test the retrieval success
hypothesis. NeuroImage, 7, 163-175.
Buckner, R. L., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1995).
Dissociation of human prefrontal cortex areas across
different speech production tasks and gender groups.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 74, 2163 -2173.
Buckner, R. L., Wheeler, M. E., & Sheridan, M. A . (2001).
Encoding processes during retrieval tasks. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 406-415.
Buschbaum , B. R., Hickok, G., & Humphries, C. (2001).
Role of left posterior superior temporal gyrus in
phonological processing for speech perception and
production. Cognitive Science, 25, 663-678.
Cabeza, R., Dolcos, F., Graham, R., & Nyberg, L. (2002).
Similarities and differences in the neural correlates of
episodic memory retrieval and working memory.
NeuroImage, 16, 17-30.
Cabeza, R., Dolcos, F., Prince, S., Rice, H., Weissman,
D., & Nyberg, L. (2003). Attention-related activity during
episodic memory retrieval: A cross-function f MRI study.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 390-399.

References

Caplan, D. (2001). Functional neuroimaging studies of
syntactic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 30, 297-320.

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Child Behavior Checklist: Four to
eighteen year olds. Burlington: University of Vermont,
Department of Psychiatry.

Caplan, D., & Waters, G. (2002). Working memory and
connectionist models of parsing: A reply to MacDonald and
Christiansen (2002). Psychological Review, 109, 66 -74.

Baddeley, A . (1986). Working memory. Oxford, United
Kingdom: Clarendon Press.

Carpenter, P., Miyake, A ., & Just, M. (1994). Working
memory contraints in comprehension: Evidence from
individual differences, aphasia, and aging. In M. A.
Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of psycholinguistics
(pp. 1075-1122). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Baddeley, A . (1998). Human memory: Theory and practice
(Rev. ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Baddeley, A . (2003). Working memory and language: An
overview. Journal of Communication Disorders, 36,
189-208.
Baddeley, A ., Gathercole, S., & Papagno, C. (1998). The
phonological loop as a language learning device.
Psychological Review, 105, 158-173.
Baddeley, A . D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation: Advances in research and theory ( Vol. 8,
47-90). New York: Academic Press.

422

Carroll, J., Davies, P., & Richman, B. (Eds.). (1971). The
American Heritage word frequency book. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Casasanto, D. J., Kilgore, W. D. S., Maldjian, J. A .,
Glosser, G., Alsop, D. C., & Cooke, A . M., et al. (2002).
Neural correlates of successful and unsuccessful verbal
memory encoding. Brain and Language, 80, 287-295.
Chein, J., Ravizza, S., & Fiez, J. (2003). Using
neuroimaging to evaluate models of working memory and

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

their implications for language processing. Journal
of Neurolinguistics, 16, 315-339.
Clark, D., & Wagner, A . D. (2003). Assembling and
encoding word representations: f MRI subsequent
memory effects implicate a role for phonological control.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 304 -317.
Cohen, M., & DuBois, R. (1999). Stability, repeatability,
and the expression of signal magnitude in functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, 10, 33 - 40.
Cowan, N. (1999). Embedded-processes model of working
memory. In A. Miyake, & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working
memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive
control (pp. 62-101). New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Disorders of language development (pp. 21-37). Timonium,
MD: York Press.
Ellis Weismer, S., Tomblin, J. B., Zhang, X., Buckwalter,
P., Chynoweth, J. G., & Jones, M. (2000). Nonword
repetition performance in school-age children with and
without language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 865-878.
Friederici, A . D., Meyer, M., & von Cramon, D. (2000).
Auditory language comprehension: An event-related f MRI
study on the processing of syntactic and lexical
information. Brain and Language, 74, 289-300.
Freiderici, A . D., Opitz, B., & von Cramon, D. (2000).
Segregating semantic and syntactic aspects of processing in
the human brain: An f MRI investigation of different word
types. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 698-705.

Cox, R. W. (2002). Analysis of Functional NeuroImages
(AFNI) [Computer software]. Retrieved from
http://afni.nimh.gov/afni

Frisk, V., & Milner, B. (1990). The role of the left
hippocampal region in the acquisition and retention of
story content. Neuropsychologia, 28, 349-359.

Crosson, B., Rao, S., Woodley, S., Rosen, A ., Bobholz, J.,
& Mayer, A ., et al. (1999). Mapping semantic,
phonological, and orthographic verbal working memory in
normal adults with functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Neuropsychology, 13, 171-187.

Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there
a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29, 336-360.

Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450 - 466.
Demonet, J., Price, C., Wise, R., & Frackowiak, R.
(1994). A PET study of cognitive strategies in normal
subjects during language tasks: Influence of phonetic
ambiguity and sequence processing on phoneme
monitoring. Brain, 117, 671-682.
Denays, R., Tondeur, M., Foulon, M., Verstraeten, F.,
Ham, H., Piepsz, A ., & Noel, P. (1989). Regional brain
blood flow in congenital dysphasia: Studies with
Technetium-99m HM-PAO SPECT. Journal of Nuclear
Medicine, 30, 1825-1829.
D'Esposito, M., Ballard, D., Aguirre, G., & Zarahn, E.
(1998). Human prefrontal cortex is not specific for
working memory: A functional MRI study.
NeuroImage, 8, 274 -282.
Dollaghan, C., & Campbell, T. (1998). Nonword repetition
and child language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1136-1146.

Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1993). Working memory
and language processing. Hove, United Kingdom:
Erlbaum.
Gathercole, S., Service, E., Hitch, G., Adams, A ., &
Martin, A . (1999). Phonological short-term memory and
vocabulary development: Further evidence on the nature of
the relationship. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 65-77.
Gathercole, S., Willis, C., Emslie, H., & Baddeley, A .
(1992). Phonological memory and vocabulary development
during the early school years: A longitudinal study.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 887-898.
Gauger, L., Lombardino, L., & Leonard, C. (1997). Brain
morphology in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40,
1272-1284.
Gaulin, C., & Campbell, T. (1994). Procedure for assessing
verbal working memory in normal school-age children:
Some preliminary data. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
79, 55-64.
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Kaschak, M. (2003). Neuroimaging
studies of language production and comprehension.
Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 91-114.

Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test--Revised. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.

Gillam, R. (1998). Memory and language impairments in
children and adults. Frederick, MD: Aspen Publishers.

Ellis Weismer, S. (1996). Capacity limitations in working
memory: The impact on lexical and morphological learning
by children with language impairment. Topics in Language
Disorders, 17, 33-44.

Giraud, A . L., & Price, C. J. (2001). The constraints
functional neuroinmaging places on classical models of
auditory word processing. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 13, 754-765.

Ellis Weismer, S. (2004). Memory and processing capacity.
In R. Kent (Ed.), MIT encyclopedia of communication
disorders. Boston: MIT Press.

Goldberg, T. E., Berman, K. F., Fleming, K., Ostrem, J.,
Van Horn, J. D., & Esposito, G., et al. (1998).
Uncoupling cognitive workload and prefrontal cortical
physiology: A PET rCBF study. NeuroImage, 7, 296-303.

Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. (1999).
An examination of verbal working memory capacity in
children with specific language impairment. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42,
1249-1260.

Helzer, J., Champlin, C., & Gillam, R. (1996). Auditory
temporal resolution in specifically language-impaired
age-matched children. Perception and Motor Skills, 83,
1171-1181.

Ellis Weismer, S., & Thordardottir, E. (2002). Cognition
and language. In P. Accardo, B. Rogers, & A. Capute (Eds.),

Hugdahl, K., Gundersen, H., Brekke, C., Thomsen, T.,
Rimol, L. M., Ersland, L., & Niemi, J. (2004). f MRI

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

423

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

brain activation in a Finnish family with specific language
impairment compared with a normal control group.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
47, 162-172.

Miller, C. A ., Kail, R., Leonard, L., & Tomblin, J. B.
(2001). Speed of processing in children with specific
language impairment . Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 44, 416-433.

Humphries, C., Willard, K., Buchsbaum, B., & Hickok, G.
(2001). Role of anterior temporal cortex in auditory
sentence comprehension: An f MRI study. NeuroReport,
12, 1749-1752.

Montgomery, J. (1995). Sentence comprehension in
children with specific language impairment: The role of
phonological working memory. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 38, 187-199.

Jackson, T., & Plante, E. (1997). Gyral morphology in
the posterior sylvian region in families affected by
developmental language disorder. Neuropsychology
Review, 6, 81-94.

Montgomery, J. (2000). Verbal working memory and
sentence comprehension in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 43, 293-308.

Jernigan, T., Hesselink, J., Sowell, E., & Tallal, P. (1991).
Cerebral structure on magnetic resonance imaging in
language- and learning-impaired children. Archives of
Neurology, 48, 539-545.

Montgomery, J. (2003). Working memory and comprehension
in children with specific language impairment: What
we know so far. Journal of Communication Disorders, 36,
221-231.

Jonides, J. (2000). Mechanisms of verbal working memory
revealed by neuroimaging studies. In B. Landau, J. Sabini,
J. Jonides, & E. Newport (Eds.), Perception, cognition, and
language (pp. 87-104). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Morro, A ., Tettamanti, M., Perani, D., Donati, C., Cappa,
S. F., & Fazio, F. (2001). Syntax and the brain:
Disentangling grammar by selective anomalies.
NeuroImage, 13, 110-118.

Just , M., & Carpenter, P. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual difference in working
memory. Psychological Review, 99, 1-28.

Naucler, N., Wulfeck, B., & Bates, E. (1998).
A developmental study of complex sentence interpretation
abilities [Technical report from the Project in Cognitive
and Neural Development, Center for Research in Language].
La Jolla: University of California, San Diego.

Just, M., Carpenter, P., & Keller, T. (1996). The capacity
theory of comprehension: New frontiers of evidence and
arguments. Psychological Review, 103, 773-780.
Just, M., Carpenter, P., Keller, T., Eddy, W., & Thulborn,
K. (1996). Brain activation modulated by sentence
comprehension. Science, 274, 114 -116.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kail, R. (1994). A method of studying the generalized slowing
hypothesis in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 418 - 421.
Kang, A . M., Constable, R. T., Gore, J. C., & Avrutin, S.
(1999). An event-related f MRI study of implicit phraselevel syntactic and semantic processing. NeuroImage, 10,
555-561.
Keller, T., Carpenter, P., & Just, M. (2001). The neural
bases of sentence comprehension: An f MRI examination
of syntactic and lexical processing. Cerebral Cortex, 11,
223-237.
King, J., & Just, M. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The role of working memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with
specific language impairment name pictures more slowly
than their peers? Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
39, 1081-1097.
Leonard, C., Lombardino, L., Walsh, K., Eckert, M.,
Mockler, J., & Rowe, L ., et al. (2002). Anatomical risk
factors that distinguish dyslexia from SLI predict reading
skill in normal children. Journal of Communication
Disorders, 35, 501-531.
Leonard, L. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lou, H. C., Henriksen, L., & Bruhn, P. (1984). Focal
cerebral hypoperfusion in children with dysphasia and /or
attention deficit disorder. Neurology, 41, 825-829.

424

Ni, W., Constable, R. T., Mencl, W. E., Pugh, K. R.,
Fulbright, R. K., & Shaywitz, B. A., et al. (2000). An
event-related neuroimaging study distinguishing form and
content in sentence processing. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 120-133.
Nyberg, L., Marklund, P., Persson, J., Cabeza, R.,
Forkstam, C., Petersson, K., & Ingvar, M. (2003).
Common prefrontal activations during working memory,
episodic memory, and semantic memory. Neuropsychologia,
41, 371-377.
Plante, E. (1991). MRI findings in the parents and siblings of
specifically language impaired boys. Brain and Language,
41, 67-80.
Plante, E., Swisher, L., Vance, R., & Rapcsak, S. (1991).
MRI findings in boys with specific language impairment.
Brain and Language, 41, 52-66.
Plante, E., Van Petten, C., & Senkfor, A . (2000).
Electrophysiological dissociation between verbal and
nonverbal processing in learning disabled adults.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 1669-1684.
Posner, M., & Dehanene, S. (1994). Attentional networks.
Trends in Neurosciences, 17, 75-79.
Pugh, K., Einer Mencl, W., Jenner, A ., Katz, L., Frost, S.,
& Ren Lee, J., et al. (2000). Functional neuroimaging
studies of reading and reading disability (developmental
dyslexia). Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities Research Reviews, 6, 207-213.
Ranganath, C., Johnson, M., & D'Esposito, M. (2003).
Prefrontal activity associated with working memory
and episodic long-term memory. Neuropsychologia, 41,
378-389.
Roskies, A . L., Fiez, J. A ., Balota, D. A ., Raichle, M. E., &
Petersen, S. E. (2001). Task-dependent modulation of
regions in the left inferior frontal cortex during semantic
processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 829-843.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  Vol. 48  405-425  April 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Rutten, G., Ramsey, N., van Rijen, P., & van Veelen, C.
(2002). Reproducibility of f MRI-determined language
lateralization in individual subjects. Brain and Language,
80, 421-437.
Rypma, B., Berger, J., & D' Esposito, M. (2002). The
influence of working-memory demand and subject
performance on prefrontal cortical activity. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 721-731.
Rypma, B., Prabhakaran, V., Desmond, J., Glover, G., &
Gabrieli, J. (1999). Load-dependent roles of frontal brain
regions in the maintenance of working memory.
NeuroImage, 9, 216-226.
Semel, E., Wiig, E., & Secord, W. (1995). Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals - 3 (CELF-3).
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Shaywitz, B., Shaywitz, S., Pugh, K., Fullbright, R.,
Skudlarski, P., & Einer Mencl, W., et al. (2001).
The functional neural architecture of components of
attention in language-processing tasks. NeuroImage, 13,
601-612.
Swanson, H. L. (1996). Individual and age-related differences
in children's working memory. Memory & Cognition, 24,
70-82.
Sylvester, C. C., Wager, T. D., Lacey, S. C., Hernandez,
L., Nichols, T. E., Smith, E. E., & Jonides, J. (2003).
Switching attention and resolving interference: f MRI
measures of executive functions. Neuropsychologia,
41, 357-370.
Thompson, J. K., Peterson, M. R., & Freeman, R. D.
(2003). Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in the
cerebral cortex. Science, 229, 1070-1072.
Tomblin, J. B., Records, N., & Zhang, X . (1996). A system
for the diagnosis of specific language impairment in

kindergarten children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 1284-1294.
Wagner, A ., Poldrack, R., Eldridge, L., Desmon, J.,
Glover, G., & Gabrieli, J. (1998). Material-specific
lateralization of prefrontal activation during
episodic encoding and retrieval. NeuroReport, 9,
3711-3717.
Wagner, A . D., Schacter, D. L., Rotte, M., Koutstaal, W.,
Maril, A ., & Dale, A . M., et al. (1998). Building memories:
Remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as
predicted by brain activity. Science, 281, 1188-1191.
Wallace, G., & Hammill, D. D. (1997). The Comprehensive
Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test: Adult. Austin,
TX: PRO-ED.
Wechsler, D. (1991). Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children--
Third Edition (WISC-III). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.
Zatorre, R. J., Evans, A . C., & Meyer, E. (1994). Neural
mechanisms underlying melodic perception and memory
for pitch. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 1908-1919.
Received September 22, 2003
Revision received April 16, 2004
Accepted July 27, 2004
DOI: 10.1044 /1092-4388(2005/ 028)
Contact author: Susan Ellis Weismer, Waisman Center,
University of Wisconsin, Room 473, 1500 Highland
Avenue, Madison, WI 53705.
E-mail: ellisweismer@wisc.edu
Maura Jones is now at Marquette University.

Ellis Weismer et al.: fMRI Investigation of SLI

425

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

