Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449
www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Effects of dialect on merger perception:
ERP and behavioral correlates
Brianna Conrey a,*, Geoffrey F. Potts b, Nancy A. Niedzielski c
a

Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
b
Department of Psychology, Rice University, USA
c
Department of Linguistics, Rice University, USA
Accepted 23 June 2005
Available online 15 August 2005

Abstract
Native speakers of a language are often unable to consciously perceive, and have altered neural responses to, phonemic contrasts
not present in their language. This study examined whether speakers of dialects of the same language with different phoneme inventories also show measurably different neural responses to contrasts not present in their dialect. Speakers with (n = 11) and without
(n = 11) an American English I/E (pin/pen) vowel merger in speech production were asked to discriminate perceptually between minimal pairs of words that contrasted in the critical vowel merger and minimal pairs of control words while their event-related potential (ERPs) were recorded. Compared with unmerged dialect speakers, merged dialect speakers were less able to make behavioral
discriminations and exhibited a reduced late positive ERP component (LPC) effect to incongruent merger vowel stimuli. These
results indicate that between dialects of a single language, the behavioral response differences may reflect neural differences related
to conscious phonological decision processes.
 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Speech perception; Dialect perception; Language-related ERPs; Late positivity; Late positive component

1. Introduction
The cognitive neuroscience method of event-related
potentials (ERPs) has demonstrated that phonological
differences between languages result in differential neural responses to speech sound contrasts that are native
versus nonnative in the listenerOs language (Buchwald,
Guthrie, Schwafel, Erwin, & Van Lancker, 1994; Naatanen et al., 1997; Rivera-Gaxiola, Osibra, Johnson, &
Karmiloff-Smith, 2000). These findings indicate that
exposure to particular sound patterns in speech results
in language-specific neural responses that occur early
in phonological processing. One question that arises
from these cross-linguistic studies is whether familiar
*

Corresponding author. Fax: +1 812 855 4691.
E-mail address: bconrey@indiana.edu (B. Conrey).

0093-934X/$ - see front matter  2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2005.06.008

phonological contrasts from a different dialect of the listenerOs language also produce altered ERP responses. In
addition, it is of interest to both sociolinguists and cognitive neuroscientists who study individual differences in
language processing to find out what ERP components
might index within-language differences in phonological
processing.
We know from sociolinguistics, the study of language
variation and change, that a great deal of phonetic variation occurs even within a single language. For instance, vowel mergers are a form of language variation
in which two vowels that contrast in pronunciation in
one dialect of a language are merged, or not distinguished in pronunciation, in another dialect. For example, in some dialects of American English, the
nonperipheral front vowels /I/ as in pin and /E/ as in
pen are merged in pronunciation before nasal conso-

436

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

nants. As a result, productions of pin and pen by a
merged dialect speaker might both sound like the word
pin to an unmerged dialect speaker. This merger in production, known as the pin/pen merger, is characteristic
of Southern States dialects, and is also widespread in
Texas, the South Midland, and parts of the West (Labov, 1996).
Several studies have investigated the perception of
vowel mergers by speakers of merged and unmerged dialects. Findings indicate that speakers of dialects that
merge two vowels are less able to make perceptual discriminations between those merged vowels than speakers of dialects in which the vowels are not merged
(Bowie, 2000; Janson & Schulman, 1983; Labov, Karan,
& Miller, 1991). In an early study, Janson and Schulman
investigated production and perception of Swedish nonperipheral front vowels. Participants spoke either the
Lycksele dialect of Swedish, which has four front vowels, or the Stockholm dialect, which has only three.
The Stockholm speakers were not able to discriminate
perceptually between the two vowels that had merged
in production in their dialect. In addition, although
some Lycksele dialect speakers could discriminate perceptually among all four vowels, others could not discriminate reliably between the two vowels that had
merged in production in the Stockholm dialect. Janson
and Schulman suggested that exposure to merged vowels from other dialects rather than acoustic characteristics of merging vowels might have been responsible for
the poorer performance of unmerged dialect speakers
on vowels merged in other dialects than on other vowels.
A follow-up experiment in the Janson and Schulman
(1983) study showed that telling Stockholm dialect
speakers that they were listening to English rather than
Swedish words significantly improved their ability to
discriminate between the two vowels that were merged
in the Stockholm dialect. However, a cross-linguistic
study by Ingram and Park (1997) reported that speaking
a merged dialect may still be correlated with a lack of
reliable perceptual discrimination among similar sounds
in another language. In Ingram and ParkOs study, native
speakers of Korean and Japanese were assessed on their
production and perception of Australian English vowels. Younger Korean speakers tended to speak a dialect
of Korean in which /e/ and /E/ are merged. These
speakers were worse than speakers of unmerged Korean
dialects at both production and perceptual discrimination of Australian English vowels that were similar to
the merged Korean vowels.
Studies of merger production and perception in
American English dialects have been carried out by Labov et al. (1991) and by Bowie (2000). Labov and his colleagues studied the merger of /E/ and /uh/ before
intervocalic /r/ in Philadelphia dialect speakers. Philadelphians with and without the merger in production
did not differ significantly in their ability to distinguish

perceptually between /E/ and /uh/. However, all Philadelphians, whether or not they had the merger in production, were worse than non-Philadelphians at
making the perceptual distinction. Labov et al. suggested that the presence of the merger in some Philadelphia
dialects influenced the perceptual discrimination abilities
of not only Phildelphians who were merged dialect
speakers, but also of other Philadelphians who were unmerged dialect speakers but had been exposed to the
merger through dialect contact.
The influence of dialect contact on merger perception
has been studied more extensively by Bowie (2000) in
Waldorf, Maryland. Bowie looked at the difference in
the production and perception of /u/, /U/, and /ow/ before /l/, in lifelong Waldorfians and ``Waldorf exiles,''
who were natively from Waldorf but had moved away
for some years as adults and later returned. All Waldorf
exiles and all but one lifelong Waldorfian maintained a
pronunciation distinction between pull and pool. However, whereas all but one lifelong Waldorfian failed to
distinguish between the two words in perception, Waldorf exiles were more likely to be able to distinguish between the words perceptually the longer they had spent
away from Waldorf. Bowie (2000) suggested that the
development of this perceptual distinction was a function of exposure to non-Waldorfian dialects in which
the critical merger did not occur.
To our knowledge, although there have been several
behavioral studies examining cross-dialectal perception
of vowel mergers, no previous electrophysiological studies of cross-dialectal merger perception have been conducted. As noted above, however, several studies have
examined cross-linguistic perception of phonemes that
are contrastive in some languages but not in the native
language of the participants. Most electrophysiological
studies of cross-linguistic phoneme perception have used
oddball paradigms to look at the mismatch negativity
(MMN) and P300 ERP components. Both components
are sensitive to the relative frequency of perceptually distinct stimuli and are larger in amplitude in response to
infrequent stimuli. In ERP studies of cross-linguistic
phoneme perception, typically, one phoneme is presented as the frequent stimulus and one or more others are
presented as deviant stimuli. These studies have shown
that phoneme contrasts that are not relevant in the participantsO native language result in relatively reduced
ERP component amplitude. For example, in an ERP
study that compared native speakers of Japanese and
native speakers of English on an oddball task (Buchwald
et al., 1994), the two groups did not differ significantly in
behavioral or P300 response to consonant-vowel syllables that were meaningfully contrastive in both languages. However, the Japanese speakers showed reduced
P300 amplitude in response to the English minimal pair
rip/lip, which contrasts on a phoneme distinction not
present in Japanese. Similarly, in another study, Rive-

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

ra-Gaxiola et al. (2000) examined the passive auditory
oddball ERP response of English speakers to pairs of
syllables that were either contrastive in English, or contrastive in Hindi but not in English. They reported that
English speakers showed reduced amplitude and different scalp distribution of the MMN for the Hindi contrast compared with the English contrast.
In addition to the finding that MMN amplitude is reduced for nonnative contrasts, a complementary finding
has been that MMN amplitude is enhanced for some
speech-sound contrasts that are relevant in the participantsO native language. For instance, Naatanen et al.
(1997) reported that Finnish speakers had enhanced
MMN and MMNM (the magnetic equivalent of
MMN) to vowels prototypical in Finnish compared with
those prototypical in Estonian. This was the case even
though the Estonian vowels were more acoustically distinct from each other, and thus would have been expected to produce higher MMNM amplitude than the
Finnish vowels.
Because ERP responses to phonological contrasts
within dialects of the same language have not previously
been examined, it has not been determined whether
within-language differences in phonology affect early
phonological processing, as do cross-language phonological differences, or might be more reflective of later
semantic integration or phonological decision processes.
In an unpublished study, we examined the MMN in seven merged dialect speakers and eight unmerged dialect
speakers to an auditory oddball design that presented
merged word pairs (e.g., pin and pen) and control word
pairs (e.g., pain and pine) to speakers with or without the
critical vowel merger in production. This unpublished
work revealed no significant MMN differences for the
word pairs across the dialect groups, suggesting that
either the differences were smaller than could be detected
in our design or that differences in processing these word
pairs may not occur until later in processing. Although
data from the present study do not rule out the possibility of early phonological processing differences, the later
processing explanation does seem plausible, since speakers who merge the vowels in pin and pen may still differentiate between /I/ and /E/ in other word pairs, such as
pick and peck. Because speakers of merged dialects still
retain the critical vowel distinction in some word pairs,
differences in early sensory processing, indexed by the
MMN, may not explain the ultimate behavioral differences between the two dialect groups. Thus, the present
study examined ERP differences between the merged
and unmerged dialect groups that might emerge later
in linguistic processing, as a result of either semantic
integration or phonological decision processes.
To examine later processing differences between dialect groups, the present study used a task that might elicit later ERP component differences by embedding the
words in sentential context and requiring that merged

437

and unmerged dialect speakers make an explicit behavioral response in comparing pairs of words. In this task,
a written sentence ending with a critical word was presented and was immediately followed by an auditory
word that was either a repetition of the sentence-terminal word or another word whose vowel contrasted with
that of the sentence-terminal word. The sentence-terminal and auditory words were selected from either a control word pair, such as pain and pine, that all
participants should have been able to discriminate, or
a merger word pair, such as pin and pen, that only the
participants with the unmerged dialect should have been
able to discriminate. The participants were asked to decide whether the acoustically presented word was the
same as or different from the sentence-terminal word.
For example, if a participant saw the word pain and then
heard the word pain, the correct decision would be that
the words were the same, or congruent. On the other
hand, if the participant saw the word pain and then
heard the word pine, the correct decision would be that
the words were different, or incongruent. In a previous
study using this task (Conrey, 2001), merged dialect
speakers were significantly worse than unmerged dialect
speakers at making congruity judgments that involved
potentially merged vowels, indicating that the task does
tap into differential linguistic processing between the
two dialect groups and provides a reasonable starting
point for examining what ERP components might index
these processing differences.
The task in the present study involved a semantic
context, a repetition of a word or a presentation of an
acoustically similar counterpart, and an explicit comparison of the sentence-terminal word and the acoustic
word. Given these task components, the data were
examined for evidence of N400 and late positive component (LPC) effects. There were at least two possibilities
for how the N400 might have been affected by the cognitive processes involved in our task. The N400 is
known to be affected by semantic context. For example,
the N400 is more negative for items that violate semantic context, such as when the terminal word of a sentence
does not fit the semantic expectations built by the preceding words (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). An enhanced
N400 has also been demonstrated in cross-modal
semantic priming, where an auditory word is semantically incongruent with a visual word (Holcomb & Anderson, 1993). If the semantic context of the sentence
prominently affects semantic processing of the acoustic
word, the prediction was that the N400 would be more
negative following acoustic words that were semantically inconsistent with the sentential context. In the unmerged dialect group, a more negative N400 would be
expected for incongruent control and merger words,
whereas in the merged dialect group, a more negative
N400 would be expected for incongruent control words
only. On the other hand, the N400 is attenuated rather

438

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

than enhanced for repeated words in repetition priming
paradigms (e.g., Misra & Holcomb, 2003; Radeau, Besson, Fonteneau, & Castro, 1998). If the repetitive nature
of the visual-auditory word pair outweighs any semantic priming induced by the sentential context, a slightly
more negative N400 might be observed in the merged
dialect group for incongruent merger words than for
incongruent control words or for either word type in
the unmerged dialect group, because being unable to
perceive the difference between the incongruent merger
words might cause the merged group to respond as if
the merger word pairs had been repeated twice as often
as the control word pairs. Alternatively, no N400 effects
might be observable. In this scenario, there would be
sufficient repetitions of each word pair to attenuate the
N400 beyond recognizability. A comparison condition
using unrepeated words, which would have controlled
for this possibility, was not included so as to keep the
data collection sessions to a reasonable length for the
participants.
The repetition priming, explicit memory, and phonological components of the task all lead to similar predictions for the LPC. The LPC is known to be enhanced in
tasks involving repetition priming (e.g., Misra & Holcomb, 2003), so the repetition priming aspect of our design should have increased rather than decreased any
LPC effects. In addition, although it is somewhat controversial whether the N400 indexes automatic or controlled processes, the LPC is generally considered to
require explicit memory for previously presented items
(e.g., Duzel, Yonelinas, Mangun, Heinze, & Tulving,
1997; Misra & Holcomb, 2003; Schnyer, Allen, & Forster, 1997). Finally, the LPC is sensitive to decision processes involving the sensory congruity and salience of
stimuli. For example, Japanese speakers, who do not
distinguish between /r/ and /l/ in their native language,
displayed reduced P300 amplitudes for incongruent
rip/lip pairings compared with English speakers, for
whom the /r/ and /l/ distinction has phonological salience (Buchwald et al., 1994). Given these characteristics
of the LPC, it was predicted that the LPC would be
more positive for incongruent word pairs than congruent ones in the unmerged dialect group for both the
merger and control words and in the merged dialect
group for the control words only. However, no difference in LPC amplitude was expected in the merged dialect group between the congruent and incongruent
merger word pairs.
Although differences in the MMN were not expected
given the results of our unpublished study and the relatively slow stimulus presentation in the task, the data
were examined for evidence of MMN differences between the groups in the event that contextualized stimuli
might affect the MMN. If there are early phonological
processing differences for merger stimuli between the
merged and unmerged dialect groups, an MMN effect

would show a more negative MMN in the unmerged
dialect group for incongruent merger and control word
pairs and also a more negative MMN in the merged dialect group for incongruent control word pairs only.
However, MMN differences would not be expected for
incongruent versus congruent merger word pairs in the
merged dialect group. Alternatively, if processing differences between the merged and unmerged dialect groups
do not emerge until later stages of linguistic processing,
a more negative MMN might be observed in general for
incongruent than congruent word pairs, or perhaps no
MMN would be observed since congruent and incongruent word pairs were equiprobable.
In accordance with previous findings on merger perception, we expected that the merged dialect group
would be less accurate overall than the unmerged dialect
group at identifying incongruent pin/pen merger stimulus pairs. However, the groups were not expected to differ in their accuracy for identifying incongruent pain/
pine control stimulus pairs.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Participants
The participants (N = 23; 10 females, 13 males) were
Rice University undergraduate and graduate students.
All were right-handed native speakers of American English with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and normal hearing. Participants ranged in age from 17 to 40
(M = 20.5, SD = 4.9). The participants were divided
into two dialect groups, merged dialect (n = 11; 5 females, 6 males) and unmerged dialect (n = 12; 5 females,
7 males). One of the female participants in the unmerged
dialect group was eliminated from the final analysis due
to stimulus-synchronous artifacts in her waveform data,
leaving a total of eleven participants in each dialect
group for the final analysis. The dialect groups did not
differ significantly in terms of age, t(20) = 2.086,
p = .29 (two-tailed). The group assignments were made
as follows: Prior to beginning EEG data collection, each
participant was asked to read aloud a short paragraph
that included some words with potentially merged vowels (see Appendix A). The participantsO speech in reading
the paragraph was recorded using a Sony TCD-D8 Portable Digital Audio Tape (DAT) recorder (Sony Corporation). A phonetically trained listener (the first author,
who is a native speaker of an unmerged dialect of American English) later made auditory ratings from these
recordings of whether each participant made a pronunciation distinction between the words pin and pen. The
merged dialect group was composed of participants
who were judged by the first author to make no pronunciation distinction between the words pin and pen in
reading this paragraph; the unmerged dialect group

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

made a clear contrast between the words. The recorded
pronunciations of the control words pain and pine were
also evaluated for each participant. All participants in
both dialect groups consistently made a pronunciation
distinction between these words.
As a check on the auditory ratings, information
about where the participant had lived was compared
with LabovOs (1996) pin/pen merger dialect map of the
US. In six cases, participants from a merged dialect region had been judged to have a pronunciation distinction; their dialect classification was not changed based
on this information. However, their perception of merger stimuli may have been affected by large amounts of
contact with merged dialect speakers, as noted in the
Discussion. There were no cases in which participants
were judged to have a merger when a distinction would
have been expected based on the regions of the country
where they had lived.
2.2. Stimuli
The critical stimuli were one-syllable minimal pairs
that differed only in the vowel. Three monosyllabic pairs
in English differed only in the merged vowel and were
well matched for frequency, with frequency data obtained from Kucera and Francis (1967). These three
pairs were: pin/pen, tin/ten, and din/den. In addition,
three pairs of control stimuli were chosen that contained
the minimal vowel pair /ei/ and /ai/, as in the words pain
and pine, which contrast in most (if not all) American
English dialects.1 The control stimulus pairs, pain/pine,
lane/line, and main/mine, were matched as closely as
possible in frequency of occurrence to the merger stimuli, with frequency data obtained from Kucera and
FrancisOs (1967) word-frequency count.2 Very few different stimuli were used, but they were presented in the
context of different sentences to encourage semantic as
well as phonological processing (see Appendix B for a
list of the sentences used). The sentence contexts were
only presented visually, but the critical stimuli were presented both visually and auditorily.
The auditory versions of the critical stimuli were synthesized using a male voice from the Bell labs (1997)
Text-to-Speech Synthesis demo site (http://www.belllabs.com/project/tts/voices.html). Synthetic speech was
used in order to minimize the phonological and prosodic
variation inherent to natural speech stimuli. The stimuli
were controlled so that all the pairs differed only in the
formant frequencies of the relevant critical vowel. Mean
formant values of the vowels used in the merger stimuli,
1

As noted above, all participants made a pronunciation distinction
between /ei/ and /ai/ in pre-nasal environments.
2
The homophony of main and mane was taken into account in the
frequency matching, but as mane is much less frequent, it was not used
as a visual stimulus.

439

Table 1
Average formant values of American English /E/ and /I/ for male
speakers (Hz)
This study

Ladefoged (1993)

/E/
F1
F2
F3

560
1783
2594

550
1770
2490

/I/
F1
F2
F3

381
1977
2659

400
1920
2560

along with a comparison to values in Ladefoged (1993),
can be found in Table 1. Control stimuli had a mean
duration of 474 ms, with a standard deviation of
16 ms. Merger stimuli (from here on referred to as pin/
pen stimuli) had a mean duration of 345 ms, with a standard deviation of 22 ms. Control stimuli (now referred
to as pain/pine stimuli) were somewhat longer than
merger stimuli because control stimuli contained diphthongal vowels. All tokens were relatively natural
sounding and were easily identifiable by speakers of an
unmerged dialect.
2.3. Procedure
A cross-modal congruity judgment task was used to
measure merger perception. Each trial proceeded as follows: All but the terminal word of a sentence appeared
on the screen for 1500 ms. At the offset of the sentence,
a fixation point appeared at the center of the screen for
200 ms. The fixation point was replaced by the terminal
word of the sentence, which appeared for 200 ms. The
terminal word was then replaced again by the fixation
point. At the offset of the terminal word an auditory
word was presented. An example trial sequence is shown
in Fig. 1.
Participants were instructed to respond as quickly as
possible, using a keypad, to indicate whether the word
they heard was the same word they had just seen at
the end of the sentence. Response hand was counterbalanced across participants. The experimenters were
speakers of unmerged dialects of English, and participants were not told until after the experimental session
that they had been in a dialect study.
There were a total of 160 sentences used in this study.
Eighty of the sentences contained sentence-terminal and
auditory words that were members of a merger pin/pentype pair; the other 80 had sentence-terminal and auditory words that were members of a control pain/pinetype pair. Each sentence was presented twice. One presentation of the sentence was in the congruent condition, in which the auditory word was consistent with
an unmerged dialect pronunciation of the visually presented word (e.g., pin and pin or pain and pain). The

440

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

Fig. 1. Example trial sequence for an incongruent merger trial. On a congruent merger trial, the auditory word would be ``pen'' instead of ``pin.''

other presentation of the sentence was in the incongruent condition, in which the auditory word was inconsistent with an unmerged dialect pronunciation of the
visually presented word (e.g., pin and pen or pain and
pine). An example of a trial in the incongruent condition
is shown in Fig. 1. Note that for merger pin/pen-type
stimuli, both congruent and incongruent conditions
could be considered consistent with a merged dialect
pronunciation of the visually presented word. Altogether each participant received 320 trials, which were selected randomly without replacement from a pool of trial
types. Participants received a break every 32 trials.
Visual stimuli were presented on a 1500 flat-panel active matrix Studio display (Apple Computer, Inc.) connected to a personal computer (Dell Computer
Corporation) that was controlled by E-Prime software
(Psychology Software Tools, Inc.). Auditory stimuli
were presented through speakers at a comfortable listening level in the EEG collection room.

due to choice of reference sensor. The data were computer-screened for artifacts such as eye movements or
electrical transients, and the remaining trials were averaged by condition to produce the four experimental cells
resulting from the crossing of Stimulus and Congruity.
Finally, the data were baseline corrected using the
200 ms before the onset of the auditory stimulus as the
baseline. A grand average for each cell was constructed
for each dialect group by averaging across the participant averages.
Regions of interest (ROIs), shown in Fig. 2, and temporal windows were identified for analysis by visual
inspection of the grand average data. Specifically, a
fronto-central region was examined for the MMN
(150-300 ms) and N400 (350-500 ms), and the bilateral
centro-parietal region was examined for the late positive

2.4. Data acquisition and analysis
Behavioral responses were collected with a 4-key
microswitch keypad (Electrical Geodesics, Inc., Eugene,
OR). Proportion correct was analyzed using a repeatedmeasures ANOVA with within-group factors of Stimulus (merger and control) and Congruity (congruent
and incongruent) and a between-groups factor of Dialect. Response times (RTs) were not analyzed statistically because there were several trial-response type pairings
with few values. However, a qualitative description of
RT patterns is provided.
The EEG signal was recorded using a 128-channel
Geodesic Sensor Net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc., Eugene, OR) at 250 Hz with a vertex reference. Electrode
impedances were maintained below 50 kX as per manufacturerOs instruction. The data were segmented into
1200 ms epochs from 400 ms before to 800 ms after the
onset of the auditory stimulus. After segmentation, the
data were lowpass filtered at 40 Hz to eliminate 60-Hz
line and 67-Hz monitor noise. An average reference
transformation was applied to the data to reduce bias

Fig. 2. Locations on the Geodesic Sensor Net of the fronto-central
(MMN and N400: circles) and centro-parietal (LPC: squares) ROIs
with 10-20 system locations marked.

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

component (LPC; 400-750 ms). Mean amplitudes for
each electrode within the ROI were extracted from each
participantOs average for the temporal window of interest. The mean amplitudes for each electrode were submitted to a repeated measures ANOVA, with withingroup factors of Stimulus, Congruity, Site (bilaterally
symmetric electrode pairs), and Hemisphere, and a between-groups factor of Dialect. We were unable to analyze the EEG data from ``same'' and ``different''
responses separately, because behavioral data were not
available for all participants due to technical problems.

3. Results
3.1. Behavioral
Behavioral data were obtained for seven of the 11
participants in the merged dialect group (behavioral
data from four participants were lost due to technical
problems) and all 11 participants in the unmerged dialect group. Expected response, proportion correct
(based on the expected response for the unmerged dialect group), and response times for the merged and unmerged dialect groups are presented in Table 2.
3.1.1. Proportion correct
All but one of the participants identified incongruent
control pain/pine stimuli as ``different'' with error rates
of 10% or less. One participant in the merged dialect
group had an error rate of 14%; this participant also
had the highest rate of reporting that incongruent merger pin/pen stimuli were the same, at 99%.
A repeated measures ANOVA revealed a main effect
of stimulus, F(1,16) = 43.938, p < .001. Both dialect
groups performed worse overall on merger stimuli than
on control stimuli. A significant main effect of congruity
[F(1,76) = 31.975, p < .01] indicated that performance
was better on congruent trials than on incongruent trials. A significant Congruity * Dialect interaction
[F(1,76) = 8.700, p < .01] showed that merged dialect
speakers performed worse overall on the incongruent

441

conditions, because of their poorer performance on the
incongruent pin/pen stimulus trials. Similarly, a significant Stimulus * Congruity interaction [F(1,76) =
31.455, p < .001] indicated that performance was worse
for incongruent merger stimuli than for incongruent
pain/pine stimuli.
In addition, the three-way interaction of Stimulus * Congruity * Dialect was significant, [F(1,76) =
7.217, p < .05]. Both dialect groups performed at about
the same level for the congruent merger and control trials
and the incongruent control trials, but both groups performed worse on the incongruent merger trials, with the
merged dialect group showing poorer performance on
these trials than the unmerged dialect group. On average,
the merged dialect group responded that incongruent
merger pin/pen stimuli were the same 59% of the time, versus 22% of the time for the unmerged dialect group. These
results are consistent with the merger dialect groupOs being
less able to make a perceptual distinction for cases in
which they do not make a distinction in production.
3.1.2. RTs
A statistical analysis of RTs was not considered
appropriate because of the small number of response
types for certain trial types (e.g., most subjects seldom
or never made ``same'' responses for incongruent control stimuli). However, in inspecting the average RTs
provided in Table 2, it appears that both groups had
faster ``same'' responses for congruent than incongruent
trials. Also, incongruent trials tended to result in slower
average responses.
3.2. ERP
3.2.1. MMN
The MMN ROI included fronto-central electrodes
over a window from 150 to 300 ms. Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate the waveforms in the MMN ROI for the merged
and unmerged dialect groups, respectively. The main effect of stimulus was significant [F(1,20) = 5.012,
p < .05]. The MMN was more negative overall for pin/
pen than for pain/pine stimuli. The main effects of site

Table 2
Behavioral data for merged and unmerged dialect groups
Group

Stimulus

Congruity

ER

PER

RT ``same'' (SE)

Merged

pin/pen

Congruent
Incongruent

``Same''
``Different''

0.964
0.414

690 (69)
814 (205)

650 (86)
770 (76)

pain/pine

Congruent
Incongruent

``Same''
``Different''

0.963
0.963

707 (75)
793 (147)

1006 (171)
1048 (119)

pin/pen

Congruent
Incongruent

``Same''
``Different''

0.966
0.777

615 (61)
790 (183)

737 (77)
682 (68)

pain/pine

Congruent
Incongruent

``Same''
``Different''

0.973
0.983

557 (67)
832 (131)

745 (153)
744 (106)

Unmerged

RT ``different'' (SE)

Note. ER, expected response; PER, proportion expected response; RT, response time (ms); SE, standard error of response time (ms).

442

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

Fig. 3. Individual electrode waveforms for the merged dialect group in congruent and incongruent merger pin/pen and control pain/pine conditions,
as measured over fronto-central regions (the MMN and N400 ROI). Each row of two waveform plots represents a bilaterally symmetric electrode
pair, with the left hemisphere electrode on the left and the right hemisphere electrode on the right. Waveforms are shown from 400 ms before to
800 ms after the onset of the auditory stimulus, with the onset of the auditory stimulus marked as ``0.'' The area between the dotted vertical lines is
the temporal window of interest for the MMN, from 150 to 300 ms after the onset of the auditory stimulus, and the area between the dashed vertical
lines is the temporal window of interest for the N400, from 350 to 500 ms. The early deflections are due to the visual stimulus onset 200 ms prior to
the onset of the auditory stimulus. Positive voltage (in microvolts) is plotted up on the vertical axis.

and hemisphere were also significant [F(8,20) = 4.679,
F(1,20) = 12.434; pOs < .01], and the interaction of
Site * Hemisphere was also significant [F(8,160) =
3.688, p < .01]. Overall, the left hemisphere sites were
more negative than the right hemisphere sites; however,
the Site * Hemisphere interaction indicated that this
pattern was not the same for every electrode pair. The
interactions of Stimulus * Site and Stimulus * Congruity * Site * Dialect were significant [F(8,160) = 4.916,

F(8,160) = 2.326; p < .001, p < .05, respectively], and
the interaction of Stimulus * Congruity * Hemisphere * Dialect showed a trend toward significance
[F(1,20) = 3.362, p = .082]. The interactions involving
the factor of site in general were consistent with more
negativity for the pin/pen than the pain/pine stimuli;
the
means
from
the
Stimulus times Congruity * Site * Dialect interaction indicated more overall
negativity for incongruent than congruent pain/pine tri-

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

443

Fig. 4. Individual electrode waveforms for the unmerged dialect group for the MMN and N400 ROI. Notation as in Fig. 2.

als but showed no other obvious pattern. The Stimulus * Congruity * Hemisphere * Dialect
interaction
again showed more negativity in the left than the right
hemisphere sites.
3.2.2. N400
The N400 ROI included the same fronto-central electrodes analyzed for the MMN (see Figs. 3 and 4), but over
the window from 350 to 500 ms. There was a significant
main effect of site [F(8,160) = 4.527, p < .001]. In addition, there was a trend for the critical three-way interaction of Stimulus * Congruity * Dialect [F(1,20) = 3.214,
p = .088]. However, the pattern of means was not easily
interpretable, as noted in the Discussion.

3.2.3. LPC
Significant effects were found from 400 to 750 ms,
over centro-parietal regions. Average waveforms for
each group can be seen in Figs. 5 and 6.
There was a significant main effect of congruity
[F(1,20) = 10.126, p < .05]. The main effect of site was
also significant [F(8,160) = 2.288, p < .05]. The interaction of Congruity * Site * Dialect was significant as well
[F(8,160) = 2.549, p < .05], and the interaction of Congruity * Site showed a trend toward significance
[F(8,160) = 1.761, p = .088]. In the Congruity * Site
interaction, the incongruent trials tended to show more
positivity; the Congruity * Site * Dialect interaction
means tended to be greatest for the unmerged dialect

444

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

Fig. 5. Individual electrode waveforms for the merged dialect group in congruent and incongruent merger pin/pen and control pain/pine conditions,
as measured over bilateral centro-parietal regions (the LPC ROI). The area between the dotted vertical lines is the temporal window of interest for the
LPC, from 400 to 750 ms. Other notation as in previous figures.

group on incongruent trials. Finally, the critical threeway interaction of Stimulus * Congruity * Dialect was
also significant [F(1,20) = 5.521, p < .05]. This interaction is displayed in Fig. 7. No significant main effects
or interactions were observed involving hemisphere.
To further examine the critical three-way interaction
of Stimulus * Congruity * Dialect, repeated measures
ANOVAs with within-subject factors of stimulus, congruity, and electrode were conducted separately for each
dialect group. The main effect of congruity was significant in both the merged and unmerged dialect groups
[F(1,10) = 5.915 (merged group), F(1,10) = 5.162 (un-

merged group); pOs < .05]. This main effect indicated that
in both groups, incongruent stimuli resulted in larger
LPCs than congruent stimuli. In the merged dialect
group, the interaction of Congruity * Site was significant [F(8,80) = 1.808, p < .01]. There was variability by
site in how much greater the LPC was for incongruent
than congruent stimuli. In the unmerged dialect group,
the main effect of site was significant [F(8,80) = 2.830,
p < .01], and the interaction of Site * Hemisphere
showed a trend toward significance [F(8,80) = 1.842,
p = .081]. The left hemisphere appeared to show more
positivity than the right hemisphere, although this did

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

445

Fig. 6. Individual electrode waveforms for the unmerged dialect group for the LPC ROI. Notation as in previous figures.

not interact with any of the cognitive variables. In the
merged dialect group, consistent with predictions and
as shown in Fig. 7, the LPC was larger for incongruent
than for congruent pain/pine stimuli but not larger
for incongruent than for congruent pin/pen stimuli.
Supporting this observation, there was a trend toward
a significant interaction of Stimulus * Congruity
[F(1,10) = 4.239, p = .067]. In addition, also as predicted, the interaction of Stimulus * Congruity did not
approach significance for the unmerged dialect group
[F(1,10) = 1.673, p = .225], indicating that for the unmerged dialect group, the difference between congruent
and incongruent stimuli was not significantly affected

by whether the stimulus was of the pin/pen or pain/pine
type.

4. Discussion
Our results indicated significant behavioral and ERP
differences between a merged and an unmerged dialect
group in evaluating congruity between auditory and
visual presentations of words containing vowels that
are merging in pronunciation in the merged dialect.
Behaviorally, the merged dialect group was less accurate
than the unmerged dialect group in identifying incongru-

446

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

Fig. 7. Stimulus * Congruity * Dialect interaction on mean LPC amplitude. Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.

ent stimuli involving the critical vowel merger. However,
while the merged dialect group identified incongruent
merger pin/pen stimuli as congruent 59% of the time,
the unmerged dialect group still did so 22% of the time,
a higher ``error rate'' than for the control condition. This
could be attributed to some combination of factors related to dialect contact--the unmerged dialect group has
most likely been exposed to the merger in other dialects--and also to the acoustic similarity between potentially merged vowels. The behavioral results are
consistent with findings in the sociolinguistics literature,
which indicate that although unmerged dialect speakers
are better than merged dialect speakers at discriminating
between merging vowels, unmerged dialect speakers are
still worse at discriminating between merging vowels
than other vowels unaffected by the merger (Bowie,
2000; Janson & Schulman, 1983; Labov et al., 1991). It
has been argued previously that exposure to vowel mergers in other dialects may underlie poorer discrimination
of merging vowels by unmerged dialect speakers (Janson
& Schulman, 1983; Labov et al., 1991). On the other
hand, the acoustic similarity of the vowels involved in
the pin/pen merger could provide an additional cause
for this pattern of performance, and may provide a perceptual motivation for the vowel merger. Further speculation on these issues is beyond the scope of this paper.
The major finding of this study is that the behavioral
differences long observed between speakers of different
dialects of the same language are manifested in an ERP

component, the LPC, that is known to index episodic
memory for (e.g., Duzel et al., 1997) and processing of
incongruencies in (e.g., Buchwald et al., 1994) presented
stimuli. Although the unmerged dialect group was able
to discriminate behaviorally between and showed increased LPC amplitude for incongruent versus congruent
merger and control stimuli, the merged dialect group only
showed behavioral and LPC differences for incongruent
and congruent pain/pine control stimuli and not pin/pen
merger stimuli. These LPC differences suggest that the
merged and unmerged dialect groups were processing
the pin/pen acoustic stimuli differently at a conscious,
decisional level that required explicit memory for the previously presented visual stimulus. More specifically, the
task is likely to have required the formation of an auditory
template based on the visually presented sentence-terminal word, and then a comparison of the template with
the auditory word to decide whether the two were congruent or incongruent. The unmerged dialect group was able
to act on discrepancies between the incongruent pin/pen
templates and auditory words, but the merged dialect
group was unable to make a distinction between incongruent pin/pen templates and auditory words at a conscious or decisional level. Although the consistency of
the LPC differences with the behavioral results suggests
that a relationship between the two, it should also be noted that the LPC may have been enhanced by the requirement of an explicit decision in our task (e.g., Regnault,
Bigand, & Besson, 2001).

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

Buchwald et al. (1994) reported a similar decreased
P300 amplitude in Japanese speakers differentiating between the nonnative /r/ and /l/ contrast. Although the
Buchwald et al. study did not examine the MMN, other
studies have consistently found cross-linguistic differences in phoneme perception that are manifested in the
MMN (Naatanen et al., 1997; Rivera-Gaxiola et al.,
2000). The differences in the amplitude of the MMN observed in the present study did not appear to correspond
with cross-dialectal differences in phoneme perception,
although the paradigm may not have been well suited to
elicit such differences. However, the finding of LPC differences between dialect groups combined with the lack of
dialect-related MMN effects in the present study suggests
that dialect group differences in processing the incongruent pin/pen stimuli are observable at the conscious decisional level but may not occur as early in perceptual
processing as differences between language groups.
The word pairs were presented in sentential contexts
that built up different semantic expectations, and N400
differences between the groups that approached significance were found, indicating that semantic processing
may have been engaged by the task to some degree.
However, the N400 differences were not in the predicted
direction if semantic processing were playing a factor;
specifically, the N400 means appeared to be more negative for incongruent pain/pine word pairs for the unmerged dialect group but for congruent pain/pine word
pairs only for the merged dialect group. This somewhat
puzzling pattern may have been due to the small number
of subjects in each group and also to the many repetitions of each word pair in the task. The word pairs
may have been repeated so often as to attenuate N400
amplitudes. As noted in the Introduction, this attenuation would not have been observable in the present design because of the lack of a control condition with
unrepeated words (e.g., Misra & Holcomb, 2003).
In conclusion, this study successfully combined sociolinguistic and ERP methodologies in order to reveal patterns of behavior and brain activity that would not have
been apparent through either methodology alone. In particular, ERP methods allowed us to begin investigating
the component neural processes involved in the differential behavior of speakers of two dialects of the same language. The fact that these neural differences were
detectable in our paradigm suggests that other sociolinguistic variables could also be profitably investigated
using ERPs. In addition, cognitive neuroscientists who
study linguistic processing using ERPs might be interested to learn of populations of subjects who fluently and
natively speak the same language and yet have different
ERP responses to aspects of that language. Future inquiries into the nature of individual differences in language
processing could benefit greatly from a merger, so to
speak, of sociolinguistic and electrophysiological
methods.

447

Acknowledgments
Parts of this research were supported by the Rice
University Undergraduate Scholars Program. The first
author also received support from an Indiana University
ChancellorOs Fellowship and an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. The authors thank Christine Joy
and Reeni George for assistance in data collection and
analysis, and the two anonymous reviewers for their
many helpful comments.

Appendix A. Production assessment paragraph
[To assess participantsO production of the pin/pen
merger, they were asked to read aloud the following story,
which was recorded using a portable Sony DAT recorder
and handheld microphone, at a 44.1 kHz sampling rate.
Words assessed for merger, plus words containing the
pain/pine control contrast, are italicized below.]
Dave went to the grocery store this morning expecting to spend about ten dollars, but he ended up spending
more because he bought some supplies to make dinner
for his girlfriend Jill this weekend. He paid with his credit card, and when he got ready to sign the receipt he realized he had lost the ballpoint pen that Jill had given him
for Christmas. This was especially bad because he had
just gotten into a fight with Jill after she lost the fraternity pin that he had given her. But this was nothing compared to what happened next. As Dave was leaving the
parking lot, another car was trying to pull in through the
exit. Dave swerved to avoid the other car and ended up
running his car right into a pine tree on the side of the
road. He wasnOt hurt except for a kind of painful bruise
where his forehead hit the steering wheel, but the passenger door of his car was all dented in and the car
was stuck in the mud. He was stuck spinning his wheels
in the mud for half an hour before he finally gave up,
conceded it just wasnOt his day, and called a tow truck.

Appendix B. Sentence Stimuli
/E/
Sign the check with a pen
He was given a gold pen
He took the test with his favorite pen
She wrote with a blue pen
Complete the forms with a pen
There is blue ink in the pen
I wrote that letter with my lucky pen
He stole my favorite pen
Blue ink leaked out of the pen
The queen signed with a quill pen
He composed his songs with a pen
You can write in pencil or in pen

448

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

He paid two hundred dollars for a pen
Doing calligraphy requires a special pen
My lucky number is ten
The public library closes at ten
The three-year-old can count to ten
A strike is when you knock down all ten
He had been arrested by the age of ten
The last train left at half-past ten
I counted to ten
Pens come in packs of ten
The decimal system is base ten
Twenty equals two times ten
SimonOs first class is at ten
Instead of eleven there were only ten
The restaurant closes at ten
My father likes to read in the den
The bear kept her cubs warm in the den
I watch TV in the den
The new couch wouldnOt fit in our den
The fox lured the bunny into his den
We have a fireplace in our den
A family room is also called a den
He felt like he was in a lionsO den
The lioness watched her cubs from her den
The hunters baited the bear from its den
WeOre moving this chair to the den
The rest of the family is in the den
After dinner we sat in the den
/I/
She fixed her hem with a safety pin
Hand me a safety pin
The tailor marked the hem with a pin
He jumped up in pain when he sat on a pin
The voodoo doll was no used without the pin
He pierced his ear with a pin
He fastened his badge with a pin
She pricked her finger with a pin
Close the bag with a safety pin
She is wearing a pin
He wore a lapel pin
The strap was held together with a pin
Joey gave Jill his fraternity pin
The political protestor wore a pin
First prize was a decorative tin
The cupcake containers were made out of tin
His head might as well be made of tin
Cans used to be made of tin
The breadbox was made of tin
The lunchbox was made of tin
The pail is made of tin
Altoids come in a rectangular tin
DorothyOs friend was made of tin
Pewter is an alloy composed with tin
Those toy soldiers are made of tin
I put the candy in a little tin

Look in that square tin
She wore earplugs to block out the din
The pots and pans tumbled down with a din
The playing children caused a noisy din
I couldnOt hear her over the din
We couldnOt be heard above the din
The traffic created a constant din
Construction can cause an annoying din
The jeering crowd made a disagreeable din
Cheers and applause created a joyous din
The funeral bells sounded a solemn din
The ``music'' was nothing but an obnoxious din
Everyone talked at once, causing a din
The jackhammer was causing quite a din
/ej/
Stay in your own lane
There was a police car in the left lane
His car stalled in the middle of the lane
Some people like driving in the middle lane
On the left there was a passing lane
She likes to drive in the fast lane
The right side of the road is the slow lane
There was a slow car in her lane
Construction is blocking the right lane
Most of the traffic is in the far lane
The car hit the water main
The storm burst our water main
They were sent to repair the gas main
The explosion was from a leak in the gas main
Her off-the-wall ideas werenOt in the main
The workers fixed the broken main
He doesnOt often stray from the main
That road leads away from the main
Nobody knew what caused the break in the main
ThereOs something wrong with the gas main
The other girls thought Sally was vain
The model was pretty but vain
His apology was in vain
The stockings were hung by the chimney in vain
My exam results show I studied in vain
My trust in him was in vain
The handsome boy was vain
Her best efforts were in vain
Vanity is the state of being vain
The pretty girl was not vain
She stubbed her toe and was in pain
My head is throbbing with pain
Yoga always leaves me in pain
Aspirin wonOt help when IOm in this much pain
Final exams are a pain
He doesnOt relate well to othersO pain
The injured athlete was in pain
Pulling teeth causes pain
Breaking up with someone can cause pain
The poor dog was in pain

B. Conrey et al. / Brain and Language 95 (2005) 435-449

/aj/
Those history books are mine
The chocolate ice cream is mine
He fell into the coal mine
Your explanation is different from mine
The cold beer is mine
The gem came from a diamond mine
The idea was a gold mine
The papers on the desk are mine
The prospector only found one good mine
The men worked in a coal mine
HeOs walking a fine line
I think IOm next in line
The police had him walk a straight line
The dots are connected with a line
She was first in line
There were ten people in the checkout line
The girl was in front of Jerry in line
You were behind me in line
I hate standing in line
Hold my place in line
The monkey likes to swing on a vine
The brick wall was hidden by a vine
Tarzan swung on a vine
Somebody took the grapes from our vine
The building was covered by a vine
Those trees were killed by a parasitic vine
Grapes are fruits of the vine
The ape climbed up a vine
Flowers can grow on a vine
Grapes grow on a vine
The carpenter works with pine
The Christmas tree was a pine
The table is made of pine
The dog chased the cat up a pine
I love the smell of pine
He made all his furniture out of pine
The rails were made of pine
Birds live in our oak tree but not in our pine
My favorite kind of wood is pine
One of those evergreen trees is a pine

References
Bell Labs. (1997). Text-to-speech synthesis demo page.
<http://www.bell-labs.com/project/tts/voices.html>
Accessed
15.4.2002.

449

Bowie, D. (2000). The effect of geographic mobility on the retention of
a local dialect (Doctoral dissertation).
Buchwald, J. S., Guthrie, D., Schwafel, J., Erwin, R. J., & Van
Lancker, D. (1994). Influence of language structure on brainbehavior development. Brain and Language, 46, 607-619.
Conrey, B. (2001). November. Effects of dialect on merger perception.
Poster session presented at New Ways of Analyzing Variation
(NWAV), Raleigh, NC.
Duzel, E., Yonelinas, A. P., Mangun, G. R., Heinze, H.-J., & Tulving,
E. (1997). Event-related brain potential correlates of two states of
conscious awareness in memory. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 94, 5973-5978.
Holcomb, P. J., & Anderson, J. E. (1993). Cross-modal
semantic priming: A time-course analysis using event-related
brain potentials. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8(4), 379-
411.
Ingram, J. C. L., & Park, S.-G. (1997). Cross-language vowel
perception and production by Japanese and Korean learners of
English. Journal of Phonetics, 25, 437-470.
Janson, T., & Schulman, R. (1983). Non-distinctive features and their
use. Journal of Linguistics, 19, 321-336.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational analysis of
present-day American English. Providence, RI: Brown University
Press.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences: Brain
potentials reflect semantic incongruity. Science, 207(4427),
203-205.
Labov, W. (1996). The organization of dialect diversity in North
America. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
spoken language processing.
Labov, W., Karan, M., & Miller, C. (1991). Near-mergers and the
suspension of phonemic contrast. Language Variation and Change,
3, 33-74.
Ladefoged, P. (1993). A course in phonetics. Fort Worth: Harcourt
Brace College Publishers.
Misra, M., & Holcomb, P. J. (2003). Event-related potential
indices of masked repetition priming. Psychophysiology, 40,
115-130.
Naatanen, R., Lehtokoski, A., Lennes, M., Cheour, M., Huotilainen,
M., Iivonen, A., et al. (1997). Language-specific phoneme representations revealed by electric and magnetic brain responses.
Nature, 385, 432-434.
Radeau, M., Besson, M., Fonteneau, E., & Castro, S. L. (1998).
Semantic, repetition, and rime priming between spoken words:
Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence. Biological Psychology, 48, 183-204.
Regnault, P., Bigand, E., & Besson, M. (2001). Different brain
mechanisms mediate sensitivity to sensory consonance and
harmonic context: Evidence from auditory event-related brain
potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13(2), 241-
255.
Rivera-Gaxiola, M., Osibra, G., Johnson, M. H., & Karmiloff-Smith,
A. (2000). Electrophysiological correlates of cross-linguistic speech
perception in native English speakers. Behavioural Brain Research,
111(1-2), 13-23.
Schnyer, D. M., Allen, J. J. B., & Forster, K. I. (1997). Event-related
brain potential examination of implicit memory processes: Masked
and unmasked repetition priming. Neuropsychology, 11(2),
243-260.

