Sensory Processing of BackwardMasking Signals in Children With
Language-Learning Impairment
As Assessed With the Auditory
Brainstem Response
Jeffrey A. Marler
Michigan State University,
East Lansing

Craig A. Champlin
University of Texas at Austin

The purpose of this study was to examine the possible contribution of sensory
mechanisms to an auditory processing deficit shown by some children with
language-learning impairment (LLI). Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) were
measured from 2 groups of school-aged (8-10 years) children. One group
consisted of 10 children with LLI, and the other group (control) consisted of 10
children with normally developing language. The ABR was elicited with a brief
tone burst presented either alone (no-masking condition) or immediately followed
by a longer duration noise burst (backward-masking condition). The primary
dependent variable was the latency of wave V of the ABR. The mean latencies
were not significantly different for the 2 groups in the no-masking condition.
However, in the backward-masking condition, the mean latency for the LLI group
was significantly increased relative to the mean latency for the control group.
Thus, the presence of successive sounds delay the neural response in children with
LLI. The explanation for this delay at the level of the brainstem is not known, but it
may be due to disruption of synchrony, activation of alternate (less direct)
pathways, increased inhibition, or some combination of these (or other) factors.
KEY WORDS: specific language impairment, auditory evoked potentials,
auditory brainstem response, auditory processing, temporal masking

F

or almost 40 years it has been reported that children with language-learning impairment1 (LLI) have greater difficulty separat
ing sounds from one another than do children with normally developing language (Elliott & Hammer, 1993; Elliott, Hammer, & Scholl,
1989, 1990; Tallal, Miller, & Fitch, 1993; for historical review, see
Leonard, 1998). Some researchers have characterized this problem as a
deficit in auditory temporal acuity. Temporal acuity refers to the ear's
ability to discriminate two signals (Gelfand, 1998). Numerous stimulus
paradigms have been developed to assess temporal acuity. One such
1
The term specific language impairment is most often used to describe children with primary
limitations in language ability. However, children who meet this diagnostic profile are not a
homogenous group (Conti-Ramsden, Crutchley, & Botting, 1997) and often demonstrate subtle
nonlinguistic deficits (Leonard, 1998). For these reasons, we have chosen to use the term
language-learning impairment to describe the children who participated in this study's
experimental group (Elliott, Hammer, & Scholl, 1989).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February Marler
2005 *& (c)American
Speech-Language-Hearing
Association
Champlin: Sensory
Processing in Children
With LLI
1092-4388/05/4801-0189

189

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

method is backward masking, in which the listener's
task is to detect a brief signal that is immediately followed by another sound (the masker), which is usually, but not always, longer in duration than the signal. Signal detection can be improved by increasing its
intensity, increasing the temporal separation between
signal offset and masker onset, or changing the frequency composition of the masker. A backward-masking environment would seem relevant to the general
study of auditory language processing because the context is analogous to certain acoustic characteristics
present in linguistic sounds (i.e., stop consonants, see
Bradlow et al., 1999; Kraus, McGee, Carrell, et al.,
1996; Phillips, 1998). Moreover, backward-masking
conditions may be of specific interest when studying
auditory processing in children with LLI because they
appear to be at particular risk when listening in a degraded or noisy acoustic environment (Cunningham,
Nicol, Zecker, Bradlow, & Kraus, 2001; Leonard, 1998;
Merzenich et al., 2002). This family of stimuli is just
one example of a growing inventory of nonlinguistic
analogues (e.g., amplitude-modulated signals, frequency-following response, signals-in-noise conditions)
that researchers are using to investigate general versus language-specific auditory deficits in this clinical
population of children.
It is beyond the scope of the present study to test a
current theory of auditory temporal processing deficits
in children with LLI (Merzenich et al., 1996, 2002; Tallal
et al., 1993). The data reported here reflect one part of a
larger project (Marler, Champlin, & Gillam, 2002) for
which the purpose was to differentiate between sensory2
and nonsensory (perceptual) mechanisms subserving
backward-masking thresholds in a group of children with
LLI. The clinical subgroup studied demonstrated both
receptive and expressive deficits (Elliott & Hammer,
1993). This particular project is unique in that it compared both behavioral and electrophysiological responses
elicited with an equivalent backward-masking stimulus
(i.e., identical acoustic characteristics) in the same groups
of children. For the purpose of the present discussion, a
brief review of the current acoustic processing research
in LLI is provided, followed by an overview of relevant
studies of the auditory brainstem response (ABR).
In recent studies of backward masking, Wright et al.
(1997) and Wright and Reid (2002) reported that children with LLI had higher (poorer) behavioral thresholds
2
"Sensory" refers to auditory processing mechanisms determined by
distinct physical characteristics of the stimulus (e.g., a frequency,
intensity, or duration). This definition assumes that if any one of the
physical features is above an individual's sensation level, in the absence
of significant, higher order deficits (e.g., cognitive processes), a change in
one of the measurable variables (e.g., latency or amplitude) will be
reflected in an electrophysiological response (Regan, 1989). This
neurophysiological activity would then be available (but perhaps not
sufficient) to the systems responsible for perception (Naatanen, 1992).

190

than did age-matched controls. Advocates of sensory
deficit theories in child-language research propose that
the temporal and/or spectral characteristics of speech
are "smeared" somewhere within early, non-languagespecific regions of the auditory system, thus reducing
the distinctiveness of individual sounds (Benasich &
Tallal, 2002; Elliott, 1990; Merzenich et al., 1996;
Merzenich, Tallal, Peterson, Miller, & Jenkins, 1999;
Merzenich et al., 2002; Tallal et al., 1993, Wright et al.,
1997). This argument would predict impaired or "fuzzy"
processing of nonlinguistic sounds, as well as of linguistic sounds. Merzenich et al. (2002) have suggested that
the long-term effect of such smearing would be that language develops as a syllable-based, rather than phoneme-based, system, thereby losing crucial information
embedded within a grammatic context (e.g., morphosyntax). On the other hand, proponents of cognitive theories claim that sensory mechanisms are intact. They
argue that higher order deficits (e.g., memory, attention,
language, or other cognitive abilities) cause the auditory performance errors, which only appear as sensory
impairments and are, if present at all, independent of
the linguistic deficit (Bishop, Carlyon, Deeks, & Bishop,
1999; Gillam, Cowan, & Marler, 1998; Hartley & Moore,
2002; Mody, Studdert-Kennedy, & Brady, 1997).
Wright and colleagues (1997, 2002) used a series of
masking tasks to study auditory processing in 8- to 13year-old children with LLI. Signal-detection thresholds
in the backward-masking condition were considerably
poorer than were those of the children in the control
group. It was concluded that in addition to (and perhaps undergirding) their language disorder, children
with LLI have a general auditory perceptual deficit (see
also Merzenich et al., 2002).
The explanatory power of sensory processing theories has been repeatedly questioned (Bishop, 2002;
Bishop et al., 1999; Nittrouer, 1999; Zhang & Tomblin,
1998). One argument posits an impaired task-learning
mechanism and whether, with continued practice, the
poorer auditory threshold performances of the children
with LLI might eventually reach age-appropriate levels.
Helzer, Champlin, and Gillam (1996) and Robin, Tomblin,
Kearney, and Hugg (1989) reported significant trainingrelated improvements in auditory temporal tasks (i.e.,
gap detection and sound-pattern recognition, respectively). They hypothesized that cognitive mechanisms
(e.g., memory, sustained attention, or learning strategies
necessary for psychophysical tasks) played a significant
role in the averaged thresholds, independently of auditory temporal acuity. This interpretation has found recent support from Hartley, Wright, Hogan, and Moore
(2000), who hypothesized that backward-masking performances of children between the ages of 6 and 11 years
are closely associated with such nonsensory factors as
motivation, attention, and listening strategies (see also

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Bishop et al., 1999; Buss, Hall, Grose, & Dev, 1999; Hirsh
& Watson, 1996; Ludlow, Cudahy, Bassich, & Brown,
1983).
Such a possibility of cognitive influences on sensory
thresholds was investigated by Marler, Champlin, and
Gillam (2001), who used a variation of Wright et al.'s
(1997) masking paradigm. They studied learning effects
by comparing changes in masked thresholds in a small
group of children with LLI who were receiving computerbased auditory training therapies, and in age-matched
controls. The children were evaluated in simultaneousand backward-masking conditions in five sessions spread
over a 5-week period. Consistent with the data reported
by Wright et al., Marler and colleagues (2001) reported
that both groups showed improvements in backward
masking (lower thresholds) over the course of the experimental sessions. However, even at their final session, the backward-masking thresholds of the children
with LLI were still higher (poorer) than those of the
children with normally developing language. Thus, even
with extended practice, the auditory processing abilities of children with LLI failed to match those of control
children. It also was reported that whereas individual
variability in the simultaneous-masking condition was
equivalent across groups, the children in the LLI group
consistently showed larger individual differences in the
backward-masking condition. This is an interesting finding because early masking research suggested that simultaneous masking is a more automatic, peripheral
process, whereas backward masking involves both automatic and higher order factors (Deatherage & Evans,
1969; Duifhuis, 1973; Elliott, 1962; Soderquist, Carstens,
& Frank, 1981).
Aspects of these studies provide compelling support
for theories that children with LLI have a general sensory- and/or cognitive-based auditory deficit(s). Nevertheless, experiments based on behavioral tasks have
failed to resolve this ambiguity. When the dependent
variable is a behavior and the experimental variable is
an event occurring before perception, the elicited response is confounded by both processes. A multistage
study was designed in an attempt to disambiguate these
phenomena. We used the same psychophysical method
of Marler et al. (2001), but manipulated the duration of
the backward-masking stimulus so that it could be used
in event-related potential conditions (ABR and mismatch
negativity [MMN]); the stimulus parameters and participant factors are reported in the following section).
As reported by Marler et al. (2002), the behavioral backward-masking condition differentiated the two groups.
Children in the LLI group had signal thresholds that
were significantly higher (poorer) than those of their
nonimpaired controls in the backward-masking condition, but their thresholds in simultaneous masking were
not significantly different from those of the controls. This

group-by-masking effect is shown in Figure 1A. A visual
inspection also reveals the increased variability in backward-masking thresholds in both groups, but especially
in the children with LLI. This previously reported pattern (Buss et al., 1999) is evident in Figure 1B, in which
individual-participant thresholds are shown. Despite a
small degree of overlap between groups, the proportion
of variance accounted for by group membership was
moderately strong (2 = .45) and statistically significant
(p < .01).
The ABR continues to be a useful tool for assessing
the integrity of auditory brainstem mechanisms in clinical populations whose behavioral responses can be difficult to interpret (Barry, Johnstone, & Clarke, 2003;
Cunningham et al., 2001; King, Warrier, Hayes, & Kraus,
2002; Puente, Ysunza, Pamplona, Silva-Rojas, & Lara,
2002; Wible, Nicol, & Kraus, 2002). The inclusion of the
ABR in the current LLI/backward-masking debate allows us to infer the effectiveness of sensory-information
transfer of an acoustically complex, nonlinguistic stimulus through the brainstem pathway. The use of identical backward-masking stimuli in behavioral and electrophysiological conditions permitted direct comparisons
of thresholds to event-related potential components. The
10-ms period between the onset of the signal and the
onset of the masker provides sufficient time for synchronous, signal-specific neural firing (Starr & Don, 1988).
The introduction of a backward-masking ABR provided
a direct investigation of the possible degradation of neural synchrony in the presence of time-dependent sounds
in a group of children with LLI.
Although there have been numerous ABR studies
of children with varying degrees of general learning
Figure 1. A: Mean signal threshold shown by masking condition
for each group (LLI = language-learning impaired; CTR = control).
Diamonds indicate 1 SD; error bars indicate 1.5 SDs; dashed-line
oval indicates p < .05. B: Mean backward-masking thresholds of
Figure 1A by group, with individual participant thresholds
superimposed.

Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

191

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

disabilities,3 few have investigated auditory processing
in children with LLI in the absence of hearing loss
(Maison, Duclaux, Ferber-Viart, & Debreuil, 1996) or
neurological conditions (Piggott & Anderson, 1983;
Roncagliolo, Benitez, & Perez, 1994). Chiefly, previous
ABR studies have not investigated children whose language performance conformed to a standard LLI profile
(Aram, Morris, & Hall, 1992; Merrell & Plante, 1997;
Plante, 1998; Tomblin, Records, & Zhang, 1996). With
the exception of wave V amplitude differences reported
by Mason and Mellor (1984), click-evoked ABRs have
consistently failed to differentiate between children with
LLI and age-matched controls (Akshoomoff, Courchesne,
Yeung-Courchesne, & Costello, 1989; Hecox & Hogan,
1982). Ostensibly, these earlier ABR studies indicated
intact sensory stages of auditory processing in children
with LLI (see King et al., 2002, for an example of a normal click-evoked ABR, but latency differences with
speech stimuli). It is also possible, however, that the
acoustic characteristics of a click stimulus may not have
been sufficiently complex to stress the sensory-level
auditory processing in children with LLI (Phillips, 1997,
1998). Although the click is a spectrally complex signal,
young children with LLI have shown the poorest behavioral thresholds for a backward-masked stimulus for
which the complex varies in multiple physical domains
(e.g., frequency, time, and intensity characteristics). The
poorer backward-masking thresholds seen in children
with LLI may result from a disruption of the neural activity from two discrete acoustic events (as characterized
by a backward-masking stimulus; Deatherage & Evans,
1969; Duifhuis, 1973; Elliott, 1962). This could be
operationalized as a sensory impairment (Elliott, 1962;
Phillips, 1998) and may not manifest in an auditory
evoked potential elicited with a single-event stimulus.
The purpose of the present study was to examine a
possible contribution of brainstem-level sensory factors
in the higher backward-masking thresholds shown by
children with LLI. The ABR was evoked using both a puretone signal and a backward-masking stimulus (brief tone
followed by a longer duration noise) similar to (Marler et
al., 2001; Wright et al., 1997; Wright & Reid, 2002) or
equivalent to those used in earlier behavioral studies (e.g.,
Marler et al., 2002). We inferred the effectiveness of sensory-information transfer of nonlinguistic sounds through
the brainstem pathways from the amplitude and latency
measures of ABR waveforms. We hypothesized that if
poorer backward-masking thresholds were the result of
higher order learning deficits (Helzer et al., 1996; Robin
3
Cunningham, Nicol, Zecker, Bradlow, and Kraus (2001) and Wible, Nicol,
and Kraus (2002) investigated the integrity of central auditory mechanisms, including the ABR and/or the frequency-following response (FFR),
using synthetic speech. Because a primary purpose of the current study
was to investigate sensory responses to complex, nonlinguistic sounds,
any comparisons or implications of these studies are discussed in a later
section.

192

et al., 1989), intellectual demands of the psychophysical
task (Bishop et al., 1999; Hirsh & Watson, 1996), or insufficient memory (Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990; Gillam
et al, 1998; Marler et al., 2001; Montgomery, 2000, 2002),
then auditory brainstem mechanisms might be
uninvolved and no differences would exist in the ABRs
obtained from children with LLI and their age-matched
controls. However, if backward-masking threshold differences were linked to a general disruption of auditory
brainstem-level sensory mechanisms, then differences
between the two groups may be revealed by the ABR.

Method
Participants
Twenty children participated in this study. Administrators and clinicians working in public school and
private-practice settings sent recruitment letters to parents of children who had been diagnosed as having LLI
with normal, nonverbal problem-solving skills. The first
10 children whose parents responded to the recruitment
letter and who met the minimum participant selection
requirements (described below) were included in the
experimental group. All parents answered questions
about their child's developmental history and signed
consent forms. The nature of the experiment then was
explained to each child, who signed an assent form.
Children were paid for their participation.
Time constraints did not allow for a complete audiometric evaluation. All children passed a hearing
screening at octave frequencies between 0.5 and 8.0 kHz
for pure tones presented at 20 dB HL (American National Standards Institute, 1996). Further testing of bilateral thresholds at 1.0 and 4.0 kHz revealed pure-tone
thresholds  15 dB HL. To confirm that the children did
not have temporary conductive hearing loss, tympanometry was performed at the beginning of each evokedpotential condition (within 50 daPa). Parent report of
infrequent otitis media was not a reason for exclusion;
however, parents of children in both experimental and
control groups reported that at least 6 months had
passed since the last known occurrence of otitis media.
The experimental group included 10 children (4 girls
and 6 boys) with LLI. These children ranged in age from
8 to 10 years (M = 9 years, 4 months, SD = 9 months).
They had been diagnosed as language impaired by public school assessment teams that included, at minimum,
a speech-language pathologist, an educational psychologist, and a classroom teacher (Plante, 1998). The criterion language battery confirmed these diagnoses.
To be included in the experimental group, a child
had to have (a) no history of environmental deprivation,
behavioral or emotional disturbances, or neurological
diagnoses or signs; (b) estimated Performance IQ

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

deviation quotients not lower than 75 (American Psychiatric Association, 1994; Bishop, North, & Donlan,
1996; Plante, 1998; Tomblin & Buckwalter, 1998) on the
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI;
Wechsler, 1999); and (c) function 1.5 SDs or more below
the mean (e.g., two standard scores of 6 or lower) on at
least one subtest in both receptive and expressive domains of the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals--Third Edition (CELF-3; Semel, Wiig, & Secord,
1995). A description of participant criteria is provided
in Table 1. All children in the experimental group were
receiving language services from speech-language pathologists at the time of the study; however, none of the
children were then receiving auditory-based languagetraining therapies (e.g., Fast ForWord, Leaureate,
Earbonics), remedial math services, or occupational
therapy. Significant impairment in both receptive and
expressive language was an experimental participant
inclusion criterion (Elliott & Hammer, 1993; Elliott et
al., 1989).
The control group comprised 10 children (4 girls and
6 boys). The children ranged in age from 8 to 10 years
(M = 9 years, 4 months, SD = 11 months) and were
matched by gender and age ( 5 months) to those children in the experimental group. The children in the control group were recruited from the same sites as the
children in the experimental group or by parent or
teacher referral. Each child was without history of
speech, language, or hearing disorders. The CELF-3
subtests Concepts and Directions (M = 12, SD = 2) and

Formulated Sentences (M = 13, SD = 2) were used as an
initial language screening for children in the control
group. A review of Table 1 shows that they were superior to children in the experimental group on the CELF3 and the estimated Performance IQ composite of the
WASI. The language abilities of the children in the control group were higher than those of children typically
reported in the language impairment literature, although none of them were identified by parent/teacher
report to be exceptional language users. However, the
ABR is understood to reflect sensory auditory processing. In the absence of moderate-to-severe mental retardation (Courchesne & Yeung-Courchesne, 1988; Ferri,
Del Gracco, Elia, Musumeci, & Stefanini, 1995; Grillon,
Courchesne, & Akshoomoff, 1989; Roncagliolo et al.,
1994; Schepers, Stuart, & Todd, 1999; Zurron & Diaz,
1998) or attention disorders (see below), the ABR does
not differentiate groups whose cognitive abilities are
within normal limits.
Researchers have speculated that children with language impairment may have attention problems independent of language skills (Bishop et al., 1999; Denckla,
Rudel, Chapman, & Krieger, 1985; Ludlow et al., 1983;
Powell & Bishop, 1992). There are also electrophysiological studies reporting ABR differences in children with
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; Lahat,
Avital, Berkovitch, Arlazoroff, & Aladjem, 1995; Puente
et al., 2002; for report of no ADHD/ABR effect, see
Schochat, Scheurer, & de Andrade, 2002). ADHD is often characterized as impaired "executive" inhibition

Table 1. Participant criterion measures: Language and nonverbal characteristics by group.
Experimental
Sex
Age
Language (CELF-3)
RLS
ELS
TLS
Nonverbal problem solving (WASI)
Estimated PIQ
Attention (TOVA)
Errors of omission
Errors of commission

Control

p

6 M, 4 F
112 (9)

6 M, 4 F
112 (11)

ns

75 (10)
75 (12)
73 (10)

116 (16)
117 (15)
116 (14)

<.01
<.01
<.01

92 (11)

107 (13)

<.01

89 (26)
86 (21)

96 (17)
86 (19)

ns
ns

Note. The standard deviation of each mean value is given in parentheses. Age = months. Language = receptive
language composite standard scores (RLS), expressive language composite standard scores (ELS), and total
language composite standard scores (TLS) of the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-Third Edition
(CELF-3). PIQ = performance scale composite standard score of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence
(WASI). The WASI estimated Performance IQ score is derived with the Block Design and Matrix Reasoning
subtests. The Test of Variables of Attention (TOVA) was designed to assess attention and impulse control. Errors of
omission occur when the participant does not respond to the visual target, and is considered a measure of
inattention. Errors of commission occur when the participant fails to inhibit an incorrect response, and is
considered a measure of impulsivity.

Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

193

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(cognitive mechanisms; Nigg, 2000; Tannock & Schachar,
1996). It is one of the most commonly diagnosed clinical
developmental syndromes (Barkley, 1997), with a significant overlap of language-impairment symptomatology (Riccio & Hynd, 1993; Tannock & Schachar, 1996).
The Test of Variables of Attention (TOVA; Leark, Dupuy,
Greenberg, Corman, & Kindschi, 1996) was used to
evaluate cognitive processes of motivation and attention to task not specific to auditory processing (inattention and impulsivity). The TOVA is one of a number of
continuous performance tests used as objective measures
of ADHD (DuPaul, Anastopoulos, Shelton, Guevremont,
& Metevia, 1992; Sergeant & van der Meere, 1990). The
TOVA is used to evaluate an individual's ability to identify a visual target in both high-probability (impulsivity) and low-probability (inattention) environments.
The individual language and nonverbal assessment
of each child lasted between 120 and 160 min and was
performed over two sessions in the home or in a quiet
room at school. Verbal and nonverbal subtests were randomized within subjects to provide variety for the children. Otoscopy and tympanometry also were performed
prior to each of these two sessions.

Stimuli and Recording
The recording of the ABR requires a brief stimulus
with a rapid onset time. To distinguish whether neurophysiologic deficits were the result of the noise component of the backward-masking stimulus, a pure-tone
signal was presented in a quiet (no masking) condition
and in a signal-plus-masker condition. The two stimuli
(e.g., no masking and backward masking) had the same
physical characteristics as those used in the earlier reported psychophysical and MMN study (see Marler et
al., 2002, for a complete description). Briefly, backwardmasking stimulus generation was accomplished with
custom-written software. The signal was an alternating polarity 1-kHz tone (Gorga, Abbas, & Worthington,
1985) with an overall duration of 10 ms, as measured
from the onset to offset at the zero-voltage points. The
signal envelope was shaped with a cosine-squared gating function that produced rise/fall times of 5 ms. The
masker was a narrow-band noise extending from 0.6 kHz
to 1.4 kHz. The masker level decreased at the rate of 96
dB/octave beyond the two cut-off frequencies. The pressure spectrum level of the masker was 43 dB/Hz (overall level of 72 dB SPL). In the no-masking condition, the
10-ms pure-tone stimulus was presented alone at 107
dB peak SPL. In the backward-masking condition, the
masker had an overall duration of 150 ms, including 5ms rise/fall times, and was temporally arranged such
that the onset of the masker immediately followed the
offset of the signal. The overall duration of the backward-masking stimulus was 160 ms. The level of the
194

masker was held constant, while the signal was presented at one of five levels (67, 77, 87, 97, or 107 dB
peak SPL). The stimulus was always presented at a rate
of 5.1/s. This presentation was frequent enough to elicit
a robust wave V (Hall, 1992) but slow enough to evaluate auditory-neural integrity (Schwartz & Berry, 1985).
The stimuli were played through a digital-to-analog converter (Tucker-Davis Technologies [TDT] DA1), routed
to a headphone buffer (TDT HB6), and delivered monaurally to the right ear via an electrically shielded insert earphone (Etymotic Research, Model ER-3A).
Evoked responses were acquired with a four-channel system, using gold-plated electrodes applied to the
surface of the scalp (three electroencephalogram [EEG]
channels and one electro-oculogram [EOG] channel).
EOG was monitored as a component of an artifact rejection protocol used when gathering the MMN response
(Picton et al., 2000). Electrode impedances were maintained below 5k, with interelectrode differences below
2k. The active electrodes were C3 (contralateral), Cz,
and C4 (ipsilateral), the inverting electrodes were linked
earlobes (A1, A2), and the ground electrode was the forehead (Fpz).
The EEG responses were amplified with a gain of
200K and filtered with a bandpass of 30 Hz to 3 kHz
(Hyde, 1985; Picton, Stapells, & Campbell, 1981; Stapells
& Picton, 1981). The scalp recordings were digitized
using a sampling frequency of 24 kHz. The overall duration of each recording epoch was 43 ms (10 ms preceding and 33 ms following the stimulus onset). Each individual ABR waveform took approximately 5-6 min to
complete and included at least 1,500 averages per channel (approximately 1,500 to 1,850, depending on artifact rejection). Six waveforms were obtained from each
EEG channel.
For the electrophysiological conditions, the children
were in a sound-treated room, sitting comfortably in a
reclined position with head, neck, and arms well supported. The children were instructed to sit quietly, while
watching a video of choice, with audio volume kept below 50 dB SPL (A - weighted scale).4 Each child was
monitored via closed circuit video for extraneous movement. Occasionally, movement was observed that did not
trigger the EEG or EOG rejection algorithm. In these
instances, the run was discontinued and the child was
reinstructed to sit quietly or a short break was taken.

4

The ABR conditions reported in the current study were elicited while the
children were watching a video. In the larger study (see Marler et al.,
2002), ABR and MMN conditions were interspersed to minimize
interruption of the electrophysiological sessions (to turn on and off the
television, to switch stimulated ear, etc.) and to help the children tolerate
the two, 60-90-min sessions. The consequence is that the ABR conditions
were not recorded in a quiet environment (as is customary) and were
always elicited with right-ear stimulation (necessary for the MMN;
Kraus, McGee, & Koch, 1998; Naatanen, 1992).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Data Analysis
In total, there were 18 ABR waveforms (3 electrode
sites x 6 conditions). Averaged response waveforms were
converted to ASCII format and transferred to a standard plotting program (Microcal Origin 6.1 software).
Each child's file was given an anonymous prefix (e.g.,
001, 002, etc.) to minimize experimenter bias. ABR wave
V peaks then were selected based on response windows
previously reported in the literature (Gorga, Kaminski,
Beauchaine, & Jesteadt, 1988), those observed through
pilot studies, and in comparison to the no-masking ABR
condition. Two criteria were used to determine the presence of ABR wave V (electrophysiological threshold): (a)
greatest positive amplitude within a 7-13-ms window
after stimulus onset and (b) whether the absolute amplitude of wave V was greater than 2.5 SDs above the
mean noise floor of the prestimulus electrical activity
(see next paragraph). The reported ABR latency windows account for the 2-ms delay of the TDT biological
amplifier (DB4/HS4) and the 0.9-ms delay imposed by
the ER-3A earphone.
The 10-ms prestimulus period was used to make a
baseline voltage correction for each waveform in the
analysis of the ABR. This correction was used to determine an absolute amplitude measure for the wave V
component. Absolute latency was also measured. Mean
and standard deviation measures were calculated for
ABR wave V latency and absolute amplitude. To control
for the likelihood of a Type I error in physiological data
(simultaneous recording from multiple electrode locations), repeated measures analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) or multivariate analyses of variance
(MANOVAs) were carried out on electrode site, latency,
and amplitude ABR measures (O'Brien & Kaiser, 1985;
Ruchkin, 1987). When MANOVA models were used, all
main effects or interactions having a p value less than
.05 were further analyzed using the method of simple
main effects (Winer, Brown, & Michels, 1991). This post
hoc method allows comparisons of multiple means with
greater degrees of freedom, uses the MANOVA model
error term, and thereby reduces the chance of Type I
error (as opposed to using a t test or ANOVA with a different error term).

.25). Because the groups performed similarly on two
clinical indices frequently used to identify attentional
psychopathology (Nigg, Hinshaw, & Halperin, 1996), it
is unlikely that differences in the behavioral or electrophysiological measures can be attributed to general executive processes associated with ADHD.

Electrophysiology
To confirm the presence of a reliable tone-generated
wave V in the children who participated in this study
and to provide a comparison between no-masking and
masked conditions, an ABR was elicited with the 1-kHz
pure-tone stimulus (no-masking condition). The group
average and individual participant ABRs for the nomasking stimulus are shown in Figure 2 (Cz electrode
is plotted in the absence of a Group x Electrode interaction). There were no significant differences in wave V
latency or amplitude. This finding indicates that in the
absence of noise, there was equivalent neurophysiologic
activity at the level of the auditory brainstem (M = 8.54,
SD = 0.22 for LLI; M = 8.36, SD = 0.34 for control).
Figure 2. Grand-average auditory brainstem response (ABR)
waveforms for a 107-dB SPL 1-kHz tone for the control (CTR) and
experimental (LLI) groups (top graph). Traces for individual children
within each of the two groups are included in the bottom two
graphs.

Results
Behavioral
Children in the experimental group showed attention behaviors within normal limits as defined in terms
of target detection errors: impulsivity (M = 89 and SD =
29 for LLI; M = 96 and SD = 17 for control), t(18) = 0.33,
p = .745; and inattentiveness (M = 86 and SD = 21 for
LLI; M = 86 and SD = 19 for control), t(18) = 1.189, p =

Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

195

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

An ABR latency-intensity function was plotted for
each participant to determine a backward-masking electrophysiological threshold (see Table 2). A two-factor
ANOVA was performed, with group as the between-subjects factor (two levels) and electrode site as a withinsubject factor (three levels, with repeated measures).
The ANOVA revealed a significant group effect, F(1, 18)
= 10.475, p < .01, 2 = 0.86. Electrophysiologic backwardmasking thresholds mirrored the psychoacoustic condition (Cz electrode is reported in the absence of a Group
x Electrode interaction). Children with LLI had higher
wave V thresholds (M = 80, SD = 8.2) than did the children in the control group (M = 72, SD = 5.3). In contrast
to the ABR no-masking condition, the addition of backward-masking noise to the stimulus resulted in diminished amplitudes. Specifically, at lower stimulus intensity levels, wave V could not be differentiated from the
prestimulus noise floor.

solely the result of learning deficits, cognitive attentionrelated factors, psychophysical task demands, or inefficient memory. Taken together, the behavioral responses
and corresponding evoked potentials support a hypothesis of a prelinguistic, biological basis for perceptual
deficits shown by some children with LLI (Cunningham
et al., 2001; Elliott et al., 1989; Kraus et al., 1996; Kraus
& Nicol, 2003; Merzenich et al., 2002; Tallal et al., 1993).
Furthermore, the difference between the signal-alone
(no masking) and signal-with-noise (backward masking)
responses implies subcortical, neurophysiologic deficits
for complex sounds having a noise component. Recent
studies have shown such low-level auditory deficits with
speech stimuli in children with learning deficits
(Cunningham et al., 2001; King et al., 2002; Wible et
al., 2002), but this is the first study to demonstrate a
brainstem-level deficiency with backward-masking
sounds in children fitting the diagnostic profile of LLI.

Additional analyses were performed on the three
highest signal levels. These were chosen to ensure that
every participant had a reliable wave V at all analyzed
signal levels across the three electrodes. Representative
ABR waveforms are shown in Figure 3 for a child from
each of the experimental and control groups. In the absence of a Group x Electrode Site interaction, responses
are shown from electrode Cz for signal intensities 107,
97, and 87 dB SPL. A three-factor MANOVA was performed. Group was the between-subjects factor (two levels), signal level was a within-subject factor (three levels,
with repeated measures), and electrode site was a withinsubject factor (three levels, with repeated measures). The
MANOVA revealed a significant effect for group (see
Figure 4), demonstrating that the wave V latencies for
the experimental group (M = 9.97, SD = 0.43) were significantly delayed relative to the control group (M = 9.68,
SD = 0.54), F(1, 18) = 3.661, p < .05, 2 = 0.22. There was
no significant difference between the two groups of children with respect to wave V amplitude.

These findings implicate a general auditory processing deficit characterized by neural asynchrony of auditory brainstem nuclei to sounds in a noise environment.
It would appear in these children with LLI that the presence of the backward-masking noise selectively degrades
the neural encoding of the preceding signal. The neurophysiologic mechanisms involved are not known. However, a recent animal study by Cunningham, Nicol, King,
Zecker, and Kraus (2002) implicated the auditory midbrain and thalamus. Cunningham et al. (2002) measured
auditory event-related potentials in guinea pigs to vowelconsonant-vowel (VCV) stimuli (with 10-ms burst for the
consonant) in quiet and in background noise. They reported in the VCV-plus-noise condition that there was
poorer neural encoding of the VCV release burst at the
levels of the inferior colliculus and medial geniculate
body. They concluded that neural synchrony for the release burst was affected adversely by the presence of
noise.

Discussion
The higher electrophysiologic thresholds and delayed wave V latencies elicited from children with LLI
indicate that poorer behavioral thresholds were not
Table 2. Mean ABR wave V threshold in dB SPL (and standard
deviations) across three electrode sites for backward-masking
latency-intensity function.
Electrode site
Group
Control
Experimental

196

C3

Cz

C4

74 (8.2)
85 (9.1)

72 (5.3)
80 (8.2)

78 (8.8)
84 (6.7)

The ABR is dependent on synchronized firing of
large populations of neurons (Starr & Don, 1988) and
can be significantly reduced in the presence of noise
(Geisler & Gamble, 1989). The prolongation in backwardmasking wave-V latency in the current study can be
compared indirectly to brainstem-elicited speechin-noise responses in children with general learning deficits (Cunningham et al., 2001; Hayes, Warrier, Nicol,
Zecker, & Kraus; 2003; King et al., 2002; Wible et al.,
2002) and to the animal model data (Cunningham et
al., 2002). Evidence is building in support of impaired
brainstem responses to complex sounds, regardless of
whether the "noise" can be characterized as backward
or spontaneous masking. These representative studies
are part of a growing body of research reporting consistent sensory-level (nonlinguistic) factors contributing to,
or resulting in, cognitive-processing deficits in a clinical

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 3. Individual ABR waveforms for a child from the control group (CTR) and for a child from the experimental group (LLI). Responses are
shown from intensities 107, 97, and 87 dB SPL at electrode Cz. The point selected as wave V is indicated in each waveform.

group of children also demonstrating language-learning difficulties (Kraus, 2001; Kraus & Nicol, 2003;
Merzenich et al., 2002). They also reflect an increasing
trend to incorporate psychoacoustic and electrophysiologic responses within the same study, strengthening the ability to differentiate sensory from cognitive
processes embedded in behavioral performances.
There is an issue of growing importance that must
be raised when discussing the current LLI sensory-deficit debate. A frequently reported assumption (some
might say dogma) in current research is that certain
electrophysiological methods (e.g., ABR or MMN) are
relatively independent of the attentional or cognitive
processes. We have noted that certain clinical populations showing a high comorbidity with LLI (e.g., ADHD)
exhibit electrophysiologic differences at the brainstem
level. But this particular factor can be controlled with
participant criteria measures. It is when attention or
cognitive factors might be rooted within the experimental method that the independence assumption may be
especially weakened.
The ABR studies reviewed above were elicited in the
presence of visual and bilaterally competing auditory

stimulation. The children were watching a video with a
low-intensity soundtrack while the experimental stimulus was delivered via ER-3A earphone. This protocol introduces a selective-attention confound (Berger &
Posner, 2000), whereby the child expends considerable
effort to listen to a low-intensity, high-priority sound
(video) while ignoring the louder experimental sound
(backward masking or speech stimulus). In an investigation of automatic and cognitive auditory attention
mechanisms, Spence and Driver (1994) identified voluntary sustained attention to a single auditory channel
as task related or "endogenous." Significant endogenous
attention effects have been reported in the auditory
modality for the MMN (Woldorff, Hackley, & Hillyard,
1991; Woldorff, Hillyard, Gallen, Hampson, & Bloom,
1998) and early cortical areas (Woldorff et al., 1993).
Historically, ABR studies have reported that the
brainstem response is free of attention-related effects
(Naatanen, 1992; Picton & Hillyard, 1974; Picton et al.,
1981). Woldorff et al. (1993) also have reported that the
source coordinates of the neuromagnetic fields generated in their participants support the existence of
precortical attention mechanisms. Bauer and Bayles

Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

197

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 4. ABR wave-V latencies for no-masker signal (solid
symbols) and for backward-masking stimulus conditions as a
function of signal level. The corresponding 1.5-SD bars are shown
for each mean value.

(1990) hypothesized that earlier studies failed to elicit
attentional effects due to their use of higher intensity
experimental stimuli. The allocation of task-relevant
attention may only be invoked when the attended sounds
are low intensity (as in the current LLI/ERP studies
using videos). This raises the question of whether the
brainstem-level differences reported in the currently
reviewed studies result from neural asynchrony in the
experimental groups or from more efficient endogenous
orienting of attention in the control group. This issue
should be investigated in more detail, given the growing use of this ERP paradigm, especially when testing
children.5
Two issues make it difficult to resolve completely
the selective attention problem. The first issue is the
higher functioning control group in the backward-masking ABR study. They were slightly better in the nonverbal problem-solving domain and notably higher in language abilities than is standard for control groups in
the LLI literature. It is possible that attention mechanisms supporting pattern-recognition and task-performance abilities in these children somehow modulate
early, precortical mechanisms. This scenario would support shorter brainstem latencies in the control group.
5

In a topic-related methodological study, McArthur, Bishop, and
Proudfoot (2003) recently raised questions about the possible degrading
effect of video sound on auditory ERP wave morphology (size, latency, and
reliability), especially the MMN. They reported that while the relatively
low-intensity video noise had no significant effect on the P1 or P2, there
was a significant delayed latency and reduced amplitude of the MMN.

198

The second issue is the experimental groups used in the
speech-stimuli studies. King et al. (2002) reported that
their participants included "a broad range of learning
disabilities...based on previous research showing that
perception/encoding deficits cut across diagnostic categories" (p. 112). Kraus and Nicol (2003) further reported
that their learning disorder group included children with
diagnosed ADHD. This scenario would suggest delayed
brainstem latencies in the experimental group. However,
it was reported that the backward-masking and speechstimuli studies were not contradictory, but showed
equivalent latency patterns. The issue of group characteristics has to be investigated in more detail.
Marler et al. (2001) reported that for children with
LLI, the behavioral backward-masking thresholds improved with practice. This finding indicates that there
was a perceptual change in the children's sensation level
with practice. Because the ABR is correlated to behavioral sensation level, it is logical to ask whether there
would have been a corresponding change in the
electrophysiologic threshold and latency measures reported in the current study with practice. King et al.
(2002) and Hayes et al. (2003) investigated electrophysiological changes after auditory language training with
a commercially available program. Auditory brainstem
and cortical responses were recorded with speech stimuli
before and after language training. Some of the children with learning deficits demonstrated delayed ABR
latencies, and background noise had a detrimental effect on cortical waveform morphology. After language
training, behavioral performances improved and there
were better correlations between cortical ERPs elicited
in noise and in quiet (improved physiological responses
consistent with cognitive gains). These results suggest
that even with improvements in language performance
and consequent changes in the cortical representation
of speech, neural asynchrony at the brainstem level may
not be immediately ameliorated by successful cognitive
learning strategies: Successful top-down modulation is
possible even with an impaired sensory system.
Some investigators have commented that the backward-masking effect reported in a subset of children with
LLI has received more attention than is merited. This
perspective might be accurate if it is understood only
within the context of perceiving rapidly presented sounds
(see Kraus et al., 1996, and Wright et al., 1997, for further discussions of spectrotemporal deficits). The backward-masking paradigm will likely continue to be a
workhorse in the area of speech perception and language
learning because it reflects a singular nonlinguistic
event, which mirrors a series of processes integral to
speech intelligibility (Phillips, 1995, 1998, Pichney,
Durlach, & Braida, 1985). The nonlinguistic aspect is
particularly important when studying children with LLI.
It is increasingly difficult to assume that studying the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

auditory nervous system's response to linguistic sounds
provides a measure of neural representation independent of the known language impairment. (For an investigation of language effects on an ERP [MMN] once reported to be prelinguistic, see Winkler et al., 1999.)
Similar questions are still levied at the researchers who
use speech stimuli (e.g., [ba]-[da]) to study general auditory processing. Studdert-Kennedy and Mody (1995)
claimed that such linguistic deficits could not be excluded
because "no one has demonstrated equivalent difficulties for matched nonspeech control patterns" (p. 509). It
is important to continue to look forward. We need to
develop new ways of using stimuli that have a rich and
informative psychophysical history (e.g., backward
masking, frequency movement over time, auditory
streaming, etc.) and also ones that demonstrate certain
acoustic characteristics to serve as speech analogues
(Elliott, Hammer, & Carrell, 1991, 1992; Green, 1988;
Phillips, 1997; Pisoni, Carrell, & Gans, 1983).
Finally, these results cannot be reported to support
current theories of temporal processing deficits in children with LLI. Although the electrophysiologic differences reported in this study were elicited with a backward-masking signal, the ABR studies reviewed above
indicate a broader physiological impairment. It would
seem that at the level of the brainstem, noise interferes
with the encoding of stimulus onset (Kraus & Nicol,
2003), regardless of whether the "stimulus" is linguistic. This finding would suggest that the inclusion of a
simultaneous-masking ABR condition in the current
study might have also elicited a group difference. Time
constraints precluded the addition of another experimental condition with these children.
Taken together, the psychophysical and electrophysiological data imply a co-occurring deficit and may potentially have an impact on how we view auditory processing in children with language impairment. The
backward-masking findings indicate that in combination with language processing deficits (Leonard, 1998),
task-learning deficits (Bishop et al., 1999), and verbal
memory deficits (Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990; Gillam
et al., 1998; Montgomery, 2000), analysis of complex
sounds is disrupted at the level of the auditory
brainstem. The preceding description of the psychophysical and electrophysiological results is, admittedly, based
on diverse empirical data from a broadly designed study.
However, it is constructed with elements common
throughout the experimental conditions. The conclusions
are also consonant with current hypotheses about the
nature of language impairment and possible manifestations of sensory processing deficits (Gillam, Hoffman,
Marler, & Wynn-Dancy, 2002; Hartley & Moore, 2002;
Kraus & Nicol, 2003; Merzenich et al., 1996; Montgomery, 2002; Wright et al., 1997). Although these findings
are not presented in support of a causative relation

between nonlinguistic auditory perceptual deficits and
language impairment, they do place the issue before
those who would discount the role of auditory processing in children with language impairment.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Sparrgrove
Endowment of the University of Texas and by a Doctoral
Dissertation Grant from Shell Oil. Our gratitude is extended
to all the families who participated in this study, to the
speech-language pathologists and Directors of Special
Education of the Pflugerville and Round Rock School
districts, and to the Directors of Capital School and VIPs
Tutoring Services of Austin. We thank Ron Gillam, Randy
Diehl, Don Teas, and Dan Harris, for their helpful assistance
in earlier manuscripts.

References
Akshoomoff, N., Courchesne, E., Yeung-Courchesne,
R., & Costello, J. (1989). Brainstem auditory evoked
potentials in receptive developmental language disorder.
Brain and Language, 37, 409-418.
American National Standards Institute. (1996).
Specifications for audiometers (ANSI S3.6-1996). New
York: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author
Aram, D., Morris, R., & Hall, N. (1992). The validity of
discrepancy criteria for identifying children with developmental language disorders. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25, 549-554.
Barkley, R. A. (1997). Behavioral inhibition, sustained
attention, and executive function: Construction of a unified
theory of ADHD. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 65-94.
Barry, R. J., Johnstone, S. J., & Clarke, A. R. (2003). A
review of electrophysiology in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: II. Event-related potentials. Clinical Neurophysiology, 114, 184-198.
Bauer, L. O., & Bayles, R. L. (1990). Precortical filtering
and selective attention: An evoked potential analysis.
Biological Psychology, 30, 21-33.
Benasich, A. A., & Tallal, P. (2002). Infant discrimination
of rapid auditory cues predicts later language impairment.
Behavioral Brain Research, 136, 31-49.
Berger, A., & Posner, M. I. (2000). Pathologies of brain
attentional networks. Neuroscience and Behavioral
Reviews, 24, 3-5.
Bishop, D. V. M. (2002). The role of genes in the etiology of
specific language impairment. Journal of Communication
Disorders, 35, 311-328.
Bishop, D. V. M., Carlyon, R. P., Deeks, J. M., & Bishop,
S. J. (1999). Auditory temporal processing impairment:
Neither necessary nor sufficient for causing language
impairment in children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 42, 1295-1310.
Bishop, D. V. M., North, T., & Donlan, C. (1996). Nonword
repetition as a behavioral marker for inherited language
Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

199

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

impairment: Evidence from a twin study. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 37, 391-403.
Bradlow, A. R., Kraus, N., Nicol, T. G., McGee, T. J.,
Cunningham, J., Zecker, S. G., & Carrell, T. D. (1999).
The effects of lengthened formant transition duration on
discrimination and neural representation of synthetic CV
syllables by normal and learning-disabled children. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 106, 2086-2096.
Buss, E., Hall, J. W., Grose, J. H., & Dev, M. B. (1999).
Development of adult-like performance in backward,
simultaneous, and forward masking. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 844-849.
Conti-Ramsden, G., Crutchley, A., & Botting, N. (1997).
The extent to which psychometric tests differentiate
subgroups of children with SLI. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 765-777.
Courchesne, E., & Yeung-Courchesne, R. (1988). Eventrelated brain potentials. In M. Rutter, A. H. Tuma, & I. S.
Lann (Eds.), Assessment and diagnosis in child psychopathology (pp. 264-297). New York: Guilford Press.
Cunningham, J., Nicol, T., King, C., Zecker, S. G., &
Kraus, N. (2002). Effects of noise and cue enhancement
on neural responses to speech in auditory midbrain,
thalamus and cortex. Hearing Research, 169, 97-111.
Cunningham, J., Nicol, T., Zecker, S. G., Bradlow, A., &
Kraus, N. (2001). Neurobiologic responses to speech in
noise in children with learning problems: Deficits and
strategies for improvement. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112,
758-767.
Deatherage, B. H., & Evans, T. R. (1969). Binaural
masking: Backward, forward, and simultaneous effects.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 46, 362-371.
Denckla, M. B., Rudel, R. G., Chapman, C., & Krieger,
J. (1985). Motor proficiency in dyslexic children with and
without attentional disorders. Archives of Neurology, 42,
228-231.
Duifhuis, H. (1973). Consequences of peripheral frequency
selectivity for nonsimultaneous masking. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 54, 1471-1488.
DuPaul, G. J., Anastopoulos, A. D., Shelton, T. L.,
Guevremont, D. C., & Metevia, L. (1992). Multimethod
assessment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: The
diagnostic utility of clinic-based tests. Journal of Clinical
Child Psychology, 21, 394-402.
Elliott, L. L. (1962). Backward masking: Monotic and
dichotic conditions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 34, 1108-1115.
Elliott, L. L. (1990). Response to Tallal: Fine-grained
discrimination deficits in language-learning impaired
children are specific neither to the auditory modality nor
to speech perception. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 33, 617-618.
Elliott, L. L., & Hammer, M. A. (1993). Fine-grained
auditory discrimination: Factor structures. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 396-409.
Elliott, L. L., Hammer, M. A., & Carrell, T. (1991).
Discrimination of second-formant-like frequency transitions. Perception and Psychophyics, 50, 1-6.
Elliott, L. L., Hammer, M. A., & Carrell, T. (1992).
Asymmetrical discrimination of narrow-band stimuli.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 92, 1919-1922.

200

Elliott, L., Hammer, M., & Scholl, M. (1989). Fine-grained
auditory discrimination in normal children and children
with language-learning problems. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 32, 112-119.
Elliott, L., Hammer, M., & Scholl, M. (1990). Fine-grained
auditory discrimination and performance on tests of
receptive vocabulary and receptive language. Annals of
Dyslexia, 40, 170-179.
Ferri, R., Del Gracco, S., Elia, M., Musumeci, S. A., &
Stefanini, M. C. (1995). Age, sex and mental retardation
related changes of brainstem auditory evoked potentials in
Down's syndrome. Italian Journal of Neurological
Sciences, 16, 377-383.
Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there
a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29, 336-360.
Geisler, C. D., & Gamble, T. (1989). Responses of "highspontaneous" auditory-nerve fibers to consonant-vowel
syllables in noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 85, 1625-1639.
Gelfand, S. A. (1998). Hearing: An introduction to psychological and physiological acoustics (3rd ed.). New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Gillam, R. B., Cowan, N., & Marler, J. A. (1998). Information processing by school-age children with specific
language impairment: Evidence from a modality effect
paradigm. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 41, 913-924.
Gillam, R. G., Hoffman, L. M., Marler, J. A., & WynnDancy, M. L. (2002). Sensitivity to increased task
demands: Contributions from data-driven and conceptually driven information processing deficits. Topics in
Language Disorders, 27, 30-48.
Gorga, M. P., Abbas, P. J., & Worthington, D. W. (1985).
Stimulus calibration in ABR measurements. In J. T.
Jacobson (Ed.), The auditory brainstem response (pp. 49-
62). San Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Gorga, M. P., Kaminski, J. R., Beauchaine, K. A., &
Jesteadt, W. (1988). Auditory brainstem responses to tone
bursts in normally hearing subjects. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 31, 87-97.
Green, D. M. (1988). Profile analysis: Auditory intensity
discrimination. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Grillon, C., Courchesne, E., & Akshoomoff, N. (1989).
Brainstem and middle latency auditory evoked potentials
in autism and developmental language disorder. Journal
of Autism & Developmental Disorders, 19, 255-269.
Hall, J. W. (1992). Handbook of auditory evoked responses.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Hartley, D. E. H., & Moore, D. R. (2002). Auditory
processing efficiency deficits in children with developmental language impairments. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 112, 2962-2966.
Hartley, D. E. H., Wright, B. A., Hogan, S. C., & Moore,
D. R. (2000). Age-related improvements in auditory
backward and simultaneous masking in 6- to 10-year-old
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 43,
1402-1415.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Hayes, E. A., Warrier, C. M., Nicol, T. G., Zecker, S. G., &
Kraus, N. (2003). Neural plasticity following auditory
training in children with learning problems. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 114, 673-684.
Hecox, K., & Hogan, K. (1982). Auditory evoked potentials
in the language impaired child. In A. Rothenberger (Ed.),
Event-related potentials in children: Basic concepts and
clinical applications (pp. 3-10). New York: Elsevier.
Helzer, J., Champlin, C., & Gillam, R. (1996). Auditory
temporal resolution in specifically language-impaired and
age-matched children. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 83,
1171-1181.
Hirsh, I. J., & Watson, C. S. (1996). Auditory psychophysics
and perception. Annual Review of Psychology, 47, 461-484.
Hyde, M. L. (1985). Frequency-specific BERA in infants.
Journal of Otolaryngology, 14, 19-27.
King, C., Warrier, C. M., Hayes, E., & Kraus N. (2002).
Deficits in auditory brainstem pathway encoding of speech
sounds in children with learning problems. Neuroscience
Letters, 319, 111-115.
Kraus, N. (2001). Auditory pathway encoding and neural
plasticity in children with learning problems. Audiology
and Neuro-Otology, 6, 221-227.
Kraus, N., McGee, T. J., Carrell, T. D., Zecker, S. G.,
Nicol, T. G., & Koch, D. B. (1996). Auditory neurophysiologic responses and discrimination deficits in children
with learning problems. Science, 273, 971-973.
Kraus, N., McGee, T. J., & Koch, D. B. (1998). Speech
sound perception and learning: Biologic bases. Journal of
Scandinavian Audiology, 27(Suppl. 49), 7-17.
Kraus, N., & Nicol, T. (2003). Aggregate neural response to
speech sounds in the central auditory system. Speech
Communication, 41, 35-47.
Lahat, E., Avital, E., Berkovitch, M., Arlazoroff, A., &
Aladjem, M. (1995). BAEP studies in children with
attention deficit disorder. Developmental Medicine and
Child Neurology, 37, 119-123.
Leark, R. A., Dupuy, T. R., Greenberg, L. M., Corman,
C. L., & Kindschi, C. (1996). Test of Variables of Attention. Los Alamitos, CA: Universal Attention Disorders.
Leonard, L. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ludlow, C., Cudahy, E., Bassich, C., & Brown, G. (1983).
The auditory processing skills of hyperactive, language
impaired and reading disabled boys. In J. Katz & E. Lasky
(Eds.), Central auditory processing disorders: Problems of
speech, language, and learning (pp. 163-185). Baltimore:
University Park Press.
Maison, S., Duclaux, R., Ferber-Viart, C., & Dubreuil,
C. (1996). Clinical interest of brain stem auditory evoked
potentials in 72 children with inadequate language
development. International Journal of Neuroscience, 88,
261-272.
Marler, J. A., Champlin, C. A., & Gillam, R. B. (2001).
Backward and simultaneous masking measured in
children with language-learning impairments who
received computer-based training. American Journal of
Speech-Language Pathology, 10, 258-268.
Marler, J. A., Champlin, C. A., & Gillam, R. B. (2002).
Auditory memory for backward masking signals in

children with language impairment. Psychophysiology, 39,
767-780.
Mason, S. M., & Mellor, D. H. (1984). Brain-stem, middle
latency and late cortical evoked potentials in children with
speech and language disorders. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 59, 297-309.
McArthur, G. M., Bishop, D. V. M., & Proudfoot, M.
(2003). Do video sounds interfere with auditory eventrelated potentials? Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35, 329-333.
Merrell, A. W., & Plante, E. (1997). Norm-referenced test
interpretation in the diagnostic process. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, 28, 50-58.
Merzenich, M., Jenkins, W., Johnston, P., Schreiner, C.,
Miller, S., & Tallal, P. (1996). Temporal processing
deficits in language-learning impaired children ameliorated by training. Science, 271, 77-81.
Merzenich, M. M., Tallal, P., Peterson, B., Miller, S., &
Jenkins, W. M. (1999). Some neurological principles
relevant to the origins of--and the cortical plasticity-based
remediation of--developmental language impairments. In
J. Grafman & Y. Christen (Eds.), Neuronal plasticity:
Building a bridge from the laboratory to the clinic (pp.
169-187). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Merzenich, M. M., Wright, B. A., Jenkins, W., Xerri, C.,
Yle, N., Miller, S., & Tallal, P. (2002). Cortical plasticity
underlying perceptual, motor, and cognitive skill development: Implications for neurorehabilitation. In M. H.
Johnson, Y. Munakata, & R. O. Gilmore (Eds.), Brain
development and cognition: A reader (pp. 293-304).
Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Microcal Origin. (1999). Origin (Version 6.1) [Computer
software]. Northampton, MA: OriginLab Corporation.
Mody, M., Studdert-Kennedy, M., & Brady, S. (1997).
Speech perception deficits in poor readers: Auditory
processing or phonological encoding? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 199-231.
Montgomery, J. W. (2000). Verbal working memory and
sentence comprehension in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 43, 293-308.
Montgomery, J. W. (2002). Information processing and
language comprehension in children with specific language
impairment. Topics in Language Disorders, 22, 62-84.
Naatanen, R. (1992). Attention and brain function.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nigg, J. (2000). On inhibition/disinhibition in developmental pathology: View from cognitive and personality
psychology and a working inhibition taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 220-246.
Nigg, J. T., Hinshaw, S. P., & Halperin, J. M. (1996).
Continuous performance test in boys with attention deficit
disorder: Methylphenidate dose response and relations
with observed behaviors. Journal of Clinical Child
Psychology, 25, 333-340.
Nittrouer, S. (1999). Do temporal processing deficits cause
phonological processing problems? Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 925-942.
O'Brien, R. G., & Kaiser, M. K. (1985). MANOVA method
for analyzing repeated measures designs: An extensive
primer. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 316-333.
Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

201

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Phillips, D. P. (1995). Central auditory processing: A view
from auditory neuroscience. American Journal of Otology,
16, 338-352.
Phillips, D. P. (1997). Auditory gap detection, perceptual
channels, and temporal resolution in speech perception.
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 10, 343-354.
Phillips, D. P. (1998). Sensory representations, the auditory
cortex, and speech perception. Seminars in Hearing, 19,
319-332.
Pichney, M. A., Durlach, N. I., & Braida, L. D. (1985).
Speaking clearly for the hard of hearing. I: Intelligibility
differences between clear and conversational speech.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 28, 96-103.
Picton, T. W., Bentin, S., Berg, P., Donchin, E., Hillyard,
S. A., Johnson, R., et al. (2000). Guidelines for using
human event-related potentials to study cognition:
Recording standards and publication criteria. Psychophysiology, 37, 127-152.
Picton, T. W., & Hillyard, S. A. (1974). Human auditory
evoked potentials: II. Effects of attention. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 36, 191-199.
Picton, T. W., Stapells, D. R., & Campbell, K. B. (1981).
Auditory evoked potentials from the human cochlea and
brainstem. Journal of Otolaryngology (Toronto), 10, 1-14.
Piggott, L. R., & Anderson, T. (1983). Brainstem auditory
evoked response in children with central language
disturbance. Journal of the American Academy of Child
Psychiatry, 22, 535-540.
Pisoni, D. B., Carrell, T. D., & Gans, S. J. (1983). Perception of the duration of rapid spectrum changes in speech
and nonspeech signals. Perceptual Psychophysiology, 34,
314-322.
Plante, E. (1998). Criteria for SLI: The Stark and Tallal
legacy and beyond. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 41, 951-957.
Powell, R., & Bishop, D. V. M. (1992). Clumsiness and
perceptual problems in children with specific language
impairment. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 34, 755-765.
Puente, A., Ysunza, A., Pamplona, M., Silva-Rojas, A., &
Lara, C. (2002). Short latency and long latency auditory
evoked responses in children with attention deficit
disorder. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 62, 45-51.
Regan, D. (1989). Human brain electrophysiology. New
York: Elsevier.
Riccio, C. A., & Hynd, B. W. (1993). Developmental
language disorders in children: Relationship with learning
disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
School Psychology Review, 22, 696-709.
Robin, D., Tomblin, J., Kearney, A., & Hugg, L. (1989).
Auditory temporal pattern learning in children with
speech and language impairments. Brain and Language,
36, 604-613.
Roncagliolo, M., Benitez, & Perez, M. (1994). Auditory
brainstem responses of children with developmental
language disorders. Developmental Medicine and Child
Neurology, 36, 26-33.
Ruchkin, D. S. (1987). Comments on the editorial policy on
analysis of variance. Psychophysiology, 24, 476-477.

202

Schepers, J. M., Stuart, A. D., & Todd, A. E. (1999).
Electrophysiological concomitants of psychometric
intelligence. South African Journal of Psychology, 29,
138-144.
Schochat, E., Scheurer, C. I., & de Andrade, E. R.
(2002). ABR and auditory P300 findings in children with
ADHD. Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria, 60, 742-747.
Schwartz, D. M., & Berry, G. A. (1985). Normative aspects
of the ABR. In J. T. Jacobson (Ed.), The auditory brainstem response (pp. 65-97). San Diego, CA: College-Hill
Press.
Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. A. (1995). Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals, Third Edition.
San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Sergeant, J., & van der Meere, J. (1990). Convergence of
approaches in localizing the hyperactivity deficit. In B. B.
Lahey & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Advances in Clinical Child
Psychology (Vol 13., pp. 207-246). New York: Plenum.
Soderquist, D. R., Carstens, A. A., & Frank, G. J. H.
(1981). Backward, simultaneous, and forward masking as
a function of signal delay and frequency. Journal of
Auditory Research, 21, 227-245.
Spence, C. J., & Driver, J. (1994). Covert spatial orienting
in audition: Exogenous and endogenous mechanisms.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 20, 555-574.
Stapells, D. R., & Picton, T. W. (1981). Technical aspects of
brainstem evoked potential audiometry using tones. Ear
and Hearing, 2, 20-29.
Starr, A., & Don, M. (1988). Brain potentials evoked by
acoustic stimuli. In T. W. Picton (Ed.), Handbook of
electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology (pp.
97-150). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Studdert-Kennedy, M., & Mody, M. (1995). Auditory
temporal perception deficits in the reading-impaired: A
critical review of the evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 2, 508-514.
Tallal, P., Miller, S., & Fitch, R. (1993). Neurobiological
basis of speech: A case for the preeminence of temporal
processing. In P. Tallal, A. M. Galaburda, R. R. Llinas, &
C. von Euler (Eds.), Temporal information processing in
the nervous system (Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, Vol. 82, pp. 27-47). New York: New York Academy of Sciences.
Tannock, R., & Schachar, R. (1996). Executive dysfunction as an underlying mechanism of behavior and language problems in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
In J. Beitchman, N. Cohen, M. M. Konstanteareas, & R.
Tannock (Eds.), Language, learning, and behavior
disorders (pp. 128-155). Cambridge, United Kingdom:
Cambridge University Press.
Tomblin, J. B., & Buckwalter, P. (1998). Heritability of
poor language achievement among twins. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 188-199.
Tomblin, J. B., Records, N., & Zhang, X. (1996). A system
for the diagnosis of specific language impairment in
kindergarten children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 1284-1294.
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 48 * 189-203 * February 2005

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Wible, B., Nicol, T., & Kraus, N. (2002). Abnormal neural
encoding of repeated speech stimuli in noise in children
with learning problems. Clinical Neurophysiology, 113,
485-494.

Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranik,
C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1997).
Deficits in auditory temporal and spectral resolution in
language-impaired children. Nature, 387, 176-178.

Winer, B. J., Brown, D. R., & Michels, K. M. (1991).
Statistical principles in experimental design. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Wright, B. A., & Reid, M. D. (2002, February). Excessive
auditory masking in children with language or listening
impairments interpreted as a developmental delay. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Association for
Research in Otolaryngology, Tampa, Florida.

Winkler, I., Kujala, T., Tiitinen, H., Sivonen, P., Alku, P.,
Lehtokoski, A., et al. (1999). Brain responses reveal the
learning of foreign language phonemes. Psychophysiology,
36, 638-642.
Woldorff, M. G., Gallen, C. C., Hampson, S. A., Hillyard,
S. A., Pantev, C., Sobel, D., & Bloom, F. E. (1993).
Modulation of early sensory processing in human auditory
cortex during auditory selective attention. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 90, 8722-8726.
Woldorff, M. G., Hackley, S. A., & Hillyard, S. A. (1991).
The effects of channel-selective attention on the mismatch
negativity wave elicited by deviant tones. Psychophysiology, 28, 30-42.
Woldorff, M. G., Hillyard, S. A., Gallen, C. C., Hampson,
S. R., & Bloom, F. E. (1998). Magnetoencephalographic
recordings demonstrate attentional modulation of
mismatch-related neural activity in human auditory
cortex. Psychophysiology, 35, 283-292.

Zhang, X., & Tomblin, B. (1998). Can children with
language impairment be accurately identified using
temporal processing measures? A simulation study. Brain
and Language, 65, 395-403.
Zurron, M., & Diaz, F. (1998). Conditions for correlation
between IQ and auditory evoked potential latencies.
Personality and Individual Differences, 24, 279-287.
Received January 7, 2003
Accepted April 5, 2004
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2005/014)
Contact author: Jeffrey A. Marler, PhD, now at Department
of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Health and
Human Services Building, James Madison University,
Harrisonburg, VA 22807. E-mail: marlerja@jmu.edu

Marler & Champlin: Sensory Processing in Children With LLI

203

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 03/15/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

