Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, Vol. 35, No. 1, January 2006 ((c) 2005)
DOI: 10.1007/s10936-005-9006-3

Searching for the Trace: The Influence of Age,
Lexical Activation and Working Memory on
Sentence Processing
Anthony J. Angwin,1,3 Helen J. Chenery,1 David A. Copland,1
Elizabeth A. Cardell,1 Bruce E. Murdoch,1 and John C. L. Ingram2
To investigate the stability of trace reactivation in healthy older adults, 22 older volunteers
with no significant neurological history participated in a cross-modal priming task. Whilst both
object relative center embedded (ORC) and object relative right branching (ORR) sentences
were employed, working memory load was reduced by limiting the number of words separating
the antecedent from the gap for both sentence types. Analysis of the results did not reveal any
significant trace reactivation for the ORC or ORR sentences. The results did reveal, however,
a positive correlation between age and semantic priming at the pre-gap position and a negative
correlation between age and semantic priming at the gap position for ORC sentences. In contrast, there was no correlation between age and priming effects for the ORR sentences. These
results indicated that trace reactivation may be sensitive to a variety of age related factors,
including lexical activation and working memory. The implications of these results for sentence
processing in the older population are discussed.
KEY WORDS: Aging; semantic priming; sentence processing; trace reactivation; working
memory.

INTRODUCTION
Given our rapidly aging society, a plethora of research into communication and language processing in the elderly has emerged over the last two
decades. In particular, much research has investigated changes to sentence
1 Centre

for Research in Language Processing and Linguistics, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.
2 Department of English, Media Studies and Art History, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.
3 To whom all correspondence should be addressed. Centre for Research in Language Processing and Linguistics, Division of Speech Pathology, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane 4072, Australia. email: a.angwin@uq.edu.au
101
0090-6905/06/0100-0101/0 (c) 2005 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.

102

Angwin et al.

comprehension in the older population. This research has used various
paradigms to illustrate that despite healthy older adults' relatively normal
comprehension of grammatically simple sentences, a decline in the comprehension of grammatically complex sentences is frequently evident (e.g.,
Emery, 1985; Obler et al., 1991; Stine & Wingfield, 1990; Stine-Morrow
et al., 2000; Wingfield & Lindfield, 1995).
In particular, recent research has illustrated that healthy older adults
can have more difficulty processing sentences with a noncanonical structure compared to processing sentences with a canonical structure (e.g.,
Grossman et al., 2002; Stine-Morrow et al., 2000). The difficulty with processing these sentences has been attributed to the complexity of assigning
thematic roles to the moved noun phrase (NP) arguments. For example, in
order to comprehend an object relative sentence such as the girli that the
boy chased (ti ) was fast, the first NP the girl must be understood to be the
object of the verb chased, despite the fact that it occurs at the beginning
of the sentence.
A generally accepted theory is that the movement of the NP leaves a
phonologically empty NP or placeholder at the position of the gap, which
Chomsky (1981) refers to as a trace (indicated by (ti ) in the example provided). Furthermore, it is posited that this trace is linked to the antecedent (indicated by i in the example), such that in our example, the girl only
receives the thematic role of object via its link to the trace. During the
online processing of such a sentence, therefore, the antecedent is rapidly
reactivated at the position of the trace or gap, allowing thematic roles to
be properly assigned. In contrast, the canonical order of NP arguments
in a subject relative sentence such as the girl that chased the boy was fast,
makes thematic role assignment much easier.
Measurements of the trace reactivation process can be conducted
using a cross-modal semantic priming task as outlined by Swinney et al.
(1979). The premise underlying the cross-modal paradigm relies on the
semantic priming effect, whereby lexical decision times to words are faster
if they have been preceded by a related word. Thus, the cross-modal task
involves the presentation of auditory sentences, with a visual probe word
presented at the position of the gap, which is either related or unrelated
to the antecedent. Provided that the antecedent is reactivated at this point,
reaction times (RTs) to the related probe word should be faster than those
to the unrelated probe word, thereby indicating that trace reactivation has
occurred. Accordingly, delays in lexical activation would be expected to
interfere with this process.
Consistent with this proposal, Broca's aphasics have demonstrated
both delays in lexical activation on semantic priming tasks (Prather
et al., 1992) and an absence of trace reactivation on cross-modal priming

Searching for the Trace

103

tasks (Swinney & Zurif, 1995). Recent research on healthy older adults,
however, has illustrated normal semantic priming (Giffard et al., 2003;
Linnville, 1995). Thus, it would appear unlikely that trace reactivation
in the healthy older population could be disrupted by delays in lexical
activation.
Nevertheless, Zurif et al. (1995) has still effectively demonstrated disruptions to the online processing of object relative sentences in healthy
older adults using the cross-modal priming task. These disruptions, however, were not attributed to delayed lexical activation. Rather, the researchers demonstrated that when the distance separating the antecedent from
the gap was 7 to 8 words for object relative sentences (e.g., the tailor
hemmed the cloaki that the actor from the studio needed (ti ) for the performance), younger participants reliably demonstrated trace reactivation
whilst an older group did not. Once the distance between the antecedent
and the gap was shortened to 4 to 5 words, however, trace reactivation
was established for the older participants. Consequently, Zurif et al. (1995)
concluded that age related memory limitations could affect the online processing of complex sentences.
Stine-Morrow et al. (2000) provided further support for age related
changes to sentence processing, by analyzing the ability of both younger
and older adults to process subject relative and object relative sentences
during a self-paced reading task. The results revealed that only the younger readers were capable of differentially allocating processing time to the
object relative sentences, as evidenced by longer reading times at the relative clause. Accordingly, Stine-Morrow et al. (2000) concluded that the
older adults were not able to allocate the additional resources necessary
to assign thematic roles to the object relative sentences. Thus, there is converging evidence to suggest that the difficulties some healthy older adults
experience with processing noncanonical sentences could be related to an
age related decline in the availability of working memory resources.
Previous research investigating cognitive resources in healthy older
adults demonstrates that working memory abilities do generally decline
with age (see Carpenter et al., 1994 for a review). Whilst working memory can be basically defined as a short duration, limited capacity memory
system (Baddeley, 1995), the notion of verbal working memory, which is
supposedly capable of transiently retaining verbal information for use in
sentence processing, is often considered most crucial to sentence comprehension. Despite continued debate over the precise nature of the working
memory resources utilized during online sentence processing, therefore, it
would seem a valid assumption that sentence comprehension difficulties in
the elderly are partly related to a decline in cognitive resources such as
working memory.

104

Angwin et al.

Recent investigations using event-related brain potentials (ERPs) have
illustrated the increased working memory load associated with processing noncanonical sentences, strengthening the proposed link between age,
working memory and sentence processing difficulties. Specifically, analyses of ERPs have suggested that working memory is required to maintain
syntactic information for the parser during the establishment of filler-gap
dependencies (e.g., Fiebach et al., 2001, 2002). Furthermore, Haarmann
et al. (2003) have also suggested that a filler phrase places demands on
the semantic component of verbal working memory during online processing. A reduction in the capacity of working memory resources such as
that observed in older adults, therefore, would presumably disturb both the
retention and reactivation of the antecedent during sentence processing.
Despite the possibility of reduced working memory resources in the
older population, however, trace reactivation should still occur reliably for
healthy older adults under controlled conditions. More specifically, according to the results presented by Zurif et al. (1995), trace reactivation should
occur unimpeded regardless of age provided that the antecedent-gap distance is short, thus reducing the load on working memory. Similarly,
despite evidence to suggest that object relative right branching (ORR) sentences (e.g., the director watched the skateri that the dancer badly insulted
(ti ) out of sheer jealousy) may be more difficult to process than object relative center embedded (ORC) sentences (e.g., the snakei that the school
principle hurriedly chased (ti ) escaped in the yard) (Hakes et al., 1976),
trace reactivation should occur reliably for both sentence types if the antecedent-gap distance is consistently short.
Consequently, the aims of the present study were based upon emerging proposals in the literature, which suggest that the reduction in working
memory capacity experienced by healthy older adults can reduce their sentence processing efficiency. Specifically, this research aimed to investigate
the ability of healthy older adults to process ORC and ORR sentences, as
measured by the presence of trace reactivation in a cross-modal priming
task. It was hypothesized that trace reactivation should be stable across
both age and sentence type when short antecedent-gap distances are consistently employed.

METHODS
Participants
Participants were 22 healthy older volunteers (12 male, 10 female)
from the general community. Participants had a mean age of 63.36 years

Searching for the Trace

105

(SD = 6.13, range = 53 - 76) with a mean education of 13.32 years
(SD = 2.71). All participants were native speakers of English, had normal
or corrected to normal vision and hearing and had no significant neurological history.
Stimuli
Stimuli consisted of 152 auditorily presented sentences. Experimental
sentences were comprised of eight ORC sentences and eight ORR sentences. The ORR sentences were based upon stimuli used by Nicol et al.
(1994), however, they were modified to more closely reflect Australian culture, whilst the ORC sentences were created by the investigators. To reduce
the influence of working memory resources on the processing of these sentences, no more than 4 to 5 words intervened between the antecedent and
the gap. Examples of each sentence type are as follows:
ORC: The snakei that the school principal 1 hurriedly chased2 (ti ) escaped
in the yard.
ORR: The director watched the skateri that the dancer 1 badly insulted2
(ti ) out of sheer jealousy.
As indicated by the subscripts, both sentence types were constructed
to elicit trace reactivation. In the ORC sentence, the antecedent (the snake)
should be reactivated at the gap, which is located after the verb `chased',
whilst for the ORR sentence, the antecedent (the skater) should also be
reactivated at the gap, which is located after the verb `insulted'. For each
experimental sentence, two visual probe words were chosen to measure
trace reactivation, one related and one unrelated to the antecedent. The
related probe words were all chosen based upon association norms and
were semantically related to the antecedent. Furthermore, unrelated probe
words were matched to the related probe words for both length and frequency. For instance, in our ORC example, the related probe word was
`reptile' (related to `snake') whilst the unrelated probe word was `booklet'.
Trace reactivation could thus be measured via priming effects, calculated
by subtracting RTs to related probe words from RTs to unrelated probes.
Both probe words were presented at two positions in the sentence, as
indicated by the superscripts provided in our examples. Position two was
located at the gap, thereby allowing trace reactivation to be measured. In
contrast, position one was used as a baseline measure, to ensure that there
was no residual activation of the antecedent prior to the gap. As illustrated in the examples, this pre-gap position was always located immediately before an adverb, which was inserted to increase the distance between
the pre-gap and gap positions. Thus, any priming effects observed at the

106

Angwin et al.

pre-gap position would not be a result of backward contamination caused
by its proximity to the gap.
Due to the 2x2 (probe x position) design, each sentence was repeated
four times, resulting in a total of 32 ORC and 32 ORR sentences. To
reduce the effects of overexposure to sentence stimuli, two separate stimulus lists were created, each containing 16 ORC and 16 ORR sentences
with probe type and position counterbalanced across the stimulus sets.
Within each stimulus set, an additional 4 ORC and 4 ORR sentences were
added with randomly placed nonword probes. Thirty-six filler sentences
were also added to each list, with random probe positions that differed to
those of the critical ORC and ORR sentences. These filler sentences contained similar semantic content to those of the experimental sentences and
used nonword probes. Consequently, each stimulus list was comprised of
76 sentences. The order of presentation of stimuli was pseudorandomized,
with a minimum of 10 trials between any repeated ORC or ORR sentence.
Each participant was tested individually during two different testing sessions, which were separated by a minimum of 4 weeks to further
reduce the possible influence of repeated exposure to the sentence stimuli.
A female speaker in a sound attenuated lab recorded the sentence stimuli using a standard speech rate. All stimuli were presented on a portable
laptop computer using Superlab experimental software (Version 2.0)
(Cedrus, 1996), which measured participants' RTs via a Cedrus response
pad (model RB-420) (accurate to within 1 ms) and collected all error and
RT data automatically. Button 2 on the response pad was labeled `Yes' (in
green) and button 3 on the response pad was labeled `No' (in red). Auditory
stimuli were administered binaurally using Sony headphones.
Pretest of Probe Plausibility
McKoon and Ratcliff (1994) have investigated the use of cross-modal
priming tasks and suggested that priming effects can result from a
confound that is induced when the related probes form more plausible
continuations of the sentence than the unrelated probes. Consistent with
the process outlined by Love and Swinney (1996), therefore, a test on
the probe stimuli was conducted to determine whether any of the related
probes formed more plausible continuations of the sentence than the unrelated probes at either the pre-gap or gap positions. In order to conduct
this test, spoken sentences were recorded that consisted of the sentence
fragments up to the pre-gap or gap position, followed by one of the probe
words. For each experimental sentence, therefore, there were four sentence
fragments created. The sentences were divided into two different lists, the
first list testing ORC sentence fragments for the pre-gap position, and

Searching for the Trace

107

ORR fragments for the gap position, whilst the second list tested the
opposite probe positions for each sentence type.
A total of eighteen participants were tested, nine completing each list,
with an age range of 38-73 (M = 57.44, SD = 9.35). Participants were
asked to rate the last word of each sentence fragment on a plausibility
of continuation measure. More specifically, participants were asked to rate
whether the last word formed a good or poor plausible continuation of
the sentence according to a 4-point scale (where a rating of 1 = a very
poor continuation and a rating of 4 = a very good continuation). Analysis of the results indicated that related probe words in the ORC sentences
were judged to be no more plausible as continuations than the unrelated
probes. In contrast, the mean plausibility ratings of the related probes for
the ORR sentences were found to be significantly larger than that of the
unrelated probes [F(1,7) = 5.97, p < 0.05]. This result suggested that the
data for the ORR sentences could be confounded by the more plausible continuation of the related items. This significant difference was eliminated, however, when two of the ORR sentence stimuli were removed.
The plausibility ratings for the related probes of these two sentence stimuli
were more than two standard deviations above the mean plausibility rating
for ORR sentences. Subsequently, these two sentence stimuli were excluded
from all further analyses.

Procedure
All participants were given the opportunity to practice the cross-modal
lexical decision task prior to conducting the experiment proper and were free
to practice until they felt comfortable with the procedure. Participants were
told that they would hear sentences over headphones, which they should
listen to carefully in order to answer occasional questions about the sentences as accurately as possible. They were instructed that these questions
would appear on the computer screen, and that they should answer the question `yes' or `no' using the appropriate buttons on the response box. These
questions were used as a measure of a participant's attention to the task and
appeared pseudorandomly, with a range of 3 - 11 sentences between each
question.
Participants were also instructed that they would need to perform a
second task, simultaneously to the first. The participants were told that
a string of letters would appear in the middle of the computer screen at
some point during the auditory presentation of each sentence over the
headphones. Participants were instructed to make a lexical decision to this
string of letters as quickly and as accurately as possible, by pressing the

108

Angwin et al.

`yes' button if it was a word, and the `no' button if it was a nonword. Participants were given rest breaks during the course of the experiment.

RESULTS
Trace Reactivation
All participants responded to the comprehension probes with an
accuracy of 85% or higher, suggesting that participants attended to the
sentence stimuli appropriately. Due to this high accuracy, no further analysis of the participants' responses to the comprehension probes was conducted. Prior to the analysis of the lexical decision data, all errors as well
as RTs less than 200 ms or greater than 1500 ms were removed from analyses, along with any matched data points for each word pair. This process
ensured that data was only analyzed when both RTs for a word pair were
acceptable and resulted in the removal of 4.13% of the total data. Participant outliers were then treated by replacing any RT that was two standard
deviations above or below the mean for a particular participant and condition with the appropriate Tukey's biweight mean estimator, resulting in
changes to 3.24% of the remaining data.
Data for the ORC and ORR sentences were analyzed separately,
allowing for the precise investigation of trace reactivation within each sentence type. Table I illustrates the mean RTs for each sentence as a function of probe type and position. Individual participant RTs were entered
into a mixed linear model analysis, with subject as a random factor and
position (pre-gap or gap) and probe (related or unrelated) as fixed factors.
Analysis of the ORC sentences revealed a significant main effect of position [F (1, 627) = 14.75, p < 0.01], but no other significant main or interaction effects. Reference to Table I indicates that the significant main effect
of position was due to faster overall RTs at the gap position as compared
to the pre-gap position.
Table I. Mean RTs as a Function of Sentence Type, Probe and Position
ORC

ORR

Position

Related

Unrelated

Related

Unrelated

Pre-gap
Gap

926.70 (187.89)
872.15 (160.95)

904.08 (183.09)
880.72 (179.85)

897.72 (199.06)
893.15 (196.95)

834.28 (171.94)
879.17 (174.60)

Note. ORC = object relative center embedded; ORR = object relative right branching;
RTs reported in milliseconds; standard deviations in parentheses.

Searching for the Trace

109

Analysis of the ORR sentences revealed a significant main effect of
probe [F (1, 475) = 11.15, p < 0.01] and a significant interaction effect
of probe x position [F (1, 474) = 4.55, p <0.05]. Further investigation of
this interaction effect was conducted by way of planned pairwise comparisons between related and unrelated RTs at each position using a second
mixed linear model analysis. The analyses revealed a significant main effect
of probe at the pre-gap position [F (1, 235) = 16.15, p < 0.01], as opposed
to the absence of any significant effects at the gap position. As Table I
illustrates, these results were indicative of an unexpected negative priming
effect at the pre-gap position, due to significantly faster RTs to unrelated
probes.
The Effect of Age
Since there was no significant facilitation of related compared with
unrelated probes at the gap position for either sentence type, further analyses were conducted to determine whether age modulated trace reactivation. Firstly, the mean priming effects were calculated for each participant
as a function of sentence type and position, by subtracting RTs for related
probes from RTs for unrelated probes. Secondly, two-tailed Pearson's R
analyses were used to determine whether the magnitude of priming effects
observed was correlated with the age of participants. The results revealed
a strong positive correlation between age and magnitude of priming at the
pre-gap position for the ORC sentences (r =.580, p <0.01), suggesting an
increase in priming effects with increasing age. In addition, a strong negative correlation between age and magnitude of priming existed at the gap
position for the ORC sentences (r=-0.557, p<0.01), suggesting a decrease
in priming effects with increasing age. In contrast, however, analysis of the
ORR sentences did not reveal any significant correlations between age and
priming effects.
In light of the significant correlations between age and priming for
the ORC sentences, the participants were divided into two groups based
upon a median split of age. The median split divided the participants into
younger old (M age = 58.55, SD = 3.62) and older old (M age = 68.18,
SD = 3.84) subgroups, or more specifically, those aged above and below
64.5 years of age, allowing trace reactivation effects to be assessed independently for each group. Figure 1 illustrates the RTs for the younger old and
older old groups respectively, as a function of position and probe type.
To determine whether differences in trace reactivation for ORC
sentences existed between the two groups, RTs were entered into a
mixed linear model analysis with subject as a random factor, group as
a between subjects factor and probe and position as within subjects

110

Angwin et al.
Younger Group (n = 11)
960
Related
Unrelated

940

milliseconds

920
900
880
860
840
820
800
Pre-gap

Gap

Older Group (n = 11)
960
940
milliseconds

920
900
880
860
840
Related
Unrelated

820
800
Pre-gap

Gap

Fig. 1. RTs for the young and old groups as a function of position and probe for the ORC
sentences.

fixed factors. The analysis revealed a significant main effect of position
[F (1, 624) = 14.88, p < 0.01] and a significant three-way interaction effect
of group x probe x position [F (1, 623) = 10.97, p < 0.01]. All other main
and interaction effects were not significant. Given the three-way interaction effect for the ORC sentences, the data from each group was subsequently analysed separately using mixed linear model analyses.
The results for the younger old group revealed a significant main
effect of position [F (1, 314) = 11.49, p < 0.01] and a significant probe x
position interaction effect [F (1, 314) = 11.91, p < 0.01]. Further analysis of priming effects using pairwise comparisons at each position
revealed significant effects of probe at both the pre-gap and gap positions

Searching for the Trace

111

[F (1, 149) = 5.82, p < 0.05; and F (1, 153) = 6.12, p < 0.05, respectively].
Figure 1 illustrates that these results are indicative of a significant negative
priming effect at the pre-gap position, as opposed to a significant positive
priming effect at the gap position. The results for the older old group also
revealed a significant main effect of position [F (1, 310) = 1.64, p < 0.05],
however, there were no other significant main or interaction effects, which
indicated an absence of any priming for the older group.
In summary, there was no evidence of significant priming overall
at the gap position for either the ORC or ORR sentences, although a
significant negative priming effect was found for the ORR sentences at
the pre-gap position. The results did indicate, however, that a significant
correlation existed between age and magnitude of priming for the ORC
sentences. More specifically, a positive correlation was observed at the pregap position and a negative correlation was observed at the gap position.
Following division of the participants into younger old and older old subgroups, analysis of the ORC sentences revealed significant negative priming at the pre-gap position and positive priming at the gap position for the
younger old group. In contrast, there were no significant priming effects
evident for the older old group of participants.

DISCUSSION
The present study hypothesized that trace reactivation would be evident in healthy older participants for both ORC and ORR sentences when
a short antecedent-gap distance was employed. The results of the present study did not support this hypothesis, however, since no significant
priming effects were evident at the gap position for either sentence type.
Previous research by Grossman et al. (2002) has illustrated that comprehension of object relative sentences is reduced in some healthy older
adults. Thus, the absence of trace reactivation effects in the present study
is consistent with reduced comprehension of noncanonical sentences in the
older population.
Further analysis of the results, however, revealed a significant correlation between age and priming for the ORC sentences. In addition, division of the participants into younger old and older old subgroups revealed
significant negative priming at the pre-gap position and positive priming
at the gap position for the ORC sentences in the younger old group, as
opposed to the older. Hence, consistent with the results of Stine-Morrow
et al. (2000) and Zurif et al. (1995), the results of the present study also
support age related changes to sentence processing. Specifically, age related

112

Angwin et al.

changes to both the dynamics of lexical activation and the allocation of
working memory resources could have contributed to the results.

Lexical Activation
Since trace reactivation relies on rapid information processing, delays
in semantic activation would be expected to interfere with both the initial
activation of the antecedent and its subsequent reactivation. Accordingly,
the positive (at the pre-gap position) and negative (at the gap position) correlations between age and magnitude of priming for ORC sentences in the
present study would initially appear consistent with an age related decrease
in the speed of lexical activation. Such interpretations, however, are not consistent with results obtained by Giffard et al. (2003) and Linnville (1995) on
paired word semantic priming tasks, which have illustrated normal semantic priming in the older population. Furthermore, as Fig. 1 illustrates, the
positive correlation between age and priming at the pre-gap position is not
indicative of larger priming effects with increasing age. Rather, it is in fact
indicative of the change from negative priming effects in the younger old
participants to the absence of any priming effects in the older old participants. Therefore, although the results are unlikely to be an indication of
age related changes to the speed of lexical activation, the other potential
implications of these age related differences should be explored.
As illustrated by Nicol et al. (1994), the presence of a priming effect
at the gap position is not sufficient to indicate successful trace reactivation has occurred. Instead, it must be proven that the priming effect is
specific to the gap position. Consequently, by presenting related and unrelated probe words at a pre-gap position, the possibility of residual antecedent activation can be monitored, and the accuracy of the match between
related and unrelated probes can also be checked. Thus, priming effects
at the gap can only be construed as an indication of trace reactivation if
no significant differences in RT exist between related and unrelated probes
at the pre-gap position. Such comparisons have been used successfully by
Love and Swinney (1996) to investigate trace reactivation in healthy undergraduate students using object relative sentences and a cross-modal priming task. Specifically, the researchers found no significant difference in RT
between related and unrelated probe words at the pre-gap position, and
so they interpreted the priming effects that were obtained at the gap position as evidence for trace reactivation. In light of these previous findings,
the presence of negative priming effects at the pre-gap position for the
younger old participants of the present study warrants further scrutiny.
Not only is this result inconsistent with previous findings on antecedent

Searching for the Trace

113

activation during sentence processing, but also potentially suggests inhibition of response to related probes prior to the gap.
Previous reports of negative priming effects in lexical decision tasks
have been reported by Dagenbach et al. (1990) and Carr and Dagenbach
(1990). Interpreting their results, Carr and Dagenbach (1990) suggested that
a center-surround mechanism in the semantic system might be responsible for negative priming effects. The researchers suggested that when difficulty retrieving semantic information about a prime word is encountered
(e.g., during masked priming), activation of the center-surround mechanism
facilitates the retrieval of information. More specifically, in order to retrieve
information about the weakly activated prime word, the center-surround
mechanism acts to dampen closely related semantic representations in order
to prevent them from blocking the retrieval attempt. Whilst we recognize the
differences between standard lexical decision tasks and those that implement the cross-modal priming paradigm, the center-surround mechanism
may have some applicability to the negative priming evident at the pre-gap
position for ORC sentences.
As illustrated by Haarman et al. (2003), maintenance of the antecedent prior to the gap position (e.g., up to position 2) in the ORC sentences
of the present study places demands on the semantic component of verbal working memory. Thus, some form of semantic information related
to the antecedent may remain activated during sentence processing after
the initial exposure to the antecedent. Furthermore, the typical absence
of priming effects at pre-gap positions, suggests that any such antecedent
maintenance normally exists beyond the usual boundaries of lexical or
semantic activation, and so does not influence priming effects. The unexpected presence of negative priming at the pre-gap position for the younger old group of the present study, however, suggests that under some
conditions, antecedent maintenance has the potential to interfere with
semantic activation.
Consistent with both sentence processing and working memory
difficulties in the healthy older population, the maintenance of the antecedent may be partially degraded for the younger old group. As a consequence, whilst this degraded representation may still be sufficient to
allow trace reactivation to occur at the gap, the degraded signal of the
antecedent prior to the gap may result in inhibition. More specifically,
consistent with the center-surround mechanism, in order to facilitate the
maintenance of the antecedent's degraded representation, semantic information related to the antecedent may become inhibited or suppressed,
until the antecedent is reactivated at the gap position. Consequently,
responses to related probes at the pre-gap position would become inhibited, resulting in a negative priming effect. Once the antecedent becomes

114

Angwin et al.

successfully reactivated at the gap, however, inhibition of response is no
longer necessary and so semantic priming can proceed normally. In comparison, if the older old group of participants were completely unable
to maintain the antecedent prior to the gap, then neither inhibition of
response nor trace reactivation would occur, and so no priming would
be evident at pre-gap or gap positions. Indeed, the results of the present
study are consistent with such theories for the younger old and older old
groups.
Whilst the analysis of the ORR sentence data also revealed significant negative priming at the pre-gap position, there was an absence of
priming at the gap position and no correlation between age and magnitude of priming. Hence, while these results continue to support the
suppression of related information prior to the gap, they fail to support age related differences to this process. Nonetheless, a number of
caveats should be considered when interpreting the results of the ORR
sentences.
Firstly, as outlined earlier, two of the ORR sentences were excluded
from all analyses, resulting in a smaller set of data. As a result, age related
differences may be more difficult to statistically detect. Secondly, although
Zurif et al. (1995) has previously found significant trace reactivation effects
for ORR sentences using stimuli similar to those of the present study, previous research has also illustrated that ORR sentences are more difficult to
recall than ORC sentences (Holmes, 1973). Thus, the absence of priming at
the gap position may simply be indicative of greater difficulties associated
with processing ORR sentences.
Recently, Cameli and Philips (2000) used ERPs to examine whether
aging influenced the processes that allow irrelevant information to be
inhibited during language processing. They suggested that due to difficulties inhibiting the entry and maintenance of irrelevant information
into working memory, older participants might activate information both
related and unrelated to the sentence context. Since ORR sentences
contain more semantic content prior to the gap than ORC sentences,
then activation of this earlier semantic content could interfere
with antecedent maintenance prior to the gap, potentially contributing
to the presence of negative priming regardless of age for the ORR
sentences.
In order to further delineate the nature of the sentence processing
difficulties in the healthy older population, further exploration of the
dynamics and time course of antecedent maintenance and reactivation is
necessary. Consideration of other factors is also important, however, since
the influence of working memory could also potentially explain the results
of the present study.

Searching for the Trace

115

The Influence of Working Memory
Consistent with Zurif et al. (1995), in order to reduce the load on working memory during sentence processing, the stimuli used in the present study
were constructed with only a 4 to 5 word antecedent-gap distance. Therefore, both the absence of trace reactivation for ORC sentences in the older
old group of participants and the absence of trace reactivation for ORR sentences regardless of age was unexpected. Accordingly, it appears reasonable
to conclude that the use of a short antecedent-gap distance is not sufficient
to ensure trace reactivation occurs consistently in the older population.
Recently, Fiebach et al. (2002) investigated the processing of German
noncanonical sentences using ERPs and found that healthy participants
exhibited a sustained left anterior negativity (LAN), which increased in
amplitude as the distance from the antecedent increased. Furthermore, the
researchers found that individual working memory capacity modulated the
LAN, such that individuals with a low working memory capacity exhibited
a stronger and more broadly distributed LAN. Consistent with individual
differences in working memory capacity, Grossman et al. (2002) recently
illustrated that whilst some healthy older adults demonstrate poor comprehension of object relative constructions, others demonstrate good comprehension. Thus, given this individual variability in sentence comprehension,
and the effects of individual working memory capacity illustrated by Fiebach et al. (2002), the possible influence of individual variations in working
memory capacity on the processing of noncanonical sentences cannot be
ignored.
In relation to the proposed influence of the center-surround mechanism on the results of the present study, reductions in working memory capacity could reduce the salience of the antecedent during sentence
processing, thereby contributing to the cause of negative priming effects.
Accordingly, the different results between the younger old and older old
groups for the ORC sentences may reflect the differential effects of reduced
working memory resources in the two groups. Specifically, if a reduced
working memory capacity in the younger old group was sufficient for trace
reactivation but still disrupted the ongoing maintenance of the antecedent, then negative priming at the pre-gap position could be expected. In
contrast, if the older old groups' working memory capacity was further
reduced, to the extent that antecedent maintenance prior to the gap as
well as its reactivation at the gap was not possible, then no priming effects
would be expected at pre-gap or gap positions. Indeed, this would be consistent with the results of the present study.
The fact that correlations between age and priming were not obtained
for the ORR sentences despite the consistent use of a short antecedent-gap

116

Angwin et al.

distance, however, suggests that working memory limitations would not
solely account for the negative priming effects observed. Furthermore,
without the use of independent measures of working memory capacity, it
is difficult to precisely establish the influence of working memory resources
on the results. Further research using separate measures of executive functioning, therefore, may shed further light on the possible relationship
between working memory and issues such as inhibition and negative priming during sentence processing.

Conclusions
In contrast to earlier trace reactivation research, the overall results of
the present study indicate an absence of trace reactivation in healthy older
adults. These results are consistent with healthy older adults' reported
comprehension difficulties for noncanonical sentences, and so may in fact
reflect the source of these difficulties. Closer inspection of the results, however, does reveal implications for the possible influence of both lexical activation and working memory resources on sentence processing in the older
population. Additional research is no doubt necessary, in order to elucidate the impact of these and other cognitive resources on the sentence processing difficulties experienced by healthy older adults.

REFERENCES
Baddeley, A. D. (1995). Working memory. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences (pp. 755-764). MIT Press.
Cameli, L., & Phillips, N. A. (2000). Age related differences in semantic priming: Evidence
from event-related brain potentials. Brain and Cognition, 43, 69-73.
Carpenter, P. A., Miyake, A., & Just, M. A. (1994). Working memory constraints in comprehension. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of Psycholinguistics (pp. 1075-1122).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Carr, T., & Dagenbach, T. (1990). Semantic priming and repetition priming from masked
words: Evidence for a center-surround attentional processes in perceptual recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 341-350.
Cedrus (1996). Superlab Experimental Laboratory Software. Phoenix, AZ: Cedrus
Corporation.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Dagenbach, D., Carr, T. H., & Barnhardt, T. M. (1990). Inhibitory semantic priming of lexical decisions due to failure to retrieve weakly activated codes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 328-340.
Emery, O. B. (1985). Language and aging. Experimental Aging Research, 11, 3-60.

Searching for the Trace

117

Fiebach, C. J., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A. (2001). Syntactic working memory and the
establishment of filler-gap dependencies: Insights from ERPs and fMRI. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30, 321-338.
Fiebach, C. J., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A. (2002). Separating syntactic memory costs
and syntactic integration costs during parsing: the processing of German WH-questions.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 250-272.
Giffard, N., Desgranges, B., Kerrouche, N., Piolino, P., & Eustache, F. (2003). The hyperpriming phenomenon in normal aging: A consequence of cognitive slowing? Neuropsychology, 17(4), 594-601.
Grossman, M., Cooke, A., Devita, C., Chen, W., Moore, P., et al. (2002). Sentence processing
strategies in healthy seniors with poor comprehension: An fMRI study. Brain and Language, 80, 296-313.
Haarmann, H. J., Cameron, K. A., & Ruchkin, D. S. (2003). Short-term semantic retention
during on-line sentence comprehension: Brain potential evidence from filler-gap constructions. Cognitive Brain Research, 15, 178-190.
Hakes, D. T., Evans, J. S., & Brannon, L. L. (1976). Understanding sentences with relative
clauses. Memory and Cognition, 4(3), 283-290.
Holmes, V. M. (1973). Order of main and subordinate clauses in sentence perception. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 12, 285-293.
Linnville, S. E. (1995). Are there age-related processing differences in semantic priming.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 80(2), 585-586.
Love, T., & Swinney, D. (1996). Coreference processing and levels of analysis in
object-relative constructions; demonstration of antecedent reactivation with the
cross- modal priming paradigm. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 25, 5-24.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1994). Sentential context and on-line lexical decision tasks.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20, 1219-1228.
Nicol, J. L., Fodor, J. D., & Swinney, D. (1994). Using cross-modal lexical decision tasks to
investigate sentence processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory
and Cognition, 20, 1229-1238.
Obler, L., Fein, D., Nicholas, M., & Albert, M. L. (1991). Auditory comprehension and
aging: Decline in syntactic processing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 12, 433-452.
Prather, P., Zurif, E., Stern, C., & Rosen, T. (1992). Slowed lexical access in nonfluent aphasia: A case study. Brain and Language, 43, 336-348.
Stine, E. A. L., & Wingfield, A. (1990). How much do working memory deficits contribute to age differences in discourse memory? European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 2,
289-304.
Stine-Morrow, E. A., Ryan, S., & Leonard, J. S. (2000). Age differences in on-line syntactic
processing. Experimental Aging Research, 26, 315-322.
Swinney, D., & Zurif, E. (1995). Syntactic processing in aphasia. Brain and Language, 50,
225-239.
Swinney, D., Onifer, W., Prather, P., & Hirshkowitz, M. (1979). Semantic facilitation across
sensory modalities in the processing of individual words and sentences. Memory and
Cognition, 7, 159-165.
Wingfield, A., & Lindfield, K. C. (1995). Multiple memory systems in the processing of
speech: Evidence from aging. Experimental Aging Research, 21, 101-121.
Zurif, E. B., Swinney, D., Prather, P., Wingfield, A., & Brownell, H. H. (1995). The allocation
of memory resources during sentences comprehension: Evidence from the elderly. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 165-182.

