Lexical Aspect and the Use of Verb
Morphology by Children With Specific
Language Impairment
Laurence B. Leonard
Patricia Deevy
Robert Kurtz
Laurie Krantz Chorev
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

Amanda Owen
University of Iowa, Iowa City

Elgustus Polite
Diana Elam
Denise Finneran
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

Purpose: Many typically developing children first use inflections such as -ed with verb
predicates whose meanings are compatible with the functions of the inflection (e.g.,
using -ed when describing events of brief duration with clear end points, such as
dropped ). This tendency is assumed to be beneficial for development. In this study, the
authors examine whether preschool-aged children with specific language impairment
(SLI) show a similar tendency.
Method: Sixteen children in each of three groups participated--children with SLI,
typically developing children matched for age (TD-A), and younger typically developing
children matched for mean length of utterance (TD-MLU). The children described actions
in contexts that promoted either past tense -ed or progressive aspect -ing in past
contexts. Half of the verb predicates referred to events of brief duration with distinct
endpoints (e.g., drop), and half referred to events of considerable duration with less
distinct points of termination (e.g., play).
Results: Both the TD-A children and the TD-MLU children used -ed with verb predicates
of the first type more consistently than they did with verb predicates of the second
type. They showed the reverse pattern for -ing. The children with SLI did not show any
effects according to the verb predicate type. However, although the children with SLI
made less overall use of -ed than did both groups of TD children, they differed only from
the TD-A children in their overall use of -ing.
Conclusion: Difficulties with tense-related morphology may be compounded in children
with SLI if they fail to make use of associations between the lexical aspect of verb
predicates and the grammatical function of the accompanying inflections. The authors
argue that the advantages of using these associations as a starting point in acquisition
may be especially important in the case of -ed. Additional studies of children with SLI
are clearly needed, including those that employ longitudinal, naturalistic data.
KEY WORDS: language disorders, language assessment, language expression

C

hildren with specific language impairment (SLI) often exhibit a
more serious deficit in morphosyntax than in other areas of language. Conspicuous among the special difficulties with morphosyntax is a weakness in the use of grammatical morphemes that mark
tense and agreement, such as past tense -ed, third person singular -s, and
copula and auxiliary forms of be (is, are, am, was, were). This weakness is
most obvious during the preschool years but can extend into the elementary school years (e.g., Marchman, Wulfeck, & Ellis Weismer, 1999;
Norbury, Bishop, & Briscoe, 2001; Rice, Wexler, & Hershberger, 1998).
Children with SLI not only use such morphemes less consistently than
their typically developing (TD) agemates, but they also use them less reliably than younger TD children with similar mean lengths of utterance

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

759

1092-4388/07/5003-0759

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(MLUs; e.g., Leonard, Eyer, Bedore, & Grela, 1997; Oetting
& Horohov, 1997; Rice & Wexler, 1996; Rice, Wexler, &
Cleave, 1995).
These children's use of tense and agreement morphemes may be inconsistent, but it is not haphazard. Productions of a morpheme in inappropriate contexts (e.g.,
They runs fast) are relatively infrequent (Rice et al., 1995).
Furthermore, there is considerable evidence that the same
children with SLI who sometimes fail to use a morpheme
in an obligatory context will nevertheless display knowledge of the morpheme's application through creative errors such as throwed in place of threw (e.g., Marchman
et al., 1999).
The inconsistent use of tense and agreement morphology coupled with the children's clear grasp of certain
facts about how the morphemes should be used has been
characterized as the product of a grammar that permits
"optional" use of these morphemes. Specifically, Rice,
Wexler, and their colleagues ( Rice et al., 1995; Rice &
Wexler, 1996; Rice et al., 1998) have proposed that children with SLI go through an extended phase of development during which they fail to grasp the fact that tense is
obligatory in main clauses. Thus, when they produce a
tense morpheme, it is usually appropriate; the problem
rests in their underlying grammar that permits nonfinite
verb forms (e.g., Yesterday she play outside) in the same
contexts.
In the present study, we examine the inconsistent
use of tense morphology from a different perspective.
Although there is ample evidence to believe that the
same verbs can appear with and without the appropriate
morpheme in the speech of children with SLI (e.g., Miller
& Leonard, 1998), there is reason to suspect that factors
pertaining to the meanings of verb predicates may also
influence the degree to which tense morphemes are
applied. Since the early studies of young TD children by
researchers such as Antinucci and Miller (1976) and
Bloom, Lifter, and Hafitz (1980), it has been known that
the initial use of verb morphemes is not evenly distributed across verb types. Rather, morphemes such as -ed
are more likely to be used with a verb such as drop than
with a verb such as play, whereas for a morpheme such
as -ing, the opposite is true. Verbs such as drop refer to
actions with clear end points; those such as play refer to
actions with longer durations and no distinct end point.
The purpose of the present study is to examine the
relationship between verb predicate type and the use of
verb morphology by children with SLI and TD comparison groups to determine whether the interplay between
these two elements of language can contribute to our understanding of the tense-related difficulties seen in SLI.
Before discussing the possible relationships that might be
expected in the speech of children with SLI, it is necessary
to provide a brief review of the relationships among tense,
grammatical aspect, and lexical aspect.

760

Tense, Grammatical Aspect,
and Lexical Aspect
The three constructs--tense, grammatical aspect,
and lexical aspect--all pertain to notions of time in either
a direct or indirect manner. For English, the familiar
construct of tense refers to the temporal relationship between the time of the event and another time, usually the
time of speaking. Past tense, for example, typically refers
to an event that preceded the speaker's reference to it.
Thus, the utterance I broke the window refers to an event
that occurred prior to the utterance itself. However, tense
also applies to differences in time between two events.
For example, in She heard that I broke the window, both
the hearing of the event and the breaking itself occurred
prior to the utterance, but the breaking occurred first.
Aspect pertains to the temporal distribution of an
event rather than to its location in time. A distinction is
made between grammatical aspect, often referred to as
viewpoint aspect, and lexical aspect, known also as situation aspect (Smith, 1997). A contrast central to grammatical aspect is that between the perfective and the imperfective (e.g., Bybee, 1985). The perfective provides an
"outside-in" view of the event and may involve predicates
that specify end points (e.g., I read the book [and it was
excellent]), whereas the imperfective provides an "insideout" perspective with no end points expressed or implied
(e.g., I was reading the book [when the phone rang];
Wagner, 2002).
The expression of perfective aspect in English is not
straightforward. Often, it is best expressed by means of the
irregular past or the past tense inflection -ed, although
use of these forms does not necessarily signal that the
action has been completed. For example, whereas Kendall
ate a piece of candy implies that the action has been completed, the same verb form in Kendall ate indicates only
that the action took place prior to the time of the utterance. It is sometimes assumed that constructions such
as the present perfect (e.g., She has eaten) also mark perfective aspect (see Lyons, 1969). However, present perfect
constructions usually describe past events that have present relevance and do not express perfective aspect (see
Comrie [1976] for the distinction between "perfective"
and "perfect"). Imperfective aspect is reflected in English
through use of the inflection -ing. More precisely, this
inflection marks progressive aspect, one subtype of imperfective that expresses a continuous (nonstative) action
(Comrie, 1976). ( Note that when -ing is applied to stative verbs, as in I am wanting some ice cream, the meaning refers not only to the state but also to its emergence
or its intensification.)
As noted by Lyons (1969) and Bloom et al. (1980),
among others, tense and grammatical aspect are confounded in English. For example, in a radio broadcast of
a baseball game, the verb looked can mark a distinction of

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

tense in Jones looked over at the runner on first relative to
Jones looks over at the runner on first but can mark a
distinction of grammatical aspect in Jones looked over at
the runner on first (before delivering his pitch) relative to
Jones was looking over at the runner on first (when the
runner on third broke for home).
Lexical aspect refers to aspectual elements related to
verb semantics. Four semantic categories, first proposed
by Vendler (1967), are often employed in this regard.
These categories are (a) "states" such as see; (b) "activities," defined as events that have duration but an arbitrary end point, as in play; (c) "accomplishments," which
have an inherent end point but also have duration because there are identifiable phases before the end point is
reached, as in draw a picture; and (d) "achievements,"
which have an end point that is reached instantaneously,
as in fall.
The placement of verbs into these different categories
is not straightforward. For example, although many activity verbs are intransitive (e.g., walk, run), there are
activity verbs that are transitive, as in drive a car and
pull a wagon (Dowty, 1979). Furthermore, the same verb
that reflects an activity in one sentence (e.g., Francesca
drank wine for an hour) can reflect an accomplishment
in another sentence when used with a slightly different
direct object and prepositional phrase (e.g., Francesca
drank a glass of wine in an hour). Given the importance
of the contents of the larger predicate, our use of the term
lexical aspect will refer to the lexical aspect of the verb in
combination with its object or modifier, not of the individual verb divorced from its larger context.
Operational tests to determine the lexical aspect of
verbs within the larger predicate have been proposed
by several different scholars. In the present study, we
make use of the particular tests employed by Shirai and
Andersen (1995), which were, in large part, adapted from
those proposed by Dowty (1979). First, to distinguish
between states and nonstates, we ask whether the verbwithin-predicate has a habitual interpretation in simple present tense. States do not (e.g., I love my mother),
whereas nonstates do have such an interpretation (e.g.,
I watch PBS). Second, to distinguish between activities
and accomplishments or achievements, we ask if the event
as expressed in the present progressive (e.g., Mickey is
running; Mickey is running to the store) entails the event
as expressed in the present perfect (e.g., Mickey has run;
Mickey has run to the store). An affirmative answer applies to activities (at any point in the action of running, it
is accurate to say that Mickey has run); a negative answer applies to accomplishments and achievements (there
is a point in Mickey's running to the store where it is
not accurate to say that he has run to the store). For
reasons soon to be noted, the distinction between accomplishments and achievements was not a central factor
in the present study. Tests used to make this distinction

include how the addition of almost to the sentence alters the interpretation of the event. If the event has
two interpretations (e.g., She almost emptied the trash
could mean she almost began to empty the trash or she
almost finished emptying the trash), the verb-withinpredicate is classified as an accomplishment. If only
one interpretation is possible (as in He almost dropped
the ball), the verb-within-predicate is regarded as an
achievement.
It should be noted that although these tests provide important guidelines, they have limitations. Dowty
(1979) has pointed out several subtypes of lexical aspect
categories that conform only to select tests. For example,
states such as sleep are quite compatible with the progressive (e.g., Mary is sleeping) and, as in activity verbs,
Mary is sleeping entails Mary has slept. Both Vendler
(1967) and Dowty (1979) have noted that some achievement verbs represent instantaneous events but do not result in a change of state (e.g., knocking on a door). Smith
(1997) and Olsen and Weinberg (1999) refer to such verbs
as semelfactives.
The four categories of state, activity, accomplishment, and achievement are often distinguished on the
basis of three features: durative (vs. nondurative or punctual), telic (vs. atelic), and dynamic (vs. nondynamic; Shirai
& Andersen, 1995). Durative, as the name suggests, refers
to an event having duration. Telic refers to having an
inherent end point, and dynamic indicates that energy is
required for the event to occur. Using these features,
states are viewed as involving the features of durative,
atelic, and nondynamic. Activities reflect the features durative, atelic, and dynamic. Accomplishments and achievements are both telic and dynamic, differing only in the
durative (accomplishment) versus nondurative (achievement) feature.

Grammatical Aspect and Lexical
Aspect Interactions in Early
Language Development
It is probably clear from an inspection of the types of
meanings conveyed through lexical aspect that certain
verbs with their predicates (e.g., the achievement verb
open) combined with an inflection such as -ed convey completion as much as they convey a prior point in time. Other
verbs with their predicates (e.g., the activity verb walk)
combined with an inflection such as -ing convey actions
that are occurring continuously, but because these actions
have considerable duration, they are very often taking
place during the time of the utterance. The past tense
function of -ed and the progressive aspect function of
-ing are not clearly distinguishable from verb predicate
semantics until these inflections are attached to a verb
predicate whose lexical aspect does not naturally lend

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

761

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

itself to these grammatical functions, as in I was opening
the window yesterday (when a bird flew in) and I walked
yesterday (and am sore today).
Of course, young children do not typically produce
-ing with open and -ed with walk when they first make
use of these inflections. Rather, productions such as
opened and walking are much more common. Since the
initial studies from the 1970s and 1980s (e.g., Antinucci
& Miller, 1976; Bloom et al., 1980; Bronckart & Sinclair,
1973; Weist, Wysocka, Witkowska-Stadnik, Buczowska,
& Konieczna, 1984), there has been considerable debate
about how to characterize this pattern of use. Initial
findings that children first used -ing with durative, atelic
(activity) verb predicates and -ed with telic (accomplishment, achievement) verb predicates suggested that they
were learning an imperfective-perfective aspect distinction and only later acquired tense. However, subsequent
studies (e.g., Weist et al., 1984) found that children are
able to mark tense as well as aspect. Studies by Aksu-Ko0
(1998), Olsen and Weinberg (1999), Li and Shirai (2000),
and Wagner (2001), among others, have helped clarify
how children seem to interpret particular details of tense
and grammatical aspect. Based on their review of the
available findings, Shirai and Andersen (1995) proposed
a prototype account of children's acquisition of tense-
aspect morphology. According to this account, young children are not rigid in their treatment of tense and aspect
inflections with particular types of verb predicates, but
they do treat certain types of verb predicates as prototypes for -ing and other types as prototypes for -ed.
An examination of the literature also led Shirai and
Andersen (1995) to propose that the relevant features
influencing children's use of -ing and -ed with particular
verb predicates were not limited to durative/nondurative,
telic/atelic, and dynamic/nondynamic. They proposed that
children's use of these inflections was also influenced by a
feature they termed result. They distinguished this feature from telic by noting that the end point for many (telic)
events may not represent salient outcomes for children.
For example, whereas the outcomes in drop the ball or
pick up the toy may be quite salient, the outcomes of forget
the milk or ask the question are probably not. In the Shirai
and Andersen (1995) scheme, the former (which have the
result feature as well as the telic feature) are more prototypical than the latter for the use of -ed.
Shirai and Andersen (1995) also argue that when
achievement verbs with no clear end points (semelfactives) are used iteratively, such as a character repeatedly
hopping or banging, young children view the event as an
action-in-progress that is as prototypical of progressive
aspect as activities such as running or swimming. In the
present study, we adopt the Shirai and Andersen (1995)
prototype framework. As features play a critical role in
this framework, our descriptions of verb predicates and

762

the operational tests for lexical aspect will be presented in
terms of features (e.g., atelic) rather than cover terms
such as activity verb.

The Use of Past Tense -ed and Progressive
-ing by Children With SLI
Given the interaction among lexical aspect, tense,
and grammatical aspect, it is not surprising that young
TD children's early use of -ed and -ing is not evenly distributed across verb predicate types but, rather, clusters
around verb predicates with highly compatible lexical
aspect. The inflection -ed seems most likely to be used
with verb predicates reflecting nondurative, telic, and result features, and the inflection -ing appears most likely
to be used with verb predicates reflecting durative, atelic,
nonresult features.
An important question is whether these co-occurrences
are not only natural but beneficial to the children's acquisition of the inflections. Given that this close association between inflections and lexical aspect is seen in
young children who are developing language on schedule,
it is reasonable to assume that this link is facilitative.
However, it is highly plausible that these co-occurrences
are merely an expected by-product of the children's language experience. For example, children might hear dropped
more frequently than dropping and playing more frequently than played because at the time of speaking, dropping actions have often already occurred, whereas playing
actions might often still be taking place. Children's own
productions might not venture far from those in the input,
helped in large part by the same real-world tendencies for
brief actions to be already completed by the time they are
described and actions with a longer duration to be continuing at the time of mention. Shirai and Andersen (1995)
present evidence that indicates that parents' input to their
young children does, in fact, show this uneven distribution of inflections with lexical aspect.
Such input-based production patterns are in keeping
with Tomasello's (2003) usage-based theory of language
acquisition. According to this theory, children's initial use
of inflections such as -ed and -ing might be tied to specific
verbs precisely because of the frequent association between them in the input. At this early point, forms such as
dropped and playing may constitute unanalyzed wholes
for the children. Only later will children recognize a pattern and treat the inflections as separable elements. Because this early association between inflections and specific
verbs is assumed to be widespread in child language, it
might well constitute a natural route to the learning of
inflections. However, nothing in Tomasello's account seems
to require a semantic correspondence between lexical
aspect and these verb inflections. That is, if a particular
child were to frequently hear play with -ed and drop

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

with -ing, this child's rate of development would not be
expected to differ from the rate seen with the more typical association of play with -ing and drop with -ed. In
either case, the child would soon recognize that these inflections occur on a more widespread basis and would gradually treat them as separable from the verbs themselves.
However, an alternative possibility is that the frequent co-occurrence of -ed with actions that are completed
or -ing with actions that are ongoing does more than
simply bind the verb and inflection together during the
initial phase of language development; it also provides
the children with an important starting point in learning
the grammatical function of these inflections. The frequent association of -ing with verbs such as play could
hasten children's insight that -ing expresses the temporal notion of continuous action. Gradually, through exposure to the appearance of -ing with other types of verbs
(e.g., fall, build) and their predicates, children can learn
that the function of continuous action is served by the
inflection independent of verb predicate semantics.
The frequent association of -ed with verbs such as
drop could also provide children with a useful starting
point. However, in this case, the route to adultlike mastery might be less direct. Specifically, whereas children's
interpretation of -ing must merely broaden over time to
include continuous actions involving nondurative verb
predicates (that is, verb predicates with other types of
lexical aspect), children's interpretation of -ed must broaden
not only to accommodate verb predicates with differing
lexical aspect but also to allow this inflection to describe
actions that occurred in the past (tense), whether or not
they were completed. This complication could lead to
slower development of adultlike mastery of -ed relative
to -ing. Fortunately, because actions described by the
inflected verb dropped are both a thing of the past and
completed, an initial association between -ed and verbs
of this type should still put children on the right track.
If, as we assume, the initial association between nondurative, telic, and result features and -ed, and durative
and atelic features and -ing, is beneficial to children's
development, we should test the hypothesis that this association is more evident in TD children than in children
with SLI. Two types of evidence support the testing of this
hypothesis. First, when interpreting the meaning of verbs
themselves, children with SLI appear to be relatively
insensitive to perfective aspect (e.g., Kelly & Rice, 1994;
Schulz & Wittek, 2003). For example, Penner, Schulz, and
Wymann (2003) found that TD German-speaking children were more likely than children with SLI to require
evidence of an end state before judging the verb open as
applicable. Second, on the basis of all evidence known to
us, children with SLI are slow to begin using verb inflections in the first place. Thereafter, their pace is significantly protracted relative to that seen for TD children,
especially for -ed. This pattern is consistent with the view

that children with SLI are not making the initial association between inflections and lexical aspect and, as a
result, do not benefit from this useful inroad to discovering the grammatical function of these inflections. Without
this insight to serve as a guide, their use of these inflections develops at a slow rate. Because the discovery of the
grammatical function of -ed might be especially difficult
without the aid of beginning with a lexical association that
accommodates both tense and perfective aspect, the development of -ed might be expected to be especially slow.
The purpose of this study, then, was to compare a
group of children with SLI, a group of same-age TD children, and a group of younger MLU-matched TD children
in their use of -ed and -ing across verb predicates that
differ in lexical aspect. The MLU-matched TD children
were not yet at an age when adult-level use is reached.
Therefore, they should still provide evidence of lexical
aspect effects on their verb inflection use. Whether the
same holds for children with SLI is the primary question
of interest. The inclusion of -ing as an area of focus in this
study offers an additional benefit. This inflection is examined in a past progressive context, thus providing us with
an opportunity to examine the children's use of the accompanying (and less often studied) auxiliary forms was
and were.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight children participated in the study, 16 in
each of three groups. All children were White, monolingual speakers of English. Children with SLI comprised
the first group. These children had a mean age of 5;1
(years;months; SD = 9 months). Six of the children were
female, and 10 were male. Each of these children had
been diagnosed as language impaired and were scheduled for language intervention at the time of their participation in this study. Each child scored more than
1.5 SD below the chronological age mean on the Structured
Photographic Expressive Language Test--II (SPELT-II;
Werner & Kresheck, 1983a). These children passed a hearing screening and an oral-motor screening and scored
above 85 on the Columbia Mental Maturity Scale (CMMS;
Burgemeister, Blum, & Lorge, 1972), a test of nonverbal
intelligence. No child had a history of seizures or showed
any evidence of neurological dysfunction. All children
demonstrated the ability to produce word-final [t] and [d]
in monomorphemic contexts to ensure that their production of -ed would not be hampered by a lack of phonological ability. The children's MLUs, which were based on a
sample of 100 spontaneous utterances, averaged 4.15 morphemes (SD = 0.46). A composite measure of these children's use of finite (tense and agreement) verb morphology
in spontaneous speech, based on Leonard, Miller, and

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

763

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Gerber (1999), revealed limitations for their chronological age (M = 63.44%, SD = 24.30). This measure is based
on the children's combined use of copula and auxiliary
be forms, third person singular -s, and past tense -ed.
The number of obligatory contexts for past tense -ed in
spontaneous speech was relatively small. Across all of
the children with SLI, regardless of number of obligatory
contexts, the mean percentage of use of past tense -ed
was 69.07 (SD = 33.98). For only those children with at
least four obligatory contexts for this morpheme (N = 13),
the mean percentage was 75.25 (SD = 28.09). As will be
seen, these means are somewhat higher than the means
observed during the experimental task, due in large part,
we suspect, to the fact that the children can rely on highly
familiar forms in spontaneous speech.
A second group consisted of TD children who closely
resembled the SLI group in age (hereafter, the TD-A
children). Each child in this group was within 3 months
of the chronological age of a child in the SLI group. The
mean age of these children was 5;0 (SD = 10 months).
Six of the children were female, and 10 were male. These
children scored at age level on both the SPELT-II and the
CMMS, and passed the hearing and oral-motor screening. Like the children with SLI, these children provided
no evidence of neurological impairment. Not surprisingly, the MLUs of the children in this group (M = 5.39,
SD = 0.76) were considerably higher than those of the
children with SLI. Similarly, the children's finite verb
morphology composite scores (M = 98.06%, SD = 1.98)
were substantially higher than those of the children in
the SLI group. These children's past tense -ed use was
likewise quite proficient (M = 96.47%, SD = 7.85, with all
children's spontaneous speech samples providing at least
four obligatory contexts).
The remaining 16 children were younger typically
developing children who closely resembled the SLI group
in MLU (hereafter, the TD-MLU children). These children's mean age was 3;5 (SD = 5 months). Eight of the
children were female, and 8 were male. The MLU of each
child in this group was within 0.3 morphemes of a child
in the SLI group. The mean MLU for these children was
4.19 (SD = 0.43). These children passed both a hearing and oral-motor screening. Given the younger ages
of these children, they were administered, and obtained
age-appropriate scores on, either (a) the U.S. standardization of the Reynell Language Development Scales
(Reynell & Gruber, 1990) if they were under age 3;0 or
(b) the Structured Photographic Expressive Language
Test--Preschool (Werner & Kresheck, 1983b) if they were
between age 3;0 and 3;11. All children in this group age 3;6
and above scored above 85 on the CMMS; those below age
3;6 were administered the Leiter International Performance Scale--Revised (Roid & Miller, 1997) and, likewise,
scored above 85. These children's finite verb morphology
composite scores averaged 90.63 (SD = 7.83). Across all

764

TD-MLU children, the mean percentage of use of past
tense -ed in obligatory contexts in spontaneous speech
was 87.73 (SD = 20.98); for those children whose samples
provided at least four obligatory contexts for this morpheme ( N = 9), the mean percentage of use was 90.38
(SD = 15.07). As will be seen (and as is true for the SLI
group), the TD-MLU children's percentages of use of
past tense -ed were higher in spontaneous speech than
during the experimental tasks.

Materials and Procedure
The children participated in a probe task designed
to create obligatory contexts for past tense -ed and in a
probe task aimed at promoting contexts for progressive
aspect -ing. There were 20 items in the past tense -ed
task. Ten of the items were selected to be prototypical -ed
items, with the features nondurative, telic, and result.
We first consulted the list of verbs prepared by Olsen and
Weinberg (1998; see also Olsen & Weinberg, 1999) and
selected six verbs classified as telic. We then added direct
objects to these verbs and ensured that each item passed
the operational test for telic verb predicates of Shirai and
Andersen (1995) and had salient outcomes consistent with
the result feature. The verbs used in these items were
open, dump out, close, drop, scare, and cover. Four other
verbs regarded as semelfactives by Olsen and Weinberg
(1998) were selected and combined with particles and/or
direct objects to meet the operational test for telic verb predicates and the requirements for the result feature. The
verbs used in these items were knock over, jumped over,
kick, and pop. The specific items are provided in Appendix A. Hereafter, these items will be referred to as prototypical -ed items to indicate that these items reflected
the features viewed as prototypical for use with -ed.
The other 10 items for the past tense -ed task were
nonprototypical -ed items. Eight of these items employed
verbs classified as dynamic, durative, and atelic by Olsen
and Weinberg (1998) and passed the operational test for
these features after we added the direct object or adjunct.
The verbs employed in these items were rake, dance,
crawl, play, push, pull, carry, and chase. We then added
two semelfactive verbs, hop and brush, and combined them
with direct objects or adjuncts that allowed them to pass
the test for dynamic, durative, and atelic items. These
items also appear in Appendix A.
The 20 past tense -ed items were divided into two
lists of 10 items that were presented on separate days.
The order of presentation of the lists was counterbalanced
for each group of children.
Given that the items used for the past tense -ed
probes were selected on the basis of lexical aspect, it
was possible that the verbs used for the two categories
(prototypical -ed, nonprototypical -ed) differed along other
dimensions. We examined several possibilities. First, it

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

seemed that the two sets of verbs might differ in frequency of occurrence. Accordingly, we compared the verbs
in the two categories in terms of the frequency of occurrence of their stems, using the log frequencies in Francis
and Kucera (1984). The two types of verbs did not differ
on this measure, t(18) = 0.27, p = .787. We also compared these verbs according to the log frequency of their
stem + -ed forms. It should be noted that these values
might not be independent of lexical aspect, for reasons
noted earlier. That is, verbs and their predicates with
the features of durative and atelic might be less frequent
in past tense form than verbs and their predicates with
nondurative, telic, and result features because the events
that they represent may be less likely to be completed
when mentioned by a speaker. However, the two types of
verbs did not differ in this respect, t(18) = 0.47, p = .645.
A summary of these data appears in Appendix B.

using the past tense of the verb, and prompted the child to
describe the second action. An example follows.

We performed comparable analyses using two other
measures: the sum of the segment frequencies of each
verb and the sum of the biphone frequencies of each verb.
The former considered the frequency of occurrence of the
word position in which the segment appeared in the verb.
The latter was a measure of phonotactic frequency. Frequencies were based on Vitevich and Luce (2004). Using
the stem form of the verbs, neither segment frequency,
t(18) = 1.16, p = .260, nor biphone frequency, t(18) = 0.84,
p = .410, revealed a difference between the two categories
of verbs. Similarly, no differences were found when frequencies were based on the stem + -ed forms: for segment
frequency, t(18) = 1.19, p = .250; for biphone frequency,
t(18) = 0.89, p = .387. A summary of these data can be
found in Appendix B.

It can be seen that the experimenter used a regular
past tense -ed form just prior to the child's response. This,
of course, occurred for all items. For the items targeting
prototypical -ed verb predicates, one-half of the experimenter's own past tense -ed productions involved a verb
predicate with nondurative, telic, and result features,
and the other half involved a verb predicate with durative, atelic features. Likewise, for the items targeting
nonprototypical -ed verb predicates, one half of the experimenter's own productions made use of a verb predicate with nondurative, telic features, and one half
involved a verb predicate with durative and atelic features. To assist us in the detection of the appearance of
-ed at the end of the verb, we designed items that promoted the use of direct objects with possessive pronouns
(as in opened his window) or indefinite articles.
There were 30 items for the progressive -ing task.
Sixteen of the items were selected to represent prototypical -ing items with the features dynamic, durative,
and atelic. In selecting these items, we first consulted
the list of verbs of Olsen and Weinberg (1998) and selected
15 verbs that reflected these features. We ensured that all
of these items passed the operational test of Shirai and
Andersen (1995) for durative, atelic verb predicates. The
verbs used in these items were drive, draw, cry, skate,
slide, run, rake, sing, sweep, fly, rock, swim, ride, dance,
and march. The remaining verb, sleep, is classified by
Olsen and Weinberg (1998) as a state verb. State verbs are
durative but nondynamic. However, sleep is used in English as if it carries the dynamic feature, and, as noted by
Dowty (1979), is compatible with progressive aspect (one
says She's sleeping, not She sleeps, to describe an event in
the present). Futhermore, the item created for sleep involved the character lying in bed, snoring. The verb snore
is an activity verb (dynamic as well as durative); however,
children typically used the verb sleep rather than snore to
describe the event. The prototypical -ing items are shown
in Appendix A.

The past tense -ed task was adapted from Schutze
and Wexler (2000) and took the form of a game that the
children were asked to play with the experimenter. A
puppet, Pooh, was introduced and the children were told
that Pooh was very forgetful and often forgets to watch
what is happening. The children were then asked to help
Pooh by paying attention to what was happening and
explaining to Pooh what had happened if Pooh forgot
to watch. For each item, two characters (puppets or toy
figures) were used. These characters asked the children
"choice" questions before performing their actions. That is,
the first character announced its intention to perform one
of two actions and asked the child which it should perform. After the child responded, the character then performed the selected action. The second character than
announced its intention to perform one of two actions (different from the first character's actions), and the child was
again asked a choice question, with the character then
performing the action selected by the child. After the two
characters had performed their respective actions, Pooh
then confessed to not paying attention. The experimenter
then suggested that she and the child help Pooh. The
experimenter described the first of the actions performed,

Experimenter: Cookie Monster has a lot of beads. He
wants to fill up something.
Cookie Monster: Should I fill up my cup or my basket?
Child: Your basket.
(Cookie Monster then fills up his basket.)
Experimenter: And Grover wants to open something.
Grover: Should I open my door or my window?
Child: Your window.
(Grover then opens his window.)
Pooh: I didn't see what happened. Could you tell me?
Experimenter: Well, Cookie Monster filled up his basket
and Grover _____.

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

765

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

The remaining 14 items were designed to reflect
nonprototypical -ing items. Such items had to be selected
with care because, on the one hand, they had to reflect
telic and result features but, on the other hand, they had
to lend themselves to a progressive aspect interpretation.
To this end, we selected verbs that represented discrete
actions that could be repeated. For example, in one item,
the characters closed several windows of a toy house.
Each act of closing led to an observable outcome (telic and
result features), but the event as a whole continued. Furthermore, for all these items, the curtain closed while
the characters were about to perform another instance of
the action (e.g., another window remained open but was
about to be closed). Eight of the verbs for the nonprototypical -ing items were drawn from the telic verbs listed
by Olsen and Weinberg (1998). These verbs were fold,
pick, empty, tie, break, open, close, and cover. The remaining verbs were selected from the semelfactive and activity
verb categories but were used with particles and/or direct
objects in a manner that provided a telic interpretation.
Smith (1997) refers to some of these as multiple-event
activities made up of a series of short-duration events
whose stages have a telic or semelfactive property. For
example, for cut, the character took a large sheet of paper
and proceeded to cut it into smaller strips. For knock over,
the character knocked several toy animals over in succession. Although each discrete act could be identified
with a clear outcome, the curtain closed as the event as a
whole continued (e.g., additional strips of paper could be
cut from the larger sheet, additional toy animals could be
knocked over), and, in each case, the character's movements suggested that the next instance of the action was
about to take place. These remaining verbs were kick,
blow, cut, jump over, knock over, and sneeze.
Two of the nonprototypical -ing items may not have
been good examples for the feature result. For the item
The fish was blowing bubbles, the character blew several bubbles and started to dip the wand into the bubble
solution one more time as the curtain closed. Although
each act of blowing produced a clear result, the results
were quite transient, as the bubbles were no longer visible as the event as a whole proceeded. Similarly, for the
item The elephant was sneezing, the character was clearly
about to sneeze again when the curtain closed, but no
effects of the prior sneezes were apparent. Given these
possible differences between these two items and the
remaining items, we analyzed the data with and without
these particular items, as can be seen in the Results section. A list of the nonprototypical -ing items is provided
in Appendix A.
As was done with the verbs used in the past tense
-ed task, we determined whether the verbs used in the
prototypical -ing and nonprototypical -ing items differed
in frequency of occurrence. Neither differences in word frequency for the stem, t(28) = 0.16, p = .874, nor for stem + -ing,
766

t(28) = 1.53, p = .138, were observed. Similarly, the sum
of the segment frequencies revealed no difference for
either the stem, t(28) = 1.78, p = .085, or the stem + -ing,
t(28) = 1.88, p = .070. Finally, neither the sum of the
biphone frequencies for the stem, t(28) = 0.64, p = .530,
nor the sum of the biphone frequencies for the stem +
-ing, t(28) = 0.71, p = .481, was significant. A summary
of the frequency values is provided in Appendix B.
The task used for progressive -ing was adapted from
McShane and Whittaker (1988). A puppet show format
was used, with a small stage and curtain. The child, one
experimenter, and a puppet who was referred to as Sleepy
Bear sat on one end of the table and constituted the
audience. The other experimenter remained behind the
stage curtain and manipulated the characters whose
actions were to be described. The child was told that they
were going to watch some shows but that Sleepy Bear
often fell asleep during the shows and needed to be told
what had happened. For each item, the experimenter
behind the curtain prepared the characters and related
props. The curtain was then opened, and the experimenter
had the characters perform the action for 12 s. An example of an action involving a durative, atelic verb predicate
was a toy plane flying around in the air for 12 s; an example of an action involving a nondurative, telic, result
verb predicate was a small doll picking several flowers in
succession for 12 s (with the curtain closing before all of
the flowers had been picked). Just as the curtain opened,
Sleepy Bear fell asleep and did not wake up until the
curtain was closed after the 12-s period. Sleepy Bear then
said to the child "I fell asleep. Tell me about the show."
After the child provided a description of the show, Sleepy
Bear thanked the child. The experimenter sitting next to
the child then told the child and Sleepy Bear to get ready
for the next show.
For one half of the items of each verb predicate type, a
single character performed the action, thus requiring the
auxiliary verb was. For the remaining half of the items,
two characters performed the action, requiring the plural
auxiliary form were. The items were divided into two lists,
presented on separate days. The order of presentation of
the lists was counterbalanced for each group of children.

Scoring and Reliability
Scoring for the past tense -ed items was relatively
straightforward. As seen earlier in the example under
Materials and Procedure, the experimenter began the
description of each event by describing the first of the two
actions with a verb in past tense -ed form and then providing the subject of the sentence to be completed by the
child. Consequently, the children usually either produced
an appropriate past tense form or produced the verb as
a bare stem. In rare instances, the children did not remember the action performed or described an action that

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

had not been performed. Responses in these cases were
treated as unscorable. For each child, we then determined
the number of items for which scorable responses were
obtained and divided this number into the number of
items produced with past tense -ed. We then multiplied
this figure by 100 to obtain a percentage correct in obligatory contexts.
The progressive -ing task had to be scored somewhat
differently, owing to the fact that a response such as
danced for an item targeting were dancing is not an error
(given that the action took place in the past), even though
it makes no reference to the continuous nature of the
action that was shown. For this reason, we characterize
the children's use of -ing on this task as simply the degree
to which they described the actions with progressive aspect rather than the degree to which they produced correct responses. Responses in the form of a verb with past
tense (e.g., danced), a bare stem (dance), a progressive
form with an auxiliary (were dancing), and a progressive form without an auxiliary (dancing) were treated
as scorable. Of the scorable responses, we calculated the
percentage of responses that were in progressive -ing
form (progressive forms with or without an accompanying
auxiliary). Finally, for those responses with a progressive
-ing, we calculated the percentage of responses with an
auxiliary. We also scored the auxiliary as accurate or
inaccurate and noted the type of substitution error, if one
occurred.
We assessed transcription reliability for past tense
-ed by selecting the audiorecorded probe responses from
3 children in each of the 3 participant groups. An independent judge then transcribed these responses, and itemby-item agreement was determined. Overall, agreement
on the presence or absence of -ed in the children's responses
was 92%. Mean percentages for the SLI, TD-MLU, and
TD-A groups were 85%, 95%, and 97%, respectively. The
most common disagreement occurred when (despite our
best efforts) the child produced an article rather than
a possessive pronoun after the verb; on occasion, one
judge transcribed the response as, for example, (Arthur)
chased a butterfly, whereas the other judge transcribed it
as (Arthur) chase the butterfly.
We assessed reliability for progressive -ing and auxiliary was/were in the same manner, using the audiorecorded probe responses from 3 children in each group.
Overall agreement for the presence or absence of -ing
was 99%. Mean percentages for the SLI, TD-MLU, and
TD-A groups were 100%, 99%, and 99%, respectively.
The rare disagreements occurred with the target verb
open, whose final syllable resembles the inflection -ing.
For assessing reliability for was/were, an agreement
was assumed only if both judges not only regarded the
auxiliary as present but also agreed on which auxiliary
was produced. Overall agreement for was/were was 97%.
Mean percentages were 98%, 95%, and 98% for the SLI,

TD-MLU, and TD-A groups, respectively. Disagreements
were few in number, and no one type of disagreement was
more common than others.

Results
Past Tense -ed
The first analysis dealt with the children's use of past
tense -ed. A mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was planned, with participant group (SLI, TD-MLU,
TD-A) as a between-subjects variable and lexical aspect (prototypical -ed, nonprototypical -ed) as a withinsubjects variable. The percentages of use were arcsine
transformed for the ANOVA. Least significant difference
(LSD) testing at the .05 level was then applied in the
cases of significant main effects and interactions. Effect
sizes were also calculated through d, where values of 0.80
and larger were considered large effect sizes, and those
between 0.50 and 0.79 were considered medium effect
sizes (Cohen, 1988).
A summary of the children's use of past tense -ed can
be seen in Table 1. An inspection of the data revealed that
the TD-A children performed at or near ceiling levels. For
this reason, their data were not included in the ANOVA. A
significant main effect was found for participant group,
F(1, 30) = 37.66, p < .001. The children with SLI showed
significantly less use of past tense -ed (M = 35.44, SD =
21.66) than the TD-MLU children (M = 78.00, SD =
17.91). A significant main effect was also observed for
lexical aspect, F(1, 30) = 12.56, p = .001. Greater use of
past tense -ed was seen with prototypical -ed items (M =
60.66, SD = 30.66) than with nonprototypical -ed items
(M = 52.78, SD = 27.45). However, this difference is best
interpreted through the significant Participant Group x
Lexical Aspect interaction found, F(1, 30) = 6.24, p = .018.
LSD testing at the .05 level revealed that the TD-MLU
children made greater use of -ed than the children with
SLI with both prototypical (d = 2.46) and nonprototypical
(d = 1.93) items. However, the SLI group's use of -ed
did not differ as a function of lexical aspect, whereas the
TD-MLU children made significantly greater use of -ed
with prototypical items than with nonprototypical items
(d = 1.23).
Recall that for one half of the items for each lexical
aspect, the lexical aspect of the past tense form in the
experimenter's model matched the lexical aspect of the
verb predicate to be produced by the child. Although this
counterbalancing was intended to reduce any potential
bias on the children's productions, in principle it was
possible for the children to be differentially affected by the
lexical aspect of the verb predicates produced with -ed by
the experimenter. However, inspection of the data revealed
no such effect. Neither the percentage of use of past tense
-ed with prototypical -ed items nor the percentage of use

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

767

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Mean percentages of use (and standard deviations) of past tense -ed in prototypical -ed items and
nonprototypical -ed items.
SLI group
Lexical aspect

TD-MLU group

TD-A group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

37.13
33.75

22.88
20.98

84.19
71.81

15.42
18.54

98.13
91.19

5.44
9.59

Children not performing at ceiling level
(SLI, N = 16; TD-MLU, N = 15; TD-A, N = 10)
Prototypical -ed items
37.13
Nonprototypical -ed items
33.75

22.88
20.98

83.13
69.93

15.35
17.55

97.00
85.90

6.75
8.39

All children (N = 16)
Prototypical -ed items
Nonprototypical -ed items

Note. SLI = specific language impairment; TD-MLU = typically developing children matched for mean length of utterance;
TD-A = typically developing children matched for age.

with nonprototypical -ed items differed as a function of
the lexical aspect in the model.
Given the high percentages of use of past tense -ed
seen in the TD-A group, these children were not included
in the above ANOVA. However, the difference in past
tense -ed use as a function of lexical aspect in the TD-
MLU group prompted us to explore whether the same
type of effect might be seen in the TD-A children. Accordingly, we conducted a mixed model ANOVA involving
all three groups of children after excluding the data from
all children who showed 100% use in both prototypical
and nonprototypical contexts. This process resulted in the
inclusion of all 16 children with SLI, 15 TD-MLU children, and 10 TD-A children. (We should note here that
no child scored 0% in both prototypical and nonprototypical contexts.) A summary of the results can be seen
in Table 1.
Again, a significant main effect was found for participant group, F(2, 38) = 46.59, p < .001. LSD testing indicated that the TD-A children (M = 91.45, SD = 9.34)
produced past tense -ed to a significantly greater extent than the TD-MLU children (M = 76.55, SD = 17.53,
d = 1.11), who, in turn, used this inflection to a significantly greater degree than the children with SLI (M = 35.44,
SD = 21.66, d = 2.10). A main effect was also found for
lexical aspect, with greater use associated with prototypical -ed items (M = 68.56, SD = 31.08) than with nonprototypical -ed items (M = 59.71, SD = 27.73), F(1, 38) =
32.80, p < .001. A significant Participant Group x Lexical
Aspect interaction indicated that the lexical aspect effects were not seen in all groups, F(2, 38) = 6.64, p = .003.
LSD testing indicated that the TD-MLU children produced past tense -ed with prototypical -ed items more
readily than with nonprototypical -ed items (d = 1.35).
The same held true for the TD-A children (d = 2.48).
However, the children with SLI showed no such effect.
Thus, although many of the TD-A children had reached

768

ceiling on the past tense -ed task, the remaining children in this group showed the same lexical aspect effects
seen for the TD-MLU children.
Given that the children with SLI differed from the
other children in showing relative insensitivity to lexical
aspect, we examined the SLI data to determine whether
the factors of word frequency, segment frequency, or biphone
frequency might have influenced the children's productions.
Recall that the verbs used in the prototypical -ed and nonprototypical -ed items did not differ in these characteristics. However, it seemed possible that the children with
SLI might have produced past tense -ed more consistently
with, for example, words of higher frequency of occurrence
than with words of lower frequency of occurrence. Accordingly, for both prototypical and nonprototypical -ed items,
we selected the three most frequent and three least frequent verbs according to each of these characteristics,
making separate calculations for stem frequency and
stem + -ed frequency. The children's use of past tense -ed
did not appear to vary as a function of these characteristics. For example, the mean percentage of -ed use across
the three verbs with the highest word stem frequency was
36.50; for the three verbs with the lowest word stem frequency, the mean percentage of use of -ed was 34. When
word frequency was calculated for the stem + -ed, both the
three most frequent verbs and the three least frequent
verbs were associated with a mean of 35% use of past -ed.
The largest difference occurred with biphone frequency
for stem + -ed forms. Here, past tense -ed was used to a
somewhat higher degree with the three forms that had
the lowest frequency (40%) than with the three forms
that had the highest frequency (30%). However, when we
performed the same comparison using the forms with the
4th and 5th highest frequency, and the 4th and 5th lowest
frequency, the direction of the difference was in the opposite direction, with a numerically higher percentage for
the forms of higher (37.5) than lower (30) frequency. It

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

does not appear that word frequency, segment frequency,
or biphone frequency was a significant influence on the
use of past tense -ed by the children with SLI.

Progressive -ing
The children's use of progressive -ing was examined
through the same type of mixed model ANOVA used in the
past tense -ed comparison. A summary of the findings can
be seen in Table 2. Although the TD-A children's percentages were considerably higher than those of the other
groups, these children's mean percentage of use of progressive -ing in nonprototypical -ing items (82.88) was below
ceiling level. Nevertheless, 8 of the 16 children scored100%
in both prototypical and nonprototypical -ing items. For
this reason, the TD-A children were not included in the
first ANOVA computed for the progressive -ing data; only
the data from the SLI and TD-MLU groups were included.
The main effect for participant group was not significant, F(1, 30) = 0.23, p = .632. Likewise, there was no
effect for lexical aspect, F(1, 30) = 0.97, p = .332. However,
the Participant Group x Lexical Aspect interaction was
significant, F(1, 30) = 4.26, p = .048. LSD testing indicated
that the TD-MLU children were significantly more likely
to produce -ing with verbs in prototypical -ing items
than with verbs in nonprototypical -ing items (d = 0.52).
However, the children with SLI showed no difference in
-ing use as a function of the lexical aspect of the verb
predicate.
Earlier we noted that two of the nonprototypical -ing
items (involving blowing bubbles and sneezing) may not
have been ideal in reflecting the result feature. Therefore,
we repeated the ANOVA after excluding the children's
performance on these two items. Essentially identical results emerged, with no main effect for participant group,
F(1, 30) = 0.06, p = .800, no main effect for lexical aspect,
F(1, 30) = 0.18, p = .677, and a significant Participant
Group x Lexical Aspect interaction, F(1, 30) = 6.725,
p = .015. Again, LSD testing revealed that the TD-MLU
children were significantly more likely to produce -ing

with prototypical -ing items (M = 74.69, SD = 33.77) than
with nonprototypical -ing items (M = 62.13, SD = 42.19,
d = 0.51), whereas the children with SLI did not show
a difference in their use of -ing across these two types of
items (prototypical -ing items: M = 63.94, SD = 38.11;
nonprototypical -ing items: M = 71.38, SD = 35.20).
As we did in the analysis of past tense -ed, we attempted to determine whether the TD-A children who
were not at ceiling levels might show the same type of
lexical aspect effect seen for the TD-MLU children. We,
therefore, performed an ANOVA with all three participant groups, excluding all children who scored 100% on
each lexical aspect type. (No child scored 0% on each lexical aspect type.) The resulting analysis employed 14 children with SLI, 10 TD-MLU children, and 8 TD-A children.
For this particular analysis, we used all items in the prototypical and nonprototypical -ing categories. A summary
of the results appears in Table 2. A main effect for participant group was not found, F(2, 29) = 0.99, p = .384.
However, lexical aspect proved significant, F(1, 29) = 8.09,
p = .008, with greater use of -ing associated with prototypical -ing verb predicates (M = 64.69, SD = 34.65) than
with nonprototypical -ing verb predicates (M = 57.66,
SD = 35.03). The Participant Group x Lexical Aspect
interaction was also significant, F(2, 29) = 4.80, p = .016.
LSD testing revealed that the TD-MLU children were
more significantly likely to use -ing with prototypical
-ing items than with nonprototypical -ing items (d =
0.86). The same proved true for the TD-A children (d =
1.01). The children with SLI, on the other hand, showed
no such difference. The lack of a significant main effect
for participant group should be interpreted with some
caution because one half of the children in the TD-A
group used -ing at ceiling levels (100%) with both lexical
aspect types and, therefore, were not included in this
analysis. For those TD-A children included in the analysis, lexical aspect effects were seen.
We repeated this analysis after excluding the two
items from the nonprototypical -ing items that seemed
less ideal in reflecting the result feature. After removing

Table 2. Mean percentages of use (and standard deviations) of progressive -ing in prototypical -ing items and
nonprototypical -ing items.
SLI group
Lexical aspect

TD-MLU group

TD-A group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

63.94
69.31

38.11
34.62

74.69
63.13

33.77
41.60

90.75
82.88

19.69
25.77

Children not performing at ceiling level
(SLI, N = 14; TD-MLU, N = 10; TD-A, N = 8)
Prototypical -ing items
58.79
Nonprototypical -ing items
64.93

38.04
34.89

59.50
41.00

34.89
37.87

81.50
65.75

25.20
27.44

All children (N = 16)
Prototypical -ing items
Nonprototypical -ing items

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

769

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

these items, 1 additional child with SLI showed 100%
performance on both lexical aspect types, reducing the
number of children to 13 for this group. The number of
children in the TD-MLU and TD-A groups remained at
10 and 8, respectively. The results matched the results for
the previous analysis. No main effect was found for participant group, F(2, 28) = 1.00, p = .380, but a difference
was found for lexical aspect, F(1, 28) = 4.89, p = .35, and
the Participant Group x Lexical Aspect interaction was
likewise significant, F(2, 28) = 6.54, p = .005. LSD testing indicated that both the TD-MLU (d = 0.85) and TD-A
(d = 0.88) children were more likely to produce -ing in
prototypical -ing items than in nonprototypical -ing items.
For the TD-MLU children, means for the prototypical
and nonprototypical items were 59.50 (SD = 34.89) and
39.40 (SD = 37.89), respectively. For the TD-A children,
the respective means were 81.50 (SD = 25.20) and 65.50
(SD = 31.10). Again, the children with SLI showed no difference in use of progressive -ing as a function of lexical
aspect.
Because the SLI group showed no evidence of using
-ing as a function of the lexical aspect reflected in the
item, we examined the data to determine if word frequency, segment frequency, or biphone frequency might
have influenced these children's productions. For each frequency metric, we examined stem frequency and stem +
-ing frequency. As we did in the analyses for past tense
-ed, we selected the three forms with highest frequency
and the three forms with lowest frequency for both prototypical -ing items and nonprototypical -ing items. No
clear evidence of frequency effects was found. Differences
between high and low frequency forms were small or nonexistent and varied in direction. Representative of these
findings was the SLI group's use of -ing with 65% of the
words with low frequency and with 70% of the words
with high frequency.

Auxiliary was/were
The progressive -ing task was, by design, intended
to assess the children's use of this inflection when a

prototypical -ing or nonprototypical -ing action was occurring continuously in the past. This past progressive
context permitted us to evaluate the children's use of auxiliary was and were. These auxiliary forms share the past
tense feature with the inflection -ed. However, unlike -ed,
they overlap very little (if at all) with grammatical aspect
and should probably not be influenced by the lexical aspect
of the verb predicate. A summary of the results is provided
in Table 3. We report data only on those children in each
group for which there were at least five obligatory contexts for each lexical aspect. Obligatory contexts were
defined as contexts in which the child produced both the
subject and the main verb inflected with -ing. To ensure
a sufficient number of obligatory contexts, we combined
the items targeting was with those targeting were. ( We
show the errors associated with each of these morphemes
in Table 4.)
As can be seen in Table 3, the TD-A children performed at high levels and, therefore, their data were not
included in the ANOVA. A significant main effect was
found for participant group, F(1, 21) = 8.61, p = .008, with
higher degrees of use of was/were by the TD-MLU children (M = 89.38, SD = 16.40) than by the children with
SLI (M = 67.05, SD = 30.02). Neither lexical aspect,
F(1, 21) = 0.12, p = .727, nor the Participant Group x
Lexical Aspect interaction, F(1, 21) = 0.04, p = .835, was
significant.
Unlike the case for past tense -ed, where all errors
were productions of the bare stem, the children's errors in
contexts obligating was and were did not take a single
form. In Table 4, we provide a breakdown of the children's
scorable responses. For the children with SLI, approximately 9% of the scorable responses were omissions of either was (14/149) or were (11/123). The remaining errors
by the SLI group might be considered "near-miss" errors
in that the produced form differed from the target in
either number or tense. For example, 22% (27/123) of the
responses to the plural were items were productions of
the singular was, and 11% (13/123) were productions of
the present plural form are. Similarly, 5% (8/149) of the

Table 3. Mean percentages of use (and standard deviations) of auxiliary was/were in progressive -ing contexts in prototypical
-ing items and nonprototypical -ing items.
SLI group (N = 11)

TD-MLU group (N = 12)

TD-A group (N = 14)

Lexical aspect

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Conventional scoring
Prototypical -ing items
Nonprototypical -ing items

66.00
68.09

34.72
26.15

89.67
89.08

14.31
18.90

94.79
94.57

12.67
13.94

Was for were treated as appropriate
Prototypical -ing items
Nonprototypical -ing items

73.09
73.73

23.06
23.03

92.17
91.83

11.13
14.26

97.50
97.64

6.09
8.82

Note. Only children with at least five obligatory contexts for each lexical aspect are included.

770

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 4. The children's scorable responses in contexts obligating
auxiliary was and were.
Target
Response

was

were

SLI group (N = 11)
was
were
is
are
omission

120
7
8
0
14

27
72
0
13
11

TD-MLU group (N = 12)
was
were
is
are
omission

165
0
6
1
5

8
126
0
9
4

TD-A group (N = 14)
was
were
is
are
omission

215
1
0
0
5

12
163
0
0
2

Note. Values are total frequencies for each participant group. Correct
responses appear in bold.

responses to the singular was items were productions
of the present singular form is. Less expected were the
children's productions of were for was items, constituting
approximately 5% (7/149) of their responses to these
types of items. Although (past) tense was appropriate in
these responses, it seemed unusual for plural forms to be
produced in place of singular forms. Note that there were
no two-feature errors (number and tense) such as is in
place of were or are in place of was, even though both is
and are were used as substitute forms for other types
of items.
The TD-MLU children made fewer errors than the
children with SLI. Omissions, as well as one-feature errors such as was for were, are for were, and is for was, could
be identified in their responses. They did not commit
the plural-for-singular error of were for was that was observed in the SLI data. However, one two-feature error
was seen: are for was. Errors for the TD-A children were
infrequent. Although omissions were seen, most errors
were substitutions of was for were. Approximately 8%
of the TD-A children's auxiliary productions in contexts
designed for were proved to be productions of was.
Although 8% use of was in these contexts is a relatively small number, the fact that they represented the
only substitution type seen in the TD-A data raised the
possibility that in the geographical area in which this study
was conducted, productions of was in contexts obligating

were in Standard American English might be a characteristic of a nonstandard dialect that we had not anticipated. If so, counting these productions as errors--as we
did in the preceding analysis--might have distorted the
findings. We, therefore, repeated the above analysis of
the data from the SLI and TD-MLU groups, counting
all instances of was in place of were as an appropriate,
rather than incorrect, response. Although the mean percentages "correct" increased to a somewhat greater degree for the children with SLI (from M = 67.05, SD =
30.02 to M = 73.41, SD = 22.49) than for the TD-MLU
children (from M = 89.38, SD = 16.40 to M = 92.00, SD =
12.51), the significant difference between the participant
groups seen in the preceding analysis was seen again in
this analysis, F(1, 21) = 10.58, p = .004. Neither lexical aspect, F(1, 21) = 0.15, p = .706, nor the Participant Group x
Lexical Aspect interaction, F(1, 21) = 0.05, p = .823, was
significant. A summary of the data appears in Table 3.
The significant group difference indicates that even if
the use of was in contexts usually obligating were represented a feature of a nonstandard dialect, the children
with SLI were, nevertheless, less successful in their use
of the auxiliary forms than were the TD-MLU children.
Furthermore, as all 28 of the remaining substitutions
of the SLI group were also one-feature errors, the conclusion that these children's substitution errors were
always "near-miss" errors continues to apply. In the Discussion section, we return to the issue of nonstandard
dialect use.

Discussion
Both the TD-MLU and TD-A children showed evidence of using past tense -ed and progressive -ing to
different degrees, depending on the lexical aspect features reflected in the item. The children with SLI showed
no such effect. The effect seen for the two TD groups is
aptly termed a lexical aspect effect because these are not
differences due, for example, to certain lexical aspect features being more accommodating to inflections in general. Recall that for past tense -ed, significantly higher
percentages of use were seen for verb predicates reflecting nondurative, telic, and result features than for verb
predicates reflecting durative and atelic features. However, for progressive -ing, the reverse was true; verb
predicates reflecting durative and atelic features were
associated with significantly greater use than verb predicates reflecting nondurative, telic, and result features.
These differences did not appear to be attributable to
any other factors that we could discern, such as word,
segment, or biphone frequency of occurrence. However,
two important qualifications must be added to this point.
First, we employed the Francis and Kucera (1984) calculations on the basis of written language for our measure of

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

771

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

word frequency because they offered a means of estimating not only the frequency of the word stem but also of
the stem when it combined with the inflections of interest
in this study. However, it could be the case that word frequency effects are operative when measured in terms of
the spoken language input directed toward young children. For example, earlier it was noted that Shirai and
Andersen (1995) found that mothers of young children
were more likely to use -ed with verb predicates that
reflected nondurative, telic, and result features, and were
more likely to use -ing with verb predicates that reflected
durative and atelic features. This suggests that, in the
spoken input directed at young children, dropped may be
more frequent than played, even though Francis and
Kucera show very similar frequencies for these two forms.
To examine this issue in a fully satisfactory manner, one
would have to obtain large samples of the adult speech
directed toward each child participant.
The second qualification is that segment or phonotactic frequency as measured through biphone frequency
may well influence children's verb use when other factors
are controlled. In the present study, we selected the verbs
on the basis of lexical aspect features within the broader
predicate, and, after examination, found that the verbs in
the two lexical aspect categories did not differ in segment
or biphone frequency. However, if we were to select verbs
that were matched on lexical aspect features (and perhaps other factors such as word length and stress pattern),
it might well be the case that the verbs with, say, higher
biphone frequencies would be used with greater proficiency by the children. Factors such as biphone frequency
were not the focus of this investigation; instead, we examined these factors only to ensure that the intended lexical
aspect distinctions were not confounded by unintended
frequency differences.
At the outset of this article, we noted that sensitivity
to the aspectual properties of verb predicates could be
beneficial because it might hasten the development of
children's hypotheses about the function of the accompanying inflections. That is, by associating the inflections
with the aspectual characteristics of the verb predicates,
children might have a starting point from which to develop and refine their notion of the role of these inflections. For example, initially associating -ing with the
durative feature may give children a head start in arriving at the correct hypothesis that this inflection is
appropriate for ongoing actions even where the actions
have recognizable points of termination. Viewed from this
perspective, the finding that only the two TD groups
showed differences in their use of past tense -ed and
progressive -ing as a function of lexical aspect invites the
interpretation that a lack of sensitivity to lexical aspect
might contribute to language learning difficulties.
To evaluate the merits of this interpretation, it is
necessary to consider one important detail. Even though

772

the children with SLI showed no difference in the use of
-ing as a function of lexical aspect, they did not differ from
the TD-MLU children in their overall use of this inflection. This finding raises the possibility that the relatively
poor use of -ed by the SLI group was unrelated to the fact
that they (alone) produced this inflection to the same
degree, regardless of lexical aspect type.
We acknowledge this possibility. It might be the case
that TD children's early use of -ed is more closely tied to
lexical aspect than that of children with SLI but that
there are no particular acquisition benefits to this sensitivity. Thus, rather than suffering the consequences of
not pursuing a potentially efficient route to adultlike use
of -ed, children with SLI may be experiencing problems
of a different type. Evidence supporting this alternative
view was seen in the lower percentages of use of auxiliary
was/were by the children with SLI relative to the TD-
MLU children. These auxiliaries mark past tense but
do not seem related to aspect in any clear way; certainly,
the TD children's use of these auxiliaries did not seem to
be influenced by lexical aspect.
On the other hand, recall that a lexical aspect-based
route to learning grammatical function is more circuitous
for -ed than for -ing. In the case of -ing, children may
initially associate the inflection with durative and atelic
features as seen in predicates that include the verb play,
as these frequently express continuous action. Gradually,
the children must recognize that -ing applies as well to
other verb predicates that mark continuous action, even
when their meanings (e.g., fall, build) are quite different from that of play. However, this is a matter of having
an initial notion of (progressive) grammatical aspect and
expanding its range of application.
The case of -ed is different. Tense and perfective
aspect are confounded in English. Thus, an initial association of -ed with predicates that include verbs such as
drop--due to the clear end point of the actions to which
they refer--is not at all misdirected. However, when children gradually expand the range of application of this
inflection, they must not only extend the notion of (perfective) grammatical aspect to other types of verb predicates but also broaden the use of this inflection to
include the description of past events, even when their
completion is beside the point. That is, they must incorporate past tense into their range of application of -ed.
This extra work does not have to be accomplished by -ing,
as this inflection remains a grammatical aspect marker
in all contexts. These differences between -ing and -ed
might render the acquisition process more difficult for
-ed than for -ing for all children. Furthermore, it might
be the case that a guiding process, however indirect, is
not only beneficial but essential if -ed is to be acquired
adequately. Thus, even though the children with SLI
showed no evidence of a lexically based pattern of use for

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

either -ing or -ed, the consequences may have been only
minor for the acquisition of the former. (Recall that these
children made less use of -ing than the TD-A children
but not the TD-MLU children.) However, the consequences
for the acquisition of -ed could have been significant.
(Indeed, these children made less use of -ed than the TD-
MLU children as well as the TD-A children.)
Clearly, longitudinal studies of the use of these inflections by children with SLI would be informative. The
present study provides only a single picture of the children's inflection use as it relates to lexical aspect. Future
work should attempt to determine whether, for example,
children with SLI deviate from TD children from the
outset, never using their inflections in close association
with verb predicate semantics, and whether, as implied
here, this insensitivity has a detrimental effect on their
acquisition of, especially, -ed.
An alternative finding might be that, initially, children with SLI do, in fact, vary their use of -ed as a function of the lexical aspect of verb predicates. This may be
especially true in spontaneous speech. (Recall that the
present study employed probes, not spontaneous speech
samples, to assess the children's use of -ed and -ing.)
It could be the case that when children with SLI have
greater control of the verb predicates to use, as in spontaneous speech, they show the same effects observed for
TD-MLU and TD-A children on the probes of the present
study. On the other hand, such a pattern could merely
reflect frequency effects in the input, where the children
are influenced by the fact that particular verb predicates
are more likely to be heard with -ed because of their nondurative, telic, and result features. With longitudinal data,
it can be determined whether, as children with SLI expand
their inventory of verb predicates, they use these initial
asymmetries of -ed use as a guiding process. Certainly,
any such effect would be helpful. As noted earlier, these
children's difficulties with -ed are notorious, and the
SLI group's relatively limited use of auxiliary was/were
in the present study clearly indicates that problems with
tense can occur even when grammatical aspect is not a
factor. The question for future research, then, is whether
insensitivity to lexical aspect can be a contributing factor, and, if so, how much of the difficulty it might be able
to explain.
Although the principal aim of this study was to
explore the possible role of lexical aspect in children's use
of -ing and -ed, our task for eliciting productions of
progressive -ing provided us with a glimpse into the less
commonly studied tense/agreement morphemes, auxiliary was and were. Given earlier findings for copula and
auxiliary is and are, we expected a very large proportion
of omissions on the part of the children with SLI. Indeed,
these children did omit was and were more frequently
than either of the TD groups. However, omissions were

not their dominant error type. Substitution errors were
more frequent than omissions for these children.
The substitution errors seemed to have a principled
basis. All substituted forms differed from the appropriate
form by either tense or number but not both. It is possible
that the productions of was in contexts obligating were (in
Standard American English) were instances of nonstandard dialect use that we had not anticipated. Recall that
even the TD-A children showed some evidence of productions of this type; approximately 8% of their auxiliary
productions in contexts designed for were proved to be
productions of was. However, when we reanalyzed the
data after treating the was-for-were substitutions as
correct productions, the children with SLI continued to
perform at significantly lower levels than the TD-MLU
children.
Until studies are conducted on the use of were by
adults in the community from which our participants
were sampled, we will not know if nonstandard dialect
use was a factor at all in this investigation. However, it
seems even less likely that a factor of this type influenced
our findings for past tense -ed. As noted earlier, all of the
children were White, and nonstandard dialects of English
used by White speakers, even if they allow zero-marking
of -ed, do so at rates that are very low. For example,
Oetting and Garrity (2006) found that both 4- and 6-yearold typically developing speakers of Southern White English marked past tense in over 90% of contexts in which
it would be used in Standard American English.
Along with productions of was in contexts designed
for were, there were other types of one-feature substitutions by the TD-MLU children and, especially, the children with SLI. For the latter group, is and are were among
the auxiliary forms that were incorrectly produced as substitutes. Yet each time is was used, it replaced a singular
past form; likewise, each time are was produced, it replaced a plural past form. Given that is was produced in
error on 8 occasions and are was produced in error on
13 occasions, there were, in principle, opportunities to
observe two-feature errors such as is in place of were or
are in place of was. The fact that these errors were not
seen suggests that the children were not selecting auxiliary forms at random. It appeared as if even when they
erred, these children had a sense of some of the features
that should be included in their production.
These substitutions are a departure from the errors
usually reported for preschool-aged children with SLI.
When children with SLI fail to use an appropriate auxiliary be form in an obligatory context, they most often
produce the utterance with no auxiliary at all. Rice,
Wexler, and their colleagues (e.g., Rice et al., 1995; Rice &
Wexler, 1996; Rice et al., 1998) treat such utterances as
instances in which the child produces a nonfinite option
(compare, for example, the auxiliary-less child utterance

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

773

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Bronckart, J., & Sinclair, H. (1973). Time, tense, and aspect.
Cognition, 2, 107-130.

Mommy working on the computer with the adult nonfinite
clause [I see] Mommy working on the computer). This characterization may well be accurate for the errors classified
as omissions in the SLI data of the present study. Within
the Rice and Wexler (1996) account, when an auxiliary
form is produced, it is almost always correct, because children presumably have knowledge of tense (and agreement), except for the fact that it is obligatory in main
clauses. Data reported by Rice et al. (1995) and Hadley
and Rice (1996) show accuracy levels of 95% and higher
when an auxiliary be form is actually produced. Percentages were somewhat lower in the present study. Of the
auxiliary forms produced in contexts that obligated was,
89% (120/135) were, in fact, productions of was. This percentage was lower than the corresponding percentage for
the TD-MLU children (96%, 165/172). The difference between the two groups was larger for contexts obligating
were (72/112 or 64% for the SLI group, 126/143 or 88% for
the TD-MLU group). The ages of the children with SLI in
the present study were comparable to those seen in other
studies. However, the particular auxiliary forms examined here--was and were--have, at best, been included
as part of a larger group of auxiliary forms in previous
studies. Therefore, difficulties may have been apparent in
the present study because we focused specifically on these
two less well-studied forms. The findings suggest that
difficulties with tense in SLI may be of two types. Children with SLI may have a primary problem of allowing
optional use of nonfinite forms in finite contexts. In addition, they may have a secondary problem of a delay in
learning the precise finite function of was and were, such
that even when a finite option is selected in contexts obligating one of these forms, the children sometimes select
an inappropriate form. This issue seems worthy of future
investigation.

Marchman, V., Wulfeck, B., & Ellis Weismer, S. (1999).
Morphological productivity in children with normal language and SLI: A study of the English past tense. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 206-219.

Acknowledgments

McShane, J., & Whittaker, S. (1988). The encoding of tense
and aspect by three- to five-year-old children. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 45, 52-70.

The research reported in this article was supported by
Grant R01 DC00458 from the National Institute on Deafness
and Other Communication Disorders. We thank Barbara
Brown, Sonja Solomonson, Jeanette Leonard, and Hope
Gulker for their kind assistance in helping us recruit children
for this project, and we especially thank the children and their
families for their willingness to participate.

References
Aksu-Koc, A. (1998). The role of input vs. universal predispositions in the emergence of tense-aspect morphology:
Evidence from Turkish. First Language, 18, 255-280.
Antinucci, F., & Miller, R. (1976). How children talk about
what happened. Journal of Child Language, 3, 167-189.
Bloom, L., Lifter, K., & Hafitz, J. (1980). Semantics of verbs
and the development of inflection in child language. Language, 56, 386-412.

774

Burgemeister, B., Blum, L., & Lorge, I. (1972). Columbia
Mental Maturity Scale. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Bybee, J. (1985). Morphology: A study of the relation between
meaning and form. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar.
Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Francis, W., & Kucera, H. (1984). Frequency analysis of English
usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Hadley, P., & Rice, M. (1996). Emergent uses of BE and DO:
Evidence from children with specific language impairment.
Language Acquisition, 5, 209-243.
Kelly, D., & Rice, M. (1994). Preferences for verb interpretation in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 182-192.
Leonard, L., Eyer, J., Bedore, L., & Grela, B. (1997).
Three accounts of the grammatical morpheme difficulties
of English-speaking children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40, 741-752.
Leonard, L., Miller, C., & Gerber, E. (1999). Grammatical morphology and the lexicon in children with specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42, 1076-1085.
Li, P., & Shirai, Y. (2000). The acquisition of lexical and
grammatical aspect. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lyons, J. (1969). Introduction to theoretical linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Miller, C., & Leonard, L. (1998). Deficits in finite verb
morphology: Some assumptions in recent accounts of specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 40, 701-707.
Norbury, C. F., Bishop, D. V. M., & Briscoe, J. (2001).
Production of English finite verb morphology: A comparison
of SLI and mild-moderate hearing impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 165-178.
Oetting, J., & Garrity, A. (2006). Variation within dialects:
A case of Cajun/Creole influence within Child SAAE and
SWE. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
49, 16-26.
Oetting, J., & Horohov, J. (1997). Past-tense marking by children with and without specific language impairment. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 62-74.
Olsen, M., & Weinberg, A. (1998, November). Innateness and
the acquisition of grammatical aspect via lexical aspect.
Paper presented at the 23rd Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Olsen, M., & Weinberg, A. (1999). Innateness and the acquisition of grammatical aspect via lexical aspect. In A.
Greenhill, H. Littlefield, & C. Tano ( Eds.), Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development, Volume 2 ( pp. 529-540). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Penner, Z., Schulz, P., & Wymann, K. (2003). Learning the
meaning of verbs: What distinguishes language-impaired
children from normally developing children? Linguistics, 41,
289-319.
Reynell, J., & Gruber, C. (1990). Reynell Developmental
Language Scales, U.S. Edition. Los Angeles: Western
Psychological Services.

Smith, C. (1997). The parameter of aspect. Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Kluwer.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Vitevich, M., & Luce, P. (2004). A web-based interface to
calculate phonotactic probability for words and non-words
in English. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 36, 481-487.
Wagner, L. (2001). Aspectual influences on early tense
comprehension. Journal of Child Language, 28, 661-681.

Rice, M., & Wexler, K. (1996). Toward tense as a clinical
marker of specific language impairment in English-speaking
children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 39, 1239-1257.

Wagner, L. (2002). Understanding completion entailments
in the absence of agency cues. Journal of Child Language,
29, 109-125.

Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language
impairment as a period of extended optional infinitive.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 850-863.

Weist, R., Wysocka, H., Witkowska-Stadnik, K., Buczowska,
E., & Konieczna, E. (1984). The defective tense hypothesis:
On the emergence of tense and aspect in child Polish.
Journal of Child Language, 11, 347-374.

Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Hershberger, S. (1998). Tense over
time: The longitudinal course of tense acquisition in children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1412-1431.
Roid, G., & Miller, L. (1997). Leiter International Performance Scale--Revised. Wood Dale, IL: Stoelting.
Schulz, P., & Wittek, A. (2003). Opening doors and sweeping
floors: What children with specific language impairment
know about telic and atelic verbs. In B. Beachley, A. Brown,
& F. Conlin ( Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development, Volume 2
( pp. 727-738). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Schutze, C., & Wexler, K. (2000). An elicitation study of
young children's knowledge of tense. In S. Howell, S. Fish, &
T. Keith-Lucas ( Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development,
Volume 2 ( pp. 669-683). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Werner, E., & Kresheck, J. (1983a). Structured Photographic
Expressive Language Test--II. Dekalb, IL: Janelle.
Werner, E., & Kresheck, J. (1983b). Structured Photographic
Expressive Language Test--Preschool. DeKalb, IL: Janelle.
Received February 15, 2006
Revision received June 6, 2006
Accepted September 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1044 /1092-4388(2007/053)
Contact author: Laurence B. Leonard, Department of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University,
Heavilon Hall, 500 Oval Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907.
E-mail: xdxl@purdue.edu.

Shirai, Y., & Andersen, R. (1995). The acquisition of tenseaspect morphology: A prototype account. Language, 71,
743-762.

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

775

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix A. Probe items.
Probe Items for Past Tense -ed
Prototypical -ed Items
1. GroverIopened his door/his window
2. BlueIdumped out his blocks/his beads
3. MickeyIclosed his Minnie book/his Mermaid book
4. BlueIknocked over his pink pins/his green pins (= bowling pins)
5. MickeyIdropped his book/his hotdog
6. BlueIjumped over his chair/his desk
7. ZoeIscared Woody/Buzz
8. BlueIcovered Elmo/Zoe
9. BlueIkicked his yellow ball/his pink ball
10. FrancineIpopped the pink balloon/the orange balloon
Nonprototypical -ed Items
1. Cookie MonsterIraked grass/leaves
2. Cookie MonsterIdanced with Spiderman/Barney
3. GroverIcrawled on his soft floor/his Lego floor
4. Cookie MonsterIplayed with Big Bird/Bert
5. MickeyIhopped on one foot/two feet
6. ZoeIpushed her motorcycle/her train
7. ArthurIpulled a boy/a girl
8. FrancineIcarried her suitcase/her backpack
9. ArthurIbrushed his brown dog/his Dalmation
10. ArthurIchased a bee/a butterfly
Probe Items for Progressive -ing
Prototypical -ing Items
1. The puppies were driving
2. Minnie Mouse was drawing
3. The baby was crying
4. The man was skating
5. The bugs were sliding
6. Franklin was running
7. The girls were raking (grass)
8. Ernie was singing
9. The girl was sleeping
10. Betty Lou was sweeping
11. The planes were flying
12. The girls were rocking
13. The ducks were swimming
14. Woody was riding
15. The people were dancing
16. The soldiers were marching
Nonprototypical -ing Items
1. The girls were kicking the balls
2. The fish was blowing bubbles
3. The cat was cutting paper
4. The girl was folding the blankets
5. The girls were picking the flowers
6. The boys were emptying the trash
7. The bear was tying knots
8. The girls were breaking the sticks
9. Batman was jumping over chairs
10. They were opening the presents
11. The firemen were closing the windows
12. The clown was knocking over the animals
13. The elephant was sneezing
14. The woman was covering the babies

776

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 759-777 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix B. Frequency measures.
Frequency measures for the verbs used in the past tense -ed probes
Mean (and standard deviation) word frequency of occurrence (log frequency).
type
Item typeItem
frequency

Stem frequency

Stem + -ed frequency

Prototypical -ed items
Nonprototypical -ed items

1.0478 (0.5880)
1.1256 (0.6758)

1.2427 (0.4898)
1.1271 (0.6083)

Segment and biphone frequency of occurrence.
Item type

Segment frequency

Biphone frequency

Stem

Stem + -ed

Stem

Stem + -ed

Prototypical -ed items
M
SD

0.14696
0.04169

0.21174
0.05740

0.02049
0.03690

0.01144
0.00492

Nonprototypical -ed items
M
SD

0.17591
0.06672

0.24221
0.05729

0.01035
0.00913

0.01495
0.01151

Item type

Frequency measures for the verbs used in the progressive -ing probes
Mean (and standard deviation) word frequency of occurrence (log frequency).
Item type
Item type

Stem + -ing frequency

Stem frequency

Prototypical -ing items
Nonprototypical -ing items

1.1404 (0.5367)
1.1049 (0.67752)

1.2441 (0.5696)
0.9262 (0.56810)

Segment and biphone frequency of occurrence.
Item type

Segment frequency

Biphone frequency

Stem

Stem + -ing

Stem

Stem + -ing

Prototypical -ing items
M
SD

0.17756
0.04331

0.23026
0.04144

0.00975
0.00664

0.01126
0.00684

Nonprototypical -ing items
M
SD

0.14676
0.05129

0.19710
0.05481

0.00835
0.00520

0.00966
0.00510

Item type

Leonard et al.: Lexical Aspect and Verb Morphology

777

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

