J. Child Lang. 34 (2007), 159-174. f 2007 Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S0305000906007690 Printed in the United Kingdom

NOTE

Bilingual children's repairs of breakdowns in
communication*
LIANE COMEAU
Invest in Kids
FRED GENESEE

AND

MORTON MENDELSON

McGill University
(Received 23 September 2002. Revised 12 December 2005)

ABSTRACT

This study examined two- (n=10) and three-year-old (n=16)
French-English bilingual children's repairs of breakdowns in
communication that occurred when they did not use the same
language as their interlocutor (Language breakdowns) and for other
reasons (e.g. inaudible utterance). The children played with an
experimenter who used only one language (English or French) during
the play session. Each time a child used the other language, the
experimenter made up to five requests for clarification, from nonspecific (What ?) to specific (Can you say that in French/English ?). The
experimenter also made requests for clarification when breakdowns
occurred for other reasons, e.g. the child spoke too softly, produced an
ambiguous utterance, etc. Both the two- and three-year-olds were
capable of repairing Language breakdowns by switching languages to
match that of their experimenter and they avoided this repair strategy
when attempting to repair Other breakdowns. Moreover, they switched
languages in response to non-specific requests. The results indicate
that even two-and-a-half-year-old bilingual children are capable of
identifying their language choice as a cause of communication

[*] This research was made possible by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council to F. G., and a graduate scholarship by the National Science and
Engineering Research Council to L.C. We also wish to thank the families of the children
who participated in this study for welcoming us into their homes. Finally, we wish to
thank Julie Belanger, Jessica Little, Marie-Claude Besner, Veronique Dupont-Chalaoui
and Sandra Shapiro for their help in carrying out this study. Address for correspondence : Liane Comeau, Invest in Kids Foundation, 425 Adelaide Street West, 6th Floor,
Toronto, ON, M5V 3C1, Canada. fax : (416) 977-9655 ; e-mail : lcomeau@investinkids.ca

159

C O M E A U E T A L.

breakdowns and that they can differentiate Language from Other kinds
of communication breakdowns.

Communicative competence entails sensitivity to feedback from one's
interlocutors concerning the effectiveness or appropriateness of one's
message. Clarification requests play an important role in effective
conversations, and children must learn the conversational rules for
interpreting and responding to such requests. Two classic studies have
shown that children can integrate clarification requests and responses to
requests in their conversations from a young age. Gallagher (1977) observed
children in Brown's Stages I, II and III while they were playing with an
experimenter who asked What ? every three minutes. She found that even
children in the earliest stages of acquisition usually responded appropriately
to such requests and they seldom ignored the experimenter's requests for
clarifications. Garvey (1977) found, further, that two- to five-year-old
children responded appropriately to one another's clarification requests and
were capable of embedding repair sequences in their conversations without
disrupting turn-taking. It has also been found that children between 1 ;5
and 2; 0 respond differentially to different kinds of requests for clarification
(Wilcox & Webster, 1980 ; Marcos & Bernicot, 1994), indicating that they
know that different forms of request require different responses.
For young bilingual children, language choice is an additional possible
cause of breakdowns in communication as, for example, if a French-English
bilingual child uses French with a monolingual English-speaking
interlocutor. If bilingual children are to respond appropriately to requests
for clarification from monolingual interlocutors or bilinguals who prefer one
language over another, they must determine whether their interlocutor's
requests for clarification are intended as requests for a change in language or
for another type of repair. However, requests for clarification are not always
explicit and leave it up to the child to figure out what kind of response
would repair the breakdown as, for example, when an interlocutor queries a
child by asking ` What? ' following an incomprehensible utterance.
To date, research on bilingual children's communicative competence has
focused on their ability to use their two languages appropriately with
different interlocutors and on how language socialization shapes their use of
their two languages (e.g. De Houwer, 1990 ; Dopke, 1992 ; Lanza, 1997 ;
Deuchar & Quay, 2000). A number of studies have indicated that young
bilingual children can use their languages differentially and appropriately
with familiar (i.e. parents) and with unfamiliar interlocutors during dyadic
conversations (Genesee, Nicoladis & Paradis, 1995 ; Genesee, Boivin &
Nicoladis, 1996). For example, Genesee et al. (1995) compared two-yearold French-English bilinguals' language use with each of their parents, who
160

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

usually spoke only their native language to their child, and found that,
although the children used both of their languages when speaking with their
parents (i.e. code-mixed), they used a higher proportion of the mother's
language with their mother than with their father, and vice-versa for the
father's language (see also Padilla & Liebman, 1975 ; Saunders, 1988 ;
Goodz, 1994 ; Meisel, 1994; De Houwer, 1995 ; Lanza, 1997). Dopke (1992)
and Lanza (1997) have examined the relationship between parental
discourse strategies and their bilingual children's language choices. Both
report that certain kinds of parental discourse strategies are associated with
children's use of one language over the other (Dopke, 1992) or the use of
mixed versus non-mixed patterns (Lanza, 1997), indicating that parental
language use can influence children's language choices. In contrast, in a
study of naturalistic conversations between French-English bilingual
children (1 ; 9 to 2 ; 7) and their parents, Nicoladis & Genesee (1998) were
unable to find a statistically significant relationship between parents'
discourse patterns and the children's tendencies to code-mix. Arguably,
Nicoladis & Genesee's results differ from those of Lanza and Dopke
because the former were based on turn-by-turn analyses of parents' and
children's responses in contrast to those of Lanza and Dopke which
examined extended patterns across entire conversations (see Lanza, 2001,
for a detailed discussion of this issue). Moreover, there may be a number of
mitigating factors in parent-child interactions, such as children's past
history with parents' language preferences and language socialization with
regards to the acceptability of code-mixing, that override turn-by-turn
patterns.
The present study was conducted to examine the extent to which
bilingual children understand and correctly interpret requests for language
change during dyadic interactions. In particular, our purpose was to
investigate young bilingual children's ability to repair breakdowns in
communication that occur when children do not use the same language
as their interlocutor (hereafter referred to as the experimenter's language).
Such breakdowns can only be repaired with a translation or reformulation,
in part or in whole, of the child's utterance in the experimenter's language.
In comparison, breakdowns in communication due to other causes, such as
inaudible utterances or poor lexical choice, can be repaired by repetition or
reformulation of an utterance with no change in language. Because of
possible mitigating influences in parent-child interactions, noted earlier, we
chose to examine this issue in interactions between bilingual children and
unfamiliar interlocutors. We were also interested in examining what type of
requests would elicit a change in language and, more specifically, whether
young bilingual children could identify language as the source of breakdown
if the interlocutor provided only implicit requests for a change in language ;
as for example, if an English-speaking interlocutor replied What ? to a child
161

C O M E A U E T A L.

who had just said something in French. To do this, we provided each child
with up to five requests for clarification varying from general (e.g. `What')
to specific (e.g. ` Can you say that in French/English ?') (see also Brinton,
Fujiki, Loeb & Winkler, 1986). Our analyses focused on the children's
responses immediately following each request since, to be effective, repair
strategies must be contingent on the interlocutor's request in a particular
speech turn.
In a preliminary phase of this project (see Comeau & Genesee, 2001),
we found that the majority of three-year-old English-French bilingual
children (10 of 12) translated or reformulated their response using the
experimenter's language in response to requests for clarification of
utterances that were initially not in the experimenter's language. The
majority of language switches were made in response to requests such as
` What ?' that did not specify that language was the source of the breakdown.
The children rarely switched languages in response to requests following
breakdowns that occurred for other reasons ; e.g. poor lexical choices or
inaudible utterances. The present study is an extension of our earlier study
and differs from it in that it includes a group of younger children (M
age=2;7; n=10), a somewhat larger three-year-old sample (n=16), and
more detailed statistical analyses of all results (including alternative
response strategies and not just language switches).
METHOD

Participants
Ten two-year-olds (9 girls and 1 boy; M age=2 ;7, range 2;3 to 2;10) and
16 three-year-olds (8 girls and 8 boys ; M age=3;1, range 3 ; 0 to 3;7)
participated in the study ; the gender distribution in the two-year-old
sample was circumstantial. The children lived in the Montreal area of
Quebec and were acquiring English and French in the home from their
parents, except one child who was learning French from both parents
at home and English in daycare which she had attended full time since
birth. Most parents claimed that they used their native language most of
the time when talking with their children. The parents reported that the
children were not regularly exposed to other languages and that they had no
known hearing or speech problems and no other developmental delays
or disorders. Most families were middle-class. In 20 out of 26 families, at
least 1 parent had a university or a postgraduate degree; and in 4 families,
the parents had completed high school. Twenty-six parents worked as
professionals, and 11 were employed in blue-collar occupations or as skilled
tradespeople.
Each child's mean length of utterance (MLU) and the percentage of
utterances which comprised two or more words (MWU) were calculated for
162

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

English and French. These calculations were based on the children's
language use during the first 20 minutes of the play session with the
experimenter. Only the children's fully intelligible utterances in the
language used by the experimenter during these sessions were used to
compute these indices (e.g. English when the experimenter used English
and French if the experimenter used French); mixed utterances and
utterances in the other language were not counted : two-yearolds - MLU=2.5 (SD=1.11); MWU=46.1 % (SD=19.36) ; three-yearolds - MLU=3.1 (SD=1.02); MWU=57.8% (SD=12.26). The children's
standardized scores on English and French receptive vocabulary tests,
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-R; Dunn & Dunn, 1981)
and its French adaptation, the Echelle de vocabulaire en images Peabody
(EVIP, Dunn, Theriault-Whalen & Dunn, 1993), were also obtained :
two-year-olds - English M=92.70 (SD=16.03); French M=84.00
(SD=11.60) ; three-year-olds - English M=102.44 (SD=16.03); French
M=101.69 (SD=21.69). Twenty-three of the 26 children obtained scores
that fell within the normal range for monolingual age-mates in at least one
of their two languages, with 15 of these children performing within or above
the norm in both languages ; 3 children scored below the normal range in
both of their languages.
In order to ensure that the two-year-olds had sufficient expressive
ability in both languages to participate in the study, we also recorded
them for approximately 30 minutes while playing with each parent on
two separate occasions prior to the experimental sessions. Twenty minutes
from each parent-child session were transcribed according to the
CHAT system (MacWhinney, 2000), and the children's utterances were
coded for : language (English-only, French-only, mixed [French and
English]), MLU and MWU. MLU and MWU were based on the
number of fully intelligible utterances in the parent's preferred language
during a given session so that MLU and MWU in English were
calculated when the children were with the English-speaking parent, and
in French when they were with the French-speaking parent (see Comeau &
Genesee, 2001, for more details) : English MLU M=2.80 (SD=0.79) ;
English MWU M=52 % (SD=18 %); French MLU M=2.59 (SD=0.74) ;
French MWU M=52 % (SD=15%). We did not deem it necessary
to assess the three-year-olds' expressive abilities with their parents since
it was possible to ascertain their general proficiency in both languages
during our experimental sessions with them. Finally, the parents
of all children were asked to identify their child's `dominant '
language, defined for purposes of the study as the language
used most often by the child on a daily basis and the one which the
parents felt their child was more advanced in and/or more comfortable
using.
163

C O M E A U E T A L.

Procedure
Aside from the visits for recording the two-year-olds with their parents, all
the children were visited at home twice. The vocabulary tests were
administered during one visit by a bilingual research assistant or by the
first author, who was also bilingual. During the second visit, the children
were taped for up to one hour while playing with an experimenter (either
the first author or a trained research assistant). We ensured that the adult
with whom the children played was not the same person who had
administered the vocabulary tests in the previous visit so that the
conversational partner of the child was unfamiliar to the child. The
children played with their own toys or toys brought by the experimenter.
Most parents left the room once the children felt comfortable with the
experimenter. Those who stayed were instructed to limit their interactions
with their child and to not help their child answer the experimenter's
clarification requests. The observer who filmed the session seldom spoke
and, on those few occasions when she did, she used the language in which
she was addressed. The experimenter used only the child's less proficient
language, as indicated by the child's parents, on the assumption that this
would result in more breakdowns than if the child used their more
proficient language. There was a match between the parental reports and
the language development indices obtained from the sessions with the twoyear-olds and their parents in 9 out of 10 cases ; the language dominance of
the three-year-olds, however, could not be verified in advance of our
recording sessions. While it was preferable to observe the children while
they spoke their less proficient language, our interpretation of the results
does not depend upon it.
The experimenter spoke the less proficient language of the children with
native or native-like proficiency and behaved as though she did not
understand the children when they used their other language. She did not
use the child's other language with others while in the children's presence.
Bilingual experimenters were used because pilot testing indicated that
it was often difficult, and sometimes impossible, for monolingual
experimenters to determine the language of a child's utterance and/or
plausible breakdowns in communication due to other causes besides
language. Judging whether the children provided satisfactory repairs of
Language breakdowns was also difficult for monolinguals. The fact that the
experimenters were bilingual raises the possibility that the children inferred
that the interlocutor understood both languages. Thus, the situation
examined here should be regarded as one where the child's interlocutor
displays a strong preference for one language and the results may not
be representative of how young bilinguals would respond to a true
monolingual.
164

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

Each time a child used the experimenter's language, she made up to five
requests for clarification ; the following are the English versions of these
requests :
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

What?
I don't understand.
Can you tell me that so I can understand ?
I don't speak French.
Can you tell me that in English?

The first three requests were non-specific while the last two specified the
source of the breakdown and, thus, the nature of the required repair. The
less specific requests were asked first in order to test the children's
understanding of implicit requests for language change. The explicit
requests allowed for the possibility that the children had the linguistic
proficiency to translate their initial utterance or to reformulate it in the
other language, but failed to do this because the request did not specify
explicitly what the source of the breakdown was. The same sequence was
used following Other breakdowns except that request types 4 and 5 were
modified to be appropriate for the specific source of breakdown (e.g. if a
child spoke very softly, the experimenter asked `I can't hear you.' as
request 4 and ` Can you speak more loudly ? ' as request 5).
Transcription and coding
Twenty consecutive minutes of each experimental session after the first 5
minutes were fully transcribed. Since the number of breakdowns for some
children was quite small when we limited our analysis to 20 minutes, we
also scanned the entire recording for each child to identify all possible
breakdowns, either Language or Other, and each of these breakdown-repair
sequences was transcribed for further analysis. The children's utterances
were coded for language : French-only, English-only or mixed (utterances
containing elements from both languages). This was done to determine the
extent to which the children used the same language as the experimenter.
Incomprehensible utterances were omitted from the analyses. A breakdown
sequence began with a turn by the child in which the child did not use
the experimenter's language (Language breakdown) or produced an
incomprehensible utterance (Other breakdown) followed by one or more
requests for clarification from the experimenter and the child's responses to
those requests ; see examples (1) and (2). The sequence was terminated
when the child either : (a) repaired the breakdown, (b) changed the subject,
or (c) said or did something that made it impossible for the experimenter to
continue to make requests for clarification (e.g. left the room or became
noticeably frustrated with the experimenter's requests). In the following
165

C O M E A U E T A L.

examples, glosses of utterances including French are provided in square
brackets.
(1) Example of a Language breakdown : child (CH) with French-speaking
experimenter (EX) :
CH : There's water right here.
EX : Quoi ? [` What? ']
CH : Water!
EX : Je comprends pas. [` I don't understand. ']
CH : De l'eau. [` Water. ']
(2) Example of an Other breakdown : child with an English-speaking experimenter :
CH : It's a tree xxx xxx. [xxx=incomprehensible]
EX : What?
CH : Tree?
EX : I don't understand.
CH : Tree, climb up!
The following features of each breakdown were coded.
Type of breakdown (Language or Other) : Language breakdowns consisted
of sequences during which the child used a mixed utterance or an utterance
entirely in the language not spoken by the experimenter. Other breakdowns
consisted of sequences when a child used the experimenter's language but
the utterance was inaudible, unclear or incomprehensible for other reasons.
Some of the Other breakdowns occurred naturally, and some were initiated
by the experimenter when there was a plausible reason; e.g. the child
produced an ambiguous utterance, mispronounced a word or spoke too
softly to be heard.
Responses to clarification requests : The child's responses to the
experimenter's requests were classified as : Appropriate Language Change
(ALC ; see example 1) ; Inappropriate Language Change (ILC; see example
3) ; Repetition (REP ; see example 4) ; Reformulation (REF ; see example 5);
Subject Change (SC ; see example 6) ; No Response (NR); and Other (O).
Responses were classified as Reformulations and Repetitions only if
there was no change in language ; if there was a change in language, then
the response was classified as ALC. Responses classified as Other were
seldom used and included replying to a request for clarification by
responding ` yes ' or ` no, ' asking someone else for help, changing the
pronunciation of a word to make it sound like the other language, or using
gestures, such as pointing to an object ; there were few responses of these
types. The categories of Subject Change, No Response and Other were
combined into one category (SC/NR/O) because all three are instances
when the child did not provide a repair. The child was credited with use
166

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

of more than one response if they did not repair the breakdown after
the first request for clarification. For example, if the experimenter
made three requests for clarification of a specific Language breakdown,
the child was credited with use of three responses ; each response
(including repairs) the child made was coded according to the above
categories. If the same response was used more than once in a single
breakdown sequence, the child was credited with use of that response type
as often as it was used. The number of responses to each request for
clarification was greater than the number of breakdown sequences for each
child because they usually did not repair breakdowns following the first
request for clarification.
(3) Inappropriate Language Change : child with an English-speaking
experimenter :
CH : But c'est pas c'est pas noir. [` But it's not it's not black. ']
EX : Can you say that so I can understand ?
CH : C'est pas blanc. [` It's not white. ']
(4) Repetition : repeating the initial utterance verbatim :
CH : Arrose les fleurs. [` Water the flowers. ']
EX : Quoi ? [` What?']
CH : Arrose les fleurs. [` Water the flowers. ']
(5) Reformulation : rephrasing the initial utterance in some way, by
adding, deleting or substituting elements :
CH : Ah ah un mouton. [` Ah ah a sheep. ']
EX : What?
CH : Ah chevre chevre. [` Ah goat goat.']
(6) Subject Change : introducing a new topic of conversation or activity :
CH : No I just I don't just don't like um the video but I like the thing.
EX : What?
CH : Hey you wanna read these two books they're funny.
All transcripts were coded by the first author, and a trained research
assistant independently coded the responses of randomly chosen
children within each age group (2 two-year-olds and 3 three-year-olds).
Inter-rater reliability was 90.5% and disagreements were resolved by
discussion.
Serial position of children's repairs : The child's responses were coded
with respect to the serial position of the immediately preceding
experimenter's request to which the child's response was being made ;
e.g. responses to the request ` What ?' were coded as `1;' reponses to the
request ` I don't understand ' were coded as ` 2, ' etc. This allowed us to
determine what type of requests elicited a change in language from the
children.
167

C O M E A U E T A L.
RESULTS

Children's language use with the experimenter
Despite the fact that most of the children were using their less proficient
language, both the two-year-olds and three-year-olds used the
experimenter's language most of the time : two-year-olds 90.5% and threeyear-olds 85.8 %; these percentages are the number of utterances produced
by the children in the experimenter's language divided by the total number
of utterances the child produced (English-only, French-only, mixed) during
the 20-minute sections of the recordings that were transcribed. The
4 children, 2 two-year-olds and 2 three-year-olds, who used the
experimenter's language 100 % of the time, had relatively low MLUs
(M=1.95), well below the average for both groups combined (M=2.80),
suggesting that appropriate use of the experimenter's language was not
highly correlated with linguistic ability (see also Genesee et al., 1996).
Repairs of language breakdowns
The number of breakdown sequences (Language and Other) per child
varied widely, from 1 to 36, as did the number of responses by each child to
their interlocutor's requests for clarification, ranging from 1 to 97. Tests of
proportions were carried out to examine the children's relative use of
Appropriate Language Change in comparison to the other types of
responses following Language and Other breakdowns (see Figure 1).
Separate analyses were done for each age group and the alpha level was
adjusted to 0.005 to compensate for the number of pair-wise comparisons.
These analyses were carried out on the frequency of the children's use of
each type of response expressed as a percentage of the total number of
responses of all types made by the children during the entire session
(Totals : two-year olds : 109; three-year olds : 344).
Analyses of the two-year-olds' results showed that they used Appropriate
Language Change more often than most of the other response types, namely
Inappropriate Language Change (z=3.47, p<0.005), Reformulation
(z=4.55, p<0.005), and Subject Change/No Response/Other (z=2.91,
p<0.005). However, they used Repetition and Appropriate Language
Change equally often (z=1.52, p>0.005). The three-year-olds also used
Appropriate Language Change more often than Inappropriate Language
Change (z=7.07, p<0.005) and Repetition (z=4.47, p<0.005). However,
unlike the two-year-olds, they used Appropriate Language Change and
Reformulation equally often (z=1.03, p>0.005). Further analyses
involving Repetition and Reformulation revealed that the younger
children favored Repetition, a basic repair strategy, over Reformulation,
which entails more complex responses (z=3.00, p<0.005). In contrast, the
three-year-olds preferred to reformulate their utterances rather than repeat
168

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

40
35

Percentage of Responses

30
25
2 Yrs
3 Yrs

20
15
10
5
0
ILC
(16/22)

ALC
(37/93)

REP
(27/43)

REF
(10/80)

SC/NR/O
(19/106)

Repair Strategy
Fig. 1. Percentage of each repair strategy used by two- and three-year-olds in response to
requests for clarification following language breakdowns (numbers in parentheses are the
frequencies of occurrence of each type of repair for the two- [first entry] and three-year-olds
[second entry]).
ILC=Inappropriate language change; ALC=Appropriate language change;
REP=Repetition; REF=Reformulation; SC/NR/O=Subject change/No response/Other.

them (z=3.43, p<0.005). Finally, unlike the younger children, the threeyear-olds used Subject Change/No Response/Other and Appropriate
Language Change equally often (z=1.08, p<0.005).
While all 13 three-year-olds repaired Language breakdowns using an
Appropriate Language Change at least once, only 5 of the 8 two-year-olds
did so (X 2=5.69, df=1, p<0.05). The children who made appropriate
language changes used this strategy in two ways : (a) they gave a total or
partial translation of their initial utterance, as shown in example (7) ; or (b)
they gave responses in the appropriate language that included subject
changes, yes or no answers, and short utterance such as `Like this ' with
accompanying gestures, as in example (8).
(7)

(3 ; 4) and French-speaking experimenter :
N'est pas une une boat. [` Is not a a boat.']
EX : Quoi ? [` What?']
NIC : Euh c'est bateau bateau. [` Uh it's boat boat.']
NIC

NIC :

169

C O M E A U E T A L.

(8)

(3 ; 2) and English-speaking experimenter :
And a scie. [` And a saw. ']
EX : A what ?
JUL : Scie. [` Saw. ']
EX : I don't understand.
JUL : A scie. [` A saw.']
EX : Can you say that so I can understand ?
JUL : For _ [child shows how to cut with a saw]
JUL

JUL :

Some children also used Inappropriate Language Change when
attempting to repair Language breakdowns (3 two-year-olds, and 7
three-year-olds), although rarely. A X 2 analysis comparing the frequency
of use of this response by each age group shows that the two-year-olds and
three-year-olds were equally likely to use this strategy (X 2=0.53, df=1,
p>0.05). In every case, the children initially produced a mixed utterance,
and then, rather than translating the components that were in the
inappropriate language, they used only the inappropriate language in their
reply ; see example (9).
(9)

(3 ; 2) with English-speaking experimenter :
And look vert. [` And look green. ']
EX : What?
JUL : Vert. [` Green. ']
EX : I don't understand.
JUL : Vert. [` Green. ']
JUL

JUL :

To examine whether the children were able to make an Appropriate
Language Change in response to an implicit request, we calculated the
frequency of occurrence of a language change by each child after each
clarification request by the experimenter as a percentage of the total number
of language changes made by the child in response to all requests for
clarification during the entire session (Totals : two-year-olds - 36 ; threeyear olds - 81). As shown in Figure 2, nearly half (47 %) of all Appropriate
Language Changes made by the two-year-olds occurred after the first
request, with an additional 25% occurring after the second request, and 11 %
after the third request. Thus, 83 % of language changes were made in
response to implicit requests to change language. The three-year-olds also
made the majority of their Appropriate Language Changes in response to
the first three requests : 23% after the first request, 32% after the second
request and 26 % after the third request (Total=81%).
Comparisons of repairs of Language and Other breakdowns
Tests of proportions were carried out to compare the children's use of
language change to repair Language and Other breakdowns for evidence
170

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

50
45
40

Percentage

35
30

2 Yrs
3 Yrs

25
20
15
10
5
0
1
(17/19)

2
(9/26)

3
(4/21)

4
(4/6)

5
(2/9)

Serial Position of Request Resulting in a Language Change
Fig. 2. Percentage of appropriate language changes made by two- and three-year-olds in
response to each clarification request numbered from 1 to 5 (from ` What?' to ` Can you say
that in English/French?') (numbers in parentheses are the frequencies on which the percentages were based for the two- [first entry] and three-year-old [second entry]).

40
35
Percentage

30
25
Language
Breakdown

20
15

Other
Breakdown

10
5
0
3-yr-olds

2-yr-olds
Language Change

Fig. 3. Percentage of two-year-olds' and three-year-olds' repair strategies following language versus other breakdowns 3 (the percentages in this table are based on the total number
of breakdowns experienced by the children [Language and Other]).

that their responses to requests for clarification following Language-based
breakdowns were distinctive. Separate analyses were conducted for each age
group and the alpha level was adjusted to compensate for the number of
comparisons made. For purposes of these analyses, all responses involving a
language change - inappropriate or appropriate - were combined to form
one response category, Language Change. As shown in Figure 3, the twoyear-olds used Language Change only when attempting to repair Language
breakdowns (n=37); they did not use this strategy when attempting to
repair Other breakdowns. The three-year-olds sometimes used Language
171

C O M E A U E T A L.

Change when repairing Other breakdowns, but seldom; they changed
language far more often when repairing Language breakdowns :
Language=93; Other=2 (z=11.1, p<0.005).
Self-repairs involving a language change
It is worth noting that some of the children made spontaneous autocorrections involving a language change - they changed to the
experimenter's language for part or all of their initial utterance in the
absence of feedback from the experimenter, as illustrated in examples (10)
and (11).
(2 ; 9) :
La la soeur. The the sister. [pause] The sister.
(11) JIA (3 ; 2) :
JIA : Un a. [pause] A bird.

(10)

TAL

TAL :

In example (10), TAL translates her short utterance into English, the
experimenter's language, after having produced an equivalent utterance in
French. In the other example, JIA interrupts her utterance and starts again,
translating the first portion of the utterance before completing her thought
in the experimenter's language. In total, there were 14 instances of selfrepairs involving a language change : 3 were made by the two-year-olds (by
2 different children), and 11 were made by the three-year-olds (by 6 of the
children). Similar self-repairs have been reported by De Houwer (1990) in
her study of a young child acquiring English and Dutch.
DISCUSSION

The present study contributes to the growing body of evidence that young
bilingual children are sensitive to their interlocutor's language preferences.
More specifically, the present results indicate that young bilingual children
can recognize that their use of a particular language can lead to breakdowns
in communication. Indeed, both the two- and three-year-olds were capable
of interpreting requests for clarification as cues for language change even in
the absence of specific feedback about the cause of the breakdown. The
findings suggest further that bilingual children can treat Language
breakdowns differently from Other breakdowns. Although the first three
requests for clarification were the same for both types of breakdowns, the
children rarely switched languages when attempting to repair Other
breakdowns but did so frequently for Language breakdowns. While both
the two- and three-year-olds demonstrated this pattern, more of the threeyear-olds did so. In particular, all of the three-year-olds who experienced
Language breakdowns used Appropriate Language Change as a strategy,
whereas some of the two-year-olds did not. Both groups appeared to know
172

B I L I N G U A L C H I L D R E N'S R E P A I R S

when NOT to use this strategy (that is, to repair an Other breakdown) even
if they sometimes failed to use it when it was needed. They also used
appropriate strategies such as Repetition and Reformulation when repairing
Other breakdowns. In contrast to the three-year-olds, however, the
two-year-olds showed a preference for Repetition, arguably a minimal, less
sophisticated repair than Reformulation, which entails the ability to convey
one's meaning in more than one way. This finding is consistent with earlier
studies showing that monolingual children use increasingly complex repair
strategies as they get older and as their linguistic abilities increase
(Gallagher, 1977 ; Konefal & Fokes, 1984 ; Marcos & Kornhaber-le
Chanu, 1992).
That the children did not switch languages even after two, three or four
requests in some cases may be due to a number of factors. It may simply be
difficult for young bilingual children to determine with total accuracy
whether a language change is required. Lack of proficiency in the
experimenter's language may also come into play, sometimes preventing
the children from providing adequate translations. This would not be
surprising, given that most of the children were using their less proficient
language. It is also possible that the children did not truly believe their
interlocutor to be monolingual and that through interactions with parents
and others in their home environment who are bilingual they have been
socialized to view code-mixing as an acceptable and effective strategy.
Additional analyses and research are called for to examine reasons for the
individual variation that is evident in these data.

REFERENCES
Brinton, B., Fujiki, M., Loeb, D. F. & Winkler, E. (1986). Development of conversational
repair strategies in response to requests for clarification. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 29, 75-81.
Comeau, L. & Genesee, F. (2001). Bilingual children's repair strategies during dyadic
communication. In J. Cenoz & F. Genesee (eds), Trends in bilingual acquisition, 231-56.
Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
De Houwer, A. (1990). The acquisition of two languages from birth : A case study. Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press.
De Houwer, A. (1995). Bilingual language acquisition. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney
(eds), The handbook of child language, 219-50. Oxford : Blackwell.
Deuchar, M. & Quay, S. (2000). Bilingual acquisition : Theoretical implications of a case study.
Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Dopke, S. (1992). One parent one language : An interactional approach. Amsterdam : John
Benjamins.
Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody picture vocabulary test-revised. Circle Pines,
MN : American Guidance Service.
Dunn, L. M., Theriault-Whalen, C. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1993). Echelle de vocabulaire en
images Peabody. Toronto : Psycan.
Gallagher, T. (1977). Revision strategies in the speech of normal children developing language. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 20, 303-18.

173

C O M E A U E T A L.

Garvey, C. (1977). The contingent query : A dependant act in conversation. In M. Lewis &
L. Rosenblum (eds), Interaction, conversation, and the development of language : The origins
of behavior, Vol. 5, 63-93. New York : Wiley.
Genesee, F., Boivin, I. & Nicoladis, E. (1996). Talking with strangers : A study of bilingual
children's communicative competence. Applied Psycholinguistics 17, 427-42.
Genesee, F., Nicoladis, E. & Paradis, J. (1995). Language differentiation in early bilingual
development. Journal of Child Language 22, 611-31.
Goodz, N. (1994). Interactions between parents and children in bilingual families. In
F. Genesee (ed.), Educating second language children : The whole child, the whole curriculum,
the whole community, 61-82. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Konefal, J. A. & Fokes, J. (1984). Linguistic analysis of children's conversational repairs.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 13, 1-11.
Lanza, E. (1997). Language mixing in infant bilingualism : A sociolinguistic perspective.
Oxford : Clarendon Press.
Lanza, E. (2001). Bilingual first language acquisition : A discourse perspective on language
contact in parent-child interaction. In J. Cenoz & F. Genesee (eds), Trends in bilingual
acquisition, 201-30. Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : Tools for analyzing talk, 3rd edn. Mahwah,
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Marcos, H. & Bernicot, J. (1994). Addressee cooperation and request reformulation in young
children. Journal of Child Language 21, 677-92.
Marcos, H. & Kornhaber-le Chanu, M. (1992). Learning how to insist and clarify in the
second year : Reformulation of requests in different contexts. International Journal of
Behavioral Development 15, 359-76.
Meisel, J. M. (1994). Bilingual first language acquisition : French and German grammatical
development. Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
Nicoladis, E. & Genesee, F. (1998). Parental discourse and code-mixing in bilingual children. International Journal of Bilingualism 2, 85-100.
Padilla, A. M. & Liebman, E. (1975). Language acquisition in the bilingual child. Bilingual
Review 2, 34-55.
Saunders, G. (1988). Bilingual children : From birth to teens. Clevedon, Avon : Multilingual
Matters.
Wilcox, M. J. & Webster, E. J. (1980). Early discourse behavior : an analysis of children's
responses to listener feedback. Child Development 51, 1120-25.

174

