Effects of Cueing in Auditory
Temporal Masking
Ting Zhang
School of Medicine and Graduate School,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, and
University of Maryland, College Park

Craig Formby
School of Medicine and Graduate School,
University of Maryland, Baltimore

Purpose: In a landmark study, B. A. Wright et al. (1997 ) reported an apparent
backward-masking deficit in language-learning-impaired children. Subsequently, the
controversial interpretation of those results has been influential in guiding treatments
for childhood language problems. This study revisited the temporal-masking
paradigm reported by B. A. Wright et al. to evaluate adult listener signal/masker
uncertainty effects for some of their key stimulus conditions. New signal conditions
presented off frequency from the masker also were evaluated to assess conditions
of reduced signal/masker confusion.
Method: Masked detection was measured for 20-ms sinusoids (480, 1000, or
1680 Hz) presented at temporal positions before, during, or after a gated narrowband
(bandwidth = 600-1400 Hz) masker. Listener uncertainty was investigated by cueing
various stimulus temporal properties with a 6000-Hz sinusoid presented contralateral
to the test ear.
Results: The primary cueing effect was measured in the backward-masking condition
for the cue gated simultaneously with the on-frequency 1000-Hz signal. The resulting
cued masked-detection threshold was reduced to quiet threshold. No significant
cueing effects were obtained for other signal temporal positions in the masker or
for any off-frequency signal conditions.
Conclusions: These results for normal adult listeners indicate that on-frequency
backward masking can be eliminated by cueing the signal, and thus, these findings
raise the possibility that the deficit reported by B. A. Wright et al. for languagelearning-impaired children may reflect inordinate signal/masker confusion, rather
than a temporal-processing deficit per se.
KEY WORDS: cueing effect, temporal-processing deficit, auditory temporal masking

S

timulus-cueing techniques have been used for at least half a century to investigate the nature of masking ( Tanner, 1958; Veniar,
1958). Under some circumstances, the masked threshold for a tone
may be improved by adding one or more extra components with a masker
(e.g., Sorkin, 1965; Tanner, 1958; Veniar, 1958). These added components
may serve to highlight properties of the signal /masker complex and,
thereby, provide information for the listener that reduces some aspect
of stimulus uncertainty. Consequently, this information may improve
masked detection by making it easier for the listener to attend to the
signal or to discern the signal from the masker.
Backward masking in particular appears to involve a high degree of
temporal uncertainty. The uncertainty for the listener arises from imprecise knowledge about when to listen for the signal, with the onset of
the masker being too late to inform the listener that the signal already
has occurred (Pastore & MacLatchy, 1975). Puleo and Pastore (1980) found
that contralateral cues (i.e., a broadband noise, a narrowband noise, or a

564

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/07/5003-0564

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

silent gap in an uncorrelated noise presented to the nonsignal ear) can reduce backward masking as long as the
onset and offset of the cue occur within a few milliseconds
of the onset and offset of the signal. These findings suggested an alternative explanation to account for elevated
backward-masking thresholds measured for children with
language-learning impairments (LLI; Wright et al., 1997).
Children with LLI and/or specific-language impairments (SLI) show significant developmental deficits in
language acquisition, but they otherwise exhibit no obvious
accompanying developmental conditions such as mental retardation, neurological damage, or hearing impairment (Ahmed, Lomabardino, & Leonard, 2001). Studies
have been carried out for more than 40 years to elucidate
the mechanisms underlying these impairments (e.g., Rice,
Tomblin, Hoffman, Richman, & Marquis, 2004; Tomblin,
1997). Some researchers propose that these deficits arise
from problem sites within higher brain regions associated
with language or cognitive processing (e.g., Ahmed et al.,
2001; Lubert, 1981). Others hold that LLI and SLI stem
from a more elemental problem that affects children's
abilities to process sound normally; specifically, these
children are believed to be limited somehow in their abilities to hear the acoustic distinctions between successive brief sounds in speech (e.g., Benton, 1964; Elliott,
Hammer, & School, 1989).
Wright et al. (1997) reported temporal-masking deficits for children (M = 8;1 [years;months]; SD = 6;3)
with LLI. Their findings have stimulated great debate
about a relation between temporal processing and language impairments. They measured the detection threshold for a brief tonal signal presented before, during, or
after either a gated bandpass- or notched-noise masker.
Wright et al. found that children with LLI had as much or
more difficulty detecting the signal when it was presented
before the gated bandpass noise (backward-masking condition) than when it was presented during (simultaneousmasking condition) or after the noise (forward-masking
condition). When the brief tone was presented in a notchednoise masker, which excluded masker frequencies at and
near the signal frequency, children with LLI were better
at detecting the signal presented before the notched
noise than the signal presented before the bandpass
noise. Thus, the apparent backward-masking deficit was
greatest for the children with LLI when the tonal signal
and following noise masker shared similar frequencies.
These are conditions for which the stimuli were least
discriminable from each other. Wright et al. interpreted
these results as indicating that children with LLI have
impaired temporal-processing abilities that render them
inefficient in resolving a brief sound from a rapidly following sound of similar frequency.
The controversial interpretation of the backwardmasking deficit as an auditory temporal-processing problem has been and continues to be influential in shaping

intervention and treatment strategies for children with
LLI. Notwithstanding the considerable influence of
Wright et al.'s (1997) important report, the nature of
such language-acquisition deficits continues to be hotly
debated in the literature, especially the link to an underlying temporal-processing problem (Bishop, Carlyon,
Deeks, & Bishop, 1999; Hartley, Hill, & Moore, 2003).
The purpose of this study was to explore the bases of temporal masking and, more specifically, the bases of backward masking, which is at the center of this ongoing
debate as it relates to LLI. The working hypothesis of the
current investigation was that stimulus uncertainty,
specifically confusion between signal and masker properties or, alternatively, the inability to discern the signal from the masker, may provide a better explanation
for the apparent backward-masking problem in children
with LLI /SLI than does an explanation based upon an
auditory temporal-processing deficit.
Preliminary to assessing such stimulus uncertainty/
confusion effects, we review stimulus-cueing techniques
that have previously been reported to aid adult listeners
in attending to or discerning the signal from the masker.
Evidence is considered for cueing of each temporal position of the signal that is evaluated in this investigation. This historical review highlights potentially viable
cues and provides motivation for establishing an optimal cue for this investigation. Subsequently, we present
cued and uncued temporal masked-detection thresholds
( MDTs) for the key experimental conditions described by
Wright et al. (1997). These conditions include backward
masking, simultaneous masking at both masker onset
and at a time later in the steady-state masker, and forward masking. Each of these temporal positions of the
signal was assessed for the signal presented within the
bandwidth of the masker (i.e., an on-frequency condition), which was the intriguing condition reported by
Wright et al., and for the signal presented either below
or above the frequencies contained within the masker
bandwidth (i.e., off-frequency conditions that were not
investigated by Wright et al.). To the extent that temporal
masking arises from signal/masker confusion owing to
the listener's inability to discriminate the signal from the
masker, less temporal masking would be expected for
spectrally different signal and masker conditions than for
spectrally similar measurement conditions. To our knowledge, cueing techniques have not been used in the study
of off-frequency temporal MDTs, presumably because one
would not expect much if any additional advantage to
masked detection from cueing. However, subthresholdcueing effects have been reported under certain masking
conditions (Taylor & Forbes, 1969) and, in the absence of
relevant data for cued off-frequency temporal-masking
conditions, were explored in this study.
Because the uncued temporal-masking conditions
were shown by Wright et al. (1997) to be very challenging

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

565

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

listening tasks for children, it seemed prudent to evaluate these difficult listening conditions in adult listeners
prior to any new studies of children. Accordingly, uncued
and cued temporal-masking effects are reported here for
young, normal adults and for 1 adolescent. This study
provides the groundwork and justification for a companion study of cued and uncued temporal masking in a
group of adolescents with LLI and a control group.

Historical Evidence for Cued
Temporal Masking
Below we consider historical evidence for viable cues
for this investigation and cueing effects for simultaneous-,
forward-, and backward-masking conditions described
in the literature.

Cued Simultaneous Masking
Stimulus uncertainty in simultaneous masking for
a signal presented at the temporal center of a masker
was studied early on by Tanner (1958). He demonstrated
that observer uncertainty about the signal parameters
was reduced when a cueing stimulus was added together
with the signal in the same earphone. Subsequently,
Sorkin (1965) employed contralaterally presented cues
in the nonsignal earphone to reduce stimulus uncertainty
in simultaneous-masked detection. Taylor and Forbes
(1969) later described this condition as monaural detection with a contralateral cue ( MDCC). They found that
contralateral cues presented simultaneously with a signal could improve the detectability of the signal by reducing stimulus uncertainty. Taylor and his colleagues
extended their research on simultaneous masking in a
series of studies of MDCC conditions. They reported that
the absolute intensity, frequency, relative interaural
phase ( Taylor & Clarke, 1971), and relative intensity
(Taylor, Clarke, & Smith, 1971; Taylor, Smith, & Clarke,
1971) of the cue were all important factors in determining the amount of release from masking afforded by the
contralateral cue.
In addition to the finding of a contralateral-cueing
effect for a cued signal presented at the temporal center
of the masker, there also is evidence for an unmasking
effect when a contralateral cue is presented just before
the onset of a masker and when the signal is presented
at the temporal onset of the masker. This finding has
been attributed to efferent activation, which presumably enhances the neural response to the tonal signal at
the onset of the noise masker (Bacon & Liu, 2000; Turner
& Doherty, 1997). This finding, however, is controversial,
because other investigators have failed to replicate this
unmasking effect with contralateral cues presented just
prior to either a noise (Savel & Bacon, 2003) or tonal
(Bacon & Healy, 2000; Savel & Bacon, 2003) masker. By

566

contrast, ipsilateral cues presented just before a masker
have been found to be effective in reducing or eliminating
the masking effect for signals presented at masker onset.
The mechanism for this release from masking has been
attributed to cue-induced peripheral adaptation of the
masker (for a noise masker, Bacon & Smith, 1991, and
Overson, Bacon, & Webb, 1996; for a tone masker, Bacon
& Healy, 2000, and Savel & Bacon, 2003).

Cued Forward Masking
Forward masking is thought by some investigators
to represent neural persistence of the masking stimulus,
which interferes with the processing of the later-occurring
signal (e.g., Zwislocki, 1960). This neural persistence may
involve an imperfect or weighted integration of stimulusenergy effects in time. Pastore and Freda (1980) found that
contralateral cues were not effective in reducing the threshold for a 20-ms sinusoidal signal following its presentation immediately after a gated broadband-noise masker.
They suggested that this cue was ineffective because, in
forward masking, the masker offset provides information
about the termination of the masker as well as information about the occurrence of a signal potentially following
after masker offset. The additional timing information
about the signal provided by a contralateral cue is therefore redundant for the listener. However, there are some
forward-masking situations for which the offset of the
masker might not provide an effective cue and for which
an added cueing stimulus might benefit the listener. In
particular, this situation may exist when a signal has
a similar center frequency and bandwidth to that of a
masker and, therefore, has essentially the same perceptual
quality as does the masker. For this specific condition, a
listener may have appreciable difficulty determining the
ending of the masker and the beginning of the signal
(Moore, 1978, 1980a, 1980b, 1981a, 1981b; Terry & Moore,
1977; Weber & Moore, 1981). Accordingly, the addition of
an extra (cueing) component gated with the masker offers an opportunity to introduce a qualitative difference
between the signal and the masker. The resulting distinction can lead to a large reduction in the magnitude of
forward masking ( Moore, 1980a, 1980b, 1981a; Terry &
Moore, 1977). Moore and Glasberg (1982) showed that
for such conditions both contra- and ipsilateral cues can
be effective in reducing a signal threshold in forward
masking. Their results indicate that, when the signal is
similar in quality to the masker, forward masking can
involve a high degree of temporal uncertainty, and an appropriate cue can reduce or eliminate this confusion.

Cued Backward Masking
Backward masking is believed to involve peripheral
interaction between the signal and the masker at very
brief temporal separations between the two stimuli. However, for signal /masker separations that are >10 ms,

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

backward-masking effects likely involve higher processing centers ( Weber & Green, 1978). Thus, backward
masking, in contrast to forward masking, appears to rely
significantly more on central-processing mechanisms
( Weber & Green, 1978). Pastore and MacLatchy (1975)
suggested that backward masking may reflect a great
deal of stimulus uncertainty for the listener. Specifically,
they proposed that the uncertainty for the listener arises
from imprecise knowledge about when to listen for the
signal. The onset of the masker informs the listener that
the signal already has occurred, and it is therefore too
late to use such knowledge as an aid to process the signal. Puleo and Pastore (1980) found that contralateral
cues (i.e., a broadband noise, a narrowband noise, or a
silent gap in an uncorrelated noise) can reduce backward
masking as long as the onset and offset of the cue occur
within a few milliseconds of the onset and offset of the
potential signal. Backward masking therefore appears
to involve a high degree of temporal uncertainty.

Method

More generally, backward masking is seemingly accentuated in conditions for which the signal shares or has
similar properties in common with the masker and, conversely, is diminished when the similarity of the signal/
masker properties is reduced ( Formby, Sherlock, &
Ferguson, 2000). This fact is underscored by the finding
of reduced backward masking among LLI children for a
tonal signal presented in a notched-noise masker, compared with backward-masking effects for the same signal embedded within the bandwidth of the masker (Wright
et al., 1997). For a notched-noise masker condition in the
same study, the signal/masker spectral similarity was
reduced (if not eliminated entirely) by placing the signal
at frequencies at which there was no masker energy.
Signal/masker confusion among the children studied by
Wright et al., therefore, should have been (and apparently
was) minimized in relation to the condition for the signal
frequency embedded within the frequencies of the narrowband masker. Accordingly, it is reasonable that Wright
et al. found significant backward masking among the LLI
children only for the latter condition. Because the time
difference between the signal and masker onsets was
20 ms in the backward-masking condition reported by
Wright et al., their masking effects also appear consistent with the hypothesis that backward masking involves
higher-order processes of the kind that one would associate with uncertainty.

Apparatus and Stimuli

Because several different forms of cues have been
shown to be effective in these past temporal masking
studies, the optimum cue for use in this study was not
known a priori. Therefore, reasonable cues considered in
past studies were evaluated in pilot experiments leading
up to the main experiments. The full set of cues considered in the preliminary studies was described by Formby
and Zhang (2004), and only key evidence leading to the
selection of an optimal cue for this study is reported here.

Participants
T. Zhang (a 29-year-old woman and the first author of
this article) and 6 paid observers (4 female participants
and 2 male participants) took part in the main experiments. The adult observers ranged in age from 18 to
29 years, M = 24;5, SD = 3;7. Participant CF was 15 years
old. She participated in a limited set of conditions, yielding performance similar to that of the adults. All observers had normal audiometric thresholds 15 dB HL
for octave test frequencies from 250 to 8000 Hz (American National Standards Institute, 1996). Each observer
provided written informed consent for his or her participation in this research. The research protocol and
informed-consent statement were approved by the Investigational Review Board at the University of Maryland, Baltimore.

All stimuli for this investigation were produced digitally with Tucker-Davis Technology System 2 hardware
controlled by a personal computer. The instrumentation and configuration of the signal-processing devices
have been described in detail by Formby et al. (2000). The
stimuli were delivered to each subject by headphones
( Telephonics, model TDH-39 headphones encased in
MX-41 /AR cushions). The signal was a 20-ms sinusoid
(1000-Hz tone for the on-frequency condition, 1680-Hz
tone for the high off-frequency condition, or 480-Hz tone
for the low off-frequency condition) gated with 10-ms linear
rise-fall ramps. The masker stimulus in all experiments
was logarithmically centered at 867 Hz. The nominal
masker bandwidth extended from 600 to 1400 Hz and
was presented at a spectrum level of 40 dB SPL. The attenuation of the energy outside of the nominal masker
bandwidth was very steep and was at least 150 dB per
octave. The masker duration was 300 ms, inclusive of
10-ms linear rise-fall ramps. The signal was turned on at
four different times relative to the masker onset. These
times were consistent with the four temporal positions
of the signal described by Wright et al. (1997). The timing for these four conditions was defined relative to the
onset of the masker at j20 ms (backward masking), 0 ms
(simultaneous-onset masking), 200 ms (simultaneousdelay masking), or 300 ms (forward masking). These stimulus conditions are shown schematically by the dark bars
in the lower portion of the panel within the representations of the shaded masker in Figure 1.
The cue was a 6000-Hz sinusoid with 10-ms linear
rise-fall times. In selecting this optimal cue for the study,
we evaluated four cueing conditions. Each condition previously had been shown by one or more investigators to
have utility as a cue in temporal masking (see studies

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

567

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Schematic representations of the signal, masker, and cue. The 300-ms masker was a narrowband of noise.
The 20-ms signal was turned on at four different times relative to the onset of the masker, representing backward
masking, simultaneous-onset masking, simultaneous-delay masking, and forward masking. The signal and masker
stimuli were presented to the right ear only. The following four cueing conditions are labeled and are represented
temporally above each depicted masking condition from top to bottom, respectively: cue presented over the full duration
of the masker, cue presented at the onset of the masker, cue presented at the offset of the masker, and cue presented
simultaneously with the signal. The contralateral cue was presented to the left ear. Simult. = simultaneous; Freq = frequency.

cited in the historical review). These conditions included
the following: (a) cue presented over the full duration of
the 300-ms masker (i.e., the cue was gated simultaneously
with the masker); (b) cue presented at the onset of the
masker (i.e., the 20-ms cue was gated on at 0 ms relative to
the onset of the 300-ms masker); (c) cue presented at the
offset of the masker (i.e., the 20-ms cue was gated on at the
offset of the 300-ms masker); and (d) cue presented simultaneously with the signal (i.e., the 20-ms cue was gated
synchronously with each of the four temporal positions
of the signal). In the process of selecting the optimal cue,
ipsilateral and contralateral presentation of cues to the
test ear and bilateral cues were evaluated in a preliminary study (Formby & Zhang, 2004). For each of these
presentation conditions, the cueing stimulus was presented over a narrow range of presentation levels, which
were determined to be most effective for TZ in pilot studies. We adjusted the presentation levels of the cues only
slightly as needed for each subject to ensure audibility
and to achieve an optimum cueing effect. Cueing levels
presented for all listeners in this study were between 37
and 42 dB SPL.

Procedure
An adaptive, two-interval, two-alternative, forcedchoice paradigm was used with a two-down, one-up decision rule that tracked 70.7% correct (Levitt, 1971). The

568

signal was presented in one of two observation intervals
(chosen at random), and lights were used to mark the
entire interval. Feedback was provided after the subject
pressed one of two keys on a keyboard. The adaptive step
sizes were 5 dB for the first three response reversals and
2 dB for subsequent reversals. The latter were used to
calculate the threshold estimate for a block of trials. Two
masker bursts, one in each observation interval, were presented on each trial of a 40-trial block. The estimate of the
threshold level for a given block of trials was based on the
arithmetic mean of the signal level for the last five reversals across the small adaptive steps.
The masker bursts were centered temporally within
the 500-ms observation intervals, which were separated
by a 500-ms interstimulus interval. The signal was presented with equal a priori probability in one of the two
observation intervals of a trial. For cued conditions, the
cue was presented with the same timing properties in
both observation intervals of each trial of the block.
Visual displays on a computer screen marked the observation intervals and provided feedback after each response. Subjects typically were given 1 hr of practice, or
longer if necessary, to achieve consistent performance
(i.e., threshold estimates for a given condition within 5 dB
of one another and the standard deviation of each threshold estimate less than 3 dB). It is customary in our laboratory to base a listener's average detection threshold

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

for a given condition on three consistent estimates obtained from three blocks of trials. We used this criterion
to obtain unmasked detection thresholds and MDTs. If
necessary, threshold estimates from five blocks (or more)
of trials were measured for more challenging conditions.
A trimmed mean was calculated for the three intermediate values, with higher and lower values discarded.
The order in which conditions were tested differed for
each subject.

On-Frequency Measurement Condition

Overview

The MDTs were measured initially for TZ and for
two other subjects, MLK and LL, for the on-frequency
signal in the masker and for cues added contralaterally
for each of the four cueing conditions (i.e., cue on with
signal, cue at masker onset, cue at masker offset, cue on
with masker). The individual and group mean results for
these subjects are plotted separately in Figure 2. The
corresponding 1 standard deviation bars are shown
for each mean MDT for each of the four temporal positions of the signal. The quiet-detection threshold for the
1000-Hz signal is represented by the broken horizontal
line near the bottom of each panel.

The benefit provided by the cue was quantified by
comparing cued and uncued MDTs for the on-frequency,
high-off-frequency, and low-off-frequency signals and for
each signal temporal position (i.e., signal presentation
before, at masker onset, delayed in the masker, and after the gated masker). Various stimulus temporal properties were cued with the 6000-Hz sinusoid presented
contralaterally to the test ear, which ultimately was established to be the optimum cueing condition and is therefore the focus of this study. The primary cueing effect was
measured in the backward-masking condition for the
contralateral cue gated simultaneously with the 1000-Hz
on-frequency signal. No significant cueing effects were
obtained for the two off-frequency signals, for the ipsiand bilateral cues, or for other signal temporal positions
in the masker ( Formby & Zhang, 2004).

A multivariate analysis of variance ( MANOVA) was
performed on the raw data for the MDTs using a repeatedmeasure design with two within-subjects factors (cue with
five levels and temporal-masking position with four levels).
The MANOVA results revealed significant main effects
of cue, F(4, 8) = 9.42, p < .01, and temporal-masking position, F(3, 6) = 239.074, p < .01, and a significant Cue x
Temporal-Masking Position interaction, F(12, 24) = 6.937,
p < .01. Subsequent analysis of simple main effects revealed that the MDTs were influenced by the cue for the
backward-masking condition, F(2, 1) = 7.20, p < .01, but
not for other temporal-masking positions. Pairwise comparisons were made for the simple effects of cue in the
backward-masking condition using Sidak corrected 95%
confidence intervals. The only significant group-average
cueing effect was an 8.6 dB difference between the MDT

Results

Figure 2. Individual and group average contralateral-cued (four cueing conditions identified in the accompanying legend)
and uncued temporal-masking functions for the on-frequency (1000-Hz) signal in the bandpass-noise masker.

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

569

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

measured without a cue (37.5 dB SPL) and the MDT
measured with a cue (28.9 dB SPL) for the contralateral
cue gated simultaneously with the 1000-Hz signal in the
backward-masking condition ( p = .043). The resulting
cued MDT for each listener for the backward-masking
condition was statistically equivalent to his or her quietdetection threshold for the 1000-Hz signal (two-tailed
paired t test, p > .05). None of the other measurement
conditions yielded a significant cueing effect.
The primary cueing effect for the contralateral cue
synchronized with the signal was then confirmed for two
additional listeners, JI and JY. Detection thresholds
were measured from them for the masked signal in cued
and uncued conditions for each of the four temporal positions of the signal and for the signal presented in quiet.
Their results are shown in Figure 3, along with the corresponding results from TZ, MLK, and LL, who participated in tests of the cueing conditions described above.
Also shown in Figure 3 are the group mean results, along
with the corresponding +1 standard deviation bars, for all
5 listeners. The quiet-detection threshold for the signal is
represented by the broken horizontal line near the bottom
of each panel. The pattern of the results is the same for
all listeners. A MANOVA was performed on the raw data
for the MDTs using a repeated-measure design with two
within-subjects factors (cue with two levels and temporalmasking position with four levels). The analysis revealed

significant main effects of cue, F(1, 4) = 25.81, p < .01, and
temporal masking position, F(3, 12) = 484.14, p < .01, and
a significant Cue x Temporal-Masking Position interaction, F(3, 12) = 25.62, p < .01. Subsequent analysis of
simple main effects revealed that the MDTs were influenced by the contralateral cue for the backward-masking
condition, F(1, 4) = 34.56, p < .01, but not for other
temporal-masking positions. The 6000-Hz contralateral
cue, synchronized with the signal, "unmasked" the signal in the backward-masking condition. This cue, however, had no effect on the MDT for any other temporal
position of the signal. The cue paired with the signal reduced backward masking by 7.7 dB ( MDT measured
without a cue, 36.8 dB SPL, vs. MDT measured with a
cue, 29.1 dB SPL), This reduction was statistically significant. The resulting cued MDT for the group was not
significantly different from their mean quiet-detection
threshold (28.8 dB SPL) for the 1000-Hz signal (twotailed paired t test, p > .05).

Off-Frequency Measurement Conditions
The purpose of this set of experiments was to investigate the cueing effect for the low and high off-frequency
signal conditions. MDTs were measured and compared
with and without a contralateral cue gated synchronously
with the signal in the bandpass-noise masker. We examined

Figure 3. Individual and group average uncued temporal-masking functions (circle symbols) and cued temporal-masking functions (hourglass
symbols) for the contralateral cue gated simultaneously with the on-frequency (1000-Hz) signal presented within the bandpass-noise masker.

570

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

only the contralateral cue gated synchronously with the
signal because it was the only effective cue for the onfrequency signal conditions. Participants TZ, MLK, and
LL participated in the low off-frequency signal condition.
Subjects TZ, PF, and CF participated in the high offfrequency signal condition.
The individual and group mean MDTs, along with
the corresponding 1 standard deviation bars, are shown
in Figures 4 and 5 for the high and low off-frequency signal conditions, respectively. The quiet-detection threshold for the signal is represented by the broken horizontal
line near the bottom of each panel. For the 1680-Hz signal, presented above the frequency range of the bandpassnoise masker (see Figure 4), the signal was easier to detect
when it was presented either just before or just after,
rather than during, the masker ( MANOVA, main effect
of temporal position, F(3, 6) = 98.51, p < .01). There was
generally a smaller, relatively uniform masking effect
across the four temporal positions of the signal for the
low off-frequency signal condition (see Figure 5; MANOVA,
effect of temporal position, F(3, 6) = 1.33, p > .05). The cued
and uncued MDTs were statistically similar for each of
the four signal temporal positions for the low and for the
high off-frequency signal conditions, respectively (high
off-frequency condition MANOVA, effect of cue, F(1, 2) =
0.67, p > .05; low off-frequency condition MANOVA, effect of cue, F(1, 2) = 0.44, p > .05). Thus, the contralateral
cue gated synchronously with the signal was of no added

benefit to these listeners in releasing them from simultaneous or nonsimultaneous masking for either of the offfrequency measurement conditions.

Discussion
The cued and uncued temporal-masking functions
measured in this study for the signal presented within
the bandwidth of the masker (on-frequency condition)
are compared in Figure 6 with the corresponding data
reported by Wright et al. (1997). The cued temporalmasking function shown in Figure 6 is that measured in
this study for the contralateral cue gated simultaneously
with the 1000-Hz signal. Temporal-masking functions
are shown for both the control children and the children
with LLI from Wright et al.'s study. Temporal MDTs
were greater across all signal positions for the children
than for the adults. The difference (60 dB) was greatest
between the cued MDT measured for our adults for the
backward-masking condition and the corresponding uncued MDT measured by Wright et al. for their children
with LLI. The difference was least for these same two
groups for the delayed simultaneous-signal condition,
amounting to only about 10 dB. It is noteworthy that
both groups of children studied by Wright et al. showed
less change in threshold across the signal temporal positions than did our adults. This latter finding is in line

Figure 4. Individual and group average uncued temporal-masking functions (circle symbols) and cued temporal-masking
functions (hourglass symbols) for the contralateral cue gated simultaneously with the high off-frequency (1680-Hz)
signal presented with the bandpass-noise masker.

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

571

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 5. Individual and group average uncued temporal-masking functions (circle symbols) and cued
temporal-masking functions (hourglass symbols) for the 6000-Hz contralateral cue gated simultaneously
with the low off-frequency (480-Hz) signal presented with the bandpass-noise masker.

with other studies that have reported relatively fewer
differences in temporal masking across signal temporal
position for children than for adults (e.g., Buss, Hall,
Grose, & Dev, 1999; Hartley, Hogan, Hardiman, Wright,
& Moore, 2000).

Backward masking was eliminated in this study by
presenting an appropriate contralateral cue gated synchronously with the signal. This finding is in line with
results from Puleo and Pastore (1980). The cue ostensibly reduced listener uncertainty and confusion by acting

Figure 6. Group average uncued and cued temporal-masking functions for the adults in this study are
shown for comparison with group average temporal-masking functions for the control children and children
with LLI from Wright et al.'s (1997) study. SD bars accompany each mean threshold value.

572

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

as a temporal marker to indicate to the listener when to
listen for the signal, thereby providing precise onset and
offset timing information for the signal. Consequently,
each subject was informed when to begin listening and
when to stop listening. The former presumably aids the
listener in extracting information about the signal,
whereas the latter diminishes the backward-masking
effect. In contrast, when the cue is gated over the whole
duration of the masker or with the onset of the masker,
the listener is only informed when to stop listening for
the signal but not when to begin listening. When the cue
is gated with the offset of the masker, the listener is not
provided with any meaningful timing information about
the signal. Thus, these other cues were not as effective in
reducing temporal uncertainty as was the cue gated simultaneously with the signal. Therefore, cueing of temporal properties of the masker did not benefit our listeners
in the backward-masking-signal position nor any other
temporal position of the signal relative to the masker.
Thus, these findings are different from some of the previous evidence for cueing effects reviewed earlier for other
temporal positions of the signal for alternative cueing
techniques. Cueing of temporal properties of the masker
eliminated masking among our listeners for the backwardmasking condition. This finding suggests that the mechanism that is responsible for the backward-masking effect
is not classical power-based masking, per se, but is instead
uncertainty associated with attending to or discerning
the signal from the masker.
Whereas contralateral cues gated synchronously
with the signal were effective in counteracting backwardmasking effects for the on-frequency signal condition, such
cues were not effective in releasing the off-frequency
signals from temporal masking. Presumably, this result
reflects the fact that the cue was effective only when the
signal was presented at the spectral center of the bandpassnoise masker, and the signal and masker stimuli therefore shared a similar frequency and some associated
degree of uncertainty (e.g., Moore, 1980a, 1981a). Such a
cue, however, was of little or of no benefit when the signal
was presented either above or below the spectral center
of the bandpass-noise masker, and the differences between
the signal and masker stimuli were therefore large and
readily discriminable. We expected that detection of a signal frequency within the frequency range of the masker
would be more difficult than detection of a signal frequency presented either above or below the frequency
range of the masker. Indeed, this is the set of results that
we obtained. Moreover, there was no evidence for subthreshold cued MDTs of the kind described by Taylor and
Forbes (1969), which a priori could not be ruled out.
A curious finding in the off-frequency signal measurements warrants discussion in terms of the premise
of this study that backward masking reflects an inherent

signal-masker confusion. Specifically, there was almost
no backward masking when the signal frequency was
presented above the frequencies of the masker band at
1680 Hz. However, when the signal frequency was presented at 480 Hz, below the frequencies of the masker
band, MTDs were measurably elevated across all temporal positions of the signal relative to the masker.
Moreover, cueing was not effective for reducing masked
threshold for any of these positions. Consequently, if backward masking is an uncertainty or attentional problem,
then why was any residual backward masking measured
for the 480-Hz signal, and why was cueing ineffective for
this condition? We suspect the answers to this pair of
questions are somehow linked with remote masking effects of the kind Formby et al. (2000) described for temporal masking of a 500-Hz signal by a higher-frequency
narrowband masker. Their residual remote masking effects were atypical of conventional masking phenomena
inasmuch as the small amounts (,10 dB) of masking were
invariant with masker level. Cueing effects, therefore,
might reasonably go unresolved for such small amounts
of remote masking. Moreover, the poorly understood phenomenon of residual masking does not behave in lawful
ways of classical masking, and it is therefore not surprising that cueing was ineffectual for our low offfrequency condition.
A beneficial contralateral cue was achieved in this
study with a weak high-frequency stimulus paired with
a lower-frequency signal. That this simple contralateral
cue proved to be the only useful cue in this study and
that it was effective only for the on-frequency, backwardmasking condition, suggests to us that listener uncertainty about the signal and masker properties is the
primary factor in the classical "backward-masking effect"
(i.e., at least for signal/masker onset differences exceeding a few milliseconds). Specifically, the problem faced by
our listeners in this study, when presented with a weak
signal in the on-frequency, backward-masking paradigm,
was not one of masking in the traditional "energetic"
sense ( Fletcher, 1940), nor was it "non-energetic" informational masking, which assumes randomly changing
masker conditions with each stimulus presentation (Neff
& Dethlefs, 1995; Watson, 1987). Rather, our findings
indicate that the problem for the listeners was simply
one of resolving the properties of the brief, weak signal
from those of the more intense, closely following, spectrally related masker. We demonstrated in this study that
the associated uncertainty for the on-frequency signal
condition could be completely alleviated when an appropriate contralateral temporal cue was made available to
our listeners to help them direct and focus their attention
on the precise timing of the signal. This directed attentional cue was robust and effective for all of our listeners. As such, contralaterally cued, backward masking

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

573

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

offers an excellent example of the power of cue-directed
attention in complex sound perception. A scholarly overview of this topic, which is beyond the scope of this
report, is provided elsewhere by Leek (1987).

Summary and Conclusions
The results from this study indicate that when the
signal was similar in quality to the masker, signal /
masker uncertainty/confusion in the backward-masking
condition was largely, if not wholly, eliminated by a contralateral cue gated synchronously with the signal. This
contralateral cue may act primarily as a temporal marker
to reduce temporal uncertainty associated with the gated
signal. When the spectral properties of the signal differ
completely from those of the masker (in the off-frequency
conditions), this difference alone is sufficient to eliminate most of the primary listener uncertainty, and the
added cue is of little or no further benefit.
Our temporal-masking results revealed that the adult
listeners in this study had appreciably lower MDTs than
did either the LLI or normal control children evaluated
by Wright et al. (1997). Others also have reported less
(uncued) backward masking for adults than for children
(e.g., Buss et al., 1999; Hartley et al., 2000). One might anticipate even greater differences between cued backwardmasking thresholds of adults and children, depending
upon their respective abilities to use cues to aid masked
detection. If children with LLI can learn to use the contralateral cue to reduce backward masking, then the processing problem reported by Wright et al. for children
with language-acquisition deficits may ultimately be
shown to be a primary problem of confusion between signal and masker properties, rather than a temporalprocessing disorder. Ongoing research in our laboratory
is now evaluating cueing effects in temporal masking for
groups of adolescents with LLI and with normal language
skills. These findings will be reported in a companion
report.

Acknowledgments
Support for this research was provided by Grant
K24DC00183 from the National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders to Craig Formby and by a
graduate research assistantship award from the Graduate
School of the University of Maryland, Baltimore, to Craig
Formby for support of Ting Zhang. Portions of this work were
included in a presentation titled " Uncertainty and Confusion
in Temporal Masking " at the 147th meeting of the Acoustical
Society of America, New York, New York, on May 28, 2004.
We gratefully acknowledge editorial assistance from Chinetta
Pettaway-Willis and technical aid from Mike Heinz.

574

References
Ahmed, S. T., Lomabardino, L. J., & Leonard, C. M. (2001).
Specific language impairment: Definitions, casual mechanisms, and neurobiological factors. Journal of Medical
Speech-Language Pathology, 9, 1-15.
American National Standards Institute. (1996). Specifications for audiometers (ANSI S3.6-1996). New York: Author.
Bacon, S. P., & Healy, E. W. (2000). Effects of ipsilateral and
contralateral precursors on the temporal effect in simultaneous masking with pure tones. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 107, 1589-1597.
Bacon, S. P., & Liu, L. (2000). Effects of ipsilateral and
contralateral precursors on the temporal effect on overshoot.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 108,
1811-1818.
Bacon, S. P., & Smith, M. A. (1991). Spectral, intensive,
and temporal factors influencing overshoot. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43A, 373-399.
Benton, A. (1964). Developmental aphasia and brain damage.
Cortex, 1, 40-52.
Bishop, D. V., Carlyon, R. P., Deeks, J. M., & Bishop, S. J.
(1999). Auditory temporal processing impairment: neither
necessary nor sufficient for causing language impairment
in children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1295-1310.
Buss, E., Hall, J. W., III, Grose, J. H., & Dev, M. B. (1999).
Development of adult-like performance in backward, simultaneous, and forward masking. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 42, 844-849.
Elliott, L. L., Hammer, M. A., & Scholl, M. E. (1989). Finegrained auditory discrimination in normal children and
children with language-learning problems. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 32, 112-119.
Fletcher, H. (1940). Auditory patterns. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 12, 47-56.
Formby, C., Sherlock, L. P., & Ferguson, S. H. (2000).
Enhancement of the edges of temporal masking functions by
complex patterns of overshoot and undershoot. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 2169-2187.
Formby, C., & Zhang, T. (2004). Uncertainty and confusion
in temporal masking. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 115, 2602.
Hartley, D. E. H., Hill, P. R., & Moore, D. R. (2003). The
auditory basis of language impairments: Temporal processing versus processing efficiency hypotheses. International
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 67, 137-142.
Hartley, D. E. H., Hogan, S. C., Hardiman, M. J., Wright,
B. A., & Moore, D. R. (2000). Age-related improvements
in auditory backward and simultaneous masking in 6 to
10 year old children. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 1402-1415.
Leek, M. R. (1987). Directed attention in complex sound
perception. In W. A. Yost & C. S. Watson (Eds.), Auditory
processing of complex sounds (pp. 278-288). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
49, 467- 477.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 564-575 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Lubert, N. (1981). Auditory perceptual impairments in
children with specific language disorders: A review of the
literature. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 46, 3-9.
Moore, B. C. J. (1978). Psychophysical tuning curves measured in simultaneous and forward masking. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 63, 524-532.
Moore, B. C. J. (1980a). Detection cues in forward masking.
In G. van den Brink & F. A. Bilsen (Eds.), Psychophysical,
physiological and behavioral studies in hearing (pp. 222-229).
Delft, the Netherlands: Delft University Press.
Moore, B. C. J. (1980b). Mechanism and frequency distribution
of two-tone suppression in forward masking. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 68, 814-824.
Moore, B. C. J. (1981a). Interactions of masker bandwidth
with signal duration and delay in forward masking. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 70, 62-68.
Moore, B. C. J. (1981b). Relation between pitch shifts and
MMF shifts in forward masking. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 69, 594-597.
Moore, B. C. J., & Glasberg, B. R. (1982). Contralateral and
ipsilateral cueing in forward masking. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 71, 942-945.
Neff, D. L., & Dethlefs, T. M. (1995). Individual differences
in simultaneous masking with random-frequency, multicomponent masker. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 98, 125-134.
Overson, G. J., Bacon, S. P., & Webb, T. M. (1996). The
effect of level and relative frequency region on the recovery
of overshoot. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 99, 1059-1065.
Pastore, R. E., & Freda, J. S. (1980). Contralateral cueing
effects in forward masking. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 67, 2104-2105.
Pastore, R. E., & MacLatchy, C. S. (1975). Some nonmasking auditory postsignal effects. Perception & Psychophysics, 17, 455-459.
Puleo, J. S., & Pastore, R. E. (1980). Contralateral cueing
effects in backward masking. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 67, 947-951.
Rice, M. L., Tomblin, J. B., Hoffman, L., Richman, W. A.,
& Marquis, J. (2004). Grammatical tense deficits in
children with SLI and nonspecific language impairment:
Relationships with nonverbal IQ over time. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 816-834.
Savel, S., & Bacon, S. P. (2003). Effect of contralateral
precursor type on the temporal effect in simultaneous
masking with tone and noise maskers. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 114, 580-582.
Sorkin, R. D. (1965). Uncertain signal detection with simultaneous contralateral cues. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 38, 207-212.
Tanner, W. P., Jr. (1958). What is masking? The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 30, 919-921.

Taylor, M. M., Clarke, D. P. J., & Smith, S. M. (1971).
Monaural detection with contralateral cue ( MDCC): III.
Sinusoidal signals at a constant performance level. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 49, 1795-1804.
Taylor, M. M., & Forbes, S. M. (1969). Monaural detection
with contralateral cues ( MDCC): I. Better than energy
detector performance by human observers. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 46, 1519-1526.
Taylor, M. M., Smith, S. M., & Clarke, D. P. J. (1971).
Monaural detection with contralateral cue ( MDCC): IV.
Psychometric functions with sinusoidal signals. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 50, 1151-1161.
Terry, M., & Moore, B. C. J. (1977). Suppression effects in
forward masking. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 62, 781-784.
Tomblin, J. B. (1997). Prevalence of SLI in kindergarten
children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 40, 1245-1260.
Turner, C. W., & Doherty, K. A. (1997). Temporal masking
and the active process in normal and hearing-impaired
listeners. In W. Jesteadt (Ed.), Modeling sensorineural
hearing loss (pp. 387-396). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Veniar, F. A. (1958). Effect of auditory cue on discrimination
of auditory stimuli. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 30, 1079-1081.
Watson, C. S. (1987). Uncertainty, informational masking,
and the capacity of immediate auditory memory. In W. A.
Yost & C. S. Watson (Eds.), Auditory processing of complex
sounds (pp. 267-277). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weber, D. L., & Green, D. M. (1978). Temporal factors and
suppression effects in backward and forward masking. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 64, 1392-1399.
Weber, D. L., & Moore, B. C. J. (1981). Forward masking by
sinusoidal and noise maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 69, 1402-1409.
Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranlk,
C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1997, May 8).
Deficits in auditory temporal and spectral resolution in
language-impaired children. Nature, 387, 176-178.
Zwislocki, J. J. (1960). Theory of temporal auditory summation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 32,
1045-1060.
Received October 3, 2005
Revision received March 15, 2006
Accepted October 18, 2006
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2007/039)
Contact author: Craig Formby, who is now with the
Department of Communicative Disorders, P.O. Box 870242,
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0242.
E-mail: cformby@as.ua.edu.

Taylor, M. M., & Clarke, D. P. J. (1971). Monaural detection
with contralateral cue ( MDCC): II. Interaural delay of cue
signal. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
49, 1243-1253.

Zhang & Formby: Cued Temporal Masking

575

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

