Fast Mapping Skills in the
Developing Lexicon
Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe
Indiana University, Bloomington

Erin R. Hahn
Furman University, Greenville, SC

Purpose: This preliminary investigation was a longitudinal study of fast mapping skills
in normally developing children, 16-18 months of age. The purpose was to examine
the effects of practice on the accessibility of words in lexical memory.
Method: Eight children were taught the names of 24 unfamiliar objects over 12 weekly
training sessions. The amount of practice children had with individual words varied as a
function of session. Data were compared to a control group of children--matched on
productive vocabulary--who were exposed to the same experimental words at the first
and last sessions only.
Results: The results showed that for children in the experimental group, extended
practice with a novel set of high-practice words led to the rapid acquisition of a
second set of low-practice words. Children in the control group did not show the same
lexical advantage.
Conclusions: The data suggest that learning some words primes the system to learn more
words. Vocabulary development can thus be conceptualized as a continual process
of fine-tuning the lexical system to enable increased accessibility to information.
Implications for the treatment of children with word-finding difficulties are considered.
KEY WORDS: fast mapping, word learning, lexical activation, toddlers

R

esearchers have long been intrigued by the fast, one-shot word learning that is characteristic of children in their second year of life. Despite limitations of basic attentional and memory processes, and only
rudimentary social-pragmatic skills, the average toddler typically accrues
a lexicon of more than 500 words before the age of 3 years (Fenson et al.,
1994). The ability to learn and retain new words with only minimal exposure is known as fast mapping (Carey & Bartlett, 1978; Heibeck &
Markman, 1987). Many investigators regard children's success at fast
mapping as especially remarkable, considering that they lack the conceptual requirements believed to be essential to support the appropriate interpretation of words (for a discussion, see Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, &
Lederer, 1999). Fast mapping has been observed in typically developing
children as young as 13 months of age (Kay-Raining Bird & Chapman,
1998; Schafer & Plunkett, 1998; Woodward, Markman, & Fitzsimmons,
1994) as well as those with specific language impairments (Dollaghan, 1987;
Ellis Weismer & Hesketh, 1996; Gray, 2003; Rice, Buhr, & Oetting, 1992);
hearing loss (Lederberg, Preszbindowski, & Spencer, 2000); Williams syndrome (Stevens & Karmiloff-Smith, 1997); and Down syndrome (Chapman,
Kay-Raining Bird & Schwartz, 1990; Mervis & Bertrand, 1995).
Carey and Bartlett (1978) first documented the phenomenon of fast
mapping in a pioneering study of preschool-age children. They observed
that 3-year-olds appeared to learn the meaning of a word when contrasted
with another word known to the child. For example, when told "bring me

682

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/07/5003-0682

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

the chromium tray; not the blue one, the chromium one,"
children successfully mapped the unfamiliar color term
in the presence of the familiar one. Carey (1987) proposed
that children learn the meaning of a word in two separate
phases: (a) a fast mapping phase, in which the child establishes an initial link between word and referent, and
(b) a subsequent, slow mapping phase. In the fast mapping phase, the child has only partial knowledge of the
meaning of the word, whereas in the second phase of acquisition, the initial word representation becomes supplemented through additional experience, eventually coming
to resemble the adult meaning.
The phenomenon of fast mapping has generated much
interest among child language researchers. Building on
Carey's (1987) original work, numerous studies have focused on possible constraints or biases that guide children
to interpret words in particular ways. In these experiments,
children are typically exposed to nonostensive learning
in an ambiguous context (Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek,
1994; Heibeck & Markman, 1987). For example, Evey
and Merriman (1998) presented 24-month-olds with two
simple line drawings of a cake and a novel object and told
them to "find the dax." Within this context, fast mapping
was interpreted as occurring when children attached the
new word to the previously unnamed object.
Other studies of fast mapping have focused instead
on the speed or robustness with which the initial word-toreferent mapping occurs. Here, the interest is not how
children disambiguate the meaning of words but, rather,
how general processes of learning and memory support
lexical acquisition--for example, the number of exposures
it takes to learn a new word ( Houston-Price, Plunkett, &
Harris, 2005) or the kind of information learned and retained in memory (Chapman et al., 1990; Markson &
Bloom, 1997). In many of these tasks, infants are taught
words ostensively through basic associative mechanisms--
that is, through the direct pairing of an auditory label and
visual object (Schafer & Plunkett, 1998; Woodward et al.,
1994).
In this investigation, we used similar ostensive methods. Our interest was in the developing ability to map
names to unfamiliar objects at a time when children have
fewer than 100 words in their expressive vocabulary.
Lederberg et al. (2000) suggested that ostensive learning
is especially optimal for children with small vocabularies who may otherwise be unable to demonstrate fast
mapping. They examined the fast mapping skills of deaf
preschoolers in two contexts: (a) one in which children
had to infer the meaning of a novel word and (b) a second
in which the link between object and referent was made
unambiguous by the experimenter. They found that the
ability to fast map a word through brief ostensive exposure preceded the ability to infer that a novel word refers
to a novel object. Furthermore, this ability was related to
vocabulary size, such that children with larger expressive

and receptive vocabularies were more proficient at fast
mapping new words than were children with smaller
vocabularies.

A Model of Word Retrieval
Little is known about the influence of lexical retrieval
processes on word learning in very young children. Particularly puzzling to researchers is the nature of the connection between speaking and listening. Early in development,
children understand much more than they say. Later in
development, the discrepancy is less apparent, and children often begin to use a word productively immediately
after hearing it spoken. This change reflects an important
transition in the child's ability to fast map new words
in production and is generally associated with the onset
of the vocabulary spurt or naming explosion (L. Bloom,
1973; Ganger & Brent, 2004; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith,
1997; Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994).
One reason for the asymmetry in understanding and
saying may be that the two tasks place different demands
on retrieval processes--that is, the retrieval of a word for
production may require activation strengths that are greater
than those needed to access a word in comprehension
(Capone & McGregor, 2005). This idea is based on a common
model of adult lexical access in which the retrieval of a word
is not an all-or-none event but, rather, involves a process of
graded activation (Stemberger, 1989). To comprehend the
meaning of a word, the listener begins with an auditory cue
that activates a phonological representation stored previously in memory. Activation then spreads from the phonological level to the semantic level where, given sufficient
activation of the associated concept, the word is comprehended. In contrast, the retrieval of a word for production
involves the reverse flow of information and derives its initial activation from a set of nonlinguistic cues that originates in semantic memory and spreads to the phonological
level. Given sufficient strength to activate the associated
sound form of a word, the word is accessed for production.
This model of lexical access suggests that activation
derives from two sources: (a) the strength of connections
that link units to one another and (b) the strength associated with each unit at a given moment in time. Because
infants acquire many of their early concepts before acquiring the sound forms themselves, it is likely that concepts
will initially possess higher levels of activation than the
sound forms to which they are linked. What does this
suggest, then, for the ease with which words are comprehended and produced? For a beginning word learner, hearing a particular word should provide a temporary boost
to the initially low level of activation associated with the
proper phonological unit. This activation then spreads to
the semantic level, where the more highly activated concept needs only a small contribution from the phonological level to become available for access.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

683

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

In comparison, attempts to say a word begin with the
already highly activated concept, which may robustly
spread activation to the phonological level. However, two
general weaknesses of the retrieval system at this early
stage of development conspire to make early naming a difficult task: (a) inadequate links between concept and form
and (b) initially weak states of phonological activation
for most words. As a consequence, the child often fails to
retrieve the desired name. Such an experience may be similar to the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon that adults sometimes experience (Brown & McNeill, 1966)--that is, the
child "knows" the correct word but is unable to retrieve it
(Elbers, 1985; Gershkoff-Stowe, 2007).
As conceptualized here, improvements in children's
ability to access stored representations in comprehension
should support children's ability to generate the associated words for production. This is because accessing the
sound form of a word depends, in part, on the strength of
the link to the concept itself, which becomes more robust
each time the word is accessed. Additionally, the degree to
which words and concepts are strengthened depends on
several well-documented lexical factors, including word
frequency and neighborhood density. Words that are high
in frequency are processed faster and are less susceptible
to error than words that are low in frequency (Dell, 1990;
Stemberger & MacWhinney, 1986; see also GershkoffStowe, 2002, for similar effects in young children). Practice,
then, should strengthen the activation level of individual words, both when hearing the word spoken and when
saying the word oneself.
A second factor known to influence lexical access is the
phonological and semantic neighborhood characteristics
of a word. Phonologically similar neighborhoods consist
of words that differ by the addition, deletion, or substitution of a single phoneme ( Luce & Pisoni, 1998). Adult
studies of speech production show that access is facilitated when words are from high-density phonological
neighborhoods with many phonetically similar words than
from sparse neighborhoods with few phonetically similar
words ( Harley & Bown, 1998; MacKay, 1987; Vitevitch &
Sommers, 2003). Words are also connected to other words
at the semantic level (Levelt, 1989). For example, dog and
cat belong to the same taxonomic category of animals and
are similar in overall shape. Semantic similarity is a potent force in early word learning, as suggested by several
studies of children's novel word extensions (Baldwin, 1992;
Gershkoff-Stowe, Connell, & Smith, 2006; Smith, 2000).
The importance of semantic similarity is also revealed in
adult studies of lexical access; target words are named
more quickly when primed with words that are related
in meaning (e.g., when table is primed by chair; Meyer &
Schvaneveldt, 1971; Neely, 1977; Plaut & Booth, 2000).
Several measures have been used to determine the
semantic relatedness among words, including feature

684

similarity, association, and co-occurrence (Buchanan,
Westbury, & Burgess, 2001; Mirman & Magnuson, 2006).
Because of the shifting and dynamic nature of these relationships, however, semantically similar neighborhoods
are difficult to define (Nelson, McEvoy, & Pointer, 2003).
This is especially true for children whose knowledge of semantic categories continually changes as new words and
concepts are learned. Moreover, for children as well as
adults, contextual factors play an important role. For example, 2- and 4-year-old children can be induced to overgeneralize words in response to pictures of objects that
are visually similar to a target object (Gershkoff-Stowe
et al., 2006). Adults are readily able to form new categories on the fly (e.g., "things to carry out of a burning
house") by semantically linking otherwise unrelated items
(e.g., jewelry, photo albums, pets). These ad hoc categories
emerge in response to momentary goals and the individual's long-term knowledge of objects and their properties
(Barsalou, 1983).
One developmental implication of these similarity
neighborhoods is that as the early lexicon begins to expand, improved access to phonological and semantic information should result from increased activation that
spreads through a widening network of related concepts
and words. This prediction is consistent with recent studies indicating significant gains in processing efficiency between 1 and 2 years of age (Fernald, Perfors, & Marchman,
2006; Fernald, Pinto, Swingley, Weinberg, & McRoberts,
1998). Such findings help account for the characteristic
rate change in productive vocabulary growth as children
go from saying one word at a time to saying many new
words at once (Goldfield & Reznick, 1990). We believe these
developments reflect significant changes in the underlying operations of the lexicon as productive vocabulary grows.
Specifically, we propose that the language processing
system undergoes a shift from incremental improvements
on a word-by-word basis to general, systemwide growth
in word retrieval skills. This shift occurs gradually as
the size and density of the lexicon assume a critical mass
of words--the result of increased lexical competition
and mutual support in the form of spreading activation
(Marchman & Bates, 1994; Plunkett & Marchman, 1993).
The existence of systemwide changes in lexical access
has been suggested by several studies of object naming
involving typically developing children as well as children
with language impairment. Gershkoff-Stowe (2001, 2002)
has found that the pace at which normally developing toddlers acquired a productive vocabulary was closely related
to developments in their overall ability to store and retrieve words (see also Capone & McGregor, 2005; Dapretto
& Bjork, 2000). McGregor and colleagues (McGregor,
Newman, Reilly, & Capone, 2002) also found that children with a history of specific language impairment exhibited a general weakness in the processing and storage

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

of words relative to children with normal language
development.
The goal of this investigation was to shed light on the
underlying nature of fast mapping by exploring children's
emerging ability to access information in lexical memory. As a first step, we conducted a 3-month longitudinal
study with children 16-18 months of age, using comprehension as a measure of fast mapping. This age group is of
theoretical interest because it is just before the time when
many children experience a sudden and rapid spurt in productive vocabulary growth (L. Bloom, 1973; GershkoffStowe & Smith, 1997). As suggested by several studies of
early vocabulary growth, the majority of children's first
words are nouns (Dromi, 1987; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith,
2004; Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; Nelson, Hampson, &
Shaw, 1993). Accordingly, we focused training on the
names of objects to maximize the probability that fast
mapping would be observed. Children in an experimental
condition were taught the names of unfamiliar objects
at 12 weekly sessions. To separate the contributions of
maturation and familiarity with the procedure from
experience with learning words more generally, we taught
a second group of children the same set of words under
similar training conditions but at only two sessions scheduled 12 weeks apart.
We expected that both groups of children would show
improvements in identifying individual high-practice
words as a result of repeated exposure. More important,
however, we hypothesized that extended experience with
a single collection of words would enhance the ability to
access object names in response to systemwide changes in
the activation strength of many new items. Accordingly,
we predicted that children in the experimental group
would show greater improvements in the ability to fast
map new words from Session 1 to Session 12 than would
children in the control group. We also examined the possibility that learning inside the laboratory would translate
to vocabulary gains outside the laboratory. This prediction
was based on findings from a longitudinal training study
in which toddlers who were taught novel words for novel
objects showed corresponding gains in real-world object
name vocabulary (Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe,
& Samuelson, 2002). To test this hypothesis, we compared
changes in the size of children's noun vocabulary by asking parents to complete the same vocabulary checklist at
Session 1 and again at Session 12.

Method
Participants
Eight English-speaking children (3 boys, 5 girls) participated longitudinally and were compared to a second
group of 8 children (3 boys, 5 girls), matched for productive

vocabulary size. Each child participated in multiple
word-learning trials involving the testing of 12 object
names per session. Children ranged in age from 16 to
18 months (M = 16.8) at the start of the study and were recruited from local day care centers and public birth records
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Bloomington, Indiana.
The mean age for children in the experimental group was
17.1 months (SD = 0.93), compared to 16.5 months for
their language-matched controls (SD = 0.51). One additional child was tested in the experimental group, but his
data were excluded because he failed to remain consistently on task.
Parents completed the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory: Words and Gestures
(CDI:WG), a widely used measure of early vocabulary
growth (Fenson et al., 1993). Our primary aim in selecting
a vocabulary measure was to obtain measures of both
word comprehension and production for the purpose of
tracking children individually. The CDI:WG consists of
396 words and19 semantic categories. Although designed
for younger children, we chose this version rather than
the Words and Sentences version because only the former
asked parents for information about the words their child
said and understood. The mean number of words in
receptive vocabulary was 164 (range: 98-235) for children
in the experimental group and 191 (range: 79-272) for
children in the control group, t(7) = -0.73, p = .49.
Production rather than comprehension was chosen for
matching children because it is considered to be a more
reliable and predictive measure, particularly as receptive
vocabulary size increases beyond 100 words (see Tomasello
& Mervis, 1994). Table 1 shows the number of words in
productive vocabulary for each child in the experimental group and his or her matched control. Parents reported that children in the experimental group produced
an average of 39.5 words (range: 11-98) at the start of
the study compared to 37.3 words (range: 15-96) in the
control group. Paired t tests showed that this difference
was not significant, t(7) = 1.87, p = .10.

Table 1. Number of words in productive vocabulary for individual
children in the experimental and control conditions at the initial session
based on the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory.

Participant
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Experimental group
(M = 39.5; SD = 26.6)

Control group
(M = 37.3; SD = 26.8)

40
23
33
23
37
51
11
98

37
17
31
17
33
52
15
96

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

685

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Materials and Design
The materials consisted of 24 brightly colored photographs (21.5 cm x 28 cm) of real-world objects. A sample
of the objects is shown in Figure 1. Target words were
selected on the basis of their low incidence in the receptive
and expressive vocabularies of young children (Dale &
Fenson, 1996) and were assumed to be unfamiliar to children below the age of 18 months. The words were phonologically distinct and consisted of one and two syllables.
The objects included both artifacts (e.g., trumpet, kettle)
and natural kinds, labeled at either the basic level (e.g.,
crab) or subordinate level (e.g., toucan).
The 24 pictures were divided into four sets of six
objects each, the names of which were matched approximately for object category, syllable length, and phonological complexity. The sets varied as a function of practice--
that is, by the number of times they were presented to
children in the experimental group over the 12 weeks of
the experiment. There were two high-practice sets, one
medium-practice set, and one low-practice set. The same
pictures within a set were used across sessions.
Children in the experimental group saw only two sets
(i.e., 12 pictures) per session. The schedule of presentation
of the high-, medium-, and low-practice sets across the 12
sessions is outlined in Table 2. Children saw two highpractice sets for 8 of the sessions, one high-practice and one
medium-practice set at every third session, and one highpractice and one low-practice set at the final session. The

Table 2. Schedule of training and testing of high- (h), medium- (m),
and low- (l) practice sets in the experimental condition by session.
Session

Practice

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

12h
12h
6h, 6m
12h
12h
6h, 6m
12h
12h
6h, 6m
12h
12h
6h, 6l

two high-practice sets were included to counterbalance words across Sessions 3, 6, 9, and 12. The mediumpractice set was included as an additional within-subject
control that allowed us to examine children's familiarity with the experimental procedure as well as their
experience with individual sets of words. Fast mapping was measured for each set at the first session in
which children were introduced to the words: Session 1
for the high-practice words, Session 3 for the mediumpractice words, and Session 12 for the low-practice
words. That is, given equivalent exposure--a single
session--we compared children's learning of the high-,

Figure 1. Sample pictures used.

686

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

medium-, and low-practice words as a function of time in
the experiment.
Children in the control group saw two high-practice
sets at Session 1 and one high-practice and one lowpractice set at Session 12. For the intervening visits, the
children looked at and named 12 familiar objects in a
picture book. Both groups of children thus obtained similar experience naming and identifying pictures of objects over the 12-week course of the study; the critical
difference between the groups was the amount of practice children were given with the new, unfamiliar words.
The complete sets of words for each group are listed in
the Appendix.

Procedure
Children in the experimental group participated
in both a training and testing phase at each session. In
the training phase, the parent and experimenter together
labeled each of the 12 pictured objects a minimum of six
times per session. Naming occurred in an ostensive context when both the child and adult were jointly focused on
the referent. This interaction was structured naturalistically: Words were typically embedded in propositional
statements to support the processing of word-referent
pairings (Dollaghan, 1985). Thus, the child might hear
the parent say, for example, "See the crab? The crab lives
in the ocean!" No attempt was made to systematically
manipulate the amount or kind of the semantic information provided.
Parents were instructed to use only the experimental
words rather than synonyms (e.g., toucan rather than
bird) and to provide only one potential referent by focusing on the whole object rather than a part (e.g., crab
rather than legs). The experimenter also requested that
parents avoid deliberate attempts to name the objects
outside the laboratory. In weekly interviews to assess
compliance, parents reported few occasions when additional naming occurred.
Testing probes were administered immediately after
training. In the testing phase, the experimenter arranged
6 of the 12 pictures in front of the child. The same exemplars were used in both training and testing. The child
was asked to point to the correct picture as the experimenter named each object. For example, the experimenter
asked, "Where's the crab?" The order and location of the
pictures were randomly arranged at each session and for
each child. The same procedure was repeated for the remaining 6 pictures presented at that session. When errors occurred, the experimenter provided the child with
the correct name and picture. No other feedback was given.
The training and testing procedures were identical
for the experimental and control groups with the exception of the scheduled presentation of stimulus sets. On

the first and last of the 12 experimental visits to the laboratory, children in the control group were trained and
tested on the same set of unfamiliar words used in the
experimental group. In the intervening sessions, the children were trained and tested on a set of 12 pictures
of common, everyday objects (e.g., dog, baby, car) that
were assumed to be familiar to children below the age of
18 months. The same set of pictures was used at each
of the 10 middle sessions. As in the experimental group,
children were provided with the correct name during
training and testing; no additional feedback was given.
This design thus provided a between-subject control for
the number of visits to the laboratory and the nature
of the experience with the procedure. The two groups
differed primarily in their exposure to word-referent pairs.
Specifically, the experimental group was exposed to the
high-practice set during each of the 12 sessions, whereas
the control group was exposed to the high-practice set
during Sessions 1 and 12 only.
All sessions were videotaped for later coding. Groups
were compared for accuracy in picture identification, frequency of adult picture labeling during the training phase,
and frequency of children's talking during the training
phase. We randomly selected a total of 5 children (3 from
the experimental group and 2 from the control group) to
assess reliability between two independent coders. Percentage agreement was based on the first and last experimental sessions. Reliability was .94 for adult input (range:
.91-.95), based on 1,299 responses, and .89 for children's
talking (range: .78-1.00), based on 122 responses. Children's unintelligible utterances were not counted. Reliability was .94 for children's comprehension of the object
words (range: .91-.96). Comprehension scores were slightly
lower than expected because of multiple pointing strings
that children sometimes produced. Differences were resolved by reviewing the tapes and by discussion.

Results
The main question was whether extended practice
with a novel set of high-practice words would facilitate
the acquisition of a second set of low-practice words with
which children had little familiarity. An additional question was whether learning new names for objects inside
the laboratory would make children more skilled at fast
mapping words outside the laboratory. Before addressing
these questions, we examined three preliminary issues:
(a) whether exposure to the experimental words was
comparable between conditions; (b) whether children
demonstrated similar amounts of interest in the task, as
measured by how much talking they generated in the
laboratory; and (c) whether the two groups of children
learned the names of the high-practice words equally
well at Session 1.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

687

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Adult Input to Children
Over the course of the 3-month study, children in
the control group were hearing the familiar picture book
words outside of the laboratory. Hence, we made no attempt to control or measure their exposure to the words
inside the laboratory. More critical to the main hypothesis
was whether the two groups of children had equivalent
amounts of exposure to the experimental high-practice
words at the first and last sessions at which direct comparisons of learning were made. The results indicate that
the mean number of times children heard the objects named
during the training phase of the experiment did not differ
systematically as a function of condition. At Session 1,
the parent and experimenter jointly labeled each of the
12 high-practice objects a mean of 9.9 times (SD = 2.28)
in the experimental group and 11.1 times (SD = 2.48) in
the control group, t(7) = 1.11, p = .30. At Session 12, the
parent and experimenter labeled the 6 high-practice
words, on average, 11.3 times (SD = 3.08) in the experimental group and 10.3 times (SD = 2.56) in the control
group, t(7) = 0.86, p = .42; they labeled the 6 low-practice
words 11.8 times (SD = 1.79) and 10.7 times (SD = 2.12),
respectively, t(7) = 1.56, p = .16.
In addition, within each condition there were no significant effects concerning how often children heard the
objects named per session for the high-practice, mediumpractice, and low-practice words (all p values > .05). For
the experimental group, we calculated the mean proportion of times that the children heard the adults use the
high-practice words during the 12 experimental sessions
(M = 11.0); the medium-practice words during Sessions 3,
6, and 9 (M = 11.5); and the low-practice words during the
final session (M = 12.8). For the control group, we calculated the mean proportion of times that the children
heard the adults say the high-practice words in Sessions 1
and 12 (M = 11.3) and the low-practice words in Session 12
(M = 11.1). Together, the results indicate that adult input to children was, on the whole, equivalent both for the
experimental and control conditions and across the three
different levels of practice.

Children's Talking in the Laboratory
Between the first and last sessions of the study, children in the control condition looked at and named familiar objects in a picture book. Because the same book was
used at each session, it is possible that children's attention in the experiment waned over time compared with
children in the experimental condition, who were exposed
to different pictures of unfamiliar objects over the course
of 12 weeks. As a measure of children's engagement in
the task, we counted all intelligible utterances that were
produced by each group during training. This word count

688

included nouns, modifiers, and verbs, as well as deictic
utterances such as "that." A paired t test comparing
the mean frequency of talking per session for each child
yielded a significant difference, t(7) = -2.29, p < .05, although in the opposite direction from that predicted.
Children in the control group produced an average of
12.48 words (SD = 8.37) per session, whereas those in the
experimental group produced only 5.26 words (SD = 5.13).
This result suggests that recurring presentation of a single picture book did not dampen children's enthusiasm in
the word learning task; instead, repeated exposure to the
same set of familiar pictures seems to have encouraged
children's talking during training.
It is possible, however, that the observed difference
between the two groups is due to a high rate of interest in
the task early in the experiment but not later. To determine whether the distribution of attention was roughly
even across sessions, we counted the number of children
in each group who showed a decrease in talking from
Sessions 2-6 to Sessions 7-11. This analysis revealed a
decline in both groups, although the actual reduction in
the number of words spoken by the children was small:
3 participants in the experimental group (M = 1.1 words;
range: 0.4-1.8) and 4 participants in the control group
(M = 4.3 words; range: 1.0-7.6). It is important to note,
however, that for all children, this decline was accompanied by a higher proportion of unintelligible utterances,
a category that was not included in the word count. The
observed decline thus appears to be an artifact of the coding procedure. Rather than demonstrating reduced levels of children's interest in the task, the data suggest
a rise in the number of attempts made to communicate
verbally.

Comprehension of the Experimental
High-Practice Words
A remaining question is how well children learned
the high-practice words in both conditions. As expected,
children in the experimental group showed a gradual increase in the proportion of high-practice words correctly
identified in the comprehension task over the 12 weeks
of the study. Twenty-three percent of the high-practice
words were correctly identified at testing in Session 1 with
only minimal exposure compared to 81% in Session 12.
Although there was wide variation among individual children in terms of how many high-practice words they comprehended at each session, the same general pattern of
increase was observed, F(11, 77) = 7.60, p < .001, hp2 = .52.
Children in the control group correctly identified only 21%
of the high-practice words at Session 1 but showed little
gain at Session 12 with only 35% correct (see Figure 2).
A 2 x 2 repeated measures analysis of variance revealed
main effects of session, F(1, 7) = 30.24, p < .001, hp2 = .81,

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Mean proportion of words fast mapped in comprehension
at first presentation for high-practice (Session 1), medium-practice
(Session 3) and low-practice (Session 12) sets.

Comprehension of the Experimental
Low-Practice Words: Evidence
of Fast Mapping
The central question that this study posed was whether
frequent exposure to a set of novel words would support the
rapid acquisition of additional words. If so, children in the
experimental group would be expected to show a fast mapping advantage relative to children in the control group.
This was assessed by comparing the number of low-practice
words comprehended in Session 12. Recall that both groups
of children had the same opportunity to learn the lowpractice words during training and differed only in the
amount of practice they received with the high- and mediumpractice words. A paired t test confirmed the main hypothesis: Children in the experimental group correctly identified
71% of the low-practice words at testing, compared with
38% for the control group, t(7) = 2.64, p = .03, Cohen's
d = 1.26.2

The Medium Practice Set as a
Within-Subject Control
and group, F(1, 7) = 18.73, p = .003, hp2 = .73. In addition, there was a significant Session x Group interaction,
F(1, 7) = 7.81, p = .03, hp2 = .53, indicating that children
in the experimental group comprehended more highpractice words at Session 12 than did children in the control group. This effect of condition was not apparent at
Session 1.
In the weeks between the first and last session, the
control group of children received training on a set of familiar words in a picture-book context of parents reading
and naming common, everyday objects. This ensured that
children in both conditions received equivalent experience in the experimental task, the critical difference being whether they received extended practice with a single
set of familiar words (e.g., dog, baby, car) or with multiple
sets of novel words (e.g., squid, bagpipe, crab). Although
not every child in the control group showed evidence of
knowing every word when tested at weekly intervals,
as a whole, children in the control group comprehended
many more of the familiar words than the unfamiliar highpractice words.1 Of primary interest, however, were the
final sessions of testing, in which the children correctly
identified 76% of the familiar words at Session 11, compared to only 35% of the unfamiliar words at Session 12.
This result suggests that, similar to children in the experimental group, those in the control group were capable of performing the basic word learning test and were
comfortable with the experimental procedure.
1

The fact that children did not perform at ceiling with the familiar words
in the comprehension task at every session is consistent with previous
findings of children's early lexical growth (Gershkoff-Stowe, 2002).

Additional evidence was found that children are capable of fast mapping new words when given extended
practice mapping a set of new words to novel objects. We
compared the mean proportion of words comprehended
by children in the experimental group at first presentation
for the high-practice, medium-practice, and low-practice
words at Sessions 1, 3, and 12, respectively. The results
are presented in Figure 3. As previously noted, children
correctly identified only 23% of the high-practice words at
Session 1. In contrast, children correctly identified 35% of
the medium-practice words and 71% of the low-practice
words at the first session in which they were introduced.
A one-way repeated measures analysis of variance revealed that this difference was significant, F(2, 14) = 11.94,
p = .001, hp2 = .63. Furthermore, a Bonferroni post hoc test
revealed that comprehension of the low-practice words
at first test was significantly greater than comprehension
of both the high-practice and medium-practice words at
first test.
One interpretation of the findings, however, is that for
children in the experimental group, improved performance
2
Children in both groups were presented with mixed sets containing highand low-exposure items for testing in the comprehension task at Session 12.
This aspect of the procedure, however, raises the possibility that children
in the experimental group used familiarity to narrow the test options for
identifying the low-exposure items. If this were the case, then comprehension errors for the low-exposure items should consist of low-exposure foils,
and errors for the high-exposure items should consist of high-exposure foils.
Instead, we found that children tended to select the low-exposure foils for
both the low- and high-exposure items. This suggests that children were
attracted to the novelty of the low-exposure items and were not simply
relying on an elimination strategy. Furthermore, children's responses in the
control group revealed a similar pattern of error for the high- and lowexposure items. Together, these data suggest that the high-exposure foils
were not driving children's correct performance on the low-exposure items.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

689

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 3. Mean proportion of high-practice words comprehended at
Sessions 1 and 12 as a function of condition.

laboratory. Accordingly, we compared children's productive vocabulary size at the beginning and end of the
12-week experiment, based on the MacArthur-Bates
CDI. Children gained an average of 90.9 words (range:
13-218) in the experimental group and 64.0 words (range:
26-93) in the control group. This difference, although large
and in the predicted direction, failed to reach statistical
significance, t(7) = 0.88, p = .41, Cohen's d = 0.52. Furthermore, we examined growth of receptive vocabulary
over the 12-week study and again found a nonreliable increase, also in the predicted direction: Children gained
107 words, on average (range: 52-199), in the experimental group and 86 words in the control group (range:
36-164). We consider the implications of these results in
the discussion below.
The findings from this study suggest that rapid word
learning occurs in response to extended practice with
words--practice in the experimental word learning task,
practice through the repetition and access of identical
words, and, more interestingly, practice with words in
general.

at Session 12 is confounded with experimental practice--
that is, familiarity with the procedure, and not with practice learning words, may have been responsible for the
observed effect. If children's heightened performance was
simply due to time in the experiment, then we would expect a significant increase in word comprehension after
6 weeks of training. Accordingly, we examined children's
comprehension of the high- and medium-practice words
at second presentation, which for the medium-practice set
occurred 4 weeks later, at Session 6. The results revealed
no difference in performance at 2 weeks and 6 weeks.
Children correctly identified 47% of the high-practice
words at Session 2, compared to 48% of the mediumpractice words at Session 6, t(7) = -0.208, p = .84,
Cohen's d = -0.03.
These results suggest that familiarity with the laboratory procedure itself is not solely responsible for the
rapid learning of the low-practice words at Session 12.
Instead, it appears that the pace of children's word learning accelerated as children obtained sufficient amounts
of practice with a novel collection of words. This idea is
supported by the additional finding that at third presentation, children's comprehension performance of the
medium-practice words at Session 9 (M = 0.71) surpassed
their performance of the high-practice words at Session 3
(M = 0.50), t(7) = -2.72, p = .03, Cohen's d = 0.64.

Productive Vocabulary Growth
Outside the Laboratory
We hypothesized that children's improved fast mapping skills inside of the laboratory might correlate
with developments in vocabulary growth outside of the

690

Discussion
At the core of the debate on early lexical acquisition
is the question of how children accomplish the task of
learning words quickly and with little apparent effort.
Increasingly, researchers are recognizing the need to integrate contributions from studies of learning, attention,
and memory--studies that emphasize the cognitive processes underlying the ability to fast map (P. Bloom, 2000;
Golinkoff et al., 2000; Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff,
2000). In the research reported in this article, we tracked
the development of children's word learning over a period
of 3 months, at an age when a sudden onset in the rate of
new word acquisitions is often observed (Bates, Bretherton,
& Synder, 1988; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 1997; Lifter &
Bloom, 1989; Reznick & Goldfield, 1992). We presented
data showing that children who received extended training on the names of a number of unfamiliar objects progressed from learning each word individually to learning
many words at once. We attribute this finding to changes
in the strength of lexical activation as the result of repeated practice: Knowing some words appears to prime
the system to knowing more words.

Practice With Words
Practice effects are, of course, ubiquitous in learning
(Newell & Rosenbloom, 1981). Yet, to date, the role of practice in the lexical development of novice word learners has
received little attention. In most models of adult lexical
retrieval, the accessibility of a word reflects the speaker's
past history of use, namely, how often and how recently

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

an item has been practiced (Anderson & Schooler, 1991).
The more an item is selected for comprehension or production, the stronger the level of activation will be and,
hence, the greater the probability of access. This idea
suggests that practice with individual words in a rapidly
expanding lexicon changes the operation of the lexicon
through the accumulated activation of many items. This
is accomplished through an increase in the base of lexical
and semantic units and the strengthening of connections
between them.
Although the present results should be interpreted
with caution because of the modest sample size and use of
unique training sets, they underscore the importance of
examining potential changes in the strength of activation of words in response to repeated practice. Additional
studies are needed to determine whether the findings extend beyond the laboratory to the real world of the child,
particularly with respect to vocabulary size and to word
classes other than nouns. Must children obtain a criterial
number of words, for example, before improvements in
processing efficiency arise ( Marchman & Bates, 1994)?
Are the findings specific to novice word learners, or do they
extend to older children and adults? Our conjecture is that
similar mechanisms would be found in learners at any age
as they acquire more and more information within a given
semantic domain (e.g., dinosaur names, chess moves). Such
improvement is likely to stem from increased lexical density, leading to new pressures to reorganize information that better supports the accurate retrieval of words
(Storkel, 2002). We further speculate that the nature of
this change is neither abrupt nor discontinuous but rather
emerges from a coalescence of changes over multiple episodes of learning.
The present findings are consistent with a proposed
shift in how words are processed, from local increases in
the activation strength of individual words to systemwide
increases in the activation strength of multiple words.
Such a shift might account for the apparent spurt in receptive and productive vocabulary growth that occurs for
most children toward the end of the second year (Reznick
& Goldfield, 1992). The shift might also help to explain
the transitory increase in naming errors associated with
this early period of accelerated vocabulary growth. Specifically, Gershkoff-Stowe and Smith (1997) reported a
rise and fall in retrieval errors concomitant to the vocabulary spurt that involved object words known to the
child. Errors were greatest at the time when the child
was just beginning to produce many new words, but errors rapidly declined in the weeks that followed. GershkoffStowe and Smith (1997) attributed this curvilinear pattern
to changes in the strength of activation of words in response to increased competition. They suggested that
word representations that were initially fragile were
strengthened as children acquired more words and gained
practice retrieving and producing those words. With the

simultaneous increase in the strength of many individual items, even newly learned words were better able to
resist interference from possible lexical competitors. These
results, together with the fast mapping advantage found in
the present experiment, suggest that systemic changes in
lexical processing arise as children accrue practice with
learning new words and from continued exposure to
familiar words.
Although the precise nature of this systemwide
change is unknown, automaticity likely plays a key role.
Many activities, such as walking, drinking from a cup, or
riding a tricycle, involve a shift from controlled to automatic processes (Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977). Among adults,
automaticity underlies much processing in memory and
attention. A classic example is the Stroop effect (Stroop,
1935). In the Stroop task, respondents are asked to name
words in different colored inks but are unable to ignore
the word's meaning when it is incongruent with the color
of the ink (e.g., green written in blue ink). The interference
that occurs when seeing the word and accessing its meaning is taken to reflect the automaticity of component processes within the word production system.
Automaticity is considered to emerge gradually as a
result of consistent and sustained practice. Although the
biological mechanisms that enable automatic processing
are not well understood, recent studies using functional
magnetic resonance imaging techniques indicate that the
development of automaticity in adults involves noticeable
changes in brain activity (Schneider & Chein, 2003). In
particular, there is a reduction in the amount of cortical
activity associated with working memory and attentional
control as new skills are acquired. This change in activity is thought to indicate a shift from serial to parallel
processing.
A similar shift may occur in the act of learning words--
a development that is reflected in the fast mapping associated with the vocabulary spurt ( Mervis & Bertrand,
1994; Reznick & Goldfield, 1992). In support of this
idea, event-related potential studies of infants 13 and
20 months old revealed an emerging specialization of
neural systems that mediate language comprehension
before and after the period of initial rapid vocabulary
growth (Mills, Coffey-Corina, & Nelville, 1997). Mills
et al. (1997) found, in addition, that this early functional
specialization was linked to language experience independent of chronological age. In particular, studies showed
that neural changes occurred as a function of vocabulary
size and familiarity with individual words (Mills, Plunkett,
Prat, & Schafer, 2005). In light of these and other findings,
Mills et al. (2005) proposed that neural processes may
become more automatic as the amount of brain activity
needed to discriminate words decreases and working memory capacity increases. Automaticity, then, may be conceptualized an emergent property of the language processing
system.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

691

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Neighborhoods of Collective Activity
A fundamental question that the present study raises
is why children showed improved recognition of the novel
words (i.e., the low-practice words at Session 12) with
repeated prior exposure to the high- and medium-practice
words. If familiarity were simply the answer, then we
should find that children in the control group who heard
the names of 12 highly familiar objects (e.g., bunny,
apple, dog) performed as well as, or perhaps better than,
children in the experimental group. However, this was
not the case. We believe the answer lies, instead, in changes
that occurred in response to extended learning involving
a new set of words. These words, acquired gradually
over the 12 weeks of the study, were contextually related. Collectively, they formed what might be considered a unique "neighborhood"--gradually increasing in
strength as the number and density of task-related words
also increased (Charles-Luce & Luce, 1990). Our use of
the term neighborhood reflects the theoretical idea
that through associative learning processes and prior
experience, words and concepts can organize into larger
units or systems that facilitate "fast, efficient, and parallel access to a broad base of related past knowledge"
( Nelson et al., 2003, p. 49; see also Shiffrin & Steyvers,
1997).
The idea that a small set of contextually related words
can create a structural neighborhood that facilitates the
spread of activation to other newly acquired words is
consistent with adult studies showing that networks of
association affect memory performance in tasks of recognition and cued recall ( Nelson et al., 2003). In the present study, children were provided with limited information
about the nature and function of the novel objects, yet
they were united by the context in which the words were
acquired. These words were neither phonologically nor
semantically similar (indeed, children were provided with
little information about the objects). With the introduction of six additional new (low-practice) words at Session 12, children in the experimental group, but not their
language-matched controls, readily fast mapped the experimental words. Having a pre-established neighborhood
in which to incorporate the new words thus appears to
have a facilitating effect on rapid word learning. We
interpret this finding within the context of a spreading activation model: Broadening the base of conceptually related links within a single neighborhood produces patterns
of activation that support the accessibility of individual
words.
These ideas have obvious relevance for developmental issues concerning the dynamics of vocabulary growth.
However, there is evidence in the adult literature for
facilitative as well as competitive effects of similarity
neighborhoods on word retrieval. As Stemberger (2004)

692

succinctly noted, a word's neighbor is its potential competitor. Several recent studies suggest a complex interaction
among lexical neighborhoods, word frequency, and levels
of processing (Luce & Pisoni, 1998; Vitevitch & Sommers,
2003). The picture is further complicated in children, moreover, where multiple factors operate to influence retrieval
on two time scales: (a) as it occurs online and (b) over ontogenetic development (Newman & German, 2002). In the
present study, we found evidence that neighbors of target items provided a facilitative effect on children's performance in the word comprehension task rather than
acting as a source of interference. This effect, however,
was not related to vocabulary development outside the
laboratory.

Fast Mapping and Its Relation to
Productive Vocabulary Growth
We anticipated that improvements in the ability to
fast map words in the experimental task might translate
to lexical gains outside the laboratory. This prediction
was based on evidence from a 7-week training study by
Smith et al. (2002). In that study, eight 17-month-olds
were taught the names for four different novel object categories that were well organized by shape. At the conclusion of the study, these children acquired a shape bias
that was associated with a 166% increase in the size of
their productive vocabulary, compared with only a 73%
increase in the vocabularies of 8 control children who did
not participate in the training portion of the study.
In the present experiment, we found a modest increase
in both receptive and productive vocabulary for children in
the experimental group relative to their language-matched
controls; however, these differences were not reliable.
There are several possible reasons for this outcome. One
possibility is the vocabulary instrument we selected. The
CDI:WG provides useful information about receptive vocabulary for the beginning word learner. However, as suggested by Bates (1993) and others (Tomasello & Mervis,
1994), parents can keep track of word comprehension only
up to about 100 words. Thus, the instrument may have
become an insensitive measure of receptive vocabulary
growth for children in the present study who amassed
more than 250 words by the time of Session 12. Moreover, there was a clear ceiling effect in the size of
productive vocabulary for our most lexically advanced
children.
A second possibility is that the absence of a significant effect indicates a limitation in sample size. Insufficient power may have resulted from the small number of
children who participated in the study, thus obscuring
any real effect of word learning inside the laboratory
on vocabulary growth outside the laboratory. A third

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

possibility concerns the nature of the underlying mechanisms of lexical access in the emerging lexicon. In particular, it may be that the activation of a single set or
neighborhood of words is not sufficient to create acrossthe-board increases in the processing strength of items
belonging to other lexical neighborhoods. Instead, qualitative changes may be found only after both the size of
the lexicon and the number of different neighborhoods
reaches a critical mass. In this regard, the present results
are an important first step. The need for more research is
clearly indicated, specifically with respect to how vocabulary growth and the process of fast mapping relate to
word frequency and neighborhood density.

Clinical Implications
This research presents data that bear on the question
of how to regard children who have difficulty accessing
established words for expressive use. Such children are
often diagnosed as having word finding deficits and typically require some form of language intervention. In most
cases, children with word finding problems have difficulty
naming objects despite intact comprehension ( Dockrell,
Messer, & George, 2001). We have suggested that both
listening to words and producing words influence the lexical representations that children have previously stored
in memory. Although they differ in that listening entails
passive access, whereas speaking entails active retrieval,
both processes are mutually influencing: Practice that
strengthens the activation of units in one modality
strengthens the activation of units in the other modality.
In the interactive model of language that we have
proposed, lexical access is driven by both top-down and
bottom-up processes. In the former case, words are strengthened in production by activation that is summed across
multiple semantic connections. In the latter case, words are
strengthened in comprehension by multiple opportunities
to hear the sound and syllable structure of words. Both
processes should contribute to long-term changes in the
connection strength of pathways between the phonological and semantic levels.
We also have suggested that the number and density
of lexical neighborhoods should affect the ease and accuracy with which words are retrieved for naming. Several recent studies have shown that children with word
finding difficulties benefit from treatment at a variety of
ages, but no single semantic or phonological approach is
known to be effective for all children (McGregor, 1994; for
a discussion, see Best, 2005). This may be due, in part, to
the heterogeneous nature of the population identified
with word finding difficulties, but differences in treatment outcome are also likely to reflect changes in the size
and organization of the child's lexicon as it continually
develops.

If problems in accessing words stem from the strength
of semantic connections associated with neighborhood
density, then one might expect differences in successful
retrieval as a function of lexical category. Consistent with
this idea, Dockrell et al. (2001) found that 6- and 7-yearold children with word finding difficulties performed less
well than their age-matched peers on naming objects and
actions but did not differ significantly in naming letters
and numerals. These categories vary in semantic complexity, with actions and objects involving more complex
representations than letters and numbers. In addition,
Best (2005) noted that although there is a simple one-toone mapping between word and concept for letters and
numbers, there is a one-to-many mapping for objects and
actions. Thus, for example, features such as "furry,"
"four-legged," and "pet" will activate cat in addition to
dog. Dockrell et al. interpreted their findings as support
for the hypothesis that children with word finding difficulties have impoverished semantic representations
(see also McGregor et al., 2002). In the present theoretical framework, we find the results to be especially intriguing with regard to the unique properties associated
with (a) individual neighborhoods and their relation to
lexical frequency and (b) word retrieval. Future investigation is warranted.

Conclusion
As with many other acquisition tasks that adults and
children perform, the transition from novice to expert word
learner requires extensive practice. Word learning is more
than the simple acquisition of information in memory; it
also involves the fine-tuning of processes that enable increased accessibility to information (Rumelhart & Norman,
1978). One effect of these changes is to free children to focus
their efforts on other linguistic tasks, such as the emergence of grammar (Anisfeld, Rosenberg, Hoberman, &
Gasparini, 1998; Bates & Goodman, 1997) and the growth
of pragmatic understanding (Baldwin, 1991). In this sense,
the very activity of learning words may be the causal force
behind fast mapping and related developments in language.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant RO1-HD39424 from
the National Institutes of Health to the first author. Some data
were collected while both authors were at Carnegie Mellon
University. Portions of these data were presented at the April
2001 biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
We thank Rachel Whipple, Veronica Sansing, Audrey
Russo, and Kimberly Massengill for their help with data
collection. We are also grateful to Dana Courier, Elizabeth
Carafiol, and Lisa Cantrell for their coding assistance and to
the parents and children who participated in the study.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

693

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

References
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396-408.
Anisfeld, M., Rosenberg, E. S., Hoberman, M. J., &
Gasparini, D. (1998). Lexical acceleration coincides with the
onset of combinatorial speech. First Language, 18, 165-184.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 62, 875-890.
Baldwin, D. A. (1992). Clarifying the role of shape in children's taxonomic assumption. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 54, 392-416.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.

Dell, G. S. (1990). Effects of frequency and vocabulary type on
phonological speech errors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 5, 313-349.
Dockrell, J. E., Messer, D., & George, R. (2001). Patterns
of naming objects and actions in children with word
finding difficulties. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16,
261-286.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1985). Child meets word: "Fast mapping" in
preschool children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
28, 449-454.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1987). Fast mapping in normal and language impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 52, 218-222.
Dromi, E. (1987). Early lexical development. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Bates, E. (1993). Comprehension and production in early
language development. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 58, 222-242.

Elbers, L. (1985). A tip-of-the-tongue experience at age two?
Journal of Child Language, 12, 353-365.

Bates, E., Bretherton, I., & Synder, L. (1988). From first
words to grammar: Individual differences and dissociable
mechanisms. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Ellis Weismer, S. E., & Hesketh, L. J. (1996). Lexical
learning by children with SLI. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 39, 177-190.

Bates, E., & Goodman, J. C. (1997). On the inseparability
of grammar and the lexicon: Evidence from acquisition,
aphasia and real-time processing. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 12, 507-584.

Evey, J. A., & Merriman, W. E. (1998). The prevalence and
the weakness of an early name mapping preference. Journal
of Child Language, 25, 121-147.

Best, W. (2005). Investigation of a new intervention for
children with word-finding problems. International Journal
of Language and Communication Disorders, 40, 279-318.
Bloom, L. (1973). One word at a time: The use of single-word
utterances before syntax. The Hague, The Netherlands:
Mouton.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of words.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brown, R., & McNeill, D. (1966). The "tip of the tongue"
phenomenon. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 5, 325-337.

Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal,
D. J., & Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early communicative development. Monographs of the Society for Research
in Child Development, 59(Serial No. 242).
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E.,
Hartung, J., et al. (1993). MacArthur Communicative
Inventories: User's guide and technical manual. San Diego:
Singular Publishing Group.
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V. A. (2006). Picking
up speed in understanding: Speech processing efficiency and
vocabulary growth across the 2nd year. Developmental
Psychology, 42, 98-116.

Buchanan, L., Westbury, C., & Burgess, C. (2001). Characterizing semantic space: Neighborhood effects in word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 531-544.

Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., &
McRoberts, G. W. (1998). Rapid gains in speed of verbal
processing by infants in the second year. Psychological
Science, 9, 228-231.

Capone, N. C., & McGregor, K. K. (2005). The effect of semantic representation on toddlers' word retrieval. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48, 1468-1480.

Ganger, J., & Brent, M. R. (2004). Reexamining the
vocabulary spurt. Developmental Psychology, 40, 621-632.

Carey, S. (1987). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Gershkoff-Stowe, L. (2001). The course of children's naming
errors in early word learning. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 2, 131-155.

Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new word.
Papers and Reports in Child Language Development, 15,
17-29.
Chapman, R. S., Kay-Raining Bird, E., & Schwartz, S. E.
(1990). Fast mapping of words in event contexts by children
with Down syndrome. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 55, 761-770.
Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity neighborhoods of words in young children's lexicons. Journal of
Child Language, 17, 205-215.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms
for young children. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments
and Computers, 28, 125-127.
Dapretto, M., & Bjork, E. L. (2000). The development of
word retrieval abilities in the second year and its relation to
early vocabulary growth. Child Development, 71, 635-648.

694

Gershkoff-Stowe, L. (2002). Object naming, vocabulary
growth, and the development of word retrieval abilities.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 665-687.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L. (2007, June). Lexical road jams: Eliciting tip-of-the-tongue states in children. Poster presented at
the 28th annual Symposium on Research in Child Language
Disorders, Madison, WI.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., Connell, B., & Smith, L. (2006).
Priming overgeneralizations in 2- and 4-year-old children.
Journal of Child Language, 33, 1-26.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (1997). A curvilinear
trend in naming errors as a function of early vocabulary
growth. Cognitive Psychology, 34, 37-71.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred words. Child Development, 75, 1-17.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulations of vocabulary learning. Cognition, 73, 135-176.
Goldfield, B. A., & Reznick, J. S. (1990). Early lexical acquisition: Rate, content, and the vocabulary spurt. Journal of
Child Language, 17, 171-183.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bloom, L., Smith, L. B.,
Woodward, A. L., Akhtar, N., et al. (2000). Becoming a
word learner: A debate on lexical acquisition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21, 125-155.
Gray, S. (2003). Word-learning by preschoolers with specific
language impairment: What predicts success? Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 46, 56-67.
Harley, T. A., & Bown, H. E. (1998). What causes a tip-ofthe-tongue state? Evidence for lexical neighbourhood effects
in speech production. British Journal of Psychology, 89,
151-174.
Heibeck, T., & Markman, E. (1987). Word learning in children: An examination of fast mapping. Child Development,
58, 1021-1034.
Hollich, G. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist coalition
model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 65(Serial No. 262).
Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Harris, P. (2005). Wordlearning wizardry at 1;6. Journal of Child Language, 32,
175-189.
Kay-Raining Bird, E., & Chapman, R. S. (1998). Partial
representations and phonological selectivity in the comprehension of 13- to 16-month-olds. First Language, 18,
105-127.
Lederberg, A. R., Preszbindowski, A. K., & Spencer, P. E.
(2000). Word learning skills of deaf preschoolers: The development of novel mapping and rapid word learning strategies. Child Development, 71, 1571-1585.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lifter, K., & Bloom, L. (1989). Object knowledge and the
emergence of language. Infant Behavior and Development,
12, 395-423.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken words:
The neighborhood activation model. Ear and Hearing, 19,
1-36.
MacKay, D. G. (1987). Asymmetries in the relationship
between speech perception and production. In H. Heuer &
A. F. Sanders ( Eds.), Perspectives on perception and action
( pp. 301-333). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marchman, V. A., & Bates, E. (1994). Continuity in lexical
and morphological development: A test of the critical mass
hypothesis. Journal of Child Language, 21, 339-366.
Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (1997, February 27). Evidence
against a dedicated system for word learning in children.
Nature, 385, pp. 813-815.
McGregor, K. K. (1994). Use of phonological information in a
word-finding treatment for children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 37, 1381-1393.

McGregor, K. K., Newman, R. M., Reilly, R., & Capone,
N. C. (2002). Semantic representation and naming in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 998-1014.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the novel
name-nameless category (N3C) principle. Child Development, 65, 1646-1662.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1995). Acquisition of the novel
name-nameless category (N3C) principle by young children
who have Down syndrome. American Journal of Retardation, 100, 231-243.
Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1971). Facilitation in
recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence between
retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
90, 227-234.
Mills, D. L., Coffey-Corina, S., & Neville, H. J. (1997).
Language comprehension and cerebral specialization from
13 to 20 months. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13,
397-445.
Mills, D. L., Plunkett, K., Prat, C., & Schafer, G. (2005).
Watching the infant brain learn words: Effects of vocabulary
size and experience. Cognitive Development, 20, 19-31.
Mirman, D., & Magnuson, J. S. (2006). The impact of
semantic neighborhood density on semantic access. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Cognitive Science Society
Meeting ( pp. 1823-1828). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless spreading activation
and limited-capacity attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 106, 226-254.
Nelson, K., Hampson, J., & Shaw, L. K. (1993). Nouns in
early lexicons: Evidence, explanations and implications.
Journal of Child Language, 20, 61-84.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Pointer, L. (2003). Spreading activation or spooky action at a distance? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
29, 42-52.
Newell, A., & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1981). Mechanisms of skill
acquisition and the law of practice. In J. R. Anderson ( Ed.),
Cognitive skills and their acquisition ( pp. 1-55). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Newman, R. S., & German, D. J. (2002). Effects of lexical
factors on lexical access among typical language-learning
children and children with word-finding difficulties. Language and Speech, 45, 285-317.
Plaut, D. C., & Booth, J. R. (2000). Individual and developmental differences in semantic priming: Empirical and
computational support for a single-mechanism account of
lexical processing. Psychological Review, 107, 786-823.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to
system building: Acquiring verb morphology in children and
connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Reznick, J. S., & Goldfield, B. A. (1992). Rapid change in
lexical development in comprehension and production.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 406-413.
Rice, M. L., Buhr, J. C., & Oetting, J. B. (1992). Specificlanguage-impaired children's quick incidental learning of
words: The effect of a pause. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 35, 1040-1048.

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

695

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Rumelhart, D. E., & Norman, D. A. (1978). Accretion,
tuning, and restructuring: Three modes of learning. In J. W.
Cotton & R. L. Klatzky ( Eds.), Semantic factors in cognition
( pp. 37-53). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Stemberger, J. P., & MacWhinney, B. (1986). Frequency
and the lexical storage of regularly inflected forms. Memory
& Cognition, 14, 17-26.

Schafer, G., & Plunkett, K. (1998). Rapid word learning by
15-month-olds under tightly controlled conditions. Child
Development, 69, 309-320.

Stevens, T., & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1997). Word learning
in a special population: Do individuals with Williams
syndrome obey lexical constraints? Journal of Child
Language, 24, 737-765.

Schneider, W., & Chein, J. M. (2003). Controlled and
automatic processing: Behavior, theory, and biological
mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 27, 525-559.

Storkel, H. L. (2002). Restructuring of similarity neighbourhoods in the developing mental lexicon. Journal of Child
Language, 29, 251-274.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.

Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643-662.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition memory: REM--Retrieving effectively from memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Smith, L. B. (2000). Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane. In R. M. Golinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek,
L. Bloom, L. B. Smith, A. L. Woodward, N. Akhtar, et al.
( Eds.), Becoming a word learner: A debate on lexical
acquisition( pp. 51-80). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe,
L., & Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides
on-the-job training for attention. Psychological Science, 13,
13-19.

Tomasello, M., & Mervis, C. B. (1994). The instrument is
great, but measuring comprehension is still a problem.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59, 174-179.
Vitevitch, M. S., & Sommers, M. S. (2003). The facilitative
influence of phonological similarity and neighborhood frequency in speech production in younger and older adults.
Memory & Cognition, 31, 491-504.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., & Fitzsimmons, C. M.
(1994). Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 30, 553-566.
Received September 18, 2005
Revision received April 18, 2006

Stemberger, J. P. (1989). Speech errors in early child
language production. Journal of Memory and Language, 28,
164-188.

Accepted August 11, 2006

Stemberger, J. P. (2004). Neighborhood effects on error
rates in speech production. Brain and Language, 90,
413-422.

Contact author: Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe, Department of
Speech and Hearing Sciences, 200 South Jordan Avenue,
Bloomington, IN 47405. E-mail: gershkof@indiana.edu.

696

DOI: 10.1044 /1092-4388(2007/ 048)

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 50 * 682- 697 * June 2007

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix. List of training words in the experimental and control conditions.
Experimental condition
High practice
bagpipe
bat (mammal)
clamp
crystal
dolphin
globe
grater
mask
mushroom
squid
toucan
zipper

Medium practice
beaker
crab
drill
feather
tadpole
trumpet

Low practice
backhoe
cobra
crown
kettle
pod
snail

Control condition
apple
baby
bird
car
chair
dog
fish
house
jacket
mother
spoon
sun

Gershkoff-Stowe & Hahn: Fast Mapping Skills

697

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

