Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

The role of noncriterial recollection in estimating recollection
and familiarity q
Colleen M. Parks

*

Psychology Department, University of California Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA
Received 26 September 2005; revision received 6 March 2007
Available online 20 April 2007

Abstract
Noncriterial recollection (ncR) is recollection of details that are irrelevant to task demands. It has been shown to
elevate familiarity estimates and to be functionally equivalent to familiarity in the process dissociation procedure
[Yonelinas, A. P., & Jacoby, L. L. (1996). Noncriterial recollection: Familiarity as automatic, irrelevant recollection.
Consciousness and Cognition, 5, 131-141.]. However, Toth and Parks [Toth, J. P., & Parks, C. M. (2006). Effects of
age on estimated familiarity in the process-dissociation procedure: The role of noncriterial recollection. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 527-537.] found no ncR in older adults, and hypothesized that this absence was related to older adults'
criterial recollection deficit. To test this hypothesis, as well as whether ncR is functionally equivalent to familiarity and
increases the subjective experience of familiarity, remember-know and confidence-rating methods were used to estimate
recollection and familiarity with young adults, young adults in a divided-attention condition (Experiment 1), and older
adults. Supporting Toth and Parks' hypothesis, ncR was found in all groups, but was consistently larger for groups with
higher criterial recollection. Response distributions and receiver-operating characteristics revealed further similarities to
criterial recollection and suggested that neither the experience nor usefulness of familiarity was enhanced by ncR.
Overall, the results suggest that ncR does not differ fundamentally from criterial recollection.
 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Noncriterial recollection;
characteristic; Partial recollection

Recognition;

Recollection;

q
Thanks to Jeff Toth, Andy Yonelinas, Andy Smith, Christopher Hertzog, Randy Engle, and Paul Corballis for helpful
suggestions and comments on this research. This paper is based
on the author's dissertation research conducted at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, and was supported in part by a
predoctoral traineeship from the National Institute of Aging
(T32 AG0175). Parts of this research were presented at the 45th
annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Minneapolis, MN,
November 2005.
*
Fax: +1 530 752 2087.
E-mail address: cmparks@ucdavis.edu

Familiarity;

Aging; Remember-know; Receiver-operating

When trying to remember a specific detail about a
prior event, people sometimes recollect other, often irrelevant, details. Memory for these irrelevant details has
been dubbed ``noncriterial recollection'' (ncR); `recollection' because the memory is of episodic details and `noncriterial' because those details are not the criterial (or
target) detail that one is trying to remember (Yonelinas
& Jacoby, 1996). For instance, many students have had
the unfortunate experience of reading a test question
and realizing that they can remember the page in the
book where they read the answer, perhaps even the exact
location of that answer on the page (noncriterial details),

0749-596X/$ - see front matter  2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.03.003

82

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

but are unable to remember what that answer (the criterial detail) actually is. Thus, ncR can be viewed as the
somewhat common (and irritating) experience of
remembering information that is often useless for successfully completing the task at hand, such as answering
a test question correctly.

The process dissociation procedure and ncR
ncR is one of the lesser-known and more conceptual
aspects of the larger controversy that has surrounded the
process dissociation (PD) procedure (Jacoby, 1991,
1998). In fact, ncR has been defined and examined only
within the PD paradigm, perhaps because it presents a
potential problem for the procedure--specifically, that
ncR can be captured in familiarity estimates despite
the fact that it is memory of episodic details (e.g., Yonelinas & Jacoby, 1996). The possibility of ncR contributing to familiarity, rather than recollection, estimates
arises because of the way that recollection and familiarity are operationally defined in the PD procedure. In the
original version (Jacoby, 1991), subjects typically study
two lists of words, one incidentally with an orienting
task (list 1) and the other intentionally, with no orienting
task (list 2). There are two trial types on the subsequent
recognition test--inclusion and exclusion--that are used
to estimate recollection and familiarity for list-1 items.
On inclusion trials, both list-1 and list-2 words should
be accepted as old. On exclusion trials though, only
the intentionally studied list-2 items should be accepted
as old; list-1 items should be rejected. However, participants are likely to recognize some words from the study
phases without being able to remember list membership;
when this occurs, the items should be accepted as old.
On inclusion trials then, recollection and familiarity will
lead to the same response, a hit (p(``old''|list
1) = R + (1  R)F). However, on exclusion trials, the
two processes work in opposition, such that recollection
of an item from list-1 will result in a correct rejection,
but familiarity for a list-1 item, in the absence of recollection, will result in an exclusion error (p(``old''|list
1) = (1  R)F).
Thus, recollection is defined by the exclusion task,
and in this version of the procedure, it is specifically
defined as memory of list membership. Memory of other
details that do not specify list membership will not
``count'' as recollection. Ideally, participants can distinguish list-1 from list-2 items on the basis of the orienting
task paired with the first list--that is, the orienting task
serves to differentiate the lists from one another and
makes it easier to determine list membership. But participants may sometimes recollect other details, such as an
association or background noise, that are irrelevant to
determining list membership but that do indicate that
the item is old, and thus, the item would be accepted

regardless of inclusion/exclusion trial type. Assuming
that such instances occur equally often on inclusion
and exclusion trials, responses based on memory of such
noncriterial details will elevate familiarity estimates (i.e.,
both inclusion hits and exclusion errors will increase).
But given that those responses are based, at least in part,
on memory of an episodic detail, it seems that they
should be categorized as recollection. Thus, if ncR
contributes to performance on a PD recognition test,
estimates of familiarity may be overestimated, and
recollection underestimated.
Yonelinas and Jacoby (1996) tested this possibility in
an experiment where studied words varied along two
independent dimensions, location and size. Subjects
used a mnemonic to remember the words' locations (left
or right on a computer screen), and were led to believe
that font size (large or small) varied in order to manipulate readability (and could presumably be ignored).
On the following recognition test, participants were
divided into four groups corresponding to two definitions of recollection and two response speeds. Recollection was defined either as memory of location (the Easy
condition) or as memory of font size (the Hard condition), and half the participants in each of those groups
responded within 1.2 s (the Fast condition), or waited
at least 1.2 s to respond (the Slow condition). In the
Slow condition, recollection estimates were, unsurprisingly, greater for the Easy than for the Hard test (.50
and .18, respectively). More interesting though, was
the opposite pattern found for the familiarity estimates,
which were greater for the Hard than for the Easy test
(.67 and .56, respectively). Given that encoding conditions were constant across test groups, there is no obvious reason for the difference in familiarity--except ncR.
That is, participants did not recollect font size very well,
but they did recollect location, and it's reasonable to
assume that this was true for both test groups since they
had the same encoding experience. Thus, those in the
Hard condition often failed to remember font size, but
likely did remember location; memory of location indicated that the item had been studied, but was irrelevant
to the test question (font size). Because all recognized
items that were not specifically recollected were to be
accepted as old, memory of location (i.e., ncR) in the
Hard condition increased familiarity estimates. Similar
findings of the ncR effect--that is, greater familiarity
estimates in a Hard relative to an Easy condition--have
been reported by others as well (Gruppuso, Lindsay, &
Kelley, 1997; Mulligan & Hirshman, 1997), and these
results seem to indicate that familiarity is being overestimated in the Hard condition. However, the response
speed manipulation, which reduced criterial recollection
by more than half in the Fast condition (.24 and .04, on
the Easy and Hard tests, respectively), had no effect on
the pattern of familiarity estimates. Familiarity was still
elevated on the Hard test (.57 and .64 in the Easy and

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Hard Fast conditions, respectively). Therefore, although
ncR did elevate familiarity estimates, this pattern
remained invariant across a manipulation that successfully undermined criterial recollection. Had ncR been
operating in the same manner as criterial recollection,
it too should have been reduced in the Fast condition,
eliminating the elevation on the Hard test. Thus, Yonelinas and Jacoby argued that ncR may contribute to the
PD procedure's familiarity estimates under some conditions, but since it was functionally independent of criterial recollection and operated like familiarity (i.e., it was
relatively automatic), ncR could be treated as familiarity
without detriment to the process estimates.

Aging and ncR
The finding that ncR operates relatively automatically raises some paradoxical questions, especially with
respect to aging. There is a wealth of research demonstrating the relative preservation of automatic uses of
memory in older adults in the face of diminished recollection (Hay & Jacoby, 1999; Java, 1996; Jacoby, 1996,
1999; Jennings & Jacoby, 1993, 1997; Light & Singh,
1987; Mantyla, 1993; Parkin & Walter, 1992; but see
Light, Prull, La Voie, & Healy, 2000; Prull, Dawes,
Martin, Rosenberg, & Light, 2006). Thus, if there is in
fact a form of recollection that operates relatively automatically, should we expect it to decrease with age (given
clear indications that older adults have difficulty remembering episodic details), or should we expect it to remain
invariant with age (given that familiarity tends to be
preserved in older adults)?
Toth and Parks (2006) addressed this question by
examining whether older adults would show similar levels of ncR as young adults. They modified Yonelinas
and Jacoby's (1996) procedure, using location (Easy
condition) and font color (Hard condition) as the two
encoding dimensions, and eliminating the speededresponse manipulation. They replicated the ncR effect,
in the young adults, but there was no evidence of a significant ncR effect for the older adults. Toth and Parks
argued that the lack of an ncR effect in older adults
was due to low recollection of location. That is, young
adults were fairly successful at remembering location
when directly tested on it, with an average recollection
estimate of .32 in the Easy condition. However, recollection in the Easy condition was approximately half that
for the older group, .15. If ncR consisted of location
information, it is safe to say that the older adults had little of that information available, thus making it unlikely
that ncR could significantly elevate familiarity estimates
in the Hard condition. Toth and Parks argued that the
age differences in ncR were likely due to a proportional
relationship between ncR and criterial recollection. Specifically, they hypothesized that the ncR effect is propor-

83

tional to the level of (potential) recollection of the
noncriterial information, and thus, ncR should be found
in older adults when the noncriterial information is better encoded and is available to be recollected. Support
for this hypothesis would suggest that ncR is functionally more similar to criterial recollection than it is to
familiarity.

What is ncR?
The difficulty in determining just how problematic
ncR is to the PD procedure has been due in part to disagreements about what ncR is. That is, even if ncR is
functionally equivalent to familiarity, it's still not clear
whether ncR truly increases subjective feelings of familiarity, whether it is a unique process that requires its
own parameter estimate, or whether it is simply an artifact of the PD procedure. To date, there are two basic
positions that have been taken concerning this question,
with one in favor of ncR as a ``real'' phenomenon and
the other in favor of the idea that it's merely an artifact.
The first position, that ncR is real, has been advocated in different ways by Gruppuso et al. (1997), Toth
and Parks (2006), and Yonelinas and Jacoby (1996).
Gruppuso et al. argued that episodic information that
is ``too incomplete'' to allow the critical discrimination
to be made will increase the subjective experience of
familiarity. By this view, when a participant recalls a
noncriterial detail about a studied item (e.g., its location)
but cannot recall the criterial detail (e.g., its size), familiarity estimates are appropriately increased because
memory of location will increase the feeling of familiarity for the item (this is much like the student's situation,
in which remembering the page that the test answer is on
makes the answer feel all the more known, even if inaccessible). Yonelinas and Jacoby made a similar, but less
extreme, argument: ignoring the experiential effects of
ncR, they argued that ncR operates independently of
recollection and similarly to familiarity, and thus is best
treated as functionally equivalent to familiarity.
In contrast to these positions, Mulligan and Hirshman (1997) argued that ncR is a form of recollection
that should be measured as recollection and that its
contribution to PD familiarity estimates is a case of
contamination and mismeasurement--specifically an
overestimation of familiarity and a simultaneous underestimation of recollection. By this view, the elevation of
the familiarity estimates by ncR does not reflect a true
change in the experience of familiarity, but is due to
the use of the PD procedure in experimental settings
with which it is incompatible. Methodologically, this
argument treats ncR as an artifact of the PD procedure,
one that may invalidate the estimates it yields.
Theoretically, it suggests that the only real difference
between criterial recollection and ncR is the content of

84

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

the memory--that is, relevant or irrelevant content--
and that the functional characteristics of the two types
of recollection should be the same.
Toth and Parks (2006) advocated aspects of both of
the above arguments. Specifically, they argued that
although ncR may sometimes increase the subjective
experience of familiarity, it also appears to be conceptually distinct from traditional views of familiarity as an
undifferentiated feeling of oldness. On this view, ncR is
not an artifact of the PD procedure per se (i.e., it is a
phenomenon that occurs outside the laboratory), but
its measurement as undifferentiated familiarity is a
potential problem for accurately estimating familiarity.
It seems relatively clear that ncR is indeed ``real''--at
least in the sense that it occurs outside of experimental
contexts. However, it is still unclear whether ncR is better classified as recollection or familiarity and whether it
really increases the subjective experience of familiarity.
The present experiments were aimed at addressing these
issues by investigating the proportionality hypothesis
proposed by Toth and Parks (2006) and assessing
whether ncR operates in the same way as familiarity in
young and older adults. If the proportionality hypothesis holds, greater recollection of the noncriterial detail
(when directly tested) should be associated with a
greater ncR effect, for young and older adults alike. In
Experiment 1, this idea was tested by comparing the
ncR effect between young adults studying under full
attention, young adults studying under divided attention, and older adults studying under full attention. If
older adults' lack of the ncR effect in the Toth and Parks
study was due to insufficient information about the noncriterial detail, then dividing the attention of young
adults at study should produce results similar to those
of the older adults; that is, low recollection of the noncriterial detail and a reduced ncR effect relative to the
young full attention group. Experiment 2 provided
another test of the proportionality hypothesis, but
focused more on the effect of ncR on subjective experience and its functional properties.
Both experiments were similar in design to previous
ncR experiments--studied items varied along two dimensions, one of which was to be remembered and the other
mentioned to subjects only parenthetically. At encoding,
words spoken in either a male or female voice were presented over headphones to either the right or left ear.
These Voice and Location attributes varied independently
and participants were told to remember the speaker for
each word and were given mnemonics to do so. The
instructions noted that Location (i.e., presentation to
right or left ear) would vary, but did not indicate that it
should be remembered. Thus, Voice served as the Easy
dimension (due to the intentional instructions and use of
mnemonics) and Location as the Hard dimension.
At test, recollection was defined in terms of these
two dimensions. The Remember-Know (RK) method

(Tulving, 1985) was used in Experiment 1 and the definition of recollection was manipulated within-subjects, creating three tests: Broad, Easy, and Hard. In the Broad
condition, recollection was defined as the ability to
remember any episodic detail of the studied words (i.e.,
the definition used in RK experiments; see Gardiner &
Richardson-Klavehn, 2000 for a review). Recollection
was defined as the ability to remember Voice in the Easy
condition, and as the ability to remember Location in
the Hard condition. To date, only Easy and Hard conditions have been examined, but if ncR is created by specific
definitions of recollection, then it should also be found in
the Easy condition (relative to the Broad condition) since
it too restricts successful recollection to memory of one
detail, and will not capture all possible recollection. In
Experiment 2, only the Broad and Hard conditions were
tested, and confidence ratings were collected in order to
construct receiver operating characteristics and to generate recollection and familiarity estimates with the dual
process signal detection model (Yonelinas, 1994). This
design afforded a test of the ncR effect with a different
model than that used in Experiment 1, as well a detailed
examination of the response distributions and receiver
operating characteristics. If ncR increases the subjective
experience of familiarity, it should be evident in the confidence distributions and the estimates generated from
them, and if it is functionally equivalent to familiarity, it
should be evident in the receiver operating characteristics.

Experiment 1
The RK method was used in Experiment 1 to obtain
estimates of recollection and familiarity under Broad,
Easy, and Hard test conditions with the expectation that
ncR would elevate familiarity estimates in both the Easy
and Hard conditions relative to the Broad condition.
Young and older adults were tested, with one group of
young adults studying under divided attention. On the
basis of the proportionality hypothesis, the young divided
attention group was expected to perform on par with the
older group, such that recollection would be lower than in
the young full attention group, and any ncR effect that
might be found would be smaller than that observed for
the young full attention group. The proportionality
hypothesis would be contradicted if, despite lowered criterial recollection estimates, either the young divided attention group or the older group had an ncR effect
comparable to the young full attention group.
Method
Participants
Two hundred nine participants were tested in total,
with data from 54 young adults in the full attention
condition, data from 54 young adults in the divided

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

attention condition, and data from 54 older adults (full
attention) submitted to the analyses (a total of 162
participants). Data inclusion criteria were very conservative; participants had to meet a minimum performance requirement on a manipulation check (see
Results for details), and in the divided attention condition, a minimum performance requirement on the
divided attention task. Additionally, participants with
very high false alarm rates were excluded from the
formal analyses in an attempt to equate false alarm rates
across the three groups. Details on exclusion criteria
and numbers of participants' data set aside are presented in Results.
Older adults (mean age = 71.6, SD = 4.5) were from
Atlanta and the surrounding communities and were paid
$10 an hour for their participation. Young adults (mean
age = 19.5, SD = 1.2) were Georgia Tech undergraduates enrolled in a psychology course who received extra
credit in return for their participation. As expected,
older adults performed better on the Shipley vocabulary
test (Shipley, 1985) than did young adults (young
mean = 30.6, SD = 2.9; old mean = 34.4, SD = 3.4;
t(160) = 7.57, p < .001, d = 2.32), and had completed
approximately one and a half more years of education
on average than young adults (young mean =
13.5, SD = 1.2, old mean = 14.9, SD = 2.3, t
(68.345) = 4.36, p < .001, d = .872).
Design and materials
Experiment 1 was designed as a 3 (age-attention
group) * 3 (test condition) mixed factorial, with ageattention group as a between-subjects factor and test
condition as a within-subjects factor.
Nine lists of 12 words, of relatively low frequency
(10-15 occurrences per million) and five to eight letters
long, were constructed from the Kucera and Francis
(1967) compilation. In any given condition, six of the
nine lists (72 words) were studied and the last three
(36 words) were new words at test. One third of the
words were assigned to each test condition (Broad, Easy,
and Hard) such that each test included 24 old and 12
new words. Within each of those tests, half the old
words were assigned to the male voice and half to the
female voice. Additionally, half of the words in each
of the male and female voices were presented to the right
ear and half to the left ear (6 right male, 6 left male, 6
right female, 6 left female, 12 new per test). Across participants, these lists rotated through the Old/New,
Broad/Easy/Hard, Male/Female, and Right Ear/Left
Ear conditions such that each word appeared in each
of the conditions equally often, resulting in 18 counterbalance conditions per age-attention group. Studied
and tested words were presented in a newly randomized
order for each participant, with the exception of 4 primacy and 4 recency buffers that were presented in the
same order for all participants.

85

To account for possible order effects three different
orders were used (1. Broad, Easy, Hard; 2. Easy, Hard,
Broad; 3. Hard, Broad, Easy). These orders were randomly assigned to participants in each of the counterbalance conditions described above, such that 18
participants in each age-attention group were assigned
to each order. No effects of order were found to be
reliable.
Procedure
The experimental materials and tests were presented
to participants aurally (study) and on computer screens
(test), and were controlled by the E-prime 1.0 program.
Participants were primarily tested in groups of two to
four, although some were tested individually.
Study. Participants studied 72 target words that were
presented over headphones at a rate of 1 every 3 s. Half
the words were spoken in a male voice and half in a
female voice. In addition, half the words were presented
to the right ear and half to the left. Participants were
instructed to remember the words and whether they
were spoken by the man or the woman. Pilot testing
showed that mnemonics were necessary in order to reach
desirable levels of recollection of Voice, and therefore
two mnemonic strategies were provided. One strategy
was to think about either the masculine or feminine
aspects of a word, depending on the speaker. The second
was to associate each word to a woman or man the participant knew, depending on the speaker. Participants
were strongly encouraged to use either or both strategies
to improve memory of Voice. Instructions presented on
the computer screen noted parenthetically that the
words would also be presented to different ears; however
the experimenter did not mention this dimension in verbal instructions unless specifically asked about it. (In
such cases, the experimenter simply noted that the most
important aspect to remember was who said each word.)
The computer presented a blank black screen for the
duration of the study phase.
Young adults in the divided attention condition were
given the same instructions as above; however, the
experimenter noted that the use mnemonics might be
difficult with a secondary task, but that if possible, they
should be used. The secondary task was a visual version
of the odd-digits task (Craik, 1982) presented on a second computer screen, and consisted of presenting single
digits between 1 and 9 every 900 ms (800 ms digit duration plus 100 ms ISI). Participants' task was to monitor
these digits for a series of three odd numbers in a row
and to press the spacebar when they detected a series
of three before the third digit disappeared from the
screen. Feedback was given for both commission and
omission errors visually; the word ``Error'' was
presented centrally in red for 500 ms after each error.
Participants were instructed to aim for 85-90% accuracy

86

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

on the digit-monitoring task and were given a short
practice session with the digit task alone prior to beginning the study session.
Test. All participants were given a Broad, Easy, and
Hard recognition test. In each of the test conditions,
participants classified the state of their memory for
each test item using Recollect, Familiar, or New
response options. In the Broad condition, instructions
followed typical RK instructions (Gardiner, 1988;
Gardiner, Ramponi, & Richardson-Klavehn, 1998;
Gardiner & Richardson-Klavehn, 2000). Specifically,
Recollect was defined as the ability to remember
clearly any episodic detail about the word, including,
but not limited to, the gender of the speaker or the
ear to which it was presented. Familiar was defined
as a feeling of familiarity for the word, or recognizing
the word from the earlier list without being able to
remember any specific details, and New was defined
as a state of no memory of the word from the study
list.
Instructions in the Easy and Hard conditions were
similar, but specific to the attribute being tested, such
that Recollect was defined as memory of Voice or
Location, respectively. In the Easy condition, participants responded Recollect only if they could specifically remember who said the word (i.e., the man or
woman), Familiar if they recognized the word but
could not recollect who said it, and New if they
did not remember the word. Likewise, in the Hard
condition, Recollect was defined as the ability to specifically remember which ear the word was presented
to, and Familiar as recognition of the word without
being able to remember the ear to which the word
was presented.
In all conditions, participants read instructions presented on-screen and were given the opportunity to
ask questions. The experimenter answered any questions, reiterated the critical aspects of the instructions,
went over examples of correct uses of the response
options, and discouraged guessing by stressing that it
was just as important to identify new words as New as
it was to classify old words as Recollect or Familiar.
Throughout each test, the response options were presented at the bottom of the screen in colors that corresponded to colored keys used for each response. Test
words were presented centrally in 16-point white font
on a black background. Participants completed each test
at their own pace.
A manipulation check was conducted after the last
test to determine participants' ability to (a) correctly
identify relatively low-frequency words spoken out
of context, (b) identify the ear to which a word
was presented, and (c) to distinguish between
the male and female voices. The purpose of this
manipulation check was to ensure that young and

older adults were able to hear the words and distinguish between the Voices and Locations equally well.
This task consisted of the presentation of 24 new
words with frequencies similar to those used in the
memory tests; Voice and Location attributes were
manipulated independently such that half the words
were assigned to each Voice and each Location.
These words were presented at a 12-s rate and participants wrote the word, indicated which ear it was
presented to, and whether it was in the male or
female voice. Participants were instructed to guess
the word if they were not sure what was said.
Finally, the Shipley vocabulary test (Shipley, 1985)
was administered before participants were debriefed.
Results
The means for Recollect, Familiar, and New
responses are presented in Table 1. Recollection was
estimated as the proportion of Recollect responses
whereas familiarity was estimated according to the independence assumption (F = Familiar/(1  Recollect);
Yonelinas & Jacoby, 1995). Alpha was set at .05 unless
otherwise noted, and the basic analysis for all estimates
was a 3 (age-attention group) * 3 (test condition) mixeddesign ANOVA, with test condition as the within-subjects factor, although specific contrasts comparing the
size of the difference between test conditions for the different participant groups served as the main focus. In
some cases, degrees of freedom were adjusted to deal
with violations of the assumption of homogeneity of
variance, resulting in degrees of freedom with decimal
places. Effect sizes, d (for t-tests) and f (for ANOVA
main effects and interactions) are reported for significant
results (Cohen, 1988; Dodd & Schultz, 1973). The results
are organized by memory process; first, however, I
address exclusion criteria and the manipulation check
results.
Exclusion criteria
Participants' data were excluded from the formal
analyses for three reasons: they did not meet the criterion on the manipulation check (i.e., correctly identifying at least 21 out of 24 words), they had high false
alarm rates, and/or they had high false recollection
rates. Participants' data were excluded on the basis of
high false alarm and false recollection rates as a means
of trying to equate baselines between the three groups.
High false alarm rates were defined as familiarity estimates of .50 or greater for new items on any of the three
tests. A .50 or greater estimate of familiarity for new
items indicates that a participant responded Familiar
to half the new words (or more) to which they had not
responded Recollect. Data from three young full attention subjects, 11 young divided attention subjects, and
11 older adults were excluded on the basis of high false

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

87

Table 1
Experiment 1 response and estimate means as a function of item status (old or new), age-attention group, and test condition
Old items

New items

R

Corr. R

F

N

IRK F

Corr. F

R

F

N

YA-FA
Broad
Easy
Hard

IRK F

0.58
0.49
0.17

0.57
0.48
0.17

0.22
0.27
0.58

0.20
0.22
0.25

0.54
0.53
0.71

0.43
0.43
0.62

0.01
0.01
0.00

0.11
0.10
0.09

0.88
0.88
0.91

0.11
0.11
0.09

YA-DA
Broad
Easy
Hard

0.31
0.27
0.10

0.28
0.25
0.09

0.30
0.32
0.46

0.39
0.41
0.44

0.46
0.44
0.52

0.30
0.29
0.39

0.03
0.01
0.01

0.16
0.15
0.12

0.81
0.84
0.87

0.16
0.15
0.12

OA
Broad
Easy
Hard

0.39
0.35
0.19

0.33
0.31
0.17

0.28
0.29
0.46

0.33
0.36
0.35

0.46
0.44
0.55

0.33
0.30
0.42

0.06
0.05
0.02

0.12
0.13
0.13

0.80
0.83
0.85

0.13
0.13
0.13

Note: R, recollect responses; F, familiar responses; N, new responses; IRK F, familiarity estimates; Corr. R, R responses to old items
minus R responses to new items; and Corr. F, IRK F estimates for old items minus IRK F estimates for new items.

alarm rates.1 High false recollection was similarly
defined as falsely recollecting half or more of the new
items on any of the tests,2 and data from two older
adults were excluded on this basis. Finally, an 80%-correct criterion was established for performance on the
divided attention task, which only one participant failed
to meet (mean performance was 95% correct). The
formal analyses excluded data that did not meet these
criteria; however, analyses including these data from
high-baseline participants showed the same effects as
those presented below, with one exception described in
Footnote 3.
Manipulation check
For purposes of evaluating performance on the
manipulation check, the attention variable was collapsed
1

In the young full attention group, 2 subjects were excluded
for high baselines only on the Hard test, and the third was
excluded for high baselines only on the Broad test. In the young
divided attention group, the breakdown was as follows: 2
subjects excluded due to performance on all three tests, 1
subject excluded for high baselines on two of the three tests, 4
were excluded for high baselines on the Easy test alone, and 1
for high baselines on the Hard test only. In the older adult
group: 3 subjects were excluded for high baselines on all three
tests, 3 were excluded for high baselines on two of the three
tests, 3 were excluded for high baselines only on the Easy test,
and 2 were excluded for high baselines only on the Hard test.
2
This is a rather lax criterion--the mean false recollection
rate in Dunn (2004) database of 400 RK studies is 5% with a
standard deviation of 4%. Thus, the majority of rememberknow studies find false recollection below 10%. However, for
the current study, this criterion served to exclude participants
with extreme false recollection rates and to include very few
participants with false recollection rates between 10 and 50%.

in order to directly compare young and older
adults. Despite the exclusion criteria, differences
remained between the two age groups for the number
of words correctly identified (t(72.39) = 5.64,
p < .001, d = 1.10), with young outperforming older
adults (means = 23.4 and 22.4, respectively). The mean
difference between the age groups was less than one
word, and thus it is unlikely that this difference would
provide much in the way of explanation of the agerelated differences reported below. No significant differences were found between age groups for identification
of Location (t(158) = .71, p = .48) or Voice
(t(53.21) = 1.28, p = .21).
Recollection
Despite the exclusion of data from participants with
high false recollection rates, analysis of false recollection
revealed significant main effects of test condition
(F(2, 318) = 8.35, MSE = .002, p < .001, f = .14),
and age-attention group (F(2, 159) = 12.62, MSE =
.06, p < . 001, f = .26), and a marginally reliable interaction between the factors (F(4, 318) = 2.26, MSE = .06,
p < .07). Post hoc tests revealed that false recollection,
though low across conditions, was higher in the older
than the young adults (older = .042, young divided
attention = .018, young full attention = .006, Tukey's
HSD p < .004 for both tests), and higher on the Broad
test than the Hard test (Broad = .031, Easy = .024,
Hard = .011, alpha adjusted to .025, F(1, 159) = 19.36,
MSE = .07, p < .001). Due to these differences, recollection estimates were corrected by subtracting false recollection from true recollection for each participant on
each test. However, analyses of corrected recollection,
reported next, resulted in the same conclusions as
analyses of uncorrected recollection responses.

88

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Corrected recollection estimates are presented in the
top panel of Fig. 1. As is evident in Fig. 1, both
main effects of test condition (F(2, 318) = 139.11,
MSE = .02, p < .001, f = .54) and age-attention group
(F(2, 159) = 27.78, MSE = .02, p < .001, f = .20) were
significant, as was the interaction between those factors
(F(4, 318) = 11.49, MSE = .02, p < .001, f = .19). Specific
contrasts showed that the average of the Broad and Easy
conditions resulted in greater recollection than did the
Hard condition (F(1, 159) = 238.73, MSE = .14,
p < .001), and that the young divided attention and older
groups had significantly lower recollection estimates than
the young full attention group (F(1, 159) = 50.42,
MSE = .06, p < .001). A post hoc contrast showed that
the difference between Broad and Easy conditions and
the Hard condition was greater for the young full attention group than it was for the other two groups
(F(1, 159) = 33.059, MSE = .14, p < .001). The pattern
of means also suggested that the Broad and Easy conditions were similar for the older and young divided attention groups, but that there may have been a difference
between the two conditions for the young full attention
group; however, this trend was only marginally reliable
(F(1, 159) = 3.30, MSE = .04, p = .071).
Overall, these analyses demonstrated the expected
effects: the difference between the Broad and Easy conditions and the Hard condition was greater for the young

full attention group than for the other two groups.
Importantly, the lack of a difference between the young
divided attention and older groups indicates that the
divided attention manipulation was successful in reducing the amount of information available about the criterial and noncriterial details, and therefore the
proportionality hypothesis can be tested by examining
the familiarity estimates. However, because there were
no significant differences between the Broad and Easy
conditions, contrasts testing the ncR effect in the familiarity estimates, below, focused on differences between
the average of those two tests and the Hard test.
Familiarity
Because familiarity estimates for new words differed
as a function of test condition (F(2, 318) = 3.21,
MSE = .008, p < .05, f = .04), analyses of the estimates
corrected for baseline (familiarity estimates for new
items subtracted from estimates for old items) are
reported, although the patterns were the same for analyses of uncorrected estimates. The raw familiarity
responses were also analyzed, and also produced the
same results as those reported here for the familiarity
estimates, with two exceptions, noted below.
Analyses of corrected familiarity estimates (bottom
panel, Fig. 1) revealed main effects of test condition
(F(2, 318) = 31.54, MSE = .03, p < .001, f = .29), and
age-attention group (F(2, 159) = 24.24, MSE = .05,
p < .001, f = .35); however, the interaction between
these factors was not significant (F(4, 318) = 1.76,
MSE = .03, p < .15).3 Tukey's HSD tests on the ageattention effect showed that the familiarity estimates
were higher for the young full attention group than for
the other two groups (both p's < .001).
The question of primary interest concerned whether
the ncR effect was greater in the young full attention
group than in the other two groups. A planned contrast,
conducted to compare the size of the increase from the
Broad and Easy to the Hard test across groups, supported the proportionality hypothesis. Specifically, the
difference between the Broad and Easy conditions and
the Hard condition was greater for the young full attention group than it was for the other two groups
(F(1, 159) = 6.353, MSE = .17, p < .02). This critical
finding was due to a true difference in the size of the
ncR effect between the different groups, rather than to
the absence of the ncR effect in the young divided attention and older adult groups: Analyses including only
3

Fig. 1. Corrected recollection and familiarity estimates as a
function of age-attention group and test condition. Note. YA,
young adult full attention; YA-DA, young adult divided
attention; OA, older adult. Error bars represent standard error
of the means.

Interestingly, when participants with high false alarm rates
were included in the analysis, the overall interaction was
significant for the corrected IRK Familiarity estimates (f = .25),
indicating that the lack of a reliable interaction without those
participants is likely due to a lack of power. This interaction
was also significant for the raw familiarity responses
(F(4, 318) = 9.988, MSE = .02, p < .001, f = .20).

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

these two groups showed that familiarity estimates were
approximately equivalent in the two groups (F < 1), but
differed across tests (F(1, 212) = 13.15, MSE = .03,
p < .001, f = .22; interaction F < 1), with greater familiarity estimates in the Hard than in the Broad and Easy
conditions (F(1, 106) = 25.68, MSE = .17, p < .001).
In sum, ncR elevated familiarity estimates of all three
participant groups in the Hard condition. However, the
critical finding was that the ncR effect was significantly
reduced in the young divided attention and older
groups--an effect that mirrors the reduction of recollection in those groups and supports the proportionality
hypothesis.
Discussion
The primary goal of Experiment 1 was to test the
hypothesis that ncR is proportional to recollection of
the noncriterial detail when it is specifically tested; if supported, older adults and young adults under divided
attention would show the ncR effect, but to a lesser degree
than young adults studying under full attention. Indeed,
the familiarity estimates were clearly elevated by ncR in
both the young divided attention and older groups, but
in line with the proportionality hypothesis, the ncR effect
was larger in the young full attention group. Given the
lack of a difference between the Broad and Easy conditions, it is not possible to support the strongest version
of that hypothesis, namely that the effect of ncR on familiarity estimates is directly proportional to the level of recollection for the noncriterial detail. Nonetheless, the
contrast of age-attention groups and test conditions indicates that undermining recollection, whether due to aging
or divided attention, also reduces the ncR elevation of
familiarity. The reduction in the ncR effect can be traced
to the fact that the young divided attention and older
groups recollected less information in the Broad and Easy
conditions than did the young full attention group. Therefore, there appears to be some degree of dependency
between the two processes; the elevation of familiarity
by ncR is, at least in part, reliant on the ability to recollect
the noncriterial information when it is directly tested (i.e.,
when it is criterial).
The purpose of including both the Broad and Easy
conditions was to include a more fine-grained manipulation of the difficulty of recollection than examined so far
in ncR studies, and to allow an evaluation of the ncR
effect when recollection is defined in a relatively easy
way. The fact that there was no reliable difference
between the Broad and Easy tests indicates that when
participants focus on a particular attribute at study (at
least when they are given effective strategies), they are
more likely to remember that attribute than anything
else, as one might hope. Allowing participants to
remember any detail in the Broad condition did not
increase recollection estimates, presumably because the

89

detail(s) they remembered concerned Voice and/or the
strategies they used to remember Voice. One possible
exception was the trend towards greater recollection
on the Broad than the Easy test for the young full attention group. Although only marginally reliable in the current study, there are likely to be conditions in which
people study one detail and later remember others that
would be captured in broadly, but not specifically,
defined recollection estimates.
A final result of interest was the decrease in familiarity estimates for the young divided attention and older
groups as compared to the young full attention group.
Divided attention manipulations typically reduce familiarity, though to a much smaller extent than they reduce
recollection, and thus the attention-related familiarity
decrease found in the current study is consistent with
past research (e.g., Gruppuso et al., 1997; Jacoby & Kelley, 1992; Gardiner & Parkin, 1990; Yonelinas, 2001; see
Yonelinas, 2002 for a review). In contrast, familiarity
estimates yielded by the PD procedure are typically
invariant across age groups, although recent research
has suggested that there may be small familiarity deficits
in older adults (e.g., Light et al., 2000; Prull et al., 2006).
Although consistent with those recent findings, some
caution is warranted before concluding that the agerelated familiarity differences in the current experiment
reflect a true familiarity deficit in the older adults. That
is, the familiarity differences between the age-attention
groups were relatively small in the Broad and Easy conditions and larger in the Hard condition. Indeed, a comparison of the top and bottom panels of Fig. 1 suggests
that the age-attention effect on recollection in the Broad
and Easy conditions was forced into the familiarity estimates in the Hard condition, where ncR was inflating
the estimates. In fact, follow-up tests showed that the
differences in familiarity estimates in the Broad condition were actually driven by differences between young
adults in the two attention conditions (p < .004), with
the difference between the older and young full attention
groups being unreliable by post hoc standards and only
marginally reliable by typical standards (p = .062). This
apparent shift of age-attention effects between recollection and familiarity estimates renders the age- and attention-related reduction in familiarity somewhat suspect.
Specifically, the age-related differences in familiarity
seem likely to have been due to ncR. However, it may
still be the case that the elevation of familiarity estimates
by ncR reflects true increases in the subjective experience
(and effectiveness) of familiarity, and thus that the agerelated differences reflect real differences in familiarity.
That is, it could be argued that the ncR effect should
not be the same size across groups because sub-optimal
encoding of the noncriterial detail in the young divided
attention and older groups would lead to decreased
experiences of familiarity for the items. Experiment 2
addressed this issue.

90

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 had three main purposes: to test the
findings of Experiment 1 using a different model and
method of generating process estimates, to test whether
ncR is functionally equivalent to familiarity, and to test
whether ncR increases the subjective experience of familiarity. To these ends, the dual process signal detection
(DPSD) model (Yonelinas, 1994) was used to estimate
recollection and familiarity, the functional equivalence
of ncR to familiarity was examined using receiver operating characteristic analyses, and the distributions of
responses across confidence ratings were plotted to
assess the question of subjective experience. To accommodate the methods necessary to use the DPSD model,
the attention manipulation and the Easy test were eliminated, the Broad and Hard test conditions were manipulated between-subjects, and the response options were
changed to include a six-point confidence scale and a
Recollect response.
Recollection and familiarity estimates are generated
with the DPSD model by fitting receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) constructed from confidence ratings
(for a complete description of the model see, e.g., Yonelinas, 1994, 2001). ROCs are created by cumulatively
plotting recognition performance (hits versus false
alarms) as a function of confidence levels (i.e., criterion),
such that the left-most point on the curve includes only
the most confident hits and false alarms, the second
point includes those responses along with the second
most confident responses, and so on for n  1 of the
points on an n-point response scale (see Fig. 2). The
DPSD model uses a modified form of the equations of
the PD model that incorporates response criteria to produce estimates of recollection (in probabilities) and
familiarity (in terms of d 0 ) by fitting the model's parameters to the ROC data for each subject.

Fig. 2. Example of a typical recognition ROC curve. Note. R,
the Recollect response, and the numbers represent confidence
ratings with 6 being the most confident that an item is old.

The Broad and Hard tests were defined in the same way
as in Experiment 1: recollection on the Broad test was
defined as the ability to remember any specific detail of a
word's prior presentation and recollection on the Hard test
was defined as memory of Location. If participants could
recollect according to the given definition, they chose the
Recollect response, but if not, they rated their confidence
in recognizing the word on a six-point scale. Thus, there
were a total of seven response options: Sure New 1 2 3 4
5 6 Sure Old Recollect, with ``Sure New'' and ``Sure
Old'' describing the 1 and 6 responses, respectively.
To address the question of whether ncR increases the
subjective experience of familiarity, response distributions were plotted for the two test conditions for the
young and older groups. If ncR increases the subjective
experience of familiarity, then it should be the case that
the non-recollect old responses (responses 4, 5, and 6)
should increase in the Hard, relative to the Broad, condition. That is, an increase in the subjective experience of
familiarity should affect at least the accurate non-recollect old responses. Alternatively, the ncR effect may be
due to a simple shift in responses created by task
demands, such that those items that are recollected by
the Broad definition are forced into another category
by the Hard definition (e.g., the 6, Sure Old, response).
If this occurs, then there should be an obvious shift
between many Recollect responses in the Broad condition to many 6 responses in the Hard condition, with
few other changes.
A quantitative evaluation of these patterns involves
comparing process estimates generated from the
response distributions in two ways. In the first method
(the full scale in Results), the Recollect response was
treated as the highest level of confidence and the process
estimates were expected to replicate the findings of
Experiment 1--greater ncR for young compared to
older adults. In the second method (the truncated scale
in Results), the Recollect response was collapsed
together with the 6 responses. The ncR effect should
be found in familiarity estimates generated from this
truncated scale if there was an increase in all the accurate non-recollect old responses in the Hard condition.
Alternatively, if the effect of the Hard test is simply to
shift responses, without affecting overall levels of recollection and familiarity, then collapsing the Recollect
and 6 responses would create response distributions that
look very similar in the two test conditions, and therefore no ncR effect should be found in the process
estimates.
Evaluating process estimates and response distributions addresses the question of subjective experience,
but does not directly address the question of whether
ncR operates in the same way as familiarity or as recollection--to do this, the ROCs were examined. Recognition ROCs are usually curvilinear functions that are
almost always asymmetrical, and the direction of that

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

asymmetry (the ROC appears pushed up on the left side,
as in Fig. 2) indicates that the memory strength of old
items varies more than that of the new items. The DPSD
model explains the increased variance of old items by
assuming that recognition performance involves two
processes--recollection, a probabilistic process, and
familiarity, an equal-variance signal detection process
(Yonelinas, 1994, 2001). The model predicts that familiarity by itself will produce symmetrical ROCs and that
it is recollection, which leads to high-confidence
responses relative to familiarity, that increases the variance of the old items and makes the ROCs asymmetrical. Therefore, recollection is related to ROC
asymmetry in the DPSD model, and it predicts that conditions and groups that differ in recollection will also differ in asymmetry, with greater levels of recollection
resulting in greater degrees of asymmetry (depending
on the contribution of familiarity). Thus, assessing the
symmetry of the recognition ROCs provides a means
of testing whether ncR is functionally equivalent to
familiarity. To the extent that overall recollection is
the same in the Broad and Hard test conditions, asymmetry of the ROCs should be approximately equal,
given that participants study the same materials with
the same mnemonics. However, if the processing characteristics of ncR are similar to familiarity--for example, if
it is well described by an equal-variance signal detection
model--then asymmetry should differ between conditions, with less asymmetry in the Hard condition where
criterial recollection would be low and ncR would be relatively high.
Method
Participants
One hundred sixty-five participants were tested in
total, with data from 72 young adults (mean
age = 20.0, SD = 1.4) and from 72 older adults (mean
age = 70.6, SD = 4.6) submitted to the primary analyses. Data from one young and eight older adults were
excluded due to high false alarms; however, analyses
including data from participants with high baselines
showed the same effects as those presented below.4 Data
from 12 older adults were excluded due to below-criterion performance on the manipulation check.
As expected, older adults completed approximately
one more year of education than had the young adults
(young mean = 14.0, SD = 1.5; old mean = 15.3,
SD = 2.4, t(116.41) = 3.71, p < .001, d = .61), and
out-performed young adults on the Shipley Vocabulary

4

The one young adult was excluded from the Hard condition.
Six of the excluded older adults were from the Hard condition,
and two were from the Broad condition.

91

test (young mean = 31.1, SD = 2.8; old mean = 34.7,
SD = 3.2; t(142) = 7.14, p < .001, d = 1.18).
Design and materials
Experiment 2 was designed as a 2 (age group) * 2
(test condition) factorial with test condition as a
between-subjects factor.
Because many trials are required to obtain reliable
estimates for ROC curves, the experiment was broken
down into two study-test blocks. A total of 240 target
items of low frequency (5-15 occurrences per million),
ranging from five to eight letters in length were selected.
A single block consisted of 80 study words, followed by
a test of those and an additional 40 new words. For
study items, half the words were presented in a male
voice and half in a female voice. Also, half of the words
in each voice were presented to the right ear, and half to
the left ear. Items were rotated through the experimental
conditions (Voice, Location, and Block) for each age
and test condition group, such that each word appeared
in each condition equally often. Item order at study and
test was randomized for each participant, with the
exception of three primacy and three recency buffers
for each study phase.
Procedure
Study. Words were presented over headphones in a
male or female voice to the right or left ear. All participants were instructed to remember the words and
whether they were spoken by a man or a woman. To
ensure use of the mnemonics, participants were (misleadingly) told that the purpose of the experiment was
to examine the effects of a type of mnemonic on memory, and that it was therefore very important that they
use one of two possible strategies (the same as those used
in Experiment 1). Words were presented at a 3.5-s rate
with a 1-s ISI and the computer displayed a black screen
during study.
Instructions for the second study session emphasized
the necessity of participants' compliance with the
instructions. That is, given that Voice was not directly
tested in either condition, participants were told that
despite the temptation to ignore Voice (and in the Hard
condition, to study Location), it was essential that they
continue to use the strategies for remembering Voice
that they used before, and that if they did not, their data
would be unusable. This instructional strategy was effective; no participants' data indicated that they ignored
Voice and studied other attributes, which was particularly important in the Hard condition.
Test. After each study phase, participants were administered a visual recognition test presented on a computer
screen. For both the Broad and Hard tests, participants
reported whether they recollected the item, or if they did
not recollect the item, they made a confidence rating on

92

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

a six-point scale. As in Experiment 1, Recollect in the
Broad condition was defined as memory of any detail
of the word's presentation during study, including, but
not limited to, who said the word or the ear to which
a word was presented. In the Hard condition, Recollect
was defined as a memory of the ear to which the word
was presented. If unable to recollect according to the
definition, participants used the six-point scale to rate
their confidence that the word had been studied or
not. These response options were presented at the bottom of the screen throughout the test, with the Recollect
option presented at the right end of the scale. Numbers
1, 3, 4, and 6 were labeled as Sure New, Unsure New,
Unsure Old and Sure Old, respectively. Participants
used the number keys on the keyboard to enter
responses and the number eight was color-coded as the
Recollect response. The tests were self-paced and the
two study-test blocks typically took young adults
45 min to complete, and took older adults 50-60 min.
Following the last test, a manipulation check was
conducted. This task was the same as that used in Experiment 1, but with words of frequencies approximately
equal to those used in the current experiment. Finally,
the Shipley vocabulary test was administered before
participants were debriefed.
Results
Analyses are presented in two sections below. The
first section, Response Distributions and DPSD Estimates, addresses the subjective experience of familiarity
by examining response distributions and two ways of
generating process estimates. The second section, ROC
Asymmetry addresses the issue of whether ncR operates
in a manner similar to familiarity through comparisons
of ROC asymmetry.
Response distributions and DPSD estimates
The response distributions, presented in Fig. 3, show
that the only obvious difference between the test conditions was a shift from the Recollect response in the
Broad condition to the 6 response in the Hard condition.
That is, the distributions for the two tests look very similar within each age group, except for these responses.
There are more Recollect responses than any other
response in the Broad condition, but more 6 responses
than any other in the Hard condition. The rest of the
responses appear quite similar across test conditions.
Clearly then, the effect of the Hard definition was to prevent subjects from responding Recollect when they
otherwise would have (i.e., on the basis of the Broad definition). Thus, the patterns suggest that subjective experiences of familiarity were similar for participants in the
two test conditions.
To quantify the patterns evident in the response distributions, process estimates were generated in two

ways. To do this, ROCs were constructed for each participant and the DPSD model was fit to those data by
minimizing sums of squared error using the solver program in Excel. Fitting the model to the ROC data is
what generates estimates of recollection and familiarity
(d 0 ), and this was done in two ways for each participant.
The first and most intuitive method was to fit the model
to all the ROC points represented in Fig. 2. This full
scale method was expected to replicate the findings of
Experiment 1 (an ncR effect for both groups, but larger
for young adults). The second method, hereafter the
truncated scale, was to exclude the far left Recollect
point of the ROC, and fit only the remaining points.
Because these ROC data are cumulative, the Recollect
responses are still included, but are summed with the 6
responses (e.g., the ``R + 6'' point on the ROC in
Fig. 2) and thus are simply not fit as a separate point.
If the effect of the Hard condition is to change the experience of recollection and familiarity relative to the Easy
condition, then the ncR effect should be found regardless
of which scale is used to generate process estimates. That
is, the exact values will differ but the ncR pattern should
remain the same--greater familiarity estimates in the
Hard compared to the Broad condition. If, however,
the effect of the Hard condition was to shift what would
have been a Recollect response with the Broad definition
to a 6 response, without affecting overall levels of recollection and familiarity, then collapsing the two points
that are creating the ncR effect should effectively eliminate it. Thus, if recollection and familiarity are essentially the same for the two tests, there should be no
ncR effect found with the truncated scale estimates.
Indeed, the process estimates generated by the two
scales, presented in Table 2, support the conclusions
drawn on the basis of the response distributions. The
fit of the model to the average ROC in each condition
is presented in Fig. 4. Analyses of the estimates generated from the full scale replicated the findings of Experiment 1. Recollection estimates were greater for young
than older adults (F(1, 140) = 5.42, MSE = .04, p < .03,
95% CIDifference: .011-.086, f = .13), and higher on the
Broad than the Hard test (F(1, 140) = 122.37,
MSE = .04, p < .001, 95% CIDifference: .286-.411,
f = .88), although the difference between the test conditions was larger for young than older adults
(F(1, 140) = 11.06, MSE = .04, p < .002, f = .19). Familiarity (d 0 ) estimates were also greater for the young
adults (F(1, 140) = 12.11, MSE = .44, p < .002, 95%
CIDifference: .166-.603, f = .26), but more importantly,
the ncR effect was evident in the familiarity estimates
of both groups [main effect of test: F(1, 140 = 18.72,
MSE = .44, p < .001, 95% CIDifference: .260-.697,
f = .33; older adults only: t(70) = 1.76, p < .05, 95%
CIDifference: .549 to .034, d = .41), although larger
for the young than the older group (F(1, 140) = 3.99,
MSE = .44, p < .05, f = .13)]. Thus, the full scale

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

produced the ncR effect and, as found in
Experiment 1, that effect was larger for young than for
older adults.5
In contrast, the estimates generated from the truncated scale did not show the ncR effect. Specifically,
both recollection and familiarity (d 0 ) estimates differed
only as a function of age-group, favoring young adults
in both cases (recollection: F(1, 140) = 16.198, MSE =
.05, p < .001, 95% CIDifference: .076-.224, f = .33; familiarity: F(1, 140) = 4.921, MSE = .340, p < .03, f = .17).
Thus, recollection and familiarity were approximately
equal in the different test conditions and there was no
ncR effect. As suggested by the response distributions,
this pattern of results across the two scales indicates that
the effect of the Hard test condition was to force what
would have been a Recollect response in the Broad condition to a 6 response in the Hard condition, without
affecting the overall levels of recollection and familiarity.
Thus, recollection of noncriterial details certainly seems
to have occurred in the Hard condition, but the recollection of those irrelevant details did not appear to change
the levels of recollection or familiarity relative to the
Broad condition.
ROC asymmetry
ROC asymmetry was assessed to determine whether
ncR was functionally equivalent to familiarity. ROC
asymmetry is evaluated by plotting the ROC in z-space,
thus creating a zROC. The degree of asymmetry of the
ROC is reflected by the slope of the zROC, such that
perfectly symmetrical ROCs have a 1.0 slope in z-space,
and asymmetrical ROCs have zROC slopes that are different than 1.0 (less than 1.0 for recognition memory).
Based on the DPSD model, ROCs were expected to be
more asymmetrical for young than older adults (i.e.,
young adults' z-slopes should be lower than the older
adults' z-slopes), indicating a greater contribution of recollection to recognition performance. With respect to
test condition, zROC slopes should differ if recollection
5

The RK data implicit in this experiment also replicate
Experiment 1. The difference between recollection responses in
the Broad and Hard conditions was greater for young than
older adults (F(1, 140) = 8.19, MSE = .032, p < .01, f = .15).
Response options ``unsure old'' through ``sure old'' were for
summed to create a ``Familiar'' response, and then corrected for
the false alarm rate. These Familiar responses were greater in
the Hard than the Broad condition (F(1, 140) = 138.62,
MSE = .035, p < .001, f = .94), but this difference was greater
for the young than older adults (F(1, 140) = 15.99, MSE = .035,
p < .001). IRK familiarity estimates were greater for young
than older adults (F(1, 140) = 7.95, MSE = .029, p < .01,
f = .21) and larger in the Hard than the Broad test (F(1, 140),
17.95, MSE = .029, p < .001, f = .33). The interaction between
age and test was not significant unless participants with high
baselines were included in the analysis (F(1, 148) = 4.44,
MSE = .034, p < .04, f = .14).

93

differs in the two conditions. Thus, if ncR is functionally
equivalent to familiarity, z-slopes should be greater in
the Hard condition where it is occurring. Alternatively,
if ncR operates in the same way as criterial recollection,
then z-slopes should be about the same in the two test
conditions.
Standard linear regressions were conducted to obtain
slope and intercept estimates for each participant.
Although analyses were done at the participant level,
average zROCs are presented for each age group and
test condition in Fig. 5 (depicting both the full and truncated zROCs) and average slopes, intercepts, and R2s
are presented in Table 3 for both the full and truncated
scales. For several participants the ROCs included
points not defined in z-space (i.e., 1.00 and .00); those
undefined data points were not included in the regression analyses and zROCs with less than three points
were excluded from analysis. Some participants' zROCs
were curvilinear, and therefore slopes were analyzed
only when standard linear regression accounted for
90% or more of the variance of the zROC. Analyses conducted with data from all participants with more than
two defined zROC points led to the same conclusions
as those found for this more conservative analysis.
As can be seen in Fig. 5, the average zROCs were
curved down for all but the young Broad group, which
is representative of the subject-level data. This bend
reflects floor effects, primarily on false alarms with the
recollect response, but also on accurate recollection (in
the Hard condition), as well as on high-confidence old
responses in some cases. Although such floor effects indicate that participants understood the definitions of recollection and were accurate (and/or cautious) in using
that response, it is questionable whether inferential analysis of the slopes would be meaningful given the non-linearity of the functions. Therefore, analyses of the fullscale slopes are not reported.
However, the zROCs can also be examined without
the recollect response represented separately. Note that
because they are cumulative across confidence levels,
the only difference between the z-ROCs generated from
the full and truncated scales is the left-most point (the
Recollect response). Thus, the truncated-scale zROCs
are just the full-scale zROCs without the Recollect
response, and these were more linear and appropriate
for analysis. Only the main effect of age group was reliable for the truncated-scale slopes (F(1, 126) = 7.53,
MSE = .027, p < .008, 95% CIDifference: .012-.125,
f = .22), with lower slopes for young than for older
adults, indicating greater asymmetry for the young
adults, as expected. Thus, in contrast to the estimates
derived from the full scale, but in line with those derived
from the truncated scale (which showed no ncR effect),
the zROCs suggest that recollection contributed to performance equally in the two test conditions, and recollection was greater for young than for older adults.

94

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Fig. 3. Response distributions as a function of age group and test condition.

Discussion
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test the proportionality hypothesis using the DPSD model to generate
process estimates, test whether ncR is functionally
equivalent to familiarity by evaluating the asymmetry
of the ROCs, and to test whether ncR increases the subjective experience of familiarity by examining response
distributions and different ways of generating process
estimates. There was clear evidence that ncR elevated

familiarity estimates when the Recollect response was
treated as the highest level of confidence (full scale),
and in line with the proportionality hypothesis, the influence of ncR was present for both age groups, but greater
for the young adults.
In contrast, recollection and familiarity estimates
generated from the truncated scale showed only agerelated effects--there was no ncR effect. The asymmetry
analysis of the ROCs revealed the same pattern: Slopes
differed only between the age groups, indicating no

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100
Table 2
Average recollection and d 0 estimated from the full and
truncated scales with the DPSD model, and SSE for young
and older adults as a function of test condition for Experiment 2
d0

SSE

n

Full scale estimates
Young adults
Broad
0.49
Hard
0.03

1.59
2.29

0.0016
0.0038

36
36

Older adults
Broad
Hard

1.43
1.69

0.0027
0.0038

36
36

Truncated scale estimates
Young adults
Broad
0.59
Hard
0.63

1.24
1.36

0.0008
0.0009

36
36

Older adults
Broad
Hard

1.14
1.03

0.0012
0.0009

36
36

Recollection

0.31
0.06

0.45
0.47

ncR effect. Overall then, these analyses show that recollection-based recognition was the same in the two test
conditions, but that the estimates generated from the full
scale captured different aspects of performance than did
the truncated-scale estimates and slopes. Specifically,
differences in response patterns across the test conditions--evident in the distributions in Fig. 3--produced
different levels of recollection and familiarity estimates
generated from the two scales. However, the primary
difference was between the Recollect and 6 responses,
presumably because the recollected information supported a Recollect response with the Broad definition,
but not with the Hard definition. When those responses
were collapsed in the truncated scale, the estimates indi-

95

cated that recollection was the same in the two test conditions and differed only between the age groups. In
sum, the data demonstrate that ncR behaves like criterial recollection and does not seem to influence the experience or usefulness of familiarity for the item.
The age-related decrease in familiarity estimates
found in Experiment 1 was also replicated, again suggesting a small age-related decline in familiarity-based
performance in older adults. For the full-scale estimates,
the age-related familiarity differences were greater in the
Hard than the Broad condition, indicating that the difference may be due to ncR rather than true differences
in familiarity. In contrast, the age-related difference
was approximately the same size in the two test conditions with the truncated-scale familiarity estimates.
The fact that the size of the decrease did not differ in
the Broad and Hard conditions with the truncated scale
estimates would seem to argue against the possibility
that the age-related familiarity deficit could be attributed to ncR alone, but it is difficult to rule that possibility out entirely.

General discussion
The primary aim of these experiments was to examine ncR in young and older adults as a means of determining when ncR should and should not be expected to
contribute to familiarity estimates, to assess whether
ncR is functionally equivalent to familiarity, and to
assess whether ncR increases the subjective experience
of familiarity. The results demonstrate that (a) ncR
occurs when recollection is operationally defined as a
specific detail that is difficult to remember, (b) the size
of the ncR effect is related to the level of recollection
of the noncriterial attribute when it is directly tested,

Fig. 4. Fit of DPSD model to (full scale) recognition ROCs. Note. Obs., observed.

96

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Fig. 5. zROCs as a function of age group and test condition. Note. The solid + dashed lines represent the full scale zROC. The solid
lines alone represent the truncated scale zROC. The young adult Hard condition includes only 5 points because only one participant
made a false alarm with the Recollect response, and thus this point is not illustrated.

Table 3
Average slopes, intercepts, R2s and n's of recognition zROCs generated from the full and truncated scales for Experiment 2
Slope

Intercept

R2

n

Full scale
Young adults
Broad
Hard

0.59
0.55

1.65
1.66

0.97
0.98

33
32

Older adults
Broad
Hard

0.69
0.71

1.39
1.39

0.97
0.96

26
30

Truncated scale
Young adults
Broad
Hard

0.58
0.55

1.70
1.66

0.97
0.98

35
32

Older adults
Broad
Hard

0.63
0.66

1.39
1.38

0.98
0.97

30
33

and that (c) ncR does not appear to be functionally
equivalent to familiarity nor increase the subjective
experience of familiarity.
ncR and criterial recollection
Yonelinas and Jacoby (1996) found that a speeded
response manipulation, which successfully undermined
criterial recollection, failed to reduce the ncR effect.
Toth and Parks (2006) followed up on that finding by
testing young and older adults to determine whether
ncR would be preserved (given that familiarity typically
is) or reduced in older adults (given that memory of episodic detail is impaired in older adults). They found no

significant evidence of ncR in older adults and argued
that the reason was due to low levels of (potential) recollection of the noncriterial detail. More generally, they
suggested that there is a proportional relationship
between the ncR effect on familiarity estimates and recollection of the noncriterial detail (when directly tested).
The results of both experiments, but particularly Experiment 1, support this proportionality hypothesis. The
divided attention manipulation in Experiment 1 was
chosen specifically to reduce the likelihood of young
adults encoding study words and thus reduce the availability of the noncriterial information, thereby undermining recollection, as well as other potential indirect
influences. Thus, the parallels seen between the young

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

divided attention and older groups in Experiment 1 indicate that the size of the ncR effect on familiarity estimates is related to the overall level of (potential)
recollection of the noncriterial information. In fact, both
experiments show that groups with lower levels of recollection of the noncriterial information have smaller ncR
elevations of their familiarity estimates than do groups
with better recollection of the noncriterial information.
Thus, as might be expected, one major precondition
for observing the ncR effect is some requisite level of recollection for the noncriterial information. Exactly what
level of recollection of noncriterial information is necessary to produce the ncR effect on familiarity estimates
remains an open question, although Toth and Parks'
study indicates that recollection estimates of .15 or less
are likely to be too low to produce a significant ncR
effect.
Support of the proportionality hypothesis--that is,
the reduction of the ncR effect by age and divided attention--indicates that ncR is not functionally equivalent
to familiarity. Rather, the data suggest that ncR operates in the same way as criterial recollection, and differs
only with respect to the relevance of its content to the
test decision. Not only did age and divided attention
affect ncR in the same way they affected criterial recollection, but the ROCs in Experiment 2 were very similar
across test conditions. In fact, the zROC slopes differed
only between age groups, indicating that recollectionbased recognition did not differ between the test
conditions.
Furthermore, the experience of ncR in the Hard condition did not appear to affect the subjective experience,
or the usefulness, of familiarity. Response distributions
in Experiment 2 showed that the ncR effect (found with
the full scale estimates) was due to a shift between the
Recollect and 6 responses across test conditions, suggesting that memories classified as Recollect under the Broad
condition were simply forced into the 6 category by the
Hard definition. This was further confirmed by the fact
that there was no ncR effect on the familiarity estimates
generated with the truncated scale. Therefore, unless it
somehow affected only the highest-confidence experiences of familiarity, ncR did not appear to influence
the subjective experience of familiarity in the current
study. Of course, this does not mean that ncR has no
effect on subjective experience at all. For example, it
seems likely that recollection of one detail of an event
could increase feelings-of-knowing for other details
about the event when recollection of those details fails.
In fact, an increase in feelings-of-knowing may best
describe the student's subjective experience when
remembering where the answer is on the page in the text,
but not the test answer itself. However, the ncR effect
examined here did not affect either the experience or
the effectiveness of familiarity in discriminating old from
new items.

97

Measurement implications
Overall, the results seem to fall in line with those of
Mulligan and Hirshman (1997), who argued that ncR
can cause familiarity to be overestimated and recollection
to be underestimated in the PD procedure. However, there
is an alternative explanation to consider: that the observed
ncR effects were actually due to systematic misclassifications of strong experiences of familiarity as recollection.
That is, if people occasionally mistake strong familiarity
as a recollective experience due to misunderstanding or
forgetting the instructions and this probability varied
across conditions and/or groups, it could be the case that
the ncR effects were due to recollection estimates that were
contaminated by strong familiarity more in some conditions than in others. Note that this is a contamination
account, but one which attributes the cause of the ncR
effect to people's tendency to want to report strong familiarity as recollection, as opposed to the way recollection is
defined. In order for this explanation to account for the
ncR pattern, it would have to be the case that this mistake
was more likely on the Broad and Easy tests, such that
familiarity would be lower on the Broad and Easy tests
and higher on the Hard. This, of course, is the ncR pattern
that was observed in both experiments. The same pattern
should be found for familiarity for new words too, but in
fact, new-item familiarity was higher in the Broad and
Easy conditions than in the Hard condition in Experiment
1 and did not significantly differ across conditions in
Experiment 2, contrary to the ncR pattern. The false recollection patterns could be argued to support the misclassification account, with greater false recollection in the Broad
and Easy conditions than in the Hard condition in both
experiments, but the magnitude of false recollection fell
far short of the magnitude of the ncR effects (false recollection fell below 5% in all conditions and groups, ncR effects
ranged from 10 to 20%). Finally, it would also have to be
the case that older age and divided attention made it less
likely to mistake strong familiarity for recollection, given
that the ncR effect was smaller in the older adult and
divided-attention groups. This seems somewhat counterintuitive, but if true, it should be evident in the false familiarity patterns: there should be higher new-item familiarity
in the Hard condition and the difference should be greater
for young than older adults. However, there were no
significant differences in new-item familiarity across age
and attention groups in Experiment 1, in contrast to the
ncR pattern. In Experiment 2, new-item familiarity
did show a significant age by test condition interaction6:

6

The interaction was found for both the raw familiarity
responses to new items extracted from the confidence scale
(F(1, 140) = 5.98, MSE = .013, p < .02) and for IRK familiarity
estimates for new words (F(1, 140) = 6.02, MSE = .013,
p < .02).

98

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

there was a negligible difference between new-item familiarity in the two test conditions for young adults, but older
adults' new-item familiarity was greater in the Hard than
in the Broad condition. This pattern of age-related differences contradicts the misclassification explanation. Overall then, it is unlikely that a systematic misclassification
of strong familiarity as recollection can account for the
observed ncR effects.
Thus, it seems that the data support Mulligan and
Hirshman (1997) argument that ncR can cause familiarity to be overestimated and recollection to be underestimated in the PD procedure, but there are two important
caveats to that conclusion. First, the present experiments
demonstrate that to the extent that ncR is a threat to
process estimates, it is not specific to the PD procedure--it is the result of defining recollection as memory
for a specific detail that is hard to remember. Thus, some
caution is warranted in using such definitions in the PD
and RK methods. As for the DPSD model, the fact that
the truncated scale estimates showed no effects of ncR
on familiarity suggests that it may be somewhat more
immune to this potential problem, but since the traditional confidence scale used in ROC studies does not
include a separate Recollect option, there is less potential
for ncR to occur with this method anyway.
Second, there was no evidence that recollection was
underestimated in these experiments, at least not according to the definitions that were used. If one aims to measure recollection in the broad sense, a specific definition
like that used in the Hard condition would be an unlikely choice. When specific definitions of recollection
are used, it is typically because it is recollection of that
particular detail that is of interest. And of course, a failure to capture other recollected details in the recollection
estimate in such a case would not qualify as
underestimation.
The fact remains, though, that the results suggest
some caution in using specific definitions of recollection,
and yet there is a clear need to do just that. Normal dayto-day memory queries most often are specific questions
(Toth, 2005), and it seems relatively rare that they can be
adequately answered by remembering any detail (``What
was the talk about?'' ``I don't know, but the room was
cold.''). It is plainly important to quantify recollection
and familiarity in conditions similar to those faced in
daily life--that is, in cases where memory for a specific
detail of a past event is required. And in fact, the results
indicate that orienting tasks that focus attention on the
dimension of interest can be used to reduce the likelihood of ncR. Experiment 1 showed that when participants focus closely on a particular attribute, that tends
to be the attribute they recollect, regardless of the definition of recollection (but see Marsh, Hicks, & Cook,
2004). The similarity between the Broad and Easy conditions demonstrates that specific definitions of recollection will not invariably produce ncR, and that it is

unlikely to have a significant impact on familiarity estimates when participants focus on the detail that defines
recollection. Of course, excluding specific and difficult
operational definitions of recollection does place a constraint on experimental designs, and it may not always
be possible to anticipate whether the conditions of interest will produce ncR or not. Therefore, it will be useful
for future work to examine ways of estimating recollection and familiarity when recollection is specifically
defined that either avoid ncR or include a way to measure it (e.g., Mulligan & Hirshman, 1997).
Familiarity and aging
Until recently, most research in aging and memory
conducted from a dual-process perspective demonstrated the preservation of familiarity across age groups
in contrast to often large recollection deficits. However,
recent findings have called that preservation into question (e.g., Light et al., 2000; Prull et al., 2006). The current studies demonstrated familiarity deficits both as a
function of age group and attention, but given the topic
under investigation, it's worth questioning whether the
deficits observed here reflect differences in recollection
(or ncR) rather than differences in familiarity. The patterns in Experiment 1, in which the relationship between
ncR effects and familiarity differences is most evident
(see Fig. 1), reveal very small differences in familiarity
in the Broad condition and larger ones in the Hard condition. In fact, it appears as though age and attention
effects switched from the recollection estimates, when
recollection was defined most inclusively, to the familiarity estimates when recollection was defined as something
specific and difficult to remember. Age-related differences in familiarity were also found in Experiment 2.
The fact that the difference persisted even when the
ncR effect disappeared (i.e., with the truncated scale)
suggests that the differences were real and not necessarily artifacts of the ncR effect, but it is impossible to rule
that possibility out completely. Thus, the current results
support other recent findings of a slight deficit in familiarity in older age groups, but they also demonstrate that
memory differences between age groups may be shifted
from one process estimate to another depending on
how recollection and familiarity are operationally
defined.

Conclusions
In sum, the current findings show that ncR elevates
familiarity estimates when the operational definition of
recollection is both specific and difficult, and, critically,
that it operates in the same way as criterial recollection.
Additionally, ncR can change the pattern of age and
attention effects on process estimates such that

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

differences can appear in recollection or familiarity estimates depending on how recollection is defined.
Although ncR and other types of partial recollection
may represent a methodological and measurement challenge in some cases, they are also fairly common experiences, and the encoding and retrieval processes and
contexts that give rise to them are theoretically interesting in and of themselves. For instance, the data thus far
indicate that ncR arises (and affects familiarity estimates) when the criterial detail is poorly encoded but
irrelevant ones are well encoded--however, these are
unlikely to be the only conditions under which ncR will
occur. Further, the experience of ncR and other types of
partial recollection (e.g., Dodson, Holland, & Shimamura, 1998) may influence metacognitive strategies or factors like retrieval orientation (e.g., Rugg, Allan, & Birch,
2000), the generation of retrieval cues, as well as simply
the amount of time allotted to the attempt to recollect
the criterial detail. Limiting operational definitions of
recollection only to the most inclusive would be unduly
restrictive and would fail to capture experiences that we
face on a daily basis--namely, the need to remember a
specific detail of a past event. Rather, investigation of
specific recollection--and related processes, such as
ncR and partial source memory--will be important in
developing a more complete picture of recollection and
familiarity as they occur outside the laboratory.

References
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Craik, F. I. M. (1982). Selective changes in encoding as a
function of reduced process capacity. In F. Klix, J.
Hoffman, & E. van der Meer (Eds.), Cognitive research in
psychology (pp. 152-161). Berlin, Germany: Deutscher
Verlad der Wissenschaffen.
Dodd, D. H., Schultz Jr., & Roger, F. (1973). Computational
procedures for estimating magnitude of effect for some
analysis of variance designs. Psychological Bulletin, 79,
391-395.
Dodson, C. S., Holland, P. W., & Shimamura, A. P. (1998). On
the recollection of specific- and partial-source information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 1121-1136.
Dunn, J. C. (2004). Remember-know: A matter of confidence.
Psychological Review, 111, 524-542.
Gardiner, J. M. (1988). Functional aspects of recollective
experience. Memory & Cognition, 16, 309-313.
Gardiner, J. M., & Parkin, A. J. (1990). Attention and
recollective experience in recognition memory. Memory &
Cognition, 18, 549-583.
Gardiner, J. M., Ramponi, C., & Richardson-Klavehn, A.
(1998). Experiences of remembering, knowing, and guessing. Consciousness and Cognition, 7, 1-26.
Gardiner, J. M., & Richardson-Klavehn, A. (2000). Remembering and knowing. In E. Tulving & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.),

99

The Oxford handbook of memory (pp. 229-244). London:
Oxford University Press.
Gruppuso, V., Lindsay, D. S., & Kelley, C. M. (1997). The
process-dissociation procedure and similarity: Defining and
estimating recollection and familiarity in recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 259-278.
Hay, J. F., & Jacoby, L. L. (1999). Separating habit and
recollection in young and older adults: Effects of elaborative
processing and distinctiveness. Psychology and Aging, 14,
122-134.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A Process Dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513-541.
Jacoby, L. L. (1996). Dissociating automatic and consciously
controlled effects of study/test compatibility. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 32-52.
Jacoby, L. L. (1998). Invariance in automatic influences of
memory: Toward a user's guide for the processes dissociation procedure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 3-26.
Jacoby, L. L. (1999). Ironic effects of repetition: Measuring agerelated differences in memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 3-22.
Jacoby, L. L., & Kelley, C. M. (1992). Unconscious influences
of memory: Dissociations and automaticity. In E. A. D.
Milner & E. M. D. Rugg (Eds.), The neuropsychology of
consciousness (pp. 201-233). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Java, R. I. (1996). Effects of age on state of awareness following
implicit and explicit word association tasks. Psychology and
Aging, 7, 108-111.
Jennings, J. M., & Jacoby, L. L. (1993). Automatic versus
intentional uses of memory: Aging, attention, and control.
Psychology and Aging, 8, 283-293.
Jennings, J. M., & Jacoby, L. L. (1997). An opposition
procedure for detecting age-related deficits in recollection:
Telling effects of repetition. Psychology and Aging, 12,
352-361.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational analysis of
present-day American English. Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
Light, L. L., Prull, M. W., La Voie, D. J., & Healy, M. R.
(2000). Dual-process theories of memory in old age. In T. J.
Perfect & E. A. Maylor (Eds.), Models of cognitive aging.
Debates in psychology (pp. 238-300). London: Oxford
University Press.
Light, L. L., & Singh, A. (1987). Implicit and explicit memory
in young and older adult. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 531-541.
Mantyla, T. (1993). Knowing but not remembering: Adult age
differences in recollective experience. Memory & Cognition,
21, 379-388.
Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., & Cook, G. I. (2004). Focused
attention on one contextual attribute does not reduce
source memory for a different attribute. Memory, 12,
183-192.
Mulligan, N. W., & Hirshman, E. (1997). Measuring the bases
of recognition memory: An investigation of the processdissociation framework. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 280-304.

100

C.M. Parks / Journal of Memory and Language 57 (2007) 81-100

Parkin, A. J., & Walter, B. (1992). Recollective experience,
normal aging, and frontal dysfunction. Psychology and
Aging, 7, 290-298.
Prull, M. W., Dawes, L. L. C., Martin, A. M., III, Rosenberg, H.
F., & Light, L. L. (2006). Recollection and familiarity in
recognition memory: Adult age differences and neuropsychological test correlates. Psychology and Aging, 21, 107-118.
Rugg, M. D., Allan, K., & Birch, C. S. (2000). Electrophysiological evidence for the modulation of retrieval orientation
by depth of study processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 664-678.
Shipley, W. C. (1985). Shipley Institute of Living Scale. Los
Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.
Toth, J.P. (2005). Subjective states of awareness in memory: A
remarkable correspondence between recognition and cuedrecall. Unpublished data and manuscript.
Toth, J. P., & Parks, C. M. (2006). Effects of age on estimated
familiarity in the process-dissociation procedure: The role of
noncriterial recollection. Memory & Cognition, 34, 527-537.

Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian
Psychology, 26, 1-12.
Yonelinas, A. P. (1994). Receiver-operating characteristics in
recognition memory: Evidence for a dual-process model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 1341-1354.
Yonelinas, A. P. (2001). Consciousness, control, and confidence: The 3 Cs of recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 361-379.
Yonelinas, A. P. (2002). The nature of recollection and
familiarity: A review of 30 years of research. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 441-517.
Yonelinas, A. P., & Jacoby, L. L. (1995). The relation between
remembering and knowing as bases for recognition: Effects
of size congruency. Journal of Memory and Language, 34,
622-643.
Yonelinas, A. P., & Jacoby, L. L. (1996). Noncriterial recollection: Familiarity as automatic, irrelevant recollection.
Consciousness and Cognition, 5, 131-141.

