Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Journal of
Memory and
Language

Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Working memory in developing and applying mental
models from spatial descriptions q
Tad T. Brunye
a

a,b,*

, Holly A. Taylor

a

Department of Psychology, Tufts University, 490 Boston Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA
b
U.S. Army RDEC, 15 Kansas Street, Natick, MA 01760, USA
Received 18 March 2007; revision received 27 July 2007
Available online 29 October 2007

Abstract
Four dual-task experiments examined visuospatial, articulatory, and central executive working memory involvement
during the development and application of spatial mental models. In Experiments 1 and 2 participants read route and
survey spatial descriptions while undertaking one of four secondary tasks targeting working memory components. Converging evidence from map drawing and statement verification tasks indicates that while articulatory mechanisms are
involved in processing the language itself, visuospatial and central executive mechanisms are involved in developing
spatial mental models, particularly during route description reading. In Experiments 3 and 4 participants undertook
the same working memory tasks, but did so during testing; results from memory and secondary task performance converge to demonstrate that using spatial mental models is a visuospatially and centrally demanding process, particularly
following route description learning. Taken together, results demonstrate that spatial mental model development and
application are contingent upon multiple working memory systems and interact with representational formats.
 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Spatial mental models; Working memory; Discourse processing

Introduction
Readers construct cohesive mental models of what a
text describes, integrating time, space, causality, inten-

q
This article is based on a portion of T.T.B.'s doctoral
dissertation completed at Tufts University. We thank Drs. Phillip
Holcomb, Emily Bushnell, Tali Ditman, M. Jeanne Sholl, and
Gabriel Radvansky, as well as several anonymous reviewers, for
their insightful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript.
Special thanks to Dr. George Wolford for statistical advice.
*
Corresponding author. Address: Research Psychologist,
Cognitive Science US Army RDEC, Bldg 4, Office 126 Kansas
St AMSRD-NSC-WS-P Natick, MA 01760. Fax: +1 617 627
3181.
E-mail address: tbrunye@alumni.tufts.edu (T.T. Brunye).

tion, and person- and object-related information. That
is, readers progress beyond the text itself to represent
the described situation (Bransford, Barclay, & Franks,
1972; Glenberg, Kruley, & Langston, 1994; Graesser,
Millis, & Zwaan, 1997; Johnson-Laird, 1983; van Dijk
& Kintsch, 1983; Zwaan, Langston, & Graesser, 1995;
Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). Most work investigating
situation models comes from narrative discourse (e.g.,
Zwaan, Radvansky, Hilliard, & Curiel, 1998; Zwaan
et al., 1995). Additional work has examined mental
model formation from reading non-spatial and spatial
expository texts (Ferguson & Hegarty, 1994; Glenberg
& Langston, 1992; Graesser & Bertus, 1998; Lee & Tversky, 2005; Millis, Graesser, & Haberlandt, 1993; Noordzij & Postma, 2005; Perrig & Kintsch, 1985; Taylor
& Tversky, 1992a). Whereas both narrative and exposi-

0749-596X/$ - see front matter  2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.08.003

702

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

tory texts lead to mental model development, it is
unclear which working memory mechanisms are responsible for constructing these mental representations and
when they may play a role (i.e., de Vega, 1995; Radvansky & Copeland, 2001, 2004a, 2004b, 2006a, 2006b;
Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). The present experiments
examine this question with spatial descriptions and
investigate working memory mechanisms (visuospatial,
phonological, central executive; Baddeley, 1992, 2002)
involved in mental model formation during reading,
and mental model application at test.
Mental models and spatial descriptions
The Event Indexing model (Zwaan et al., 1995) proposes that discourse events are indexed along at least five
dimensions (temporal, spatial, causal, intentionality,
agent- and object-based features) and that each plays a
role in comprehension. Situation models (i.e., Glenberg
et al., 1994; Graesser et al., 1997; Johnson-Laird, 1983;
van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983) are built from interactions
amongst these indexes. Recent extensions of the model
propose four classes of processes operating on these representations: construction, updating, retrieval, and foregrounding (Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). Construction
involves building a situation model during comprehension, updating is modifying existing models with new
information, retrieval is extracting information from
models, and foregrounding is maintenance of model
information in working memory. The Resonance Model
(Myers & O'Brien, 1998; O'Brien & Myers, 1999), in contrast, argues that mental model construction is mediated
by the automatic resonance of discourse-level to sentence-level relations, and that updating involves the interplay between these two levels, resulting in differential item
interrelatedness in memory. Resonance theory maintains
that retrieval varies as a function of this interrelatedness
(see also the C-I model, Kintsch, 1988, and the Landscape
Model, Linderholm, Virtue, Tzeng, & van den Broek,
2004 ). The present work focuses on the working memory
processes involved during construction and retrieval of
situation models during spatial description reading and
testing. Constructivist situation model theory predicts
active working memory involvement in tracking multiple
text dimensions (i.e., Kintsch, 1988; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998), while network-based theory (i.e., Myers &
O'Brien, 1998) predicts less differential working memory
involvement in the activation and linking of current and
existing contextual features of a discourse.
Spatial descriptions convey geographical information
through language, and generally adopt a particular perspective. Survey descriptions represent space from an
allocentric (``birds-eye'') perspective, use an extrinsic reference frame (i.e., no implied viewer), and convey directions in cardinal terms (i.e., north, south, east, west). In
contrast, route descriptions typically represent space

from an egocentric (``first-person'') perspective, use an
intrinsic reference frame (e.g., in front of you, to your
right, to your left), and convey information regarding
relevant landmarks, turn sequences, and travel distances
(Levelt, 1982; Taylor & Tversky, 1992b). Both perspectives are commonly used, for instance, when giving
directions or describing an environment's layout.
Spatial descriptions are quite effective at conveying
spatial information. Taylor and Tversky (1992a) found
that mental models derived from both route and survey
spatial descriptions were similar to those acquired during map study: after studying each, participants were
equally adept at sketching maps and verifying inference
statements. It appears that participants were able to
develop spatial mental models that are not inextricably
tied to the learned perspective (see also Brunye & Taylor, 2007; Ferguson & Hegarty, 1994; Lee & Tversky,
2005; Noordzij & Postma, 2005). In contrast, some
recent work shows that spatial memory may be strongly
tied the initial learning format (Shelton & McNamara,
2004). In a series of experiments using route and survey
texts and videos, Shelton and McNamara found that
participants adhere to a principle reference vector (i.e.,
first path segment of a route, or north as up with survey)
for scene recognition. Thus, spatial memory likely preserves orientation specificity based on a principle reference vector that is defined by certain description
elements. Flexible inferencing, in contrast, may be
strongly tied to the availability of a spatial mental
model. Further insights into the nature of spatial memory can be obtained by detailing the time course by
which people develop these models, the processes underlying their development, and the format of the resultant
representation.
Recent work has demonstrated the relative difficulty
of developing spatial mental models from route versus
survey descriptions (Brunye & Taylor, 2007; Lee & Tversky, 2005; Noordzij & Postma, 2005). With limited
exposure (i.e., a single read) to route and survey descriptions, spatial mental models are more likely to develop
from the latter; in contrast, with repeated exposure operationalized as three read cycles, spatial mental models
develop with either description perspective (Brunye &
Taylor, 2007). However, even with this repeated exposure, reading times suggest greater difficulty processing
route descriptions. This difficulty may be due to at least
the following: first, route descriptions present spatial
information embedded within a sequential framework
that requires updating relative to a principle reference
vector defined by the initial path segment (i.e., Shelton
& McNamara, 2004); second, route descriptions may
demand a high degree of complex (i.e., 3D) mental imagery as a reader imagines moving through the environment (i.e., Fincher-Kiefer, 2001); finally, landmark
interrelationships must be inferred (rather than directly
acquired) from route descriptions (i.e., Tversky, 1993).

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Developing spatial mental models
A fundamental question for discourse research is
whether mental models are constructed during comprehension or later during application. Much recent work
suggests that spatial information may only be tracked
in the context of relevant cues such as reading goals,
temporal shifts, and causal relatedness (e.g, de Vega,
1995; Jahn, 2004; Levine & Klin, 2001; Magliano,
Miller, & Zwaan, 2001, 2005; Morrow, Greenspan, &
Bower, 1987; Rapp & Taylor, 2004; Rich & Taylor,
2000; Zwaan et al., 1995; Zwaan et al., 1998). Thus,
mental models containing comprehensive spatial information may only develop under very limited
circumstances.
Spatial descriptions provide a special case for text
comprehension models, in that they differ from narrative
discourse with their focus on spatial relation information (e.g., landmark interrelationships) and omission of
causality, intentionality, and explicit agent-based information. Recent work has demonstrated the utility of discourse models in explaining spatial and non-spatial
expository text comprehension (i.e., Cote, Goldman, &
Saul, 1998; Graesser & Bertus, 1998; Taylor & Tversky,
1992a). When reading spatial descriptions there is a primary implied goal: to understand an environment's elemental interrelationships. This is supported by work
showing that spatial mental models develop without
the influence of explicit goals or causal relatedness cues
(e.g., Ferguson & Hegarty, 1994; Lee & Tversky, 2005;
Taylor & Tversky, 1992a, 1992b).
An underlying assumption of the present work,
therefore, is that spatial inferences may be formed spontaneously during spatial description reading as a consequence of at least two mechanisms. First, by making
spatial information exceedingly salient, spatial descriptions implicitly establish the goal of tracking and drawing inferences about spatial relationships (i.e., Levine &
Klin, 2001; Taylor, Naylor, & Chechile, 1999; van den
Broek, Lorch, Linderholm, & Gustafson, 2001). Second,
having few dimensions (i.e., spatial, temporal), the spatial descriptions prioritize the allocation of cognitive
resources towards tracking spatial information (i.e.,
Estevez & Calvo, 2000; Linderholm & van den Broek,
2002; Morra, 2001). An accurate spatial mental model
results from actively tracking and representing spatial
relationships (Morrow, 1994; Rinck, Hanhel, Bower, &
Glowalla, 1997). In our view, readers of spatial descriptions actively monitor spatial relation information,
make certain inferences about relationships that are
not explicit, and develop a spatial mental model. These
models are abstractions that go beyond what is read,
and they are perspective-flexible in that people use them
to think about environments from different perspectives.
The present work therefore adopts existing operational
definitions of spatial mental models (i.e., Gyselinck,

703

De Beni, Pazzaglia, Meneghetti, & Mondoloni, 2007;
Pazzaglia, De Beni, Gyselinck, & Meneghetti, 2007;
Taylor & Tversky, 1992a; Tversky, 1991, 1993). Note
that these models are quite different from the notions
of a cognitive map (i.e., Tolman, 1948) or a cognitive
collage (i.e., Tversky, 1993). The first is a perspectiveinflexible representation that preserves a map-like allocentric structure in memory, and the second is a multiperspective but incomplete representation and a potential precursor to a spatial mental model.
We explore the development and use of these models
to elucidate when (i.e., reading, application) and how
(i.e., which working memory mechanisms) they develop,
and what form they take in memory.
Working memory and selective interference
The present studies address these goals using a selective interference paradigm during either reading or
memory application. We examine three working-memory subsystems: the visuospatial sketchpad, articulatory
rehearsal loop, and the central executive (i.e., Baddeley,
1992, 2002; see also the episodic buffer, Baddeley, 2000,
which is not examined here). Selective interference paradigms typically involve suppressing one of these working
memory subsystems, with any observed memory deficits
implicating involvement of that mechanism towards
learning.
The visuospatial sketchpad appears to be involved in
processing object-based visual features such as found in
picture-based procedures, diagrams, and maps (e.g.,
Brunye, Taylor, Rapp, & Spiro, 2006; Garden, Cornoldi, & Logie, 2001; Gyselinck, Cornoldi, Dubois, De
Beni, & Ehrlich, 2002; Kruley, Sciama, & Glenberg,
1994; Logie, 1995), locations and movements in space
(De Beni, Pazzaglia, Gyselinck, & Meneghetti, 2005),
and spatial visualization and mental imagery (Farmer,
Berman, & Fletcher, 1986; Miyake, Friedman, Rettinger, Shah, & Hegarty, 2001). Investigating visuospatial
involvement during spatial description reading allows
us to assess the extent to which readers actively track
spatial information during reading (i.e., Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998), and how this tracking may translate into
spatial mental model development.
The articulatory component of working memory is
generally involved in processing verbal information
across the auditory (Baddeley, Lewis, & Vallar, 1984;
De Beni et al., 2005; Longoni, Richardson, & Aiello,
1993), visual (Brunye et al., 2006; Farmer et al., 1986;
Goldman & Healy, 1985), and even tactile modalities
(Millar, 1990). Using an articulatory secondary task
during reading allows us to assess the verbal processes
involved in developing spatial mental models, and the
extent to which these processes (i.e., developing a propositional base; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983) lay a foundation for spatial mental model development.

704

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

The central executive is relatively less well-understood, but is thought to involve supervisory control of
working memory subsystems (Baddeley, 1996; Baddeley,
Emslie, Kolodny, & Duncan, 1998; Duff, 2000). The
central executive has been implicated in: coordinating
performance between two separate tasks or information
formats (e.g., Brunye et al., 2006; Della Sala, Baddeley,
Papagno, & Spinnler, 1995; Duff, 2000; Duff & Logie,
2001; Gyselinck et al., 2002), generating random
sequences (e.g., Baddeley, 1996; Baddeley et al., 1998;
Brunye et al., 2006), inferencing and analogical reasoning (Morrison, 2004), attending to one and inhibiting
disruption of another stimulus (e.g., Baddeley, 2002),
and temporal tagging (Miyake & Shah, 1999; Miyake,
Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, & Howerter, 2000). Using
central executive tasks during reading allows us to assess
their involvement in sequential processing, and the allocation of resources between other subsystems. In turn, it
can provide insights into the nature of spatial mental
models.
Recent work has demonstrated minimal influence of
working memory capacity towards situation model
updating (Radvansky & Copeland, 2001), relatively
greater involvement in the initial development of situation models (Radvansky & Copeland, 2006a, 2006b),
and important roles for integrative processes and drawing inferences towards successful narrative discourse
comprehension (Radvansky & Copeland, 2004a,
2004b). We extend this work by selectively and individually examining working memory subsystems, complementing this group's findings with general span
measures. Specifically, composite span indicators that
consider multiple subsystem span test scores may limit
conclusions with regard to individual subsystem contributions during reading and retrieval. In line with this
work, we propose that working memory will be primarily involved during the initial development of situation
models during reading (i.e., Radvansky & Copeland,
2006a, 2006b), less involved in the direct retrieval of
these models from long term memory (i.e., Pazzaglia
et al., 2007; Radvansky & Copeland, 2006a, 2006b),
and recruited when inference processes are demanded
by the task (i.e., Radvansky & Copeland, 2004b). These
hypotheses are in contrast to the notion that the automatic resonance of sentence- and discourse-level information can proceed without high working memory
demands (e.g., Myers & O'Brien, 1998; O'Brien &
Myers, 1999).

Experiment 1
The present experiment incorporates two widely-used
suppression tasks (Brunye et al., 2006; De Beni et al.,
2005; Farmer et al., 1986; Gyselinck et al., 2002) during
spatial description reading: a visuospatial finger-tapping

task and an articulatory syllable string repetition task.
Recent work using the secondary finger-tapping task
has demonstrated that route descriptions, relative to
non-spatial sequential texts, preferentially recruit visuospatial resources (De Beni et al., 2005; Pazzaglia et al.,
2007); a verbal secondary task interfered with both
description types, suggesting articulatory mechanisms
while reading both spatial and non-spatial texts. However, the primary (listening) and secondary (oral syllable
string repetition) tasks used in this previous work may
have produced perceptual interference making it difficult
to isolate any working memory interference. The present
experiment extends this work to route and survey spatial
descriptions, and uses secondary tasks designed to produce working-memory, and not perceptual, interference.
A series of hypotheses guide this experiment. First, a
control group without secondary interference is expected
to replicate earlier work demonstrating that participants
develop spatial mental models from both survey and
route descriptions and these mental models afford
cross-perspective inferencing and map drawing. Second,
visuospatial suppression is expected to interfere with
mental model formation but not verbatim knowledge
(i.e., knowledge gathered from information directly stated in the text), and interact with description perspective.
We expect that visuospatial suppression will interfere to
a greater extent with route than with survey texts. This
hypothesis is based on work demonstrating increased
difficulty in forming mental models from route relative
to survey descriptions, due to increased demand for visuospatial resources (i.e., Brunye & Taylor, 2007), and a
strong reliance upon and updating relative to a principle
reference vector (Shelton & McNamara, 2004). Articulatory suppression, however, is expected to interfere with
both description types, particularly on measures of verbatim memory, in line with work demonstrating memory decrements following articulatory suppression
during reading, across a variety of expository text types
(e.g., Brunye et al., 2006; Farmer et al., 1986; Goldman
& Healy, 1985).
Methods
Participants
Forty-eight Tufts University undergraduates participated for partial course credit.
Materials
Spatial descriptions. Two environments, a convention
center and town, were chosen from Taylor and Tversky's (1992a) materials (see Table 1). The survey descriptions for each environment were hierarchically
organized, detailing global then local information, and
described the environment from a `bird's-eye' perspective using canonical (i.e., north, south, east, west) terms.
The route description, in contrast, guided readers on a

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

705

Table 1a
Survey and route perspective descriptions for the convention center environment
Survey description: Convention center

Route description: Convention center

Several companies that manufacture electronics have decided to get
together for a convention to show their wares. A large convention
center was chosen because its large rectangular floor plan can be easily
changed to accommodate the needs of various conventions. Temporary
wall dividers are used to separate the displays and to form a single
entrance to each display. The displays have been grouped according to
three categories-Visual Equipment, Personal Computers, and Audio
Equipment. The rectangular center section of the building is divided
into four displays for the visual equipment. In the northwest corner of
the center section, with the entrance facing north, are the Televisions.
Like many television displays, the sets are lined up along the walls, all
tuned to the same station. In the northeast corner of the center section,
with the entrance facing north, are the VCR's. In the southwest corner
of the center section, with the entrance facing south, are the 35mm
Cameras. In the southeast corner of the center section, with the
entrance facing south, are the Movie Cameras. The Movie Cameras are
set up to film people as they walk by the display. The remainder of the
displays are along the outer, rectangular wall of the Convention Center.
The east wall has only one display, the Personal Computers. This
display is in the northeast corner and extends for about half of the east
wall. There are software samples available for potential customers to
test the various computers. Along the north wall are the two Audio
Equipment displays-the Stereo Components and the CD Players.
Along the north wall, directly west of the Personal Computers, are the
Stereo Components. The Stereo Components display includes such
items as receivers, turntables, speakers, and tape decks. Directly west of
the Stereo Components are the CD Players. In addition to the displays,
there are four permanent features of the Convention Center located
along the west and south walls--the Cafeteria, the Restrooms, the
Office, and the Bulletin Board. Just west of the CD Players, beginning
in the northwest corner of the Convention Center and extending for
about half of the west wall, is the Cafeteria. The Cafeteria is privately
run by a family that leases the space on a permanent basis from the
Convention Center. Directly south of the Cafeteria, on the west wall,
are the Restrooms. Directly south of the Restrooms, extending from
the southwest corner for about a third of the south wall, is the Office.
East of the Office, covering about half of the south wall, is the
Bulletin Board. The Bulletin Board is used in every convention
for the business cards of the participating companies. East of the
Bulletin Board, on the east side of the building near the southeast
corner, is the entrance.

linear mental tour through the environment, making the
fewest possible turns while mentioning all landmarks
along a continuous path, using egocentric terms (i.e.,
on your right, in front of you). The survey and route versions of each description were equated along several
dimensions: similar text lengths, informationally equivalent (i.e., conveyed equivalent landmark interrelationship information), no indeterminate object locations,
and equal coherence according to pilot judgments (Taylor & Tversky, 1992a).
Secondary tasks. Two secondary tasks were used: one
visuospatial (finger tapping) and one articulatory (sylla-

Several companies that manufacture electronics have
decided to get together for a convention to show their
wares. A large convention center was chosen because its
large, rectangular floor plan can be easily changed to
accommodate the needs of various conventions.
Temporary wall dividers are used to separate the displays
and to form a single entrance to each display. The displays
have been grouped according to three categories-Visual
Equipment, Personal Computers, and Audio Equipment.
You go to the east side of the building near the southeast
corner where you find the entrance. As you walk into the
building, you see, on your left, a Bulletin Board. The
Bulletin Board is used in every convention for the business
cards of the participating companies. Continuing straight
ahead from the entrance, where the Bulletin Board is on
your left, you reach, on your right, the Movie Cameras.
The Movie Cameras are set up to film people as they walk
by the display. Walking past the Movie Cameras on your
right, you see, again on your right, the 35mm Cameras. On
your left, stretching into the corner of the building, is the
Office. From the Office, you are forced to turn right and
you see, to your immediate left, the Restrooms. You
continue forward from the Restrooms until you see, on
your left stretching into the corner of the building, the
Cafeteria. The Cafeteria is privately run by a family that
leases the space on a permanent basis from the Convention
Center. From the Cafeteria, you walk forward, until you are
forced to turn right and you see, to your immediate left, the
CD Players. On your right are the Televisions. Like many
television displays, the sets are lined up along the walls, all
tuned to the same station. You walk past the Televisions, on
your right, and continue forward until you see, again on
your right, the VCR's. On your left are the Stereo
Components. This display includes such items as receivers,
turntables, speakers, and tape decks. From the Stereo
Components you walk forward until you are forced to turn
right and you see, to your immediate left, the Personal
Computers. There are software samples available for
potential customers to test the various computers. From the
Personal Computers, you walk until you reach, on your left,
the corridor leading to the entrance of the building.

ble string repetition). The visuospatial task involved
repeatedly tapping four keys (2, 4, 6, 8) on a numeric
keypad in a counter-clockwise rotation. The articulatory
task involved repeating the sequence `BA BE BI BO'
aloud. Both tasks were done at a rate approximating 1
tap (spatial) or 1 syllable (verbal) per second.
Dependent measures. The present experiment incorporated two memory tasks: statement verification and map
drawing. The statement verification task assessed description knowledge that could be directly (verbatim) and indirectly (inference and paraphrase) acquired from the text.
Verbatim trials probed locative and non-locative knowl-

706

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Table 1b
Survey and route perspective descriptions for the town environment
Survey description: Town

Route description: Town

One of the largest town fairs and pumpkin festivals in the
United States is held each year in the town of Etna. Etna
is a typical small New England town. The lay-out of the
town has not changed much since it was founded in the
1700s. Etna and its surrounding areas are bordered by four
major landmarks: the White Mountains, the White River,
the River Highway, and Mountain Rd. The northern
border is made up of the White Mountain Range. Running
north-south along the western border of this region is the
White River. The southern border is made up of the River
Highway. Along the eastern border, connecting the River
Highway to the mountains, is Mountain Rd. Most of Etna
lies west of Mountain Rd. just north of its intersection
with the River Highway. Etna is built around four streets
that surround the Town Park. On the eastern edge of the
park, there is a white Gazebo. The Gazebo is used to
house the town band during afternoon concerts. Along the
eastern edge of the Town Park runs Mountain Rd. The
other three streets in Etna are each only a block long.
Along the southern border of the park runs Maple St.
Maple St. is lined with large maple trees. These maples,
when they come alive with color in the fall are an
attraction for many tourists. Across the street from the
park, on separate sides, lie three of the town's main
buildings-the Town Hall, the Store, and the School. Across
the street from the east side of the park is the Town Hall.
The Town Hall is the oldest structure in the town and one
of the buildings around which the town was built. Across
the street from the north side of the park is the Store.
People often gather at the Store to find out the latest town
news. Across the street from the west side of the park is
the School. The little red, one-roomed schoolhouse is the
original school built when the town was founded. At the
northwest corner of River Highway and Mountain Rd. is
the Gas Station. One of the mechanics from the Gas
Station sits in front of the station office and waves to all
the cars that drive past.

One of the largest town fairs and pumpkin festivals in the United
States is held each year in the town of Etna. Etna is a typical small
New England town. The lay-out of the town has not changed
much since it was founded in the 1700s. To reach Etna, drive east
along the River Highway to where the highway crosses the White
River. Continuing on the River Highway, for another half mile
past the river you come to, on your left, Mountain Rd. You have
reached the town of Etna. As you turn left onto Mountain Rd.
from the River Highway, you see, on your immediate left, the
Gas Station. One of the mechanics from the Gas Station sits in
front of the station office and waves to all the cars that drive past.
Straight ahead, you can see the road disappearing into the
distant White Mountains. You drive on Mountain Rd. a block
past the Gas Station, and come to, on your left, Maple St.
Turning left onto Maple St., you see that the street is lined with
large maple trees. These maples, when they come alive with color
in the fall, are an attraction for many tourists. After turning left
onto Maple St. from Mountain Rd., you see, on your right, the
Town Park--a central feature of Etna. You travel a block on
Maple St. and are forced to make a right turn. On your left,
about a half a block after you turn off of Maple St., is the School.
The little red, one-roomed schoolhouse is the original school
built when the town was founded. Continuing along this street
for another half a block, you are again forced to make a right
turn. You turn and drive a half a block where you see, on your
left, the Store. People often gather at the Store to find out the
latest town news. This road continues for another half a block
where it dead-ends into Mountain Rd. After you make a right
turn onto Mountain Rd., you drive about a half a block to where
you see, on your left, the Town Hall. The Town Hall is the oldest
structure in the town and one of the buildings around which the
town was built. From your position with the Town Hall on your
left, you see, on your right, a white Gazebo near the edge of the
park. The Gazebo is used to house the town band during
afternoon concerts. You return to where Mountain Rd deadends into the River Highway. You turn left from Mountain Rd.
and leave the town of Etna by taking the River Highway.

edge. A total of eight verbatim locative statements and
four verbatim non-locative statements were derived from
route and survey descriptions for each environment.
Inference trials probed locative information not directly
conveyed by the text. For each environment a total of
twelve inference statements took on route (6) and survey
(6) perspectives. Note that across-perspective verbatim
locative statements are always considered inference questions. Four paraphrase verification trials probed nonlocative information not directly imparted by the text.
Henceforth these trial types will be termed `statement
types'. There were 22 (78.5% of items) true and six
(21.5% of items) false statements in the statement verification task. The map drawing task involved self-paced
drawing of sketch maps on blank paper.

Procedures
Learning. Each participant learned both the town and
convention center, in either a route or survey perspective
in a counterbalanced manner (one from a route perspective and one from a survey perspective). That is, participants read a single description (e.g., town in survey
perspective) three times in succession, and then
advanced to memory testing; they then read a second
description (e.g., convention center in route perspective)
three times in succession, and then advanced to memory
testing. Descriptions, presented using SuperLab software for the Macintosh appeared in 14-point bold
Times New Roman font, one sentence at a time on the
computer screen. Presentation rates were established
by examining reading rates in a pilot study, during

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

which eight participants learned route and survey versions of the descriptions in a self-paced manner. Based
on these data, presentation rates were set at the average
reading time for each sentence plus 2.5 SD. Each
description was presented three times in succession.
Secondary tasks. Participants were divided into three
secondary task groups: control (no secondary task), visuospatial (tapping with non-dominant hand), and articulatory (syllable repetition). Participants practiced their
assigned task to criterion (perfect performance for three
consecutive strings). Experimenters verbally encouraged
tapping and repetition rates of approximately one
response (tap, syllable) per second.
Dependent measures. Participants completed the memory after each of the two learning sessions, in a counterbalanced manner, as quickly as possible without
compromising accuracy. Participants responded to
statement verification trials by pressing keys labeled as
true (C) or false (M) with their dominant hand. Accuracy and response time were recorded. The map drawing
task was limited to 10-min.

707

Statement verification. Three 3(secondary task: control, visuospatial, articulatory) * 2(study perspective:
route, survey) * 2(statement type: varied for each
ANOVA) mixed models ANOVAs were performed
on both accuracy and response time data from verbatim locative, verbatim and paraphrased non-locative,
and inference statements. Note that study and testing
combinations that cross perspectives require inferencing and were treated as such. To ensure that are
response time results were not driven (or masked) by
a positively-skewed distribution, all analyses (across
all experiments) were also completed using log(10)
transformed data; these analyses did not yield different
results than the pre-transformed data, and thus are
not reported here.
Map drawing. Three 3(secondary task: control, visuospatial, articulatory) * 2(study perspective: route, survey) mixed models ANOVAs were performed on data
from the three map scoring procedures.
Planned comparisons. Across all analyses, planned
comparisons were performed using t-tests with Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons.

Results
Scoring
Statement verification. Accuracy was averaged for each
statement type within each description type (route, survey). Response times were averaged for correct trials
only, for each statement type. To test for response bias
we conducted a total of 96 McNemar v2 tests for dichotomous (true/false) variables, one for each participant's
statement verification data, none of which revealed
observed response proportions biased in the ``true''
direction (v2max 1/4 2:21, all ps > .05).
Map drawing. Map scoring evaluated landmark recall,
relative landmark locations, and quadrant accuracy.
Landmark recall is the proportion of landmark names
correctly recalled relative to the total number presented
(12). Relative landmark location accuracy assesses correspondence with 26 landmark-to-landmark comparisons
derived from the survey and route descriptions (e.g., Is
the store north of the town hall?). Quadrant accuracy provides an assessment of global configuration, computed by
dividing each sketch map into quadrants along predetermined north and south axes, and summing the number
of landmarks drawn within each quadrant. This (denominator) was compared with the number of landmarks correctly drawn within the quadrant (numerator).
Analysis
For all analyses, we confirmed that there was no
main effect of or interactions with learning order (survey
or route first or second; all ps > .10, Fmax = 2.21).

Statement verification results: Accuracy
Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
As depicted in Fig. 1a, there was a main effect of secondary task, F(2, 45) = 19.82, p < .01, MSE = .01. Planned
comparisons revealed higher accuracy in the control
group relative to both the visuospatial, t(30) = 7.80,
p < .01, and the articulatory, t(30) = 8.59, p < .01,
groups. In line with previous findings, an effect of statement type revealed highest accuracy within- rather than
across-perspectives,
F(1, 45) = 47.45,
MSE = .02,
p < .01; the latter require inferencing. Finally, there
was a secondary task by statement type interaction,
F(2, 45) = 8.32, MSE = .02, p < .01. Supporting our
hypotheses, planned comparisons revealed that performance differences between the visuospatial and control
groups showed up only when an inference was required:
during across-perspective, t(30) = 6.48, p < .01, and not
within-perspective, t(30) = 1.06, p > .05, trials. There
were no other effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).
Non-locative verbatim and paraphrased statements.
There was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 17.38, p < .01, MSE = .01. Supporting the notion that articulatory secondary tasks
interfere with description reading in a broad-based manner, planned comparisons revealed higher accuracy in
the control group (M = .97, SE = .02) relative to the
articulatory (M = .87, SE = .02), t(30) = 5.34, p < .01,
but not the visuospatial (M = .95, SE = .02),
t(30) = 1.12, p > .05, group. There were no other effects
for these statement types (Fs <1).

708

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

1
0.9

Accuracy

0.8
0.7

Control

0.6

VS Task

0.5

Artic Task

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Learn Survey

Learn Route

Within-Perspective

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Across-Perspective

Statement Type
1
0.9
0.8

Control

Accuracy

0.7

VS Task

0.6

Artic Task

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Learn Survey

Inference Survey

Learn Route

Inference Route

Statement Type
Fig. 1. (a and b) Experiment 1 mean accuracy and standard error on the statement verification task for (a) locative verbatim items,
within and across perspective, and following survey and route learning, and (b) locative inference items, following survey and route
learning. Results are displayed by secondary task group.

Locative inference statements: Survey and route. There
was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 36.79, p < .01, MSE = .01.
Planned comparisons revealed higher accuracy in the
control group (M = .86, SE = .02) relative to the articulatory (M = .74, SE = .02), t(30) = 6.26, p < .01, and
visuospatial (M = .69, SE = .01), t(30) = 7.55, p < .01,
groups (see Fig. 1b). Further, secondary task interacted with description perspective, F(2, 45) = 3.33,
p < .05, MSE = .01. Whereas both secondary tasks
reduced inferencing accuracy following survey description learning, the visuospatial task had a relatively
pronounced influence following route description
learning. There were no other effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).

Statement verification results: Response times
Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
There was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 4.83, p < .05, MSE = 2.65.
Planned comparisons revealed faster response times in
the control group (M = 5.99, SE = .21) relative to the
visuospatial (M = 6.84, SE = .21), t(30) = 3.41, p < .01,
but not the articulatory (M = 6.64, SE = .21),
t(30) = 1.89, p < .025, group. Demonstrating the added
difficulty in perspective-switching during inference generation, an effect of statement type revealed faster
response times within- (M = 4.83, SE = .11) compared
to
across-perspectives
(M = 8.14,
SE = .17),
F(1, 45) = 380.85, MSE = 1.39, p < .01. Finally, there
was a secondary task by statement type interaction,

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

709

F(2, 45) = 6.23, MSE = 1.39, p < .01. Response time differences between visuospatial and control groups existed
only for across-, t(30) = 4.62, p < .01, and not withinperspective, t(30) = .604, p > .05, trials. There were no
other effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).

gural knowledge development, the visuospatial,
t(30) = 7.36, p < .01, but not articulatory group,
t(30) = 1.91, p > .05, showed reduced relative landmark
location accuracy relative to the control group (see
Fig. 3). There were no other effects for this measure.

Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).

Quadrant accuracy. There was a main effect of secondary task for this measure, F(2, 45) = 3.18, p < .10,
MSE = .01. Supporting our prediction that visuospatial
secondary tasking interferes with global configural
knowledge development, the visuospatial (M = .90,
SE = .02), t(30) = 2.75, p < .01, but not articulatory
group (M = .93, SE = .02), t(30) = 1.34, p > .05, showed
reduced quadrant accuracy relative to the control group
(M = .97, SE = .02). There were no other effects for this
measure.

Locative inference survey and route statements. There
was a main effect of secondary task for these statement
types, F(2, 45) = 5.89, p < .01, MSE = 6.15. Complementing the accuracy results, planned comparisons
revealed faster response times in the control group relative to the visuospatial, t(30) = 3.47, p < .01, but not the
articulatory, t(30) = 1.50, p > .025, group (see Fig. 2).
There were no other effects for these statement types
(Fs <1).
Map drawing
Landmark recall. There was a main effect of secondary
task for this measure, F(2, 45) = 7.59, p < .01,
MSE = .02. Supporting our prediction that articulatory
secondary tasking interferes with declarative memory
formation, the articulatory group (M = .77, SE = .02),
t(30) = 3.77, p < .01, but not visuospatial group
(M = .87, SE = .02), t(30) = .76, p > .05, showed
reduced landmark recall relative to the control group
(M = .90, SE = .02). There were no other effects for this
measure.
Relative landmark location. There was a main effect of
secondary task for this measure, F(2, 45) = 30.37,
p < .01, MSE = .01. Supporting our prediction that visuospatial secondary tasking interferes with local confi-

Discussion
In this experiment, three participant groups learned
route and survey spatial descriptions with either no secondary task, a visuospatial secondary task, or an articulatory secondary task. The control group (i.e., no
secondary task) replicated the main results of Taylor
and Tversky (1992a); specifically, while these participants were faster and more accurate at verifying verbatim locative relative to inference statements, they could
solve spatial inferences presented in both perspectives
roughly equivalently, regardless of learning perspective.
This could be seen in both statement verification and
map drawing. Participants developed spatial mental
models from both perspective descriptions and used
them successfully at test.
The visuospatial secondary task interfered with spatial mental model development, evidenced by lower performance on several memory measures (inferencing,

Average Response Time (sec)

10
9
8

Control
VS Task
Artic Task

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Learn Survey

Inference Survey

Learn Route

Inference Route

Statement Type
Fig. 2. Experiment 1 mean response time and standard error on the statement verification task for locative inference items, following
survey and route learning, displayed by secondary task group.

710

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

1
0.9
0.8
Control
VS Task
Artic Task

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Survey

Route
Perspective

Fig. 3. Experiment 1 mean accuracy and standard error on the relative landmark location scoring procedure for the map drawing task,
displayed by secondary task group.

relative map landmark location, and map quadrant
accuracy) relative to the control group. Further, the visuospatial task interfered more with inferencing accuracy
following route, relative to survey, learning. The latter
effect supports the notion that with route descriptions,
additional visuospatial resources may be involved in
monitoring and updating information relative to a principle reference vector (i.e., Shelton & McNamara, 2004),
and forming rich mental imagery (Brunye & Taylor,
2007; Farmer et al., 1986; Miyake et al., 2001). In contrast, visuospatial suppression did not interfere with
nonlocative (verbatim or paraphrased) or verbatim locative verification following route or survey learning. Map
drawing revealed similar results, with visuospatial interference showing up in both relative landmark location
(local spatial knowledge) and quadrant accuracy (global
spatial knowledge) results, but not in landmark recall
(declarative knowledge) results.
Articulatory suppression produced decrements
across verification tasks requiring the application of
declarative memories and spatial mental models. These
results speak to the importance of articulatory mechanisms during spatial description reading, regardless of
perspective, allowing readers to gather the verbal foundation for developing both declarative memories and
spatial mental models. This finding is in line with the
notion that readers progress from a representation of
the text itself (i.e., the surface form), to a text-base or
propositional form, to a mental model of the described
environment (i.e., van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983); interfering
with articulatory processes during reading reduces the
ability to extract the elements necessary for forming
propositions. These findings are also similar to those
found in other selective interference work (Canas
et al., 2003; Pazzaglia et al., 2007). In contrast to our
hypothesis, the effects of articulatory suppression did
not show up in response times to declarative memory

measures. The data suggest a trend in this direction,
but did not reach significance.
Across all dependent measures and scoring procedures, interactions with description perspective, verification type and scoring procedure allow us to dissociate
the difficulty and selectivity of our two secondary tasks.
To the extent that a given secondary task is relatively
demanding overall, interactive effects upon memory performance as a function of description perspective, and a
consistent comparison only to control group performance, should preclude difficulty--rather than selectivity-based interpretations. Indeed our findings are
congruent with recent work using both the same and different tasks; for instance, we provide converging evidence
that our articulatory task interferes with verbal resources
in general--the result of which is broad-based when the
learning materials are verbal in nature (e.g., descriptions;
De Beni et al., 2005; Pazzaglia et al., 2007), but not when
they are solely spatial in nature (e.g., diagrams and maps;
Brunye et al., 2006; Canas et al., 2003).
The present results also expand the findings of De
Beni and colleagues (2005), demonstrating that both
articulatory and visuospatial processes are important
working memory processes for route and survey spatial
discourse comprehension and memory. They also support the notion that route descriptions present additional cognitive demands relative to survey
descriptions (Brunye & Taylor, 2007; Lee & Tversky,
2005; Shelton & McNamara, 2004) as evidenced by
greater visuospatial interference. Our results demonstrate that spatial information is in fact tracked when
people read spatial descriptions, likely in an effort to
form inferences and develop mental models of the environment, especially when other indexes are limited, as
suggested by the extant literature (i.e., de Vega, 1995;
Levine & Klin, 2001; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992; Taylor
et al., 1999).

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Experiment 2
Our first experiment demonstrated the unique contributions of visuospatial and articulatory mechanisms;
our second experiment investigates central executive
functions during spatial description reading. Two central executive functions are of interest--resource coordination, and spatial-sequential processing. One
secondary task was designed to interfere with the coordination of visuospatial and articulatory resources through
random generation. The other was designed to interfere
with temporal indexing through sequential updating (i.e.,
a two-back working memory task).
Random generation appears to require central executive involvement towards the switching of retrieval plans
and repetition inhibition in an effort to avoid falling into
perceptible patterns (i.e., Baddeley et al., 1998; Duncan,
Emslie, Williams, Johnson, & Freer, 1996; Miyake et al.,
2001). These same resources appear to be necessary for
the switching between and eventual integration of visuospatial and articulatory representations within working
memory (Brunye et al., 2006). Based on this analysis
and Experiment 1 results we expect that route descriptions in particular will demand central resources for
coordinating processes involved in representing the language itself and those involved in visuospatial thinking
and mental imagery. Thus, random generation should
interfere with both description perspectives due to their
demand for spatial and verbal resources to develop spatial mental models, but should do so to a greater extent
with route descriptions.
Auditory sequence monitoring requires continuous
updating of sequential representations within working
memory, another proposed central executive function
(Brunye et al., 2006; Miyake & Shah, 1999; Rabinowitz,
Craik, & Ackerman, 1982). Based on this requirement
and work illustrating the importance of monitoring
and updating positions relative to a principle reference
vector (Shelton & McNamara, 2004), we hypothesize
that route, in contrast to survey, descriptions would
demand more online sequence indexing during reading.
While reading itself is a serial process, the added demand
of monitoring and updating relative to an unfolding spatial-sequential framework leads to our prediction that
route descriptions would recruit additional sequence
indexing resources, beyond those needed for reading
alone. This hypothesis is based on the assumption that
readers spontaneously track sequential information in
an effort to establish mental models (i.e., Radvansky,
Zwaan, Federico, & Franklin, 1998; Rapp & Taylor,
2004), and that route descriptions in particular demand
constant updating of egocentric orientations relative to a
principle reference vector (Brunye & Taylor, 2007; Shelton & McNamara, 2004). In summary, based on analysis
of central executive processes, we hypothesize that both
central executive directed secondary tasks, one requiring

711

random generation and the other requiring sequence
updating, would detrimentally impact route, compared
to survey, description reading.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-two Tufts University undergraduates participated for partial course credit, randomly divided into
two groups: 16 for the random generation task, and 16
for the sequence monitoring task. Because multiple
experiments in our labs have replicated the stability of
the control group means across participant samples,
time frames, and universities, data from Experiment 1
control participants comprise the control groups in
Experiments 2-4. See Tables 2-4 for several studies that
have used identical stimuli and dependent measures;
these data demonstrate the reliability of means across
dependent measures, experiments, and institutions.
Materials
Materials were identical to those used in Experiment
1 with the exception of the two secondary tasks.
Secondary tasks. Two secondary tasks were used, one
involving self-paced random generation (finger tapping)
and one involving experimenter-paced sequence monitoring (auditory). The random generation task was similar to Experiment 1s finger tapping task, but involved
random, rather than sequential counter-clockwise, production of finger taps. We chose a random finger tapping, as opposed to syllable-string production, as
previous work has demonstrated similar central
demands of both tasks (Brunye et al., 2006), and finger
tapping is relatively amenable to multiple-participant
experimental sessions. The sequence monitoring task
was adapted from Rabinowitz and colleagues (1982).
Participants listened to a sequence of monotonic beeps
occurring in their left and right ears, monitoring for a
target sequence of three consecutive beeps in their left
ear. Beeps were approximately 500 ms in duration, with
an ISI of 1000 ms. The full recording was 650-beeps in
length, with the following constraints (Rabinowitz
et al., 1982): at least one and no greater than five beeps
could occur between target sequences and no more than
two right ear beeps could occur in sequence.
Procedures
Procedures were identical to those used in Experiment 1 with the exception of the two secondary tasks.
Secondary tasks. Participants were divided into two
secondary task groups: random tapping and sequence
monitoring. Participants received instructions for their
assigned task and practiced to criterion. The criterion
for the random generation task was 60 s of tapping at

712

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Table 2
Control group means reflecting accuracy on the statement verification tasks across experiments and institutions
Authors (year)

Data collection site

Survey learning

Route learning

M

SE

M

SE

.95
.88

.025
.032

.94
.86

.027
.032

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.98
.96

.021
.025

.97
.95

.021
.028

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.85
.83

.032
.031

.84
.84

.032
.030

.96
.84

.021
.026

.95
.83

.042
.031

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.98
.97

.017
.019

.98
.96

.015
.019

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.83
.82

.043
.044

.83
.89

.047
.030

.97
.87

.014
.030

.95
.85

.018
.037

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.97
.96

.015
.016

.97
.95

.019
.018

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.84
.85

.041
.033

.83
.89

.039
.028

.95
.82

.031
.030

.97
.84

.029
.011

.97
.96

.013
.010

.97
.95

.012
.011

.89
.89

.025
.021

.88
.87

.029
.024

.95
.75

.042
.045

.94
.83

.027
.020

Measure: Statement type
Present control data
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Brunye and Taylor (2007)
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Brunye (2007) (Experiment 7)
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Taylor and Tversky (1992a, 1992b)
Experiment 1
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective
Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased
Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route
Experiment 2
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Tufts University

Tufts University

Dartmouth College

Stanford University

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

713

Table 2 (continued)
Authors (year)

Data collection site

Survey learning
M

Route learning
SE

M

SE

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.97
.97

.019
.010

.95
.93

.017
.021

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.86
.84

.038
.027

.81
.79

.030
.039

Experiment 3
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

.95
.82

N/A
N/A

.96
.88

N/A
N/A

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.98
.96

N/A
N/A

.98
.98

N/A
N/A

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.90
.89

N/A
N/A

.88
.86

N/A
N/A

N/A, not available for retrieval.

an approximate 1 tap per second rate while inhibiting
repetition or pattern-seeking. The experimenter verbally
encouraged random tapping when participants fell into
obvious patterns. The criterion for the sequence monitoring task was identifying three targets within a 27 beep
practice session; to make sure participants were monitoring the task, they had to make tick marks on a sheet
of paper upon identification of each target sequence.
Results
Analysis
Analyses were done in an identical manner to those
of Experiment 1, substituting random generation and
sequence monitoring secondary tasks for visuospatial
and articulatory suppression. For all analyses, we confirmed that there was no main effect of or interactions
with learning order (survey or route first or second),
(all ps > .10, Fmax = 1.69).
Statement verification: Accuracy
A total of 64 McNemar v2 tests for response bias did
not reveal response proportions biased in the ``true''
direction (v2max 1/4 2:71, all ps > .05).
Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
There was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 10.01, p < .01, MSE = .02.
Planned comparisons revealed that both secondary tasks
interfered with learning, with higher accuracy in the control group (M = .91, SE = .02) relative to both random
generation (M = .82, SE = .02), t(30) = 4, p < .01, and

sequence
monitoring
(M = .83,
SE = .02),
t(30) = 3.478, p < .01, groups. An effect of statement
type, F(1, 45) = 58.85, p < .01, MSE = .02, revealed
higher accuracy within- (M = .92, SE = .01) compared
to across-perspectives (M = .88, SE = .01). Finally a
secondary task by statement type interaction,
F(2, 45) = 5.51, p < .01, MSE = .02, revealed that secondary task performance differences were most pronounced for across-perspective study and test trials.
That is, as predicted and in line with the extant literature, central executive interference occurred primarily
when statement verification required inferencing. There
were no other effects for these statement types (Fs <1).
Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).
Locative inference survey and route statements. There
was a main effect of secondary task for these statement
types, F(2, 45) = 20.8, p < .01, MSE = .01. Planned
comparisons revealed higher accuracy in the control
group relative to the random generation, t(30) = 5.94,
p < .01, and sequence monitoring, t(30) = 4.520,
p < .01, groups (see Fig. 4). Further, secondary task
interacted with study perspective, F(2, 45) = 4.72,
p < .05, MSE = .01. Follow-up contrasts using the Bonferroni correction revealed:
Learn survey, inference survey and route. Supporting
our predictions, random generation, t(30) = 2.88,
p < .01 and t(30) = 2.49, p < .025, reduced performance

714

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Table 3
Control group means reflecting response times (sec) on the statement verification tasks across experiments and institutions
Authors (year)

Data collection site

Survey learning

Route learning

M

SE

M

SE

4.52
7.18

.273
.538

4.64
7.59

.382
.428

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

4.45
4.08

.605
.339

4.37
4.59

.284
.281

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

7.53
7.01

.360
.543

7.61
7.09

.428
.667

4.63
7.11

.303
.437

4.58
7.98

.292
.342

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

4.37
4.01

.456
.283

4.46
4.27

.262
.304

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

7.43
6.96

.598
.575

7.40
6.99

.607
.508

4.86
7.39

.223
.471

5.13
7.72

.262
.530

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

4.06
4.38

.307
.299

4.69
4.32

.333
.341

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

7.69
7.42

.309
.306

7.12
6.88

.338
.265

5.09
7.63

.296
.489

5.22
7.21

.432
.362

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

4.29
4.63

.328
.270

3.76
4.01

.205
.208

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

7.85
8.06

.284
.430

7.28
7.21

.452
.511

Experiment 2
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

4.74
6.92

.324
.394

5.70
6.62

.428
.403

Measure: Statement type
Present control data
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Brunye and Taylor (2007)
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Brunye (2007) (Experiment 7)
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Taylor and Tversky (1992a, 1992b)
Experiment 1
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

Tufts University

Tufts University

Dartmouth College

Stanford University

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

715

Table 3 (continued)
Authors (year)

Data collection site

Survey learning

Route learning

M

SE

M

SE

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

3.81
3.75

.419
.364

3.96
4.10

.368
.253

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

6.91
7.83

.462
.318

6.95
7.02

.418
.486

Experiment 3
Accuracy: Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

5.12
6.84

N/A
N/A

5.04
6.84

N/A
N/A

Accuracy: Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

3.77
4.51

N/A
N/A

3.72
4.55

N/A
N/A

Accuracy: Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

7.05
8.23

N/A
N/A

6.82
7.38

N/A
N/A

N/A, not available for retrieval.

Table 4
Control group means reflecting performance on the three map scoring procedures, across institutions
Authors (year)

Scoring procedure
Present control data
Landmark recall
Relative landmark locations
Quadrant accuracy

Data collection site

Survey learning

Route learning

M

SE

M

SE

.91
.96
.97

.029
.020
.023

.89
.92
.96

.032
.030
.018

.90
.95
.96

.144
.078
.051

.91
.95
.95

.103
.081
.101

.87
.95
.96

.041
.021
.028

.85
.91
.94

.039
.023
.026

Tufts University

Brunye and Taylor (2007)
Landmark recall
Relative landmark locations
Quadrant accuracy

Tufts University

Brunye (2007) (Experiment 7)
Landmark recall
Relative landmark locations
Quadrant accuracy

Dartmouth College

Learn route, inference survey and route. For both survey
and route inferences, sequence monitoring, t(30) = 3.36,
p < .01 and t(30) = 4.26, p < .01, respectively, reduced
performance. Random generation, t(30) = 2.25,
p < .025 for survey inferences and t(30) = 3.68,
p < .025 for route inferences, did as well.

Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
A main effect of study perspective revealed faster
response times following survey (M = 5.99, SE = .28),
relative to route (M = 6.48, SE = .32), study,
F(1, 45) = 5.82, p < .05, MSE = 2.03. An effect of statement type, F(1, 45) = 258.36, p < .01, MSE = 1.64,
revealed faster response times within- (M = 4.75,
SE = .16) compared to across-perspectives (M = 7.72,
SE = .26). There were no other effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).

Statement verification: Response times
Overall, response times from the statement verification task did not reveal any effect of secondary task.

Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).

on both survey and route inferences (respectively).
Sequence monitoring, however, did not for either perspective inferences (ps > .05).

716

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

1
0.9
0.8
Control
Rand. Gen. Task
Seq. Mon. Task

Accuracy

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Learn Survey

Inference Survey

Learn Route

Inference Route

Statement Type
Fig. 4. Experiment 2 mean accuracy and standard error on the statement verification task for locative inference items, following survey
and route learning, displayed by secondary task group.

Locative inference survey and route statements. There
were no significant main effects or interactions for these
statement types (all ps > .05).
Map drawing
Landmark recall. There were no significant main effects
or interactions for this measure (all ps > .05).
Relative landmark location. There was a main effect of
secondary task for this measure, F(2, 45) = 4.81,
p < .05, MSE = .01. Relative to the control group, both
random generation, t(30) = 2.44, p < .025, and sequence
monitoring, t(30) = 2.94, p < .01, reduced relative land-

mark location accuracy (see Fig. 5). Note that in line
with our predictions sequence monitoring suppression
appears primarily following route perspective learning--this interaction did not reach significance, however
(p < .10). There were no other effects for this measure.
Quadrant accuracy. There was a main effect of secondary
task for this measure, F(2, 45) = 3.49, p < .05, MSE = .01.
Relative to the control group (M = .97, SE = .02), both
sequence monitoring (M = .90, SE = .02), t(30) = 2.486,
p < .025, and random generation (M = .91, SE = .02),
t(30) = 2.45, p < .025, reduced quadrant location accuracy. There were no other effects for this measure.

1

Proportion Accuracy

0.9
0.8
Control
Rand. Gen. Task
Seq. Mon. Task

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Survey

Route
Perspective

Fig. 5. Experiment 2 mean accuracy and standard error on the relative landmark location scoring procedure for the map drawing task,
displayed by secondary task group.

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Discussion
In this experiment, we predicted that both central
executive tasks, random generation and sequence monitoring, would interfere with route and survey learning;
we also predicted that these effects would be most pronounced with route learning. Overall, the present results
were generally congruent with hypothesized central
executive functions as applied to spatial description
reading, with some exceptions.
Interference from random generation was selective to
mental model measures, and not measures of declarative
memory. This effect was apparent for both description
perspectives. Random generation interfered with survey
and route inferencing accuracy; response time data mirrored this pattern but did not reach significance. Map
drawing data also revealed marginally lower relative
landmark location and quadrant accuracy for the random generation, relative to the control, group. Taken
together, these results suggest that random generation
interferes with spatial mental model formation. Given
past work (Baddeley et al., 1998; Brunye et al., 2006)
we believe that random generation draws directly from
central executive resources involved in the supervisory
coordination of visuospatial (e.g., mental imagery) and
articulatory (e.g., reading) systems. Further, the degree
of central involvement appears to be similar for both
route and survey descriptions, in contrast to our prediction that route descriptions would demand additional
resources relative to survey descriptions.
Sequence monitoring during learning produced performance decrements that appear specific to forming spatial mental models from route, but not survey,
descriptions. This was evidenced by reduced performance
on both survey and route inferencing following route
learning. In contrast, sequence monitoring did not appear
to interfere with forming spatial mental models from survey descriptions, nor did sequence monitoring interfere
with acquisition of declarative information. These results
support the notion that readers of route descriptions monitor unfolding sequential information during route
description reading; this monitoring process appears to
aid in spatial mental model development, and may be initially tied to a principle reference vector (Shelton &
McNamara, 2004). In further support of this finding, following route learning with sequential suppression,
acquired memories were biased away from the egocentric
perspective towards a relatively allocentric model, or cognitive map (i.e., Tolman, 1948; Kitchin, 1994). Specifically, these participants showed signs of perspectivespecificity, but not congruent with the route format. It is
likely that given the suppression of sequence processing,
participants actively formed allocentric models to compensate for impoverished sequencing resources.
Although relatively less work has addressed central
executive targeted secondary tasks, results from these

717

two tasks targeting central executive processes support
earlier findings in our own and others' labs (Baddeley
et al., 1998; Brunye, 2007; Della Sala et al., 1995; Duff,
2000; Duff & Logie, 2001; Miyake & Shah, 1999;
Miyake et al., 2000). Random generation tasks appear
to occupy resources used to actively select and integrate
verbal and visuospatial information during learning,
whereas the present two-back working memory task
appears to interfere with sequence monitoring resources.
These two central processes appear to be critical towards
the development of spatial mental models during
description reading.

Experiment 3
Our final experiments examine the effects of four secondary tasks after learning spatial descriptions, during
application to statement verification and map drawing.
A fundamental question in language research is whether
readers develop mental models during reading, or if
these models come together only as needed. Experiment
1 suggests that readers either form mental models during
spatial description reading, or they gather the necessary
information for later consolidation into mental models,
perhaps during testing. The event indexing model
(Zwaan et al., 1995; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998) predicts
mental model construction and updating during reading,
ultimately resulting in coherent final memory representations. The resulting mental models code events both
described within and inferred from the text. This
assumption is supported by work demonstrating difficulty integrating incoming information into an evolving
mental model when that information does not correspond well with a model's current state (e.g., Zwaan
et al., 1995, 1998), or fit with a reader's standards of
coherence (van den Broek et al., 2001).
Experiments 1 and 2 support the extant literature by
demonstrating that whereas it is possible for readers to
make inferences at test, response times indicate this is
a difficult process. It is therefore unlikely that these
inferences were made during reading. We propose that
the resulting model is not a collection of specific inferences. Rather, certain spatial inferences may be made
during reading (e.g., thematic overlays from multiple
perspectives; Tversky, 1993), and others may be made
in response to testing demands (e.g., novel spatial relationships from a novel perspective). The role of the mental model, then, is to provide a perspective-flexible
foundation from which to extract information necessary
to generate inferences when needed, and to store any
inferences generated during and after reading. This is
not to say that spatial mental models do not preserve
certain characteristics of the learning format; indeed
recent work has demonstrated orientation specificity
after route learning during scene recognition (Shelton

718

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

& McNamara, 2004), and earlier work demonstrated
that map drawing often progresses in a manner corresponding to the landmark ordering in the description
(Taylor & Tversky, 1992a). Thus, if the mental model
provides this foundation for spatial inferences, working
memory processes should also be evoked during test.
Note that for consistency we adapt Baddeley's (i.e.,
1992) multi-component model terminology to processes
involving retrieval from long-term memory. This contrasts with Ericsson and Kintsch's (1995) terminology,
which labels working memory processes during retrieval
as occurring within ``long-term working memory''.
While the rationale for working memory processes
during spatial mental model application clearly exists,
general assessments of working memory at retrieval suggest they may play a lesser role. A number of studies
have demonstrated pronounced effects of dual-tasking
during learning, but not testing (e.g., Baddeley et al.,
1984; Baddeley, Lewis, Eldridge, & Thompson, 1984;
Craik, Govoni, Naveh-Benjamin, & Anderson, 1996).
This finding is often attributed to relative ease and accessibility of retrieving versus forming memories. Spatial
mental models may represent a special case whereby
interference may be pronounced during retrieval if the
existing model is insufficient to complete a particular
memory task. Inference generation may be especially
vulnerable to the effects of central and visuospatial interference if spatial mental models cannot be characterized
as containing a collection of inferences developed during
reading (Graesser et al., 1997).
Our specific experimental hypotheses and rationale
are as follows: drawing maps and verifying inference
statements should involve a high degree of visuospatial
reasoning. Spatial reasoning about environments is
likely to recruit visuospatial mechanisms (De Beni
et al., 2005; Gyselinck et al., 2007; Lee & Tversky,
2005). Visuospatial secondary tasks should therefore
interfere with map drawing and inference statement
verification; performance decrements on the latter
may be more evident in response times, reflecting the
presence of a spatial mental model with the need for
retrieval and/or computational time. Articulatory secondary tasks, in contrast, are expected to interfere
selectively with declarative information acquired during learning. Thus, an articulatory secondary task
should impact verbatim and paraphrased statement
verification. These statement types may be best served
by a representations of the text itself, suggesting that
participants may maintain and directly apply surface
and propositional representations when verifying these
statement types. Experiment 1 supports this hypothesis, demonstrating faster response times for verbatim
and paraphrased, relative to inference statement verification trials. However, if the representations being
applied are not verbal in nature, or they are exceedingly easy to retrieve (i.e., Baddeley, Lewis, & Eldridge

et al., 1984), articulatory suppression may show no
interference effects at retrieval.
The following two experiments also examine secondary task performance. If studies demonstrating
pronounced effects of dual-tasking during learning,
but not testing (Baddeley et al., 1984; Baddeley,
Lewis, & Eldridge et al., 1984; Craik et al., 1996) also
apply to spatial description processing, performance
decrements may instead be seen with the secondary
task (i.e., response slowing, error making; Baddeley
et al., 1984; Baddeley, Lewis, & Eldridge et al.,
1984; Craik et al., 1996) as a function of the nature
of the primary task.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-two Tufts University undergraduates participated for partial course credit, randomly divided into
two even groups: 16 for the visuospatial and 16 for the
articulatory task. Data from the Experiment 1 control
participants comprise the present control group. See
Tables 2-4 for several studies that have used identical
stimuli and dependent measures; these data demonstrate
the reliability of means across dependent measures,
experiments, and institutions.
Materials
Materials were identical to those used in Experiment 1.
Procedures
Procedures were identical to those used in Experiment 1 with the exception of secondary task timing.
Secondary tasks. Secondary tasks were used during
testing (i.e., statement verification and map drawing),
rather than reading. Participants completed statement
verification and map drawing using their dominant
hand while simultaneously finger tapping with their
non-dominant hand. Secondary task performance
was recorded via a digital video-recorder during statement verification for assessment of secondary-task
rate.
Results
Analysis
Analyses were identical to those of Experiment 1,
with the addition of the secondary task rate as an additional dependent measure. For each participant we
recorded the number of finger taps (visuospatial) or syllables (articulatory) for each correctly-answered verification statement and divided this number by that trial's
response time. These proportions (responses per second)
were averaged for each statement type within the two
description perspectives.

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

A total of 64 McNemar v2 tests for response bias did
not reveal response proportions biased in the ``true''
direction (v2max 1/42.56, all ps > .05).
For all analyses, we confirmed that there was no
main effect of or interactions with learning order (survey
or route first or second), (all ps > .10, Fmax = 2.03).
Statement verification: Accuracy
Overall, accuracy results from the statement verification task suggest that whereas spatial mental models are
available towards perspective-switching at test, visuospatial resources are necessary towards accurate inference generation at test.

719

p > .05. There were no other effects for these statement
types (Fs < 1).
Statement verification: Response times
Response time results revealed large performance
decrements when participants were performing secondary tasks at test, with visuospatial interference during
perspective-switching and inferencing, and articulatory
interference during declarative memory retrieval.

Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).

Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
As depicted in Fig. 6, there was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 3.78,
p < .05, MSE = 2.69. Planned comparisons revealed faster response times in the control group relative to the
visuospatial, t(30) = 2.52, p < .025, and marginally for
the articulatory, t(30) = 2.12, p < .05, group. As in
Experiment 1, an effect of statement type revealed faster
responses for within- relative to across-perspective study
and test trials, F(1, 45) = 337.48, p < .01, MSE = 1.24.
Further, statement type interacted with secondary task,
revealing different performance based on secondary
task, F(2, 45) = 10.97, p < .01, MSE = 1.24. The visuospatial task interfered primarily with across-, and articulatory with within-perspective, study and test trials.
There were no other effects for these statement types
(Fs < 1).

Locative inference statements: Survey and route. There
was a main effect of secondary task for these statement
types, F(2, 45) = 3.29, p < .05, MSE = .02. Planned
comparisons revealed higher accuracy in the control
group (M = .86, SE = .02) relative to the visuospatial
(M = .80, SE = .03), t(30) = 2.28, p < .05, but not the
articulatory group (M = .85, SE = .02), t(30) = .49,

Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There was a main effect of secondary task for these statement types, F(2, 45) = 10.27, p < .05, MSE = 3.28.
Planned comparisons revealed faster response times in
the control group (M = 4.36, SE = .39) relative to the
articulatory (M = 5.63, SE = .31), t(30) = 3.69, p < .01,
but not the visuospatial (M = 4.44, SE = .28), t < 1,

Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
There was a main effect of statement type,
F(1, 45) = 26.97, p < .01, MSE = .02. Planned comparisons revealed higher accuracy within- (M = .94,
SE = .02) compared to across-perspectives (M = .83,
SE = .02). This effect replicates Experiment 1 and 2
reduced performance on across- relative to within-perspective study and test trials. There were no other effects
for these statement types (Fs < 1).

Average Response Time (sec)

10

Control
VS Task
Artic Task

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Within-Perspective

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Across-Perspective

Statement Type
Fig. 6. Experiment 3 mean response time and standard error on the statement verification task for locative verbatim items, within and
across perspectives, and following survey and route learning. Results are displayed by secondary task group.

720

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

group. There were no other effects for these statement
types (Fs < 1).
Inference survey and route statements. There was a main
effect of secondary task, F(2, 45) = 9.21, p < .01,
MSE = 4.43. Planned comparisons revealed faster
response times in the control group (M = 7.31,
SE = .51) relative to the visuospatial (M = 8.83,
SE = .34), t(30) = 3.6, p < .01, but not the articulatory
(M = 7.64, SE = .33), t(30) = .77, p > .05, group. There
were no other effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).
Secondary task performance
See Table 5 for visuospatial and articulatory secondary task performance for each of the six statement types.
Differences in secondary task performance were only
seen for the locative verbatim items (within- and
across-perspective). Participants tapped more slowly
during across-, relative to within-perspective statement
verification, F(1, 15) = 14.07, p < .01, MSE = .02. In
contrast, articulatory rates were marginally slower during within-perspective, relative to across-perspective
statement
verification,
F(1, 15) = 3.86,
p < .10,
MSE = .02.

Table 5
Experiment 3 average visuospatial (taps/s) and articulatory
secondary task performance (syllables/s), for each of the six
statement verification types and two study perspectives
Task & statement type

Study perspective
Survey

Route

M

SE

M

SE

Visuospatial task
Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

1.52
1.37

.034
.047

1.48
1.39

.039
.039

Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

1.56
1.60

.058
.048

1.58
1.52

.063
.050

Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

Map drawing
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for any of the map drawing dependent measures (all
ps > .05; see data in Table 6).
Discussion
One major goal of the present experiment was to
assess the extent to which spatial mental models formed
from survey and route description reading would allow
for direct inference retrieval. The present results support
our prediction that, whereas mental models are generally
formed during spatial description reading, these models
do not necessarily contain a collection of retrievable
inferences. Rather, manipulating these models towards
inference generation occurs when testing circumstances
demand such processes. Further, these mental models
are complemented by the retention of relatively coarse
surface features of the text, as suggested by map drawing
patterns (Taylor & Tversky, 1992a) and recent work
with spatial descriptions and videos (Shelton & McNamara, 2004). We review these results below, in turn, by
secondary task.
Visuospatial suppression during statement verification consistently and selectively interfered with inferencing times, and inconsistently with inferencing accuracy,
relative to the control group. These results suggest that
participants are forming perspective-flexible mental
models during reading, but these models do not support
direct inference retrieval. Rather, they serve as a foundation for deriving the information necessary for making
inferences. Statement verification involving inferencing
about spatial environments appears to involve visuospatial mechanisms; this effect was most consistent in
response time.

Table 6
Experiment 3 means and standard errors for the three map
scoring procedures, by study perspective and secondary task
Measure and group

Study perspective
Survey

1.32
1.29

.046
.043

1.34
1.30

.051
.049

Articulatory task
Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

.825
.914

.036
.028

.819
.898

.040
.041

Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.838
.796

.048
.045

.787
.809

.049
.044

Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.897
.921

.037
.046

.816
.862

.041
.032

Route

M

SE

M

SE

.906
.911
.891

.029
.025
.026

.885
.875
.864

.032
.032
.038

Relative landmark locations
Control
.959
Visuospatial
.899
Articulatory
.913

.020
.024
.023

.916
.934
.926

.030
.021
.024

Quadrant accuracy
Control
Visuospatial
Articulatory

.023
.016
.017

.963
.949
.960

.018
.018
.017

Landmark recall
Control
Visuospatial
Articulatory

.973
.959
.968

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Articulatory suppression interfered only when participants could rely upon surface or propositional forms,
which appear to be retained and easily used across short
study-test intervals. That is, the mental models coexist
with declarative surface or proposition representations;
these relatively superficial memory traces are likely to
decay with time, however (e.g., Kintsch, Welsch,
Schmalhofer, & Zimny, 1990). Neither the visuospatial
or articulatory tasks interfered with map drawing.
Because participants have a relatively long time to draw
their maps, map drawing may be more amenable to
task-switching between primary and secondary tasks,
or alternatively the present secondary tasks may not
share response competition demands (i.e., Hegarty,
Shah, & Miyake, 2000).
Secondary task performance showed slowed tapping
speed during inferencing, but slowed syllable articulation during non-inference statement verification. These
results further implicate visuospatial and articulatory
processes during retrieval and support the notion of separable processing mechanisms within working memory.
Finally, we extend earlier work demonstrating secondary task slowing due to resource competition at retrieval
(Craik et al., 1996; Richardson & Baddeley, 1975).
Overall, results support the event indexing model
(Zwaan et al., 1995; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998), constructivist spatial mental model and cognitive collage
theory (Schneider & Taylor, 1999; Tversky, 1991,
1993; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983), and work noting the
importance of multiple discourse variables in determining whether inferences will be formed during reading
(e.g., de Vega, 1995; Jahn, 2004; Levine & Klin, 2001;
McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992; Rapp & Taylor, 2004; Zwaan
& Radvansky, 1998). The event indexing model predicts
mental model construction during reading; the present
experiment supports this theory by demonstrating only
minimal interference of visuospatial suppression on
inferencing accuracy and map drawing, and similar
accuracy rates and response times for within- and
across-perspective inference. The present results also
demonstrate retention of both the text itself as evidenced
by selective articulatory interference at test, and the spatial mental model as evidenced by inferencing without a
cost of switching perspectives from learning to test.
While we (and most other work) used a relatively brief
study-test retention interval, with time the availability
of coarse information directly conveyed by the text
may become relatively limited.

Experiment 4
Our final experiment investigates the interference of
two central executive tasks at testing, random generation and sequence monitoring. The random generation
task appears to tap multiple executive processes, in par-

721

ticular those involved in monitoring and maintaining
goal-directed strategies. These same resources appear
to be recruited during the integration and manipulation
of verbal and visuospatial information within working
memory. However, with spatial mental models already
developed, at test we expect random generation to interfere with inferencing times, more so than with accuracy.
The sequence monitoring task requires continuous
updating of sequential representations within working
memory, much like those processes occurring during
route description reading. In contrast to Experiment 2,
however, we do not expect sequence processing to interfere with inferencing following either route or description reading. This hypothesis is based on the notion
that abstracted mental models may not preserve the format of the learning medium (i.e., Taylor & Tversky,
1992a; Tversky, 1993; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). However, if route descriptions are stored and accessed with
reliance upon their intrinsic sequencing, as suggested
by map drawing and recent work with scene recognition
(Shelton & McNamara, 2004), then this should become
apparent during testing with sequence interference.
Finally, secondary task performance, operationalized
as tapping speed and degree of randomness for random
generation, and accuracy for sequence monitoring,
should parallel any performance decrements seen during
statement verification.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-two Tufts University undergraduates participated for partial course credit, randomly divided into
two groups: 16 for the random generation task, and 16
for the sequence monitoring task. Data from Experiment 1 control participants comprise the present control
group. See Tables 2-4 for several studies that have used
identical stimuli and dependent measures; these data
demonstrate the reliability of means across dependent
measures, experiments, and institutions.
Materials
Materials were identical to those used in Experiment 2.
Procedures
Procedures were identical to those used in Experiment 2 with the exception of secondary task timing.
Secondary tasks. Secondary tasks were used during
testing (i.e., statement verification and map drawing),
rather than reading. Participants used their dominant
hand for statement verification and map drawing, and
their non-dominant hand for random finger tapping
and recording of target identification. Secondary task
performance was recorded via a digital video-recorder
during statement verification.

722

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Results
Analysis
Analyses were done in an identical manner to those
of Experiment 2, with the addition of secondary task
performance as a dependent measure. For all analyses,
we confirmed that there was no main effect of or interactions with learning order (survey or route first or second), (all ps > .10, Fmax = 1.82).
Random generation. The addition of video-recorded
secondary task performance in the present experiment
allowed us to measure both speed and randomness during random finger tapping. Speed was calculated as in
Experiment 3.
We used the RGCalc software (Towse & Neil,
1998) to calculate the Evans' Random Number Generation Index (RNG; Evans, 1978); the RNG assesses
the relative frequency of diagram combinations, with
higher scores (range 0-1) indicating less randomness.
To increase index reliability and account for a low
number of overall trials (and thus taps) we collapsed
across statement types in the following manner: inference statements and across-perspective verbatim locative statements (also inferences) were combined
within each learning perspective to form a single inference measure, and verbatim locative (within-perspective), non-locative (verbatim and paraphrased) were
combined within each learning perspective to form a
single non-inference measure. An RNG index score
was calculated for each participant's tapping performance for inference and non-inference statement types
within each description perspectives. Analysis of RNG
data was done using a 2(study perspective: survey,
route) * 2(statement type: inference, non-inference)
ANOVA.
Sequence monitoring. Monitoring performance was
measured as accuracy in responding to target
sequences (three successive beeps in left ear), and false
alarm rates. Targets were only considered as such
when the complete target string (three successive left
beeps) occurred during a given verification trial. Target identification accuracy was calculated for each
statement type as the number of target identifications
relative to the total number of targets presented. False
alarm rates were calculated by summing the number
of false alarms that occurred during each statement
type.
Statement verification: Accuracy
A total of 64 McNemar v2 tests for response bias did
not reveal response proportions biased in the ``true''
direction (v2max 1/4 2:32, all ps > .05). Overall, there was
no evidence for central executive interference within
the statement verification accuracy data.

Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
There was a main effect of statement type,
F(1, 45) = 20.65, p < .01, MSE = .02, with higher accuracy within- (M = .94, SE = .02) rather than across-perspectives (M = .85, SE = .02). There were no other
effects for these statement types (Fs < 1).
Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).
Inference survey and route statements. There were no
significant main effects or interactions for these statement types (all ps > .05).
Statement verification: Response times
As with accuracy, there was little evidence for
response time differences as a result of central executive
interference.
Locative verbatim items: Within- and across-perspective.
As depicted in Fig. 7, an effect of statement type,
F(1, 45) = 221.78, p < .01, MSE = 1.86, revealed faster
response times within- rather than across-perspectives.
There were no other effects for these statement types
(Fs < 1).
Verbatim and paraphrased non-locative statements.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for these statement types (all ps > .05).
Inference survey and route statements. A marginal effect
of secondary task, F(2, 45) = 2.66, p < .10, MSE = 4.84,
suggested faster response times in the control (M = 7.31,
SE = .51) relative to the random generation group
(M = 8.21, SE = .36); this difference was marginally significant in an independent-samples t-test, t(30) = 2.05,
p < .10. There were no other effects for these statement
types (Fs < 1).
Secondary task performance: Random generation
See Table 7 for random generation task performance
for each of the six statement types. See Fig. 8 for average
RNG scores for study perspectives and statement types
(inference, non-inference); recall that higher RNG
scores reflect less randomness. In line with the notion
that inference generation is more cognitively demanding
following route versus survey learning, an effect of study
perspective, F(1, 15) = 9.88, p < .01, MSE = .003,
revealed higher RNG scores following route relative to
survey learning. An effect of statement type,
F(1, 15) = 122.66, p < .01, MSE = .002, revealed higher
RNG scores during inference statements relative to
non-inference statements. Finally, a study perspective
by statement type interaction, F(1, 15) = 7.75, p < .05,
MSE = .002, revealed that RNG score differences

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

723

Average Response Time (sec)

10
9
8
7

Control

6

Rand. Gen. Task

5

Seq. Mon. Task

4
3
2
1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Across-Perspective
Within-Perspective
Statement Type
Fig. 7. Experiment 4 mean response time and standard error on the statement verification task for locative verbatim items, within and
across perspective, and following survey and route learning. Results are displayed by secondary task group.

Table 7
Experiment 4 average random generation secondary task
performance (taps/s), for the two study perspectives and each
of the six statement verification types
Task & statement type

Study perspective
Survey
M

Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective
Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased
Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

Route
SE

M

was very low (M = 1.92, SE = .17), and did not vary by
study perspective or statement type.
Map drawing
There were no significant main effects or interactions
for any of the three map scoring procedures (all
ps > .05).

SE

Discussion
.98
.92

.047
.055

.97
.89

.033
.059

1.03
.99

.066
.042

.98
.94

.048
.042

.91
.96

.065
.043

.92
.98

.059
.066

between survey and route learning were driven by inferencing, t(15) = 4.52, p < .01, as non-inferencing trials
showed no study perspective differences, t(15) = .83,
p > .05. There were no significant main effects or interactions for tapping speed (all ps > .05).
Secondary task performance: Sequence monitoring
See Table 8a for mean proportion of targets identified and Table 8b for false alarm rates during sequence
monitoring; overall, sequence monitoring performance
was high (M = .915, SE = .01); an omnibus ANOVA
revealed no sequence monitoring performance differences as a function of study perspective, F(1, 15) = .03,
p > .05, MSE = .02, or statement type, F(5, 75) = .51,
p > .05, MSE = .02. The average number of false alarms

As with Experiment 3, secondary tasks at test
impacted statement verification time more so than accuracy. Statement verification accuracy was not affected by
random generation, but led to marginally slower
response times. More interestingly, verification statements requiring inferencing impacted random generation performance. Inferencing reduced the randomness
of participant-generated finger taps, particularly following route relative to survey description study. These
results suggest three main points: first, central executive
interference may produce minor delays in decision making while leaving accuracy intact. This result is congruent with work demonstrating relatively diminished
effects of secondary tasks on primary task performance
at retrieval (Baddeley et al., 1984; Baddeley, Lewis, &
Eldridge et al., 1984; Craik et al., 1996; Pazzaglia
et al., 2007), and extends it to random generation tasks.
Second, inferencing based on route descriptions may
induce a higher working memory load, relative to survey
description inferences; this result is in line with the
notion that route descriptions may be cognitively
demanding formats for acquiring spatial mental models
(Brunye & Taylor, 2007; Lee & Tversky, 2005; Noordzij
& Postma, 2005; Noordzij, Zuidhoek, & Postma, 2006;
Shelton & McNamara, 2004). We also provide support

724

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Average RNG Score

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Inference Statement

Learn Survey

Learn Route

Non-Inference Statement

Statement Type
Fig. 8. Experiment 4 mean RNG scores for the two study perspectives (route, survey) and statement types (inference, non-inference);
recall that higher RNG scores reflect less randomness.

Table 8a
Experiment 4 average sequence monitoring secondary task
performance (identified targets/total targets), for the two study
perspectives and each of the six statement verification types

Table 8b
Experiment 4 cumulative frequency of false alarms during the
sequence monitoring secondary task, for the two study
perspectives and each of the six statement verification types

Task & statement type

Task & statement type

Study perspective
Survey
M

SE

Route
M

Route
Cum. Freq.

Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

2
1

2
2

Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

2
3

2
2

Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

2
2

3
1

SE

Locative
Within-perspective
Across-perspective

.93
.89

.037
.035

.90
.94

.032
.025

Non-locative
Verbatim
Paraphrased

.92
.91

.032
.043

.93
.90

.052
.035

Locative inference
Inference survey
Inference route

.94
.91

.027
.043

.92
.89

.030
.035

for general discourse processing models, such as eventindexing (i.e., Zwaan et al., 1995; Zwaan & Radvansky,
1998), which predict mental model development during
reading; the present results support this notion following
both survey and route learning.
Finally, we have demonstrated the utility and specificity of secondary tasks targeting particular central
executive roles, and with central executive processing
the importance of examining primary tasks that demand
both verbal and spatial working memory mechanisms
(i.e., Hegarty et al., 2000; Miyake et al., 2001). The
sequence monitoring task assessed the sequential nature
of eventuating mental models following route description learning. Recent work has suggested central executive involvement in the monitoring and updating of
sequential representations, and temporal tagging, within
working memory (Brunye et al., 2006; Miyake & Shah,

Study perspective
Survey
Cum. Freq.

1999; Miyake et al., 2000). Other work has suggested
that the memories formed from route descriptions may
maintain a principle reference vector defined by the first
route path, and may be applied to map drawing in a
sequential manner (Shelton & McNamara, 2004). The
present experiment demonstrated that the inherent
sequential nature of route descriptions is not necessarily
maintained in eventuating mental representations; that
is, whereas readers may track the sequential nature of
route descriptions during reading, this information
may not be used towards inferencing or map drawing.
Note, however, that map drawing may be relatively
amenable to task switching, reducing our ability to find
sequential interference effects at test. These results suggest the importance of temporal-sequential information
during route description processing towards the development, but not necessarily the application, of cohesive
mental models.

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

General discussion
To our knowledge, the present study represents the
first experimental examination of visuospatial, articulatory, and central executive working memory involvement in spatial discourse reading, and later testing.
We provide evidence that each of these processes is differentially involved during spatial description processing. The articulatory rehearsal loop plays a large role
in acquiring information from descriptions, in this case
both route and survey perspective descriptions. These
results support the notion that while readers construct
situation models during reading, a lower-level scaffold
for these models is the propositional base (i.e., Kintsch
et al., 1990; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). Interference
with articulatory mechanisms during reading appears
to restrict propositional base formation and therefore
the ability for readers to acquire both declarative memories and mental models (see also Canas et al., 2003;
De Beni et al., 2005; Gyselinck et al., 2007). Visuospatial mechanisms are generally involved during spatial
description reading, and particularly in route description reading; they also appear to be involved when participants apply spatial memories to make inferences.
These findings support Baddeley's (1992) conceptualization of visuospatial function, as well as a number
of recent findings (De Beni et al., 2005; Deyzac, Logie,
& Denis, 2006; Pazzaglia et al., 2007), and demonstrate
limitations on the degree to which inferences are generated during reading (e.g., Levine & Klin, 2001).
Finally, the central executive plays an important role
in the development of spatial mental models, and using
these models towards inferencing tasks. These results
support recent dual-task work (i.e., Baddeley et al.,
1998; Brunye et al., 2006), and provide clear support
for an emerging consensus that multi-component models of working memory have clear theoretical relevance
to research in language comprehension and memory
(i.e., Baddeley et al., 1998; De Beni et al., 2005; Miyake
et al., 2001; Pazzaglia et al., 2007).
The present experiments also provided a unique
opportunity to examine the comprehension processes
involved during spatial description reading. Readers
process spatial descriptions at a level beyond the propositional base; spatial information is tracked during
reading toward the development of rich spatial memories. This is in contrast to findings demonstrating limited tracking of the spatial dimension during
narrative comprehension (Radvansky & Copeland,
2000; Zwaan, Magliano, & Graesser, 1995), but congruent with the notion that such characteristics will
be tracked when easy to do, tied to functional relevance, or needed for local and global coherence (Estevez & Calvo, 2000; Levine & Klin, 2001; Linderholm &
van den Broek, 2002; Magliano et al., 2001; Morra,
2001; Morrow, 1994; Radvansky & Copeland, 2006a,

725

2006b; Rinck et al., 1997; Taylor et al., 1999; van
den Broek et al., 2001). The functional relevance of
spatial information for spatial descriptions is clearly
high. For route descriptions, in particular, readers
appear to recruit significant visuospatial and central
resources towards mentally simulating travel (i.e., Pazzaglia et al., 2007; Zwaan, 1999). This finding lends
support for discourse models proposing that readers
actively track multiple text dimensions towards mental
model development (Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998), and
relatively limited support for memory models suggesting that resonance of propositional information is sufficient for text comprehension (Myers & O'Brien, 1998;
O'Brien & Myers, 1999). The present results support an
active interpretive process during reading that incorporates both propositional features of the text and spatial
imagery developed by the reader in an effort to mentally simulate the environment and develop an accurate
mental model (Bransford et al., 1972; Pazzaglia et al.,
2007; Zwaan, 1999).
Mental models formed from spatial descriptions
appear to be abstractions that support perspective
switching and inferencing. These models appear to
recruit articulatory mechanisms towards direct retrieval, and visuospatial and central mechanisms towards
inference generation. This supports work suggesting
that readers form limited inferences during reading
(Levine & Klin, 2001), and supports and extends
recent work with spatial descriptions (Pazzaglia
et al., 2007). Spatial mental models clearly provide
the flexibility to support perspective switching and
inferencing, but may not be completely dissociated
from the learning materials. This feature of spatial
mental models was evident when secondary task effects
on testing interacted with learning format; to the
extent that spatial mental models are fully abstracted
from the learning materials, such an interaction would
not be seen. We suggest that in line with recent work
using the same descriptions, and virtual environment
analogues, spatial memories preserve some features
of the initial learning formats--for instance, orientation specificity towards a principle reference vector
(Shelton & McNamara, 2004). We propose that larger
study-test lags and substantial overlearning may
reduce some of these effects, diminish memory for surface characteristics of the text, and further abstract the
resulting spatial mental model (Brunye & Taylor,
2007; see also Tversky, 1991, 1993).
Limitations
One possible interpretation of our results is that there
are limited global resources allocated to all working
memory processes; another interpretation is that each
subsystem draws from a limited allocation of a common
pool, or uses its own limited resource pool. Under the

726

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

first explanation visuospatial interference, for example,
can potentially detract from articulatory mechanisms,
and lead to verbal learning decrements. The present
experiments did not find evidence for this; it is unclear
if this is a reflection of resource allocation within working memory or the degree to which our secondary and
primary tasks were (or were not) cognitively demanding.
These issues are currently being examined (e.g., Fedorenko, Gibson, & Rohde, 2007; Lovett, Reder, & Lebiere, 1997; Young & Lewis, 1999).
The present results do not allow us to determine
whether spatial mental models are computed or
recruited during test. That is, to the extent that spatial
mental models are in fact developed during reading
they will be used at test for certain processes, such
as inferencing. However, spatial mental models may
be computed upon demand (i.e., at test) rather than
during reading, especially when the reading material
is cognitively demanding. It is our view that spatial
mental models likely arise out of the interactions of
spatial and verbal information during both learning
and testing. That is, whereas certain inferences may
be generated and a mental model of the environment
developed during reading, testing circumstances likely
reinforce, modify, and expand upon these initial models. To the extent that participants can make acrossperspective inferences with similar accuracy and
response times, we feel that a mental model is available. Recent work looking at the progression of spatial mental models over time has demonstrated that
these models are available after as little as a single
reading of survey, but not route descriptions (Brunye
& Taylor, 2007); these results correspond well with
the present findings. Of course, the question remains
open as to whether the models are ready to be computed, or ready to be used, at test.
Applying narrative discourse theory to spatial discourse experiments has obvious limitations. Narrative
discourse rarely focuses almost exclusively on spatial
information, instead spatial information becomes a
focus with a spatial shift (i.e. character moves from
one room to another), for example. In spatial descriptions, spatial information is the primary focus and is
typically comprised of explicitly stated and/or inferred
spatial relationships. Further, in narrative discourse
temporal-sequential information is inevitable whereas
in spatial descriptions is it conveyed from route, but
not survey, descriptions. It is not our intention to explicitly compare and contrast the applicability of narrative
discourse theories to spatial discourse comprehension.
Rather, we feel that general discourse theory provides
an informative foundation for developing hypotheses
and interpreting our results. Ultimately theories of
expository discourse comprehension will likely emerge,
and we feel the present studies take a substantial step
in this direction.

Concluding remarks
Spatial descriptions are an exceedingly common discourse format with its own set of characteristics,
demands, and eventuating mental model properties.
Finding our way or informing others where to go, or
what an environment is like, requires a complex interplay of visuospatial, articulatory, and central executive
processes. Perhaps the most impressive aspect is the harmonious interactions of these processes that result in our
ability to form flexible spatial memories, and use them
with ease and convenience towards accurate solutions
to complex problems.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255,
556-559.
Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Exploring the central executive.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Experimental Psychology, 49, 5-28.
Baddeley, A. D. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new component
of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Science, 4,
417-423.
Baddeley, A. D. (2002). Is working memory still working?
European Psychologist, 7, 85-97.
Baddeley, A. D., Emslie, H., Kolodny, J., & Duncan, J. (1998).
Random generation and the executive control of working
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
51A, 818-852.
Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V. J., & Vallar, G. (1984). Exploring
the articulatory loop. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36, 233-252.
Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V. J., Eldridge, M., & Thompson, N.
(1984). Attention and retrieval from long-term memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 518-540.
Bransford, J. D., Barclay, J. R., & Franks, J. J. (1972). Sentence
memory: A constructive versus interpretive approach.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 193-209.
Brunye, T. T. (2007). Building spatial mental models: Encoding
and retrieving descriptions of space (Doctoral dissertation,
Tufts University, 22 May 2007). Dissertation Abstracts
International, TBD.
Brunye, T. T., & Taylor, H. A. (2007). Extended experience
benefits spatial mental model development with route but
not survey descriptions. Acta Psychologica, doi:10.1016/
j.actpsy.2007.07.002.
Brunye, T. T., Taylor, H. A., Rapp, D. N., & Spiro, A. B.
(2006). Learning procedures: The role of working memory
in multimedia learning experiences. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 917-940.
Canas, J. J., Salmeron, L., Antoli, A., Fajardo, I., Chisalita, C.,
& Escudero, J. T. (2003). Differential roles for visuospatial
and verbal working memory in the construction of mental
models of physical systems. International Journal of Cognitive Technology, 8, 45-53.
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Anderson,
N. D. (1996). The effects of divided attention on encoding

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729
and retrieval processes in human memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 159-180.
Cote, N., Goldman, S. R., & Saul, E. U. (1998). Students
making sense of informational text: Relations between
processing and representations. Discourse Processes, 25,
1-54.
De Beni, R., Pazzaglia, F., Gyselinck, V., & Meneghetti, C.
(2005). Visuospatial working memory and mental representation of spatial descriptions. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 17, 77-95.
de Vega, M. (1995). Backward updating of mental models
during continuous reading of narratives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21,
373-386.
Della Sala, S., Baddeley, A., Papagno, C., & Spinnler, H.
(1995). Dual-task paradigm: A means to examine the central
executive. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 769,
161-171.
Deyzac, E., Logie, R. H., & Denis, M. (2006). Visuospatial
working memory and the processing of spatial descriptions.
British Journal of Psychology, 97, 217-243.
Duff, S. C. (2000). What's working in working memory: A role
for the central executive. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 41, 9-16.
Duff, S. C., & Logie, R. H. (2001). Processing and Storage in
working memory span. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 31-48.
Duncan, J., Emslie, H., Williams, P., Johnson, R., & Freer, C.
(1996). Intelligence and the frontal lobe: The organization
of goal-directed behavior. Cognitive Psychology, 30,
257-303.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Estevez, A., & Calvo, M. G. (2000). Working memory capacity
and time course of predictive inferences. Memory, 8, 51-61.
Evans, F. J. (1978). Monitoring attention deployment by
random, number generation: An index to measure subjective randomness. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 12,
35-38.
Farmer, E. W., Berman, J. V., & Fletcher, Y. L. (1986).
Evidence for a visuo-spatial scratchpad in working memory.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38, 675-688.
Fedorenko, E., Gibson, E., & Rohde, D. (2007). The nature of
working memory in linguistic, arithmetic and spatial integration processes. Journal of Memory and Language, 56,
246-269.
Ferguson, E. L., & Hegarty, M. (1994). Properties of cognitive
maps constructed from text. Memory & Cognition, 22,
455-473.
Fincher-Kiefer, R. (2001). Perceptual components of situation
models. Memory & Cognition, 29, 336-343.
Garden, S., Cornoldi, C., & Logie, R. H. (2001). Visuo-spatial
working memory in navigation. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 35-50.
Glenberg, A. M., Kruley, P., & Langston, W. E. (1994).
Analogical processes in comprehension Simulation of a
mental model. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of
psycholinguistics (pp. 609-640). New York: Academic Press.
Glenberg, A. M., & Langston, W. E. (1992). Comprehension of
illustrated text: Pictures help to build mental models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 129-151.

727

Graesser, A. C., & Bertus, E. (1998). The construction of causal
inferences while reading expository texts on science and
technology. Journal of the Scientific Studies of Reading, 2,
247-269.
Graesser, A. C., Millis, K. K., & Zwaan, R. A. (1997).
Discourse comprehension. Annual Review of Psychology, 48,
163-189.
Goldman, H. B., & Healy, A. F. (1985). Detection errors in a
task with articulatory suppression: Phonological recoding
and reading. Memory & Cognition, 13, 463-468.
Gyselinck, V., Cornoldi, C., Dubois, V., De Beni, R., &
Ehrlich, M. F. (2002). Visuospatial memory and phonological loop in learning from multimedia. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 665-685.
Gyselinck, V., De Beni, R., Pazzaglia, F., Meneghetti, C., &
Mondoloni, A. (2007). Working memory components and
imagery instructions in the elaboration of a spatial mental
model. Psychological Research, 71, 373-382.
Hegarty, M., Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (2000). Constraints on
using the dual-task methodology to specify the degree of
central executive involvement in cognitive tasks. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 376-385.
Jahn, G. (2004). Three turtles in danger: Spontaneous construction of causally relevant spatial situation models.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 969-987.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse
processing: A construction-integration model. Psychological
Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W., Welsch, D., Schmalhofer, F., & Zimny, S. (1990).
Sentence memory: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 133-159.
Kitchin, R. M. (1994). Cognitive maps: What are they and
why study them? Journal of Environmental Psychology, 14,
1-19.
Kruley, P., Sciama, S. C., & Glenberg, A. M. (1994). On-line
processing of textual illustrations in the visuospatial sketchpad: Evidence from dual-task studies. Memory & Cognition,
22, 261-272.
Lee, P. U., & Tversky, B. (2005). Interplay between visual and
spatial: The effect of landmark descriptions on comprehension of route/survey spatial descriptions. Spatial Cognition
and Computation, 5, 163-185.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1982). Cognitive styles in the use of spatial
direction terms. In R. J. Jarvella & W. Klein (Eds.). Speech,
place and action. Studies in deixis and related topics
(pp. 251-268). Chichester: Wiley.
Levine, W. H., & Klin, C. M. (2001). Tracking of spatial
information in narratives. Memory & Cognition, 29,
327-335.
Linderholm, T., & van den Broek, P. (2002). The effects of
reading purpose and working memory capacity on the
processing of expository text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94, 778-784.
Linderholm, T., Virtue, S., Tzeng, Y., & van den Broek, P.
(2004). Fluctuations in availability of information during
reading: Capturing cognitive processes using the landscape
model. Discourse Processes, 37, 165-186.

728

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729

Logie, R. H. (1995). Visuo-spatial working memory. Hove, UK:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Ltd.
Longoni, A. M., Richardson, J. T., & Aiello, A. (1993).
Articulating rehearsal and phonological storage in working
memory. Memory & Cognition, 21, 11-22.
Lovett, M. C., Reder, L. M., & Lebiere, C. (1997). Modeling
individual differences in a digit working memory task. In
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 460-465). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Magliano, J. P., Miller, J., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). Indexing
space and time in film understanding. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 533-545.
Magliano, J. P., Taylor, H. A., & Kim, H. J. (2005). When goals
collide: Monitoring the goals of multiple characters. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1357-1367.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Inference during reading.
Psychological Review, 99, 440-466.
Millar, S. (1990). Articulatory coding in prose reading:
Evidence from braille on changes with skill. British Journal
of Psychology, 81, 205-219.
Millis, K., Graesser, A. C., & Haberlandt, K. (1993). The
impact of connectives on memory for expository texts.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 7, 317-340.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., &
Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive
functions and their contribution to complex ``frontal lobe''
tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41,
49-100.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (1999). Toward unified theories of
working memory: Emerging general consensus, unresolved
theoretical issues, and future research directions. In A.
Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control
(pp. 442-481). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Rettinger, D. A., Shah, P., &
Hegarty, M. (2001). Visuospatial working memory, central
executive functioning, and psychometric visuospatial abilities: How are they related? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 621-640.
Morrison, R. G. (2004). Thinking in working memory. In K. J.
Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.). The Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning (Vol. 14, pp. 457-473).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Morra, S. (2001). On the information-processing demands of
spatial reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 347-365.
Morrow, D. G. (1994). Spatial models created from text. In H.
van Oostendorp & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.), Naturalistic text
comprehension (pp. 57-78). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Morrow, D. G., Greenspan, S. L., & Bower, G. H. (1987).
Accessibility and situation models in narrative comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 26, 165-187.
Myers, J. L., & O'Brien, E. J. (1998). Accessing the discourse
representation during reading. Discourse Processes, 26,
131-157.
Noordzij, M. L., & Postma, A. (2005). Categorical and metric
distance information in mental representations derived from
route and survey descriptions. Psychological Research, 69,
221-232.
Noordzij, M. L., Zuidhoek, S., & Postma, A. (2006). The
influence of visual experience on the ability to form spatial

mental models based on route and survey descriptions.
Cognition, 100, 321-342.
O'Brien, E. J., & Myers, J. L. (1999). Text comprehension: A
view from the bottom up. In S. R. Goldman, A. C.
Graesser, & P. van den Broek (Eds.), Narrative comprehension, causality, and coherence: Essays in honor of Tom
Trabasso (pp. 35-54). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pazzaglia, F., De Beni, R., Gyselinck, V., & Meneghetti, C.
(2007). The effects of verbal and spatial interference in the
encoding and retrieval of spatial and non-spatial texts.
Psychological Research, 71, 481-494.
Perrig, W., & Kintsch, W. (1985). Propositional and situational
representations of text. Journal of Memory and Language,
24, 503-518.
Rabinowitz, J. C., Craik, F. I., & Ackerman, B. P. (1982). A
processing resource account of age differences in recall.
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 325-344.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2000). Functionality
and spatial relations in situation models. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 987-992.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2001). Working memory
and situation model updating. Memory & Cognition, 29,
1073-1080.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2004a). Working memory
and situation model processing: Language comprehension
and memory. American Journal of Psychology, 117, 191-213.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2004b). Reasoning,
integration, inference alteration and text comprehension.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 133-141.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2006a). Memory
retrieval and interference: Working memory issues. Journal
of Memory and Language, 55, 33-46.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2006b). Situation
models and retrieval interference: Pictures and words.
Memory, 14, 614-623.
Radvansky, G. A., Zwaan, R. A., Federico, T., & Franklin, N.
(1998). Retrieval from temporally organized situation
models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1224-1237.
Rapp, D. N., & Taylor, H. A. (2004). Interactive dimensions in
the construction of mental representations for text. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 988-1001.
Rich, S. S., & Taylor, H. A. (2000). Not all narrative shifts
function equally. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1257-1266.
Richardson, J. T., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). The effect of
articulatory suppression in free recall. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 623-629.
Rinck, M., Hanhel, A., Bower, G. H., & Glowalla, U. (1997). The
metrics of spatial situation models. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 622-637.
Schneider, L. F., & Taylor, H. A. (1999). How do you get there
from here? Mental representations of route descriptions.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 415-441.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (2004). Orientation and
perspective dependence in route and survey learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 158-170.
Taylor, H. A., Naylor, S. J., & Chechile, N. A. (1999). Goalspecific influences on the representation of spatial perspective. Memory & Cognition, 27, 309-319.

T.T. Brunye, H.A. Taylor / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 701-729
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1992a). Spatial mental models
derived from survey and route descriptions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 261-292.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1992b). Descriptions and
depictions of environments. Memory & Cognition, 20,
483-496.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208.
Towse, J. N., & Neil, D. (1998). Analyzing human random
generation behavior: A review of methods used and a
computer program for describing performance. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30, 583-591.
Tversky, B. (1991). Spatial mental models. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.). The Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances
in Research and Theory (Vol. 27, pp. 109-145). NY:
Academic Press.
Tversky, B. (1993). Cognitive maps, cognitive collages, and
spatial mental models. In A. U. Frank & I. Campari (Eds.).
COSIT'93, lecture notes in computer science (Vol. 716).
Berlin: Springer.
van den Broek, P., Lorch, R. F., Jr., Linderholm, T., &
Gustafson, M. (2001). The effects of readers' goals on
inference generation and memory for texts. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1081-1087.

729

van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse
comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Young, R. M., & Lewis, R. L. (1999). The Soar cognitive
architecture and human working memory. In A. Miyake &
P. Shah (Eds.), Models of Working Memory: Mechanisms of
Active Maintenance and Executive Control (pp. 224-256).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999). Situation models: The mental leap into
imagined worlds. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8, 15-18.
Zwaan, R. A., Langston, M. C., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). The
construction of situation models in narrative comprehension: An event-indexing model. Psychological Science, 6,
292-297.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
Dimensions of situation-model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 386-397.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 162-185.
Zwaan, R. A., Radvansky, G. A., Hilliard, A. E., & Curiel, J.
M. (1998). Constructing multidimensional situation models
during reading. Scientific Studies of Reading, 2, 199-220.

