J. Child Lang. 35 (2008), 845-868. f 2008 Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S0305000908008799 Printed in the United Kingdom

The role of evidentiality in Bulgarian children's
reliability judgments*
S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A
Queen's University
(Received 8 December 2006. Revised 30 September 2007)

ABSTRACT

Evidentials are grammatical source-of-knowledge markers. In Bulgarian
they provide information about authorship - whether the speaker has
personally acquired the information or not - and modality - whether
perceptual or cognitive mechanisms were involved in the information's
generation. In two experiments, Bulgarian kindergarteners and thirdgraders (ages 6 and 9, N=96) had to decide which one of two utterances
containing different evidentials to believe. Experiment 1 showed that
children draw on modality information in their decisions : Thirdgraders favored perceptual over cognitive and kindergartners cognitive
over perceptual sources. Experiment 2 showed that third-graders can
also draw on the authorship information carried by evidentials : they
favored first- over second-hand information. The discussion focuses on
understanding the development of children's use of evidentials.
Because people make mistakes and may use communication to manipulate
each other, children have to learn to trust others selectively (e.g. Harris,
2002). Such selective trust depends on children's ability to identify cues that
can help distinguish reliable from unreliable information. One such cue is the
source of the information. Concerns about the source of knowledge manifest
themselves in questions like ` Were you at the game? ', `Did you speak with
Ivan? ' and ` How do you know this? ' as well as in the use of phrases like
` I saw' and ` Ivan said ' that often preempt these questions. In some languages,
e.g. Bulgarian, Turkish, Korean and Tuyuca, in addition to phrases
equivalent to ` I saw ', there are grammatical morphemes - evidentials - that
[*] The research was supported by grants from the Mario Einaudi Center for International
Study and the Cognitive Studies Program at Cornell University. Special thanks to
Stephen J. Ceci, Frank C. Keil and Sally MacConnell-Ginet for helpful discussions of
the project, to Ana Raikova, Pepi Kolarova and Nedyalka Fileva for facilitating its
completion, and to Mark Sabbagh for penetrating comments on an earlier version of
the manuscript. Address for correspondence : Department of Psychology, Queen's
University, Kingston, ON K7L 2N6, Canada. Email : fitneva@queensu.ca

845

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

mark the source of the speaker's knowledge (e.g. Chafe & Nichols, 1986).
The purpose of the present research was to examine the role of these
morphemes in Bulgarian children's reliability judgments and whether they
influence children's trust.
By age four, children attend to a wide range of non-verbal cues in their
judgments, such as the reliability of previous information from a source
and the age of their informants (Jaswal & Neely, 2006 ; Koenig & Harris,
2005). At this age, children also show evidence of attending to source-ofknowledge cues that are non-verbal, that is cues based on phenomenological
experience and on observing epistemically-relevant behavior by others,
e.g. looking and touching (e.g. Mitchell, Robinson, Isaacs & Nye, 1996 ;
Robinson, Champion & Mitchell, 1999 ; Robinson, Mitchell & Nye, 1995 ;
Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003 ; Whitcombe & Robinson, 2000). For example,
in one study children had to find out which one of two objects that were
identical except for color (e.g. a red and a blue ladybird) was hidden in a
tunnel (Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003). In one condition, children were
asked to look at the hidden object in the tunnel and the experimenter
touched it ; in the other condition, children were asked to touch the object
and the experimenter looked at it. After performing these actions, the child
and the experimenter had to answer which object was in the tunnel. The
experimenter always contradicted the child. At age four, children could
effectively use the sources of their own and the experimenter's knowledge in
deciding whether to keep or change their original belief. If they had looked,
they kept their belief ; if the experimenter had looked, they changed it.
Importantly, this study demonstrated that children understand that source
reliability changes with the type of information being sought. When the two
objects used in the task differed in feel rather than color (e.g. a hard and a
soft snowman), children kept their belief if they had felt the object in the
tunnel and changed it if the experimenter had felt it.
Robinson and Whitcombe's research offers two further intriguing
observations about the development of children's use of source-of-knowledge
cues. First, despite succeeding in the tunnel task described above, fouryear-olds were unable to report the source of their final belief (i.e. their
experience or being told). This disassociation suggests that at least in some
cases source can influence children's reliability judgments automatically
and without conscious awareness. Second, when four-year-olds were not
involved in the interaction but observed two others perform the task, they
were unable to decide whom to believe. Only five-year-olds succeeded in
this task. Thus, although sensitivity to non-verbal source-of-knowledge
cues emerges early, their initial use is constrained and integrating them in
reliability judgments appears to be a gradually developing skill.
Research suggests that in their preschool years children also begin to
attend to verbal reliability cues. In particular, children begin to attend
846

EVIDENTIALITY

to cues of speaker certainty provided by mental and modal verbs and
intonation (e.g. Hirst & Weil, 1982 ; Moore, Bryant & Furrow, 1989 ; Moore,
Pure & Furrow, 1990 ; Noveck, Ho & Sera, 1996). By age five, for example,
children reliably choose to rely on must statements, e.g. `The candy must
be in the red box', over might statements, e.g. ` The candy might be in the
blue box ' (Moore et al., 1990). Understanding whether evidentials influence
reliability judgments is important for further understanding of children's
ability to access reliability cues embedded in language.
Prior research on Turkish and Korean has revealed that evidentials
appear in children's speech before the age of three but that children's
awareness of the meaning of evidentials develops later (Aksu-Koc, 1988 ;
Choi, 1991, 1995). For example, the evidential suffixes -di and -mis are
available to Turkish children to mark witnessed and non-witnessed events
respectively as in (1a-b) (Aksu-Koc, 1988).
(1a)

Ahmed gel-di.
Ahmed come-PAST /witnessed
` Ahmed came ; I saw that.'
(1b) Ahmed gel-mis.
Ahmed come-PAST PERF /non-witnessed
` Ahmed came ; someone told me. /I have concluded this on the
basis of other things I know. '
When children were asked to make a sentence on behalf of a character who
had witnessed an event or a character who had just seen its consequence,
they began to reliably apply the -di and -mis suffixes respectively around age
four. When they were asked to decide which one of the two characters said
a sentence containing either -di or -mis, they succeeded around age six.
As evidentials are pervasive in the Turkish input (Aksu-Koc, 1988), it is not
surprising that children produce them before they consciously understand
their meaning. It is, however, unclear how early children use evidentials to
assess the reliability of information.
Two recent studies on Korean and Japanese addressed this question.
The studies used designs similar to that of Robinson & Whitcombe (2003)
and Moore et al. (1990) : children were asked to compare the reliability
of two utterances but this time, instead of being associated with different
non-verbal source information or certainty expressions, the utterances
were marked with different evidentials. Papafragou, Li, Choi & Han (2007)
focused on two of the five Korean sentence-ending particles that are
considered to carry evidential meaning (-e, -ta, -tay, -ci and -kwun) : -e
which indicates that the speaker has direct evidence for the reported
information and that the information is already assimilated by the speaker
and -tay which indicates that the speaker has learned the reported
information through hearsay. Four-year-olds, the oldest child participants
847

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

in the study, succeeded on non-verbal source reliability and source memory
tasks. However, they performed at chance on the reliability task involving
the two evidential particles.
Matsui, Yamamoto & McCagg (2006) examined the ability of three- to
six-year-old Japanese children to adjudicate between information marked
with the sentence-ending particles -yo which marks direct evidence and -tte
which marks indirect evidence for the report. Only six-year-olds performed
differently from chance, preferring utterances marked with -yo. Importantly,
consistent with the findings with English-speaking children described
above (e.g. Moore et al., 1990), Japanese children succeeded earlier in a
conceptually identical task involving sentence-ending particles that mark
speaker certainty.
Both Papafragou et al. (2007) and Matsui et al. (2006) reported that adults
(tested under somewhat different conditions than the children) performed
very well, suggesting that the particles affect the reliability judgments of
adult speakers of these languages. Most importantly though, these initial
findings from Korean and Japanese suggest that evidentials become part
of children's repertoire of reliability discriminating cues after other,
conceptually related cues, such as non-verbal source cues and verbal certainty
cues. There could be many reasons for the lags observed by Matsui et al.
(2006) and Papafragou et al. (2007) - e.g. integrating speaker certainty
information in a reliability judgment may require less cognitive effort
because it is in essence a reliability judgment (Comrie, 2000; Fitneva,
2001) - but for now, given that the goal of both studies was descriptive,
these explanations remain untested. The findings of these studies, however,
are consistent with Robinson and Whitcombe's conclusion that the
integration of source-of-knowledge cues in reliability judgments is a
gradually developing skill.
Examining Bulgarian evidentiality is interesting for two main reasons.
First, the age at which children begin to attend to evidentials as reliability
cues may be affected by idiosyncratic properties of the evidential system
of their language, e.g. the form of evidentials and the number and type of
source distinctions made. A Bulgarian speaker can say the sentence `Ivan
went to the park' in four ways depending on the information source, as
shown in examples (2a-d).
(2a)

Ivan otid-e v park-a.
Ivan go-PAST 3SG in park-DEF
` Ivan went to the park ; I saw that. '
(2b) Ivan e otish-al v park-a.
Ivan is go-PAST PARTICIPLE MASC in park-DEF
` Ivan went to the park ; I've concluded this on the basis of other
things I know. '
848

EVIDENTIALITY

(2c)

Ivan otish-al v park-a.
Ivan go-PAST PARTICIPLE in park-DEF
` Ivan went to the park; someone told me - she or someone else had
seen Ivan do that.'
(2d) Ivan bi-l otish-al v park-a.
Ivan be-PAST PARTICIPLE go-PAST PARTICIPLE in parkDEF
` Ivan went to the park; someone told me - she or someone else
thought that's what Ivan must have done.'
For all past tense third person statements, a Bulgarian speaker must make
a choice between the four forms illustrated in (2a-d). The evidential
information is carried by obligatory verb morphemes that, as in Turkish
and many other languages, are related to different tense-aspect paradigms.
(The verb is italicized in the examples.) Example (2a) represents simple past
tense. Example (2b) represents present perfect and is composed of the third
person form of the auxiliary sum ` be ' (e ` is ') and the past (-l) participle of
the main verb. The difference between (2c) and (2b) is the omission of the
auxiliary. Example (2d) is a form of the past perfect and composed of the
past participles of the auxiliary sum ` be ' and the main verb. (The exact form
of verb morphemes depends on the lexical aspect and phonology of the verb
and there is gender and number agreement between the participle forms
and the sentence subject.)
To highlight some other differences between evidential systems, in contrast
to Bulgarian, the Japanese particles -yo and -tte, although very common, are
optional. The Korean particles are also not used in formal discourse and
text (Choi, 1991). Also in contrast to Bulgarian, as Matsui et al. (2006)
point out, much research has stressed the unique emphasis of Japanese
communication on sharing social and interactional goals rather than on the
transfer of propositional information. Correspondingly, some Japanese
linguists have proposed that the class of particles to which -yo and -tte
belong perform perhaps predominantly a distinctive discourse function
(Horie & Taira, 2002 ; Kamio, 1995). (For example, -yo indicates that the
speech act is an assertion and that the asserted information is within the
knowledge ` territory ' of the speaker rather than the addressee.) Currently,
there is no theoretical framework that predicts how these and the numerous
other differences between languages with evidential systems influence the
use of evidentials in reliability judgments. Examining Bulgarian evidentiality
can eventually contribute to the development of such a framework.
Examining Bulgarian evidentiality is also interesting for another reason :
it provides an opportunity to examine children's use of two dimensions of
source information - how the information was acquired and who acquired
it. As a type of comparison, a source-based reliability judgment requires
849

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

that children align sources on some attribute or dimension (Markman &
Medin, 2002 ; Smith, 1984). Systematic analysis of these attributes and
dimensions, however, is largely missing from existing developmental
research. The studies on non-verbal source reliability have based their
predictions of source reliability on whether or not a source leads to the
target information (e.g. vision affords knowledge of color, touch does not).
Papafragou et al. (2007) and Matsui et al. (2006) adopted a scale which
corresponds to the degree to which the evidence involves the speaker's own
experience (Willett, 1988), positing that speakers should prefer reports of
direct over indirect experience.
The experience scale adopted by Papafragou and Matsui made possible
important advances in the study of evidentials. However, its application in
many cases is not straightforward or sufficient. In Tuyuca, for example,
there are evidentials allowing the speaker to distinguish seeing and hearing
(e.g. a game) as sources of knowledge (Barnes, 1984). Both sources involve
the speaker's own perceptual faculties, yet many would say that seeing a
game is more reliable than hearing it. As Willett himself points out, this
scale has a probabilistic relationship with the reliability of the reported
information (see also Chafe, 1986 ; Comrie, 2000; Fitneva, 2001) : the
relationship could be affected by context, the specific cultural interpretation
of the sources and may vary from one language community to another
(Willett, 1988 : 85-87). An alternative analysis of source information is
suggested by the extensive literature on source memory and source
monitoring. In it, ` source' is defined as a MULTIDIMENSIONAL construct
specifying spatio-temporal (when and where information originated), modal
(how it originated) as well as social (who the information originated with)
aspects of the process of knowledge acquisition (Johnson et al., 1993).
Expressions like ` I see ' and ` he thinks ' illustrate this multidimensionality
in English source expressions (I vs. he, see vs. think). Both the I-he contrast
and the see-think contrast could be relevant to the listeners' evaluation of
the information introduced with these expressions. Bulgarian evidentials
can be analyzed in a similar way.
Detailed analyses suggest that Bulgarian evidentials qualify the information
by WHO acquired it - henceforth referred to as an authorship dimension -
and by HOW it was acquired in the first place - henceforth referred to as
a modality dimension (Fitneva, 2001). Along the authorship dimension,
information could be first-hand or second-hand. First-hand information has
passed through one person - the speaker - before being apprehended by
the listener. Second-hand information was acquired by the speaker from
someone else and hence has passed through more than one person before
being apprehended by the listener. (The term `second-hand ' is adopted
here for ease of exposition.) Along the modality dimension, the information
could be acquired perceptually or cognitively. Perceptual acquisition can
850

EVIDENTIALITY
TABLE

1. Organization of Bulgarian evidentials
Authorship

Modality
Perceptual
Cognitive

First-hand

Second-hand

Direct perception
Inference

Hearsay
Report of inference

involve any of the senses and cognitive acquisition a range of reasoning
processes, including induction and deduction. Within this space, the
evidential form in (2a) indicates first-hand/perceptual information, e.g. that
the speaker has observed Ivan's going to the park. The evidential form
in (2b) indicates first-hand/cognitive information, e.g. that the speaker has
inferred the occurrence of the reported event. The form in (2c) indicates
second-hand/perceptual information, e.g. that the speaker reports what
someone else has observed. Finally, (2d) indicates second-hand/cognitive
information, e.g. that the speaker reports what someone else thinks. The
four evidential forms in (2a-d) have been referred to as direct perception,
inference, hearsay or report of inference respectively and these labels will be
used here for convenience as well (see Table 1). However, it is important
to keep in mind the fine-grain information carried by the evidentials as
the labels could be a bit misleading, e.g. the word hearsay carries no
connotations about how the information has come to exist, just that the
speaker has acquired it from someone else.
In sum, the present research aimed to establish whether evidentials affect
the reliability judgments of Bulgarian children and whether their effect is
due to the authorship or modality information they carry. Given the caveats
expressed in the linguistic literature about the existence of a fixed, crossculturally and cross-linguistically valid scale of source reliability (e.g. Willett,
1988) and Johnson et al.'s (1993) proposal about the multidimensionality of
sources of knowledge, the present research adopted an inductive approach
toward the problem of identifying children's evidential criteria, i.e. the
dimensions on which they compare sources. Specifically, to determine
the role of authorship and modality, the experiments assessed children's
discrimination between perceptually and cognitively acquired information
and between first- and second-hand information.
The participants in the studies were six- and nine-year-old children. This
age range was chosen for two reasons. First, there are no published data
on the acquisition of Bulgarian evidentials but preliminary observations in
the kindergarten classrooms showed that all four evidentials were present
in six-year-olds' speech. In contrast, not all evidentials were present in the
speech of preschoolers (approximately four years old) with whom similar
851

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

observations were carried out. Six-year-olds' use of evidentials was
appropriate to the extent it could be determined from the context. This
observation is consistent with detailed production studies in other languages,
which suggest that children rarely make production errors with evidentials
(Aksu-Koc, 1988).
Second, the 4th grade curriculum in Bulgaria introduces the topic of
evidentiality focusing on the issue of hearsay. This raises the question of
whether it is appropriate to compare children before 4th grade with older
Bulgarian speakers. Pilot testing revealed a marked difference between
third-graders on the one hand and fourth-graders and adults on the other
in terms of their explicit awareness of the manipulation of evidentials in
the reliability-judgment task. The latter groups, but never the former,
spontaneously commented on the evidential forms. For adults, this explicit
reasoning often led to contradictory outcomes (e.g. realizing that Ivan
asserted he had seen an event led to questioning his motivation for saying
he had witnessed it and de facto discarding the source information). This
difference between third-graders on the one hand and fourth-graders and
adults on the other suggests that formal instruction may affect the status
of evidentials in consciousness and reliability judgments, and thus that the
performance of older Bulgarian children and adults may not present an
appropriate standard for assessing younger children's development and
performance. Consequently, older children and adults were not included in
the studies and the research focused on the role of evidentials in reliability
judgments before children are exposed to evidentiality-related instruction
at school.
EXPERIMENT 1
METHOD

Participants
Twenty-four kindergartners (mean age 6; 9, range 6;1-7; 0) and 24 thirdgraders (mean age 9; 8, range 8; 7-10 ; 0) were recruited from Bulgarian
schools serving predominantly middle-class neighborhoods. There were 16
girls in the younger group and 11 in the older. All children were native
speakers of Bulgarian.
Materials, design and procedure
Children were presented with six vignettes which had the following
schematic structure (see the Appendix). A meets B and C, the best friends
of X. A is looking for X and asks B and C for help. The answers of B and C
differ. For example, B states that X went to the amusement park and C that
X went to the beach. Consequently, A has to choose whom to believe.
852

EVIDENTIALITY

Children had to answer the question ` Whom do you think A believed ? '
In case of difficulty, a second question was asked : `Where do you think A
went to look for X ?' Previous research has shown no systematic differences
between these two types of questions as measures of children's reliability
judgments (Noveck et al., 1996). Each vignette was supplemented with a
line drawing showing A, B and C.
A's question was always a request for spatial information, e.g. `Where
did Ivan go ?' The utterances of B and C embodied the manipulation of
grammatical form. Each of the six vignettes presented to a child incorporated
a different pair of evidentials. (Pairing the four evidentials with each other
yields six pairs.) Across children, the pairs of evidentials were assigned
to vignettes following a Latin-square design. Thus all children responded
to all evidential contrasts and, across children, each evidential contrast
appeared equally often in each vignette. In addition, the order of evidentials
and the order of utterances were independently counterbalanced within a
vignette between subjects.
An adult native speaker interviewed the children individually in a quiet
room in their school. Care was taken to utter the stimulus sentences in the
vignettes with natural, even intonation. Children received neutral feedback
on their answers.

RESULTS

Of main interest in the study was children's use of authorship and modality
information. Hence, two separate analyses were conducted : one to assess
whether children's reliability judgments are based on discriminating
perceptual and cognitive information and another to assess whether they are
based on discriminating first-hand and second-hand information. The two
analyses tested respectively whether the proportion of times children chose
perceptual over cognitive information and the proportion of times they
chose first-hand over second-hand information was different from the
chance level of 50 %. The data were also submitted to a univariate analysis of
variance to assess the significance of any developmental trends. Preliminary
analyses showed no effect of utterance content, utterance order and
evidentials order on children's decisions. Thus, these variables were not
considered further.
The proportion of times children chose perceptual information was derived
from the four vignettes that implemented a contrast between perceptual
and cognitive information acquisition. Recall that the direct perception and
hearsay evidentials indicate perceptual acquisition of the information and the
inference and report-of-inference evidentials indicate cognitive acquisition of
the information (see Table 1). Thus listing the perceptual before the cognitive
source, the relevant contrasts here were: direct perception vs. inference, direct
853

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

Proportion of judgments

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Kindergarten
3rd grade

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Perceptual over
cognitive

First-hand over
second-hand

Fig. 1. Mean proportion of reliability judgments favoring perceptual over cognitive information on the modality source dimension, and first-hand over second-hand information on
the authorship source dimension in Experiment 1, by grade. Error bars represent 1SE.

perception vs. report of inference, hearsay vs. inference and hearsay vs.
report of inference. The proportion of times children chose first-hand over
second-hand information was derived from the four vignettes that
implemented a contrast between first- and second-hand information. Again,
recall that the direct perception and inference evidentials indicate that the
information is first-hand and the hearsay and report-of-inference evidentials
that the information is second-hand (see Table 1). Thus, listing the first-hand
before the second-hand source, the relevant contrasts here were : direct
perception vs. hearsay, direct perception vs. report of inference, inference
vs. hearsay and inference vs. report of inference.
Figure 1 summarizes the findings. On average, older children preferred
perceptual over cognitive information 59 % of the time (SD=0.19) which
was significantly different from chance (t(23)=2.15, p=0.04). The younger
children showed the opposite pattern, choosing cognitive over perceptual
information on average 60% of the time (SD=0.19 ; t(23)=2.63, p=0.02).
With age, the value of perception relative to cognition as a source of
knowledge substantially increased (F(1, 46)=11.42, p=0.001, gp2=0.2).
Kindergartners preferred first-hand information 48 % of the time (SD=
0.32) and third-graders 51% of the time (SD=0.24). Neither group's
performance differed from chance and the age difference was not significant
(F(1, 46)=0.147, p=0.7, gp2=0.003). Thus, the data only provide evidence
that children discriminate sentence reliability based on modality.
In addition to these main analyses, the performance of each age group
with each of the six evidential pairs was assessed against chance. The
comparison between inference and hearsay was the only pair where children
854

EVIDENTIALITY

demonstrated a statistically significant preference for one of the forms.
Third-graders chose hearsay 75% of the time (p=0.02 by binomial test).
Kindergartners, however, were at chance (58% chose hearsay ; p>0.1 by
binomial test).
Supplemental analyses
The role of authorship and modality was also assessed using maximum
likelihood estimation procedures (generalized estimating equation - GEE)
for binary repeated measure data (Carey, Zeger & Diggle, 1993). GEE
methods account for correlations in the data (in particular, within-subject
variance) that are not considered in more traditional statistical approaches
for dichotomous data. The models included perceptual/cognitive or firsthand/second-hand as outcome variables and age, condition, and their
interaction as independent variables. Condition refers to the four pairs
of evidentials where modality was contrasted and the four pairs where
authorship was contrasted. Although this research focuses narrowly on
whether and at what age children use modality and authorship information
in reliability judgments, it is nevertheless important to test the robustness of
the findings across condition. Moreover, condition differences may suggest
interesting directions for future research on children's use of evidentials.
The probability of choosing perceptual over cognitive information
depended on age (x2(1, N=48)=9.34, p=0.002) but not on condition ( x2(3,
N=48)=7.77, p>0.05) or the interaction between age and condition
( x2(3, N=48)=0.87, p>0.05). None of the variables was a significant
predictor of children's choice of first-hand over second-hand information
(age x2(1, N=48)=0.11, p>0.05; condition x2(3, N=48)=6.52, p>0.05 ;
interaction between age and condition x2(3, N=48)=7.1, p>0.05).

DISCUSSION

This study provides initial evidence that the source information carried
by Bulgarian evidentials influences the reliability judgments of six- and
nine-year-old Bulgarian children. The data revealed that overall children's
judgments are guided by modality information, i.e. how the information
was acquired. The data also revealed significant developmental differences :
nine-year-olds associated reliability with perceptual sources, six-year-olds
with cognitive sources. These novel findings raise a number of questions.
The most pressing of those from the perspective of the goals of the present
research was these findings' generality.
One possibility is that children generally attend more closely to modality
than authorship information. Research on non-verbal source cues suggests
that by age five children are able to conceptually distinguish first- and
855

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

second-hand information, generally judging first-hand information more
reliable (Mitchell et al., 1996). Some of these studies, however, reveal more
robust effects of modality, although in this context the definition of modality
and authorship is somewhat different : vision vs. touch, self vs. other. For
example, when the child and the experimenter both look into the tunnel
and the only relevant difference is self vs. other, children are at chance in
deciding whether to stay with their guess or go with the experimenter's
suggestion about which object is in the tunnel (Robinson & Whitcombe,
2003).
Previous research has also shown, however, that children's informational
goal, i.e. the type of information they seek to obtain, influences their
judgments (Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003 ; Whitcombe & Robinson, 2000).
In general, decision-makers' goals influence judgments as they shift
attention from one set of attributes of the options that are being compared
to another, i.e. they shift the decision-makers' evaluation criterion (for
a review see Markman & Medin, 2002). In the present study, children
always had to assess the reliability of sentences against the goal of finding
someone's whereabouts. (Recall that A's question was always a request for
spatial ` where' information.) Thus, it is possible that the role of modality
does not generalize.
As a limited test of the generality of children's reliance on modality
information, Experiment 2 examined children's reliability judgments when
the sentences that had to be compared were answers to a `what ' rather than
` where ' question.1 If modality is the only source information in evidentials
that affects children's reliability judgments, the findings of Experiment 1
would be replicated in this setting as well.
EXPERIMENT 2
METHOD

Participants
Twenty-four kindergartners (mean age 6 ; 2, range 5;5-6;7) and 24 thirdgraders (mean age 9; 4, range 8; 9-10 ; 0) participated in the study. The
children were recruited from the same schools as the participants in
Experiment 1 but none had participated in Experiment 1. There were 16
girls in the younger group and 11 girls in the older group. All children were
native speakers of Bulgarian.
[1] The question in the vignettes was perhaps the most transparent but not the only
expression of the informational goal that was set. The goal was also to some extent
apparent in the answers to the question (e.g. in the use of motion verbs and locative
expression). Questions and answers are clearly interdependent, e.g. ` Ivan drew a picture'
is an infelicitous response to ` Where did Ivan go?'

856

EVIDENTIALITY

Materials, design and procedure
Twelve vignettes were constructed for this study so that children could be
presented with each pair of evidentials twice, counterbalancing for the order
of evidentials within-subject. The structure of the vignettes was the same
as in Experiment 1. However, A's question was always `What did X do
here ?' as in (3).
(3)

Kakvo li e prav-il Ivan tuk ?
What PARTICLE is do-PAST PARTICIPLE MASC Ivan here
` What did Ivan do here ?'

Thus, rather than finding where someone was, in this experiment children
had to assist the story protagonist in discovering what a friend did. As
questions and answers are interdependent, the sentences whose reliability
the children compared were different from those in Experiment 1.
The 12 vignettes were randomly divided into two groups. In each group,
A and X were the same for all vignettes so that the sequence of vignettes
resembled a narrative. As the transition between vignettes was much
shorter, the duration of a test session in this study was approximately the
same as in Experiment 1. The introduction to each narrative stated that X
concealed his or her actions and that the protagonist's (A's) task was to solve
the puzzle created by X :
` Ivan went away. When he came back his friends asked about his
adventures. But Ivan said he would let his friends find out what he had
done! He had left a clue at the places where he had been. Gosho was
Ivan's best friend. He decided he could solve the puzzle and would find
out what Ivan had done. '
The pairs of evidentials were assigned to the six vignettes in each
narrative following a Latin-square design, as in Experiment 1. Across
children, as in Experiment 1, each evidential contrast appeared equally
often in each vignette. The order of evidentials and the order of utterances
were independently counterbalanced within a vignette between subjects.
In addition, as children responded to all evidential contrasts twice, once in
each narrative, the order of evidentials was counterbalanced for each pair of
evidentials within child.
Two additional vignettes, one at the end of each narrative, contrasted
utterances that expressed hearsay and inference sources lexically. These
vignettes allowed for a more direct within-subject test of the effect of
informational goal on reliability judgments. The inference vs. hearsay
comparison was chosen because it was the only individual comparison
between evidentials in Experiment 1 where children showed a significant
preference. The two vignettes differed in the question A asked. In one of
them, A asked (as in the other vignettes), ` What did X do here ? ' In the other
857

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

one, A asked for spatial information as in Experiment 1 : `Where did X pass
through ?' In these vignettes the inferential source was expressed with a
modal verb (as in 4a) and hearsay was conveyed with the phrase ` [they]
said ' (as in 4b). As the subject ` they ' is omitted, in this context this phrase
means ` someone said' or ` it is said'. For these vignettes, source was crossed
with utterance between subjects and the utterances were presented in
counterbalanced order.
(4a)

Zoya tryabva da e minala prez tzentar-a.
Zoya must to is passed through center-DEF
` Zoya must have passed through the city center. '
(4b) Zoya, kaza-ha, e minala prez pazar-a.
Zoya, said-3P PL PAST, is passed through market-DEF
` Someone said Zoya passed through the market. '

RESULTS

Reliability judgments with evidentials
Preliminary analyses were conducted to test for possible effects of utterance
content, utterance order and order of evidentials on children's reliability
judgments. No such effects were found and these variables are not
considered further. Separate analyses were conducted again to examine the
roles of modality and authorship. Again, the analyses tested respectively
whether the proportion of times children chose perceptual over cognitive
information and the proportion of times they chose first-hand over secondhand information was different from the chance level of 50%. The
proportion of times children chose perceptually over cognitively acquired
information and the proportion of times they chose first-hand over secondhand information were calculated as in Experiment 1. The data were also
submitted to univariate analyses of variance to assess the significance of any
developmental trends. Figure 2 displays the data for each age group.
The analysis suggested that children did not discriminate information
based on the modality of its acquisition. Third-graders chose perceptual
information 54 % of the time (SD=0.22 ; t(23)=0.83, p=0.42).
Kindergartners again showed a tendency to choose cognitively acquired
information, selecting it on average 67 % of the time (SD=0.18), but this
result did not reach significance (t(23)=1.98, p=0.06). The difference
between the two groups was also not significant (F(1, 46)=3.61, p=0.06,
gp2=0.07).
In contrast to modality, authorship showed a clear effect in third-graders'
decisions. Third-graders showed a strong preference for first-hand over
second-hand information. They chose first-hand information on average
69 % of the time (SD=0.17; t(23)=5.438, p<0.001). Younger children
858

EVIDENTIALITY

Proportion of judgments

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Kindergarten

0.4

3rd grade

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Perceptual over
cognitive

First-hand over
second-hand

Fig. 2. Mean proportion of reliability judgments favoring perceptual over cognitive
information on the modality source dimension, and first-hand over second-hand information
on the authorship source dimension in Experiment 2, by grade. Error bars represent 1SE.

chose first-hand over second-hand information 44% of the time (SD=0.18 ;
t(23)=1.696, p=0.103). There was a significant increase in children's
preference for first-hand information from kindergarten to third grade
(F(1, 46)=24.53, p<0.001, gp2=0.35). This result suggests that authorship
is also an evidential criterion used by third-graders.
Focusing on the hearsay-inference comparison, the overall trends in the
data contrasted with those in Experiment 1 where children tended to select
hearsay. In the current study, kindergartners judged hearsay to be more
reliable only 48% of the time (t(23)=0.37, p=0.71). Third-graders did so
31% of the time, i.e. they favored inference (t(23)=2.84, p=0.009). The
new informational goal appears to have reversed older children's preference
in this comparison.
Reliability judgments with lexical inference and hearsay expressions
The two vignettes in which inference and hearsay were lexically expressed
provided an environment to test within subjects the effect of informational
goal and the robustness of the findings with evidentials. In the vignette
where the goal was spatial, i.e. to find where Zoya passed through, younger
children chose information from hearsay 54% of the time and older children
79% of the time. In the vignette where the goal was to discover what
someone has done, younger children chose hearsay 46 % of the time but
older children chose hearsay only 29 % of the time. These results closely
replicate the results from the evidentials-based inference and hearsay
comparisons in the two experiments. (Younger and older children chose
859

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

hearsay respectively 58% and 75% of the time in Experiment 1, and 48 %
and 31% of the time in Experiment 2.)
The significance of the effect of informational goal was evaluated in each
age group using McNemar's test. Informational goal had no effect on
kindergartners : three children switched their preference from inference
(when identifying what someone has done) to hearsay (when finding a
location) and three switched from hearsay to inference. In contrast,
informational goal clearly influenced third-graders' choices : twelve children
switched their preferences and all of them chose inferential information
when identifying what someone has done and hearsay information when
finding a location (p<0.001). This finding provides direct evidence for an
effect of informational goal on the reliability judgments of third-graders.
Supplemental analyses
The roles of authorship and modality were again analyzed using generalized
estimating equations. The models included age, condition and their
interaction as independent variables. The probability of choosing perceptual
over cognitive information did not depend on age ( x2(1, N=48)=3.23,
p=0.07) and condition ( x2(3, N=48)=6.9, p=.0075) but there was a
significant interaction between age and condition ( x2(3, N=48)=12.12,
p=0.007). The effect of age was examined in each of the four conditions to
identify the source of the interaction effect. The Bonferroni method was
used to control the family-wise error rate (alpha set at 0.05). The only
significant effect of age was when children compared report of inference
to direct perception ( x2(1, N=48)=6.49, p=0.01). While nine-year-olds
tended to choose information from direct perception, six-year-olds tended
to choose report-of-inference information.
The probability of choosing first-hand over second-hand information
depended on age ( x2(1, N=48)=15.77, p<0.0001) and condition ( x2(3,
N=48)=11.73, p=0.008) but these main effects were qualified by a
significant interaction between the variables ( x2(3, N=48)=11.72, p=
0.008). The effect of age was examined in each of the four conditions to
identify the source of the interaction effect (alpha set again at 0.05). In
addition to the significant effect of age reported above when children
compared report of inference to direct perception, there was also a significant
effect of age in the comparison of inference and report of inference ( x2(1,
N=48)=23.18, p<0.0001). Nine-year-olds preferred information from
inference while six-year-olds preferred again information from report-ofinference. Overall, it appears that the interaction effects in both analyses
derive from the different treatment of the report-of-inference source by the
two groups. In contrast to older children, younger children tended to prefer
report-of-inference as a source of information.
860

EVIDENTIALITY
DISCUSSION

Three findings emerge from this study. First, Experiment 1 posed the
possibility that children attend to modality but not authorship information
in evidentials. However, Experiment 2 suggests that this is not the case :
nine-year-olds can also draw on the authorship information carried by
evidentials. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the
information-gathering task children face constrains their judgments
(Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003). The finding that nine-year-olds' source
preference varied between the two vignettes that integrated lexical inference
and hearsay expressions and set contrasting informational goals also
supports this hypothesis.
The data also revealed a significant developmental difference in the use
of authorship information. In contrast to nine-year-olds, six-year-olds
showed no evidence of attending to authorship. As pointed out earlier,
by age six children usually have some conceptual understanding of the
difference between first- and second-hand information (Mitchell et al.,
1996). Although these data are from research with English-speaking
children, they suggest that the reason six-year-olds in the present study
failed to attend to authorship is unlikely to be conceptual.2 One alternative
is that six-year-olds have not mapped the evidential forms to the concepts of
first- and second-hand information. Another alternative, suggested by the
mixed evidence for children's use of authorship in non-verbal reliability
judgment studies (Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003), is that it is the use of
authorship information that is problematic for six-year-olds. That is,
six-year-olds may grasp the authorship information in evidentials but either
do not use it in their reliability judgments or use it in circumstances other
than those captured in the present studies.
GENERAL DISCUSSION

The present research investigated the role of the source information carried
by evidentials in Bulgarian children's reliability judgments. Previous
studies have shown that children attend to various aspects of how the
information was acquired (e.g. Robinson et al., 1999 ; Robinson et al., 1995 ;
Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003 ; Whitcombe & Robinson, 2000) and who
provided it (e.g. Ceci, Ross & Toglia, 1987 ; Jaswal & Neely, 2006). The
present research contributes evidence that by age nine Bulgarian children
use both of these types of information when they are intertwined in language.
The studies showed that nine-year-olds readily use the authorship and
modality information carried by the evidentials : they discriminated the
[2] Note that on the basis of their data with non-verbal tasks, Papafragou et al. (2007)
directly ruled out a conceptual explanation of the difficulty that three- and four-year-old
Korean children had in using evidentials to assess reliability.

861

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

reliability of sentences based on modality in Experiment 1 and on authorship in Experiment 2. Six-year-olds showed only evidence of using modality
to assess reports: in Experiment 1 they showed preference for cognitively
over perceptually acquired information.
The finding that children can use both authorship and modality is
an important extension of previous research on the role of evidentials in
reliability judgments (Matsui et al., 2006 ; Papafragou et al., 2007). The
contrasts between -yo and -tte in Japanese and -e and -tay in Korean do not
map clearly onto either authorship or modality. Recall that the Japanese
particle -yo and the Korean particle -e introduce information for which
the speaker has direct evidence, that the Japanese particle -tte introduces
indirect evidence, encompassing both hearsay and inference, and that the
Korean particle -tay introduces hearsay. While the literature suggests that
` direct evidence ' is perceptual evidence,3 it also suggests that when -tte and
-tay convey hearsay, they convey that the speaker reports second-hand
information but not how the information was originally acquired. Thus, as
Matsui et al. (2006) and Papafragou et al. (2007) suggest, Japanese and
Korean speakers can distinguish direct and indirect sources of knowledge,
but more specific conclusions seem unwarranted. The present research,
however, suggests that at least Bulgarian children can use finer-grain source
information, namely authorship and modality, in their evidentials-based
reliability judgments.
In addition to demonstrating that nine-year-olds can rely on authorship
and modality information, the present research contributes to previous
findings suggesting that informational goals affect children's choice of an
evidential criterion (e.g. Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003). Specifically, the
experiments differed critically in whether the protagonists sought spatial
information or aimed to discover what someone had done. Although there
were other differences between the studies, e.g. in number of trials and
whether the vignettes were presented separately or as a narrative, these
differences are unlikely to explain the qualitative change in nine-year-olds'
decisions. Importantly, when comparing inference and hearsay under
different informational goals in Experiment 2, nine-year-olds showed in the
same study that informational goals influenced what source they deemed
reliable.
Further research is needed to identify the mechanisms through which
informational goal could lead children to attend to modality in some cases

[3] As a counterpart to the evidentials-based reliability judgment task, Korean children were
given a non-verbal reliability judgment task which showed someone SEEING and someone
being told about an object and Japanese children were given a reliability judgment task
in which someone said that he SAW what he was reporting and someone else that he had
heard what he was reporting.

862

EVIDENTIALITY

and authorship in others and to express particular preferences along these
dimensions. An influential proposal by Perner (1991) is relevant here.
Perner explained the effect of informational goal on the reliability of
sources with the ` aspectuality of knowledge ', i.e. that different sources
generate different knowledge. Within this framework, the reliability of
sources can be established by examining information-gathering experience
and whether or not this experience leads to the desired information.
Importantly, other researchers have pointed out that information-gathering
experience may underlie not only contextual but also developmental
differences in the perceived reliability of source information, such as the
ones observed in the current research. For example, having observed that
three-year-olds have markedly worse understanding of the epistemic effects
of their actions than four- and five-year-olds, O'Neill, Astington & Flavell
(1992) remarked that whether three-year-olds decide to look at or feel
in order to learn a specific property of an object may depend on their
` experience and familiarity with exploring objects and the surrounding
environment ' (p. 489).
It is, however, not immediately apparent how information-gathering
experience can explain the source reliability findings in the present studies.
The problem is that our understanding of children's (and adults') information-gathering experience is quite limited. In most non-verbal source
studies, there is a (conventionally) dominant way of obtaining the needed
information, and that way could be expected to be the preferred source
of knowledge, e.g. seeing when the needed information is color of the
object. We resolve the problem of ascertaining someone's whereabouts and
actions in more variable ways and often by integrating multiple inputs.
Hence here, in the absence of detailed knowledge of information-gathering
experience, it is difficult to predict what source would be perceived as
reliable.
The present findings converge with those of Matsui et al. (2006) in
suggesting that the source information in evidentials begins to be used at
around age six. Specifically, the present findings reveal that six-year-olds
use at least some of the source information in evidentials in their judgments,
namely modality. It is intriguing that six-year-olds showed a preference
for cognitive over perceptual information in Experiment 1. Besides
information-gathering experience, two other factors warrant speculation in
searching for an account of this finding : semantic knowledge and cognitive
development. Six-year-olds may either not grasp the meaning of evidentials
or misinterpret it in some systematic way. However, if they did not know
the meaning this should have resulted in chance behavior and there is no
obvious motivation for a radical discontinuity in six- and nine-year-olds'
interpretation of evidentials. Thus, it is probably necessary to look beyond
semantic knowledge for an explanation of this finding.
863

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

An alternative possibility is that six-year-olds' preference for cognitive
over perceptual information could be based on their still developing
understanding of the interpretative nature of the mind (Carpendale &
Chandler, 1996 ; Pillow & Henrichon, 1996). At this age, children still fail
to understand that the mind introduces biases in the interpretation of
information that reaches it. It may be that until children attain such
understanding they do not view mental processing as a liability. Some
studies indeed suggest that children consider reasoning as good as
perception as a source of knowledge. Specifically, Robinson et al. (1995)
showed that three- to four-year-olds who could infer from the picture on
a toy box what the box contained tended to resist the suggestion of an
experimenter who had looked into the box and thus had knowledge derived
from perception. Although not viewing mental processing as a liability is
not the same as viewing it as an asset, such an attitude in six-year-olds may
explain in part their choice of cognitive over perceptual information.
Although six-year-olds show some use of evidential information, the
present findings clearly show that there are situations in which they do
not systematically rely on this information. This may again relate to
information-gathering experience but considered from a slightly different
angle. Judgments are affected by multiple, differently weighed factors, e.g.
prior beliefs, cognitive capacity, affective state and intentions of the decision-maker, framing of the alternatives and informant characteristics
(e.g. Bodenhausen, Kramer & Susser, 1994; Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein,
Blair & Jarvis, 1996 ; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Kumkale &
Albarracin, 2004; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). While standard in adult
decision-making and belief-formation research, this assumption has not
been given much attention in developmental research. In everyday
conversation, evidentials typically co-occur with other, in some cases
partially redundant, reliability cues, e.g. observations of the speaker's actual
behavior, knowledge of the speaker's reputation, assertions of the speaker's
certainty, own prior knowledge, etc. Given the availability of other cues and
the extensive evidence that children are sensitive to some of them since
early preschool (e.g. Jaswal & Neely, 2006; Koenig & Harris, 2005 ; Moore
et al., 1989 ; Robinson & Whitcombe, 2003), it is possible that children
begin to readily rely on evidentials as a reliability cue when these other cues
begin to fail. Until then, evidentials may be unnecessary, or of very low
utility, in deciding what to trust.
Experience that decontextualizes the reliability assessments of reports
and increases the informational value of evidentials, such as formal school
instruction, may be necessary for evidentials to become a habitually or at
least a readily used reliability cue. Bruner (1966) pointed out that, by its
remoteness from direct action, school ` robs ' children of contextual and
ostensive supports for indicating what they mean and compels them to rely
864

EVIDENTIALITY

on language to accomplish this task (p. 323). Similarly, school limits the
availability of contextual reliability cues and may thereby deepen children's
awareness of and attention to reliability cues available in language.
The present findings leave a number of important questions for future
research. In addition to better understanding the mechanisms of developmental change, these include the question of how formal instruction
about evidentiality and the associated development of explicit awareness
of reliability-marking linguistic devices affect the role of these devices in
reliability judgments. The adult data mentioned at the beginning suggest
that explicit awareness may be related to skepticism about the value of
evidentials as ` honest signals ' of reliability for adult Bulgarian speakers. In
addition, evidence from other measures should be sought about the role of
evidentials in children's reliability judgments. The present findings will
be bolstered in particular by examining children's assessment of reports in
more naturalistic settings and examining whether and how the evidential
form of a report affects children's actual behavior. Despite these limitations,
the present studies provide an important first set of data on the role of
Bulgarian grammatical source-of-knowledge markers in children's
assessment of information.
REFERENCES
Aksu-Koc, A. (1988). The acquisition of tense and aspect in Turkish. Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press.
Barnes, J. (1984). Evidentials in the Tuyuca verb. International Journal of American
Linguistics 50(3), 255-71.
Bodenhausen, G. V., Kramer, G. P. & Susser, K. (1994). Happiness and stereotypic
thinking in social judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 66(4), 621-32.
Bruner, J. S. (1966). An overview. In J. S. Bruner, R. R. Olver, P. M. Greenfield et al. (eds),
Studies in cognitive growth, 319-26. New York : John Wiley & Sons.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J. A., Blair, W. & Jarvis, G. (1996). Dispositional
differences in cognitive motivation : The life and times of individuals varying in need for
cognition. Psychological Bulletin 119(2), 197-253.
Carey, V., Zeger, S. L. & Diggle, P. (1993). Modelling multivariate binary data with
alternating logistic regressions. Biometrika 80(3), 517-26.
Carpendale, J. I. & Chandler, M. J. (1996). On the distinction between false belief
understanding and subscribing to an interpretive theory of mind. Child Development 67(4),
1686-706.
Ceci, S. J., Ross, D. F. & Toglia, M. P. (1987). Suggestibility of children's memory :
Psychological implications. Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 116, 38-49.
Chafe, W. (1986). Evidentiality in English conversation and academic writing. In W. Chafe
& J. Nichols (eds), Evidentiality : The linguistic coding of epistemology, 261-72. Norwood,
NJ : Ablex.
Chafe, W. & Nichols, J. (eds) (1986). Evidentiality : The linguistic coding of epistemology.
Norwood, NJ : Ablex.
Choi, S. (1991). Early acquisition of epistemic meanings in Korean : A study of sentenceending suffixes in the spontaneous speech of three children. First Language 11, 93-119.
Choi, S. (1995). The development of epistemic sentence-ending modal forms and functions
in Korean children. In J. Bybee & S. Fleischman (eds), Modality in grammar and discourse,
165-204. Philadelphia : John Benjamins.

865

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

Comrie, B. (2000). Evidentials : Semantics and history. In L. Johanson & B. Utas (eds),
Evidentials : Turkic, Iranian and neighboring languages (Vol. 24), 1-12. Berlin : Mouton de
Gruyter.
Fitneva, S. A. (2001). Epistemic marking and reliability judgments : Evidence from
Bulgarian. Journal of Pragmatics 33, 401-20.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way : Models of
bounded rationality. Psychological Review 103(4), 650-69.
Harris, P. L. (2002). Checking our sources : the origins of trust in testimony. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 33A(2), 315-33.
Hirst, W. & Weil, J. (1982). Acquisition of epistemic and deontic meaning of modals.
Journal of Child Language 9, 659-66.
Horie, K. & Taira, K. (2002). Where Korean and Japanese differ : Modality vs. discourse
modality. In N. Akatsuka, S. Strauss & B. Comrie (eds), Japanese/Korean linguistics
(Vol. 10), 178-91. Stanford : CSLI Publications.
Jaswal, V. K. & Neely, L. A. (2006). Adults don't always know best : Preschoolers use past
reliability over age when learning new words. Psychological Science 17(9), 757-58.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S. & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring. Psychological
Bulletin 114(1), 3-28.
Kamio, A. (1995). Territory of information in English and Japanese and psychological
utterances. Journal of Pragmatics 24(3), 235-64.
Koenig, M. A. & Harris, P. L. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust ignorant and inaccurate
speakers. Child Development 76(6), 1261-77.
Kumkale, G. T. & Albarracin, D. (2004). The sleeper effect in persuasion : A meta-analytic
review. Psychological Bulletin 130(1), 143-72.
Markman, A. B. & Medin, D. L. (2002). Decision making. In D. L. Medin & H.
Pashler (eds), Stevens handbook of experimental psychology (Vol. 2), 413-66. New York :
John Wiley and Sons.
Matsui, T., Yamamoto, T. & McCagg, P. (2006). On the role of language in
children's early understanding of others as epistemic beings. Cognitive Development 21,
159-73.
Mitchell, P., Robinson, E. J., Isaacs, J. E. & Nye, R. M. (1996). Contamination in reasoning
about false belief : An instance of realist bias in adults but not children. Cognition 59(1),
1-21.
Moore, C., Bryant, D. & Furrow, D. (1989). Mental terms and the development of certainty.
Child Development 60, 167-71.
Moore, C., Pure, K. & Furrow, D. (1990). Children's understanding of the modal
expressions of speaker certainty and uncertainty and its relation to the development of a
representational theory of mind. Child Development 61, 722-30.
Noveck, I. A., Ho, S. & Sera, M. (1996). Children's understanding of epistemic modals.
Journal of Child Language 23, 621-43.
O'Neill, D. K., Astington, J. W. & Flavell, J. H. (1992). Young children's understanding of
the role that sensory experiences play in knowledge acquisition. Child Development 63,
474-90.
Papafragou, A., Li, P., Choi, Y. & Han, C.-H. (2007). Evidentiality in language and
cognition. Cognition 103, 253-99.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.
Pillow, B. H. & Henrichon, A. J. (1996). There's more to the picture than meets the eye :
Young children's difficulty understanding biased interpretation. Child Development 67,
803-19.
Robinson, E. J., Champion, H. & Mitchell, P. (1999). Children's ability to infer utterance
veracity from speaker informedness. Developmental Psychology 35(2), 535-46.
Robinson, E. J., Mitchell, P. & Nye, R. (1995). Young children's treating of utterances as
unreliable sources of knowledge. Journal of Child Language 22, 663-85.
Robinson, E. J. & Whitcombe, E. L. (2003). Children's suggestibility in relation to their
understanding about sources of knowledge. Child Development 74(1), 48-62.

866

EVIDENTIALITY

Smith, L. (1984). Young children's understanding of attributes and dimensions : A
comparison of conceptual and linguistic measures. Child Development 55(2), 363-80.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science 211, 453-58.
Whitcombe, E. L. & Robinson, E. J. (2000). Children's decisions about what to believe
and their ability to report the source of their belief. Cognitive Development 15(3), 329-46.
Willett, T. (1988). A cross-linguistic survey of the grammaticalization of evidentiality.
Studies in Language 12, 51-97.

APPENDIX
EXAMPLE OF A VIGNETTE FROM EXPERIMENT 1

Following the general schema for the stories, X=Ivan, A=Ivan's mom,
B=Mitko and C=Kamen.
Ivan, Mitko i Kamen sa dobri priyateli. Te mnogo obichat da igrayat
futbol.
` Ivan, Mitko, and Kamen are very good friends. They like to play soccer
a lot. '
Ivan si ima kuche - Sharo. Edin den Sharo se zagubi i Ivan otide da go
tarsi.
` Ivan has a dog by the name Sharo. One day, Sharo disappeared and Ivan
went looking for him. '
Mitko i Kamen ritaha sami topka na igrishteto. Maikata na Ivan doide pri
tyah i kaza :
` Mitko and Kamen were kicking a ball on the field. Ivan's mom came to
them and said: '
Iskam da pomogna na Ivan da nameri Sharo.
` I'd like to help Ivan find Sharo. '
Kade li e otish-al ?
Where PARTICLE is go-PAST PARTICIPLE MASC
` Where did he go? '
Ivan e otish-al da tarsi Sharo v park-a - kaza Mitko.
Ivan is go-PAST PASTICIPLE to seek Sharo in park-DEF - said Mitko
` Ivan went to look for Sharo in the amusement park ; I've concluded this
on the basis of other things I know ' said Mitko.

867

S T A N K A A. F I T N E V A

Ivan otish-al da tarsi Sharo na plazh-a - kaza Kamen.
Ivan go-PAST PARTICIPLE to seek Sharo on beach-DEF - said
Kamen
` Ivan went to look for Sharo on the beach ; someone told me - she or
someone else had seen Ivan do that ' said Kamen.
Na kogo li e povyarv-al-a maika-ta na Ivan ?
To whom PARTICLE is believe-PAST PARTICIPLE-FEM motherDEF of Ivan
` Whom did Ivan's mom believe ?'
(Kade li e otish-la da go tarsi?)
Where PARTICLE is go-PAST PARTICIPLE FEM to he-ACC seek
` Where did she go to look for him ?'

868

