Applied Psycholinguistics 29 (2008), 105-123
Printed in the United States of America
DOI: 10.1017/S0142716408080053

Language and thought in bilinguals:
The case of grammatical number and
nonverbal classification preferences
PANOS ATHANASOPOULOS
University of Wales, Bangor
CHISE KASAI
University of Gifu
Received: November 16, 2005

Accepted for publication: March 19, 2007

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Panos Athanasopoulos, Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Wales,
Bangor, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2DG, UK. E-mail: panos@bangor.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Recent research shows that speakers of languages with obligatory plural marking (English) preferentially categorize objects based on common shape, whereas speakers of nonplural-marking classifier
languages (Yucatec and Japanese) preferentially categorize objects based on common material. The
current study extends that investigation to the domain of bilingualism. Japanese and English monolinguals, and Japanese-English bilinguals were asked to match novel objects based on either common
shape or color. Results showed that English monolinguals selected shape significantly more than
Japanese monolinguals, whereas the bilinguals shifted their cognitive preferences as a function of
their second language proficiency. The implications of these findings for conceptual representation
and cognitive processing in bilinguals are discussed.

Recent theoretical and methodological advances in the investigation of the relationship between language and thought have demonstrated different cognitive
effects in monolingual speakers of languages with different concepts (e.g., color:
Davidoff, Davies, & Roberson, 1999; Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000; space:
Levinson, 1996; Levinson, Kita, Haun, & Rasch, 2002; Majid, Bowerman, Kita,
Haun, & Levinson, 2004; time: Boroditsky, 2001; kinship: Anggoro & Gentner,
2003; modes of motion: Gennari, Sloman, Malt, & Fitch, 2002; Slobin, 1996, 2003;
grammatical number: Imai & Gentner, 1997; Imai & Mazuka, 2003; Lucy, 1992;
Lucy & Gaskins, 2003; grammatical gender: Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips,
2003; Sera, Berge, & del Castillo Pintado, 1994; Sera, Elieff, Forbes, Burch,
Rodriguez, & Dubois, 2002; numerical cognition: Gordon, 2004).
The majority of these studies have empirically supported the so-called "weak"
version of the linguistic relativity hypothesis (the idea that the language we speak
influences the way we think). Language directs attention to the concepts encoded
(c) 2008 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/08 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

106

in it; this does not entail that if a particular concept is not encoded in our language
then we cannot have that concept in our mind at all (for a discussion, see Fishman,
1960; Hunt & Agnoli, 1991; Slobin, 1971; for a historical overview, see Lucy,
1992). The findings from these studies pose interesting and challenging questions
for bilinguals with languages that differ in their concepts. Specifically, does the first
language (L1) fix cognitive dispositions once and for all, or can the acquisition of a
second language (L2) with different conceptual properties from the L1 reorganize
cognition according to the distinctions made in it? The current paper provides
empirical evidence in an attempt to answer that question and thus contributes
toward a new line of investigation of the linguistic relativity hypothesis in relation
to bilingualism (for a discussion, see Green, 1998).
CROSS-LINGUISTIC EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE CATEGORIZATION

Categorization is an essential element of human cognition. In our everyday lives
we tend to organize reality and the world around us into identifiable categories. A
series of recent studies, mostly in the field of cognitive psychology, have shown
that the way we do this is largely based on the lexical categories made available
by our language. For example, whereas the physiological basis of color vision
may be common to all human beings (Kay & McDaniel, 1978), recent evidence
shows that when a child learns its first language, attention is directed to the color
categories that are specific for that language (Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, &
Shapiro, 2004). Recent research has also shown that grammatical categories such
as number marking on nouns affect the way speakers of different languages categorize objects based on their shape or material properties (Lucy, 1992).
In English there is a systematic distinction in the nominal system between
count and mass nouns. Count nouns can be preceded by a numeral directly and
take obligatory morphological plural marking when quantified (e.g., three book-s).
In contrast, mass nouns cannot be modified directly by numerals nor can they take
plural marking (e.g.,  three waters), but instead require a unitizer to be quantified
(e.g., three glasses of water). In contrast, in languages like Yucatec and Japanese,
only nouns that have animate referents can be pluralized (e.g., from Japanese:
kodomo-tachi "child-plural"), and such plural marking is optional rather than
obligatory (Lucy, 1992; see also Corbett, 2000). In contrast, common nouns that
refer to inanimate entities exhibit many of the characteristics typical for mass
nouns in English (Chierchia, 1998; Takano, 1994).1 They typically cannot take
grammatical number marking or be directly preceded by a numeral (e.g., from
Japanese:  san ringo lit. three apple), but to be quantified they take unitizers,
which are called numeral classifiers (e.g., san ko no ringo, "three piece-of apple"). Consequently, all inanimate nouns in classifier languages like Yucatec and
Japanese are semantically unspecified with regard to individuation, just like mass
nouns in English are.2
Lucy (1992) hypothesized that these cross-linguistic differences have consequences for cognition. Specifically, Lucy (1992) predicted that use of obligatory
plural marking on inherently individuated (count) nouns in English should direct
speakers' habitual attention toward the shape of objects. This is because the best
perceptual indicator of individuation is usually the form or shape of an object. In

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

107

contrast, speakers of a classifier language like Yucatec should show preferential
attention to the material properties of objects because the overwhelming majority
of nouns in that language routinely draw speakers' attention to their referents as
nonindividuated substances.
To test his hypotheses, Lucy (1992) implemented a triads matching task with
Yucatec and English monolingual speakers. Participants were presented with a
standard object made from a certain material and having a certain shape, for
example, a wooden spoon. They were then presented with two alternate objects,
one matching the standard in material but having a different shape, for example,
a wooden spatula, and one matching the standard in shape but made from a
different material, for example, a plastic spoon. Participants were asked to match
one of the two alternates with the standard object. Results showed that speakers of
English tended to make a shape match significantly more than speakers of Yucatec,
who in turn, showed a material preference. These findings provided support for
Lucy's (1992) claim of a link between grammatical number marking and cognitive
categorization preferences. These results were further substantiated by a similar
study comparing English and Japanese monolingual speakers (Imai & Mazuka,
2003) and by Lucy's further investigations with English and Yucatec speakers
(Lucy & Gaskins, 2001, 2003). These studies have also prompted investigation
of categorization preferences in bilingual speakers of languages with different
grammatical properties. These are described in the following section.
COGNITIVE CATEGORIZATION IN BILINGUALS

Research on bilingualism and cognition has so far focused on general cognitive
effects that have been documented mainly in children. A series of studies have
shown that bilingualism may enhance and speed up the development of certain metalinguistic abilities such as phonological awareness and reading skills (Bialystok,
Majunder, & Martin, 2003; D'Angiulli, Siegel, & Sera, 2001; Yelland, Pollard, &
Mercuri, 1993), grammatical development (Galambos & Goldin-Meadow, 1990),
and writing skills and fluency (Ransdell, Arecco, & Levy, 2001). In addition, research has demonstrated that bilingual children and adults have an advantage over
monolingual controls in nonlinguistic tasks that require inhibition of attention to a
misleading cue (Bialystok, 1999, 2002; Bialystok, Craik, Klein, & Viswanathan,
2004; Bialystok, Martin, & Viswanathan, 2005).
However, given the increasing amount of converging evidence for crosslinguistic effects on cognition, we can now begin to investigate cognitive effects of bilingualism that stem from cross-linguistic differences in lexicalized
and grammaticalized concepts.3 Earlier work had investigated "semantic shifts"
in bilinguals, showing L2 influence on use and meaning of L1 lexical domains such as color. For example, Ervin (1961) showed that bilinguals use
their L1 color terms differently than monolinguals, whereas Caskey-Sirmons and
Hickerson (1977) showed that bilinguals have different prototypes (foci) for a
range of L1 color terms from monolinguals. Although these studies did not investigate nonlinguistic cognitive behavior, their results suggest that bilinguals
may differ from monolinguals in lexical concepts. More recently Ameel, Storms,
Malt, and Sloman (2005) showed that bilinguals exhibit a unique naming pattern

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

108

for common containers (bottles and dishes) that is unlike that of monolingual
speakers of either language but somewhere in between. Their results suggest that
lexical organization in bilinguals is a shared system, combining elements from
both languages and merging them into a single pattern.
A study by Boroditsky (2001) on the conceptualization of time showed that
the degree to which Chinese-English bilinguals who were studying in the United
States followed the Chinese pattern of thinking about time depended on how
young they were when they started to acquire English. Younger learners were
less likely to use the Chinese pattern than older learners. This finding suggests
that maturational constraints may moderate the degree to which bilinguals shift
cognitively toward the L2.
The methodological paradigm used in the object categorization studies mentioned earlier has been fruitfully applied to the domain of bilingualism in two
recent studies. Cook, Bassetti, Kasai, Sasaki, and Takahashi (2006) repeated a
word-extension task conducted by Imai and Gentner (1997), which had shown
that monolingual speakers of English tend to extend the novel name for a standard
object to another object with the same shape significantly more than monolingual
speakers of Japanese, who in turn, tended to extend the novel name for a standard
object to another object of the same material. Cook et al. (2006) found that Japanese
L2 English speakers displayed a unique cognitive disposition, preferring a match
by shape more than Japanese monolinguals but less than English monolinguals.
However, Cook et al. (2006) did not collect any data from Japanese and English
monolinguals but compared their results with those reported in Imai and Gentner
(1997). Given that some of the materials as well as the novel names used differed,
the authors point out that their comparisons are tentative rather than conclusive.
Athanasopoulos (2006) conducted a modified version of a picture-matching
task used by Lucy (1992), which had demonstrated that speakers of English
judge differences in the number of countable objects as more significant than
differences in the number or amount of noncountable substances. In contrast,
speakers of Yucatec show no such preference. Athanasopoulos (2006) replicated
Lucy's (1992) results with English and Japanese monolinguals and furthermore
found that intermediate Japanese L2 English speakers performed like Japanese
monolinguals, whereas very advanced Japanese L2 English speakers performed
like English monolinguals. These results suggest that L2 acquisition can redirect
attention toward features of different types of objects, and that such effects are
more apparent in very advanced L2 speakers.
Although the studies described above have taken significant initial steps toward
investigating cross-linguistic effects in bilinguals, there remain several important
issues that need to be addressed. For example, Boroditsky (2001) did not formally
assess the L2 proficiency of the bilinguals that took part in her study but used
instead an arbitrary measure such as the amount of exposure to the L2, which was
calculated by subtracting the age of acquisition from the age at the time of testing.
Given that the shift in the cognition of bilinguals depends on the assumption
that it is properties of language that induce this shift, rigorous assessment of
L2 proficiency is an especially important issue. Furthermore, Boroditsky (2001),
Athanasopoulos (2006), and Cook et al. (2006) overlooked an important issue,
namely, the context in which bilinguals were tested. In these studies bilinguals

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

109

received instructions in their L2 by a non-L1 speaker, in the L2-speaking country.4
Thus, it is not clear whether the patterns observed reflect the bilinguals' general
cognitive outlook, or whether they are because of the experimental context, which
facilitated the L2 pattern.
AIMS OF THE CURRENT STUDY

To address the issues raised above, the current study implements a triads matching task, comparing object categorization preferences in Japanese and English
monolinguals, and Japanese-English bilinguals of different proficiency levels and
in different experimental contexts. Furthermore, the current study will also measure bilinguals' use of grammatical number marking in English during speech
production. This will allow for straightforward comparisons between nonverbal
cognitive tendencies and spontaneous linguistic performance on the grammatical
feature claimed to be influencing object classification. Such comparisons will yield
a more complete picture of the relationship between cognition and language in the
bilingual mind than previous studies.
The current study aims to address another important issue. It has been argued
that effects of language on categorization tasks may result from implicit verbal
coding strategies (Munnich & Landau, 2003; Pilling, Wiggett, Ozgen, & Davies,
2003; Roberson & Davidoff, 2000; for the opposing view, see Lucy & Gaskins,
2001). In the case of the object categorization studies described earlier, and by
extension in the bilingual studies, many of the stimuli used were recognizable
objects and substances that could be labeled with count or mass nouns. Thus,
it is not possible to know to what degree the patterns observed reflect genuine
cognitive tendencies or whether they are simply the result of implicit verbal
descriptions of the stimuli. To address this issue, the current study employs a
series of artificial, and thus novel, two-dimensional objects as stimulus materials.
Thus, a possible verbal coding bias is significantly reduced. Obviously, using
two-dimensional displays rather than actual objects and using novel stimuli rather
than familiar ones has an effect on the comparability of the current results to
those obtained in previous studies. However, the aim of the study is to add another dimension rather than validate previously obtained results with real physical
objects.
The task in question requires participants to match these novel objects with a
shape or color alternate. Implementing a color alternate instead of a material one
affords the advantage that the stimuli cannot be lexically labelled with a count or
mass noun, that is, the crucial grammatical properties where English and Japanese
differ. Thus, it cannot be argued that participants made their choice because they
were influenced by a readily available name (e.g., "the spoon" or "the pile of
sand"). Nevertheless, there is a possibility that participants could label using a
simple noun phrase like "the red one" (count) or "the red stuff " (mass). However,
this does not pose a problem for the current study, as in those cases the color name
is used as an adjective, and as such, it is inherently neutral with regard to any
semantic or grammatical content denoting count or mass status.
Furthermore, there is empirical evidence to suggest that in shape versus color
categorization tasks, there is a range of other factors influencing participants'

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

110

choices. Previous studies have shown that educated children and adults living in
urban areas show preferential attention to shape over color, whereas uneducated
children and adults living in rural areas show preferential attention to color over
shape, suggesting that education and cultural background are the crucial variables
directing attention to shape or color (Broota & Pahwa, 1984; Kaur, Broota, &
Sinha, 1986; Schmidt & Nzimande, 1970; Serpell, 1969). Thus, in the current
study, we should expect all participants to favor shape over color, because they
are all pooled from University populations. However, given the recent findings
that the degree to which speakers of different languages attend to the shape of
objects reflects the degree to which individuation is marked in the nominal systems
of their language, the question of shape preference relative to color warrants
reexamination. Specifically, if language is the driving factor or at least one of
the driving factors behind cognitive categorization preferences then it cannot be
assumed that speakers of English and Japanese who are matched for education and
cultural background will match objects by common shape rather than color to the
same degree. In a shape- versus color-matching task, we should expect speakers
of English to select shape more than speakers of Japanese. The main concern of
the current study, however, is the behavior of bilinguals: will they follow the L1
pattern, or will their attention shift toward the L2 pattern, and if so, to what degree,
and why?
METHOD

Participants

Table 1 provides a summary of the participants' details. The monolingual participants were 16 English-speaking adults (mean age = 25, age range = 18-43; 11
female, 5 male) and 16 Japanese-speaking adults (mean age = 20, age range = 19-
23; all female),5 who were all tested in their native country with instructions in their
native language (because they were monolingual). In addition, two groups of bilingual speakers took part: 32 Japanese L2 English advanced speakers, half of whom
were tested in the United Kingdom and instructed in English by a non-Japanese
speaker (mean age = 28, age range = 20-36; mean age of L2 acquisition =
10 years old, range = 5-13; 14 female, 2 male), the other half tested in Japan and
instructed in Japanese by a Japanese native speaker (mean age = 20, age range =
18-28; mean age of L2 acquisition = 11 years old, range = 6-13; 4 female,
12 male); and 32 Japanese L2 English intermediate speakers, half of whom were
tested in the United Kingdom in English by a non-Japanese speaker (mean age =
24, age range = 19-40; all started acquiring the L2 at 12; 14 female, 2 male), the
other half tested in Japan and instructed in Japanese by a Japanese native speaker
(mean age = 23, age range = 18-43; mean age of L2 acquisition = 11, range =
5-12; 14 female, 2 male).
The English monolinguals and the L2 speakers who were tested in English
were students at the University of Essex in the United Kingdom. The advanced
L2 speakers had stayed in the United Kingdom for an average of 7 months
(range = 3-20 months), whereas the intermediate L2 speakers had stayed in the
United Kingdom for an average of 6 months (range = 3-24 months). The Japanese

Table 1. Summary of participants' details
Japanese L2 English

N
Mean age (range)
Gender
Residence
Language of instruct.
Mean L2 acquis. age (range)
Mean length of stay in UK (range)

English

Japanese

Advanced

16
25 (18-43)

16
20 (19-23)

16
28 (20-36)

16
20 (18-28)

16
24 (19-40)

11 F/5 M
UK
English
NA
NA

16 F
Japan
Japanese
NA
NA

14 F/2 M
UK
English
10 (5-13)
7 months (3-20 months)

4 F/12 M
Japan
Japanese
11 (6-13)
NA

14 F/2 M
UK
English
12 (12)
6 months (3-24 months)

Note: The values are rounded to the nearest whole number. L2, second language.

Intermediate
16
23
(18-43)
14 F/2 M
Japan
Japanese
11 (5-12)
NA

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

112

Table 2. Participants' mean percentage scores (standard deviations) in the Quick Oxford
Placement Test and picture description task and mean raw scores/number of required
plural morphology contexts in the picture description task
Groups

QPT

Mean Ratioa

Mean Raw Scoresb

L2 advanced (n = 32)
L2 intermediate (n = 32)
English natives (n = 8)

81 (6)
63 (5)
NA

77 (29)
63 (32)
100

4.59/5.93 (3.60)
2.75/4.38 (2.16)
8.5 (2.35)

Note: The values are rounded to the nearest whole number except for the mean raw
scores/number of required contexts where figures are rounded to the nearest two decimal
places. QPT, Quick Oxford Placement Test; L2, second language.
a
Mean percentage ratio of producing correct plural morphology.
b
Mean raw scores of producing correct plural morphology/number of required contexts.

monolinguals were students at Gunma Prefectural Women's University in Japan
and had never lived in an English-speaking country before. Some of the L2 speakers
who were tested in Japanese were students at Gifu University in Japan, and some at
Gunma Prefectural Women's University in Japan. None of these participants had
lived in an English-speaking country before. Sociocultural factors were controlled
in this experiment as the vast majority of participants fell more or less within the
same age range (early to late 20s) and all of them were University students living
in suburban surroundings.
Proficiency in English was measured with the Oxford Quick Placement Test
(QPT; Oxford University Press, 2001). In addition to the QPT, the L2 speakers
were also given a picture description task, where they were asked to describe
orally a picture depicting a scene from a typical town center in England. Their
descriptions were recorded through the use of a standard portable tape recorder
and transcribed for analysis. The specific grammatical property measured was
obligatory grammatical number marking on count nouns. Eight native English
speakers who took part in the object classification task were also asked to describe
the picture to obtain a reliable basis against which to rate L2 speakers' performance.
The responses for each L2 speaker were scored by calculating the ratio of correctly
supplying plural marking to the number of required contexts.6 Scores were then
converted into percentages and the mean was calculated for each group. Table 2
shows a summary of the L2 speakers' mean percentage scores in the QPT and
number marking in the picture description task, along with the raw figures for
each group.
Independent samples t tests showed that the two groups differed significantly
in their QPT scores, t (62) = 12.812, p < .01, and their plural marking scores,
t (62) = 1.830, p < .05.
Materials

Thirty color illustrations of novel objects were used as stimuli. The stimuli were
first drawn by hand on a white piece of paper and then scanned and transformed

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

113

Figure 1. A triad of stimuli used in the experiment. [A color version of this figure can be
viewed online at www.journals.cambridge.org]

in digital form. The stimuli were then edited and colored in Adobe Photoshop
5. They were then organized into 10 different triads (Figure 1 shows one such
triad). Each triad was composed of a standard object and two alternates, a shape
alternate, which had the same shape as the standard but different color, and a
color alternate, which had the same color as the standard but different shape. A
number of precautions were taken in the design of the stimulus set. First, all stimuli
were drawn and edited on the same scale. Therefore, a potential size variable was
eliminated. Second, the colors used within each triad were carefully selected so
that the shape alternate was not similar in color to the standard. For example, if
the standard was red, then care was taken so that the shape alternate was not pink
but a more contrasting color, for example, green. Conversely, care was taken so
that the color alternate was not similar in shape to the standard. Third, the shapes
used were arbitrary novel shapes as opposed to highly recognizable shapes like
squares, triangles, and circles.
Procedure

Each participant was tested individually in a quiet room at a university either
in Japan or the United Kingdom. An interactive computer program was created
as a test instrument. The software used to create the program was Flash 5 by
Macromedia. The participants had to use the computer mouse to interact with the
program. After reading the instructions on the computer screen, each participant
was prompted to click on the "next" button for the experiment to begin. There
were a total of 10 trials. Each trial consisted of two stages. In the first stage,
the standard novel object appeared on the top of the screen and participants were
asked to click on it. In the second stage, once the participants had clicked on
the standard, the two alternates appeared side by side underneath the standard
and at an equal distance from it, and participants were instructed to click on the

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

114

Table 3. Participants' mean proportion (standard
deviations) of shape and color responses
Mean Preference (%)
Groups

Shape

Color

English (n = 16)
L2 advanced (n = 32)
L2 intermediate (n = 32)
Japanese (n = 16)

94 (11)
88 (17)
69 (24)
62 (22)

6
12
31
38

Note: The values are rounded to the nearest whole number.
L2, second language.

alternate that they thought was "the same" as the standard. The English instruction
was "show me which is the same as this, please click." The Japanese instruction was
"Kore(this) to(with) onaji-no(same) wa(topic-marker) dochira(which) desuka(is).
Onaji-no(same) wo(topic-marker) crikku(click) shite-kudasai(do)."
The position of the alternates relative to the standard was counterbalanced across
trials, such that the shape alternate appeared in 5 out of 10 trials on the left side of
the screen, and in 5 out of 10 trials on the right side of the screen, and vice versa for
the color alternate. The order in which each trial was presented was randomized
for each participant. For the randomization of the trials Flash's Actionscript was
used. There was no time limit imposed on the participants. The procedure was
repeated for the remaining nine trials. Each participant's response was recorded
for each trial and was saved as a data file that appeared at the end of the experiment.
Each data file was then committed to paper and gathered for the statistical analysis
by the administrator of the experiment. The task lasted for about 10 min. Upon
completion of the task, the L2 speakers completed the picture description task and
the QPT. Testing for those participants lasted for a total of about 30 min. At the
end of the experiment, participants were thanked and debriefed. The majority of
them accepted a small reward for their participation.
RESULTS

Responses were scored as the number of times each participant selected a shape
or color alternate. Scores were then converted into percentages and the mean was
calculated for each group of participants. In Table 3 a summary of those mean
scores is presented.
It is evident from Table 3 that the proportion of color responses is 1 minus
the proportion of shape responses. Because of the binary/dichotomous nature of
the data, results were analyzed by means of a Logit, with frequency of shape
responses as the dependent variable. Overall, this showed a significant main effect
of group (2 = 51.279, p < .01). Separate Logit analyses showed a significant
difference between the English and Japanese monolinguals (2 = 23.309, p < .01);
between the English monolinguals and the intermediate L2 speakers (2 = 19.781,
p < .01); between the advanced and the intermediate L2 speakers (2 = 21.737,

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

115

p < .01); and between the advanced L2 speakers and the Japanese monolinguals
(2 = 23.729, p < .01). There were no significant differences between the English
monolinguals and the advanced L2 speakers (2 = 4.535, p > .05); and between
the Japanese monolinguals and the intermediate L2 speakers (2 = 10.136, p >
.05). To sum up, the results show that the English monolinguals and the advanced
L2 speakers selected the shape alternate significantly more than the intermediate
L2 speakers and the Japanese monolinguals.
Furthermore, a comparison of those bilinguals tested in the L1 with those tested
in the L2 showed no significant difference between them (2 = 9.436, p > .05).
This means that the experimental setting that the bilinguals were tested in did
not affect their categorization preferences in this experiment, that is, there was
cognitive shift even when instructions were given in the L1 by a native L1 speaker
in the L1 country.
Tests against chance

Despite the between-group differences, Table 3 shows that the Japanese monolinguals and the intermediate L2 speakers did show a shape bias, albeit significantly
smaller than the other two groups. Tests against chance level (50%) were carried
out to see whether the shape bias in the Japanese monolinguals and the intermediate L2 speakers is statistically reliable or whether these two groups performed
randomly. These showed that the groups in question did select shape significantly
above chance: t (15) = 2.162, p < .05 for the Japanese monolinguals; t (31) =
4.433, p < .01, for the intermediate L2 speakers. The English monolinguals and
the advanced L2 speakers showed a strong reliable bias toward shape: t (15) =
16.232, p < .01, and t (31) = 12.889, p < .01, respectively.
Individual preferences

To examine whether the group averages in Table 3 above are consistent with individual participants' patterns it is important to look at the proportion of the number
of participants that made shape or color choices. Each participant's response
preference was classified as shape preference, color preference, or no preference.
The participant's pattern was scored as shape or color preference when he or
she made a shape or color choice at least in 7 out of 10 trials. The pattern was
scored as no preference when the participant made four, five, or six shape or color
choices.7 Table 4 shows the percentage proportion of the number of participants in
each preference type for the four groups. A chi-square analysis of between-group
differences replicated the findings from the Logit analysis.8
Correlation between linguistic and cognitive performance

To directly compare L2 speakers' cognitive tendencies with their production of
number marking in English, the two groups of L2 speakers were pooled together
into one group (n = 64). Each L2 speaker's shape score in the triads matching task
(Table 3) and plural marking score in the picture description task (Table 2) was
entered into a Pearson's correlation analysis, partialing out age of L2 acquisition.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

116

Table 4. Proportion of the number of participants in each preference type across
the four groups
Participants Classified as (%)
Groups

Shape
Preference

Color
Preference

No
Preference

English (n = 16)
L2 advanced (n = 32)
L2 intermediate (n = 32)
Japanese (n = 16)

100
91
53
50

0
0
3
19

0
9
44
31

Note: The values are rounded to the nearest whole number. L2, second language.

Results showed that the correlation was moderate and statistically significant (r =
.338, p < .05). The correlation between age of L2 acquisition and shape preferences
was also significant (r = -.275, p < .05), but when plural marking scores were
partialed out the correlation became nonsignificant (r = -.190, p > .05). An
additional correlation between shape preference and plural marking scores was
performed on those L2 speakers who had lived in the United Kingdom (n = 32),
partialing out both length of stay in the United Kingdom and age of L2 acquisition.
Results showed that the correlation was moderate and statistically significant (r =
.385, p < .05). There was no significant correlation between shape preference and
length of stay in the United Kingdom (r = .095, p > .05). These results mean that
even when controlling for extra-linguistic variables such as length of stay in the
L2 country and age of acquisition, there is a significant relationship between the
shift in cognitive preferences and specific linguistic competence, that is, the better
L2 speakers are in producing correct number marking in the oral production task,
the more they select the shape alternate in the triads matching task.
DISCUSSION

The results show a clear cognitive difference between the two monolingual groups:
English speakers selected the shape alternate almost at ceiling, and significantly
more than Japanese speakers. The Japanese monolinguals, however, also displayed
a substantial shape preference, tending to select the shape alternate significantly
above chance. Given that these were University students, and bearing in mind
results from previous studies, this finding is not surprising. However, the current
results also show that the degree to which this shape bias manifests itself is
different for speakers of different languages, and appears to conform to languagespecific patterns of individuation. Given that the current study utilized novel,
artificial stimuli that could not be labeled with a count or mass noun, these findings
substantially reinforce Lucy's (1992) and Lucy and Gaskins' (2001) claim that
linguistic structure influences nonlinguistic similarity judgements.
The picture becomes even more interesting when we consider the results from
the L2 speakers. Advanced L2 speakers differed significantly from monolingual
speakers of their L1, but not from monolingual speakers of their L2. It seems

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

117

that their cognitive behavior has shifted significantly toward the L2 pattern. In
contrast, the intermediate L2 speakers performed like monolingual speakers of
their L1 and differed significantly from monolingual speakers of their L2. These
findings suggest that it is possible for language to affect cognition later in life, and
that the extent of that effect is closely linked to the acquisition of specific grammatical features and the level of proficiency reached in the specific language. The
correlational analyses showed that nonlinguistic variables such as acculturation
do not play a role in the bilingual cognitive shift, whereas learning the L2 earlier
in life may facilitate the redirection of attention to new conceptual categories, but
it is ultimately specific linguistic competence that is most tightly linked with the
bilingual cognitive shift.
The findings from the current study also address the crucial issue of cognitive
organization in bilinguals (Cook, 1997, 2002; Pavlenko, 1999). One possibility
is that bilinguals maintain two separate cognitive representations of languagespecific concepts, and they alternate between the two mental views of the world
according to the language they are engaged in. This possibility is not supported
by the current results, as advanced bilinguals shifted their behavior even when
engaged in an L1 experimental context. The current findings demonstrate that
learning specific grammatical concepts might alter the individual's cognitive representations in a more permanent way, at a deep (prelanguage) level. This suggests
that learning new conceptual dimensions may lead to genuine cognitive reorganization or restructuring to a certain extent.
Of course, the correlation between cognitive shift and linguistic competence
observed here can only be suggestive rather than demonstrative of a causal link
between specific L2 knowledge and cognition. However, this finding contributes
to the investigation of a central question for the field in general: how can we
tell whether it is language influencing cognition, or whether language maps onto
preexisting cognitive patterns? Several studies looking at the relationship between
language and cognition developmentally suggest that it is language that acts as
an attention-directing mechanism on preexisting cognitive patterns. Although
children initially use universal ontological knowledge to categorize entities as
objects or substances (Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991), later on, after experience
with language, categorization patterns are heavily influenced by the syntactic
count/mass distinction (Subrahmanyan, Landau, & Gelman, 1999) and become
language specific (Imai & Mazuka, 2003; Lucy & Gaskins, 2001, 2003). Thus,
infants acquiring an L1 modify their attention according to the salience of the
categories in their linguistic environment (Slobin, 1996, 2003). It seems that there
is a transition from cognitive-universal conceptualization in early childhood to
language-specific conceptualization in later childhood. The current study of bilinguals shows that cognitive representation is not permanently fixed by the native
language. Rather, bilinguals seem to shift their cognitive preferences with the
acquisition of novel linguistic categories. What remains to be seen, in the context
of the current study, is whether it is Japanese children who have to move away
from a starting bias toward form (as the work by Lucy and colleagues suggests),
or whether it is English-speaking children who have to move away from a starting
bias toward color. A third possibility could be that children move away from
some intermediate position (a possibility compatible with Slobin's 1985 notion of

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

118

a language-neutral "opening wedge" in semantic space). The issue is obviously
open to further research.
Furthermore, the current data show that from monolingual to intermediate L2
level there are minimal changes, whereas from intermediate to advanced level there
is a wholesale shift toward the L2. This pattern suggests that some rather specific
cognitive reorganization occurs when bilinguals reach an advanced level of L2
proficiency, thus complementing Caskey-Sirmon and Hickerson's (1977) earlier
claim that "the worldview of bilinguals, whatever their first language, comes to
resemble, to some degree, that of monolingual speakers of their second" (CaskeySirmons, & Hickerson 1977, p. 365). Although the current study has identified
and evaluated the impact of several variables on the bilinguals' changing cognitive
state, we are still at the very early stages of that investigation. Further research is
necessary, particularly in other linguistic/cognitive/perceptual domains, as well as
using longitudinal experimental techniques, to gain a more precise picture of the
nature of the bilingual cognitive shift.
Another important issue that needs to be addressed is the nature of the observed
cognitive effects. Ameel et al.'s (2005) study showed cross-linguistic effects on
naming patterns, but also showed that in nonlinguistic categorization monolinguals of Dutch and French (as well as bilinguals) performed similarly, suggesting
that language may not influence nonlinguistic classification. However, Ameel
et al.'s (2005) study addresses the lexical domain, whereas Lucy's studies and
the current study concern the grammatical domain. Thus, it may be the case
that such effects are domain specific, and are localized only in the grammatical
domain because that domain makes certain obligatory categorical distinctions,
crucial for grammaticality. In contrast, the categories of the lexical domain may
not influence nonlinguistic cognition because they do not force obligatory distinctions; for example, a speaker of English must use grammatical number marking
when quantifying nouns, whereas naming patterns are malleable and may depend
on the context as in cases of political correctness. However, studies focusing on
another lexical domain, namely, color, show robust naming effects on memory and
nonlinguistic categorization (for a review, see Roberson, 2005). This may mean
that linguistic effects on nonlinguistic cognition also depend on the relationship
between perceptual and linguistic categories, that is, color may have stronger
lexical associations in memory than container objects such as bottles and dishes
investigated by Ameel et al. (2005).
The findings from this study then open several new avenues of investigation. Specifically, are cross-linguistic effects of bilingualism on cognition empirically observable in other domains (e.g., color perception, spatial cognition,
etc.)? What are the consequences of these effects for on-line cognitive processing
(e.g., response times for perceptual judgements and memory accuracy)? Furthermore, given that the current and previous studies have shown effects of
grammatical representation on higher level cognitive processing such as categorization and reasoning, it remains to be seen whether similar effects may
be observed in the lower level processing mechanisms involved, such as visual processing for example. Psychophysical experimental techniques such as
eye tracking could test the specificity of these effects in the visual processing
stream. This will establish whether learning new ways of categorizing reality

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

119

involves genuine changes in visual perception or whether it only affects later
cognitive processing. Recent evidence shows changes in participants' perceptions over the course of a training study. Ozgen and Davies (2002) and Notman,
Sowden, and Ozgen (2005) have demonstrated that learning new, artificial categories alters low-level perceptual sensitivities, at least in the very short term.
Other studies have shown that conceptual learning leads to perceptual changes
and vice versa in categorization and object recognition by adult participants
(Goldstone, 2003; Goldstone & Barsalou, 1998; Goldstone, Steyvers, SpencerSmith, & Kersten, 2000; Rogosky & Goldstone, 2005). No investigation of the
long-term effects of learning a second set of categorical divisions (as bilinguals
do) on low-level perceptual processes has yet been undertaken.
CONCLUSION

The current study has implemented a triads matching task utilizing artificial stimuli, and has compared categorization preferences in monolingual and L2 speakers,
evaluating the relative impact of several variables that may influence the cognitive
behavior of bilinguals. The results support the basic insight of Lucy's (1992) work,
that is, that grammatical properties of specific languages correlate with the way
speakers of these languages categorize objects. More importantly, the results from
the current investigation have valuable implications for the relationship between
language and cognition in the bilingual mind. They suggest that the acquisition of
an L2 with different concepts from the L1 can reorganize the cognition of bilingual
speakers, and that the degree of that reorganization is linked to the acquisition of
specific grammatical categories, that is, number, which are present and obligatory
in the L2 but absent, or optional, in the L1. The present study provides converging
evidence to support the emerging view that language plays an important role
in the restructuring of human cognition. The extent and precise nature of that
restructuring is open to further investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by a postgraduate studentship awarded to the first author
by the Economic & Social Research Council (ESRC Award PTA-030-2002-01335). The
fieldwork trip to Japan was supported by the Sir Eric Berthoud Travel Grant awarded to
the first author by the University of Essex. The authors express their gratitude to Professor
Roger Hawkins, Dr. Shigenori Wakabayashi, and Angelos Markou for assisting at various
stages of the research. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 15th EUROSLA
Conference in Dubrovnik, Croatia, and at the joint conference of the American Association
for Applied Linguistics and the Canadian Association for Applied Linguistics in Montreal,
Canada. The authors thank the audiences of those events, as well as Dr. Martha Crago and
three reviewers for Applied Psycholinguistics for their constructive feedback. Any faults
that remain are entirely our own.

NOTES
1.

In Yucatec, some inanimate referents can be pluralized, although it is less common.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

120

For a detailed cross-linguistic comparison of individuation patterns in Yucatec and
Japanese see Imai and Mazuka (2003). For a detailed account of the Yucatec and
Japanese classifier systems see Lucy (1992) and Downing (1996), respectively.
Perhaps the first empirical investigation of linguistic relativity in bilinguals was the
one by Carroll and Casagrande (1958) as cited in Hunt and Agnoli (1991). However,
that study has been repeatedly criticized on methodological grounds and the results
were very inconsistent (Hunt & Agnoli, 1991).
Cook et al. (2006) gave mixed instructions; however, the authors did not examine
whether there was any difference between bilinguals tested in the L1 and those tested
in the L2.
Given that English is a taught subject at school in the educational systems of most
countries, it is perhaps impossible to find "pure" monolinguals who are also educated
to the university level. The Japanese monolinguals in this study had formally studied
English at school from the age of 12; however, all of them reported that they could not
understand or speak any English, and they were all selected from non-English related
courses at the university.
Required contexts were established on linguistic grounds only, that is, how the native
speakers referred to the same objects/people in the picture, and not on the basis of
what the picture showed.
This scoring method yields more equally weighted categories than one where no
preference was only 5 out of 10 trials.
Advanced L2 speakers versus intermediate L2 speakers: 2 = 11.248, p < .01; English
monolinguals versus Japanese monolinguals: 2 = 10.667, p < .01; English monolinguals versus advanced L2 speakers: 2 = 1.600, p > .05; Japanese monolinguals
versus advanced L2 speakers: 2 = 11.346, p < .01; English monolinguals versus
intermediate L2 speakers: 2 = 10.909, p < .01; Japanese monolinguals versus intermediate L2 speakers: 2 = 3.566, p > .05; bilinguals instructed in the L1 versus
bilinguals instructed in the L2: 2 = 1.144, p > .05.

REFERENCES
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B., & Sloman, S. (2005). How bilinguals solve the naming problem.
Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 60-80.
Anggoro, F., & Gentner, D. (2003). Sex and seniority. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 91-96). Boston: Cognitive
Science Society.
Athanasopoulos, P. (2006). Effects of the grammatical representation of number on cognition in
bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 9, 89-96.
Bialystok, E. (1999). Cognitive complexity and attentional control in the bilingual mind. Child Development, 70, 636-644.
Bialystok, E. (2002). Cognitive processes of L2 users. In V. J. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of the L2 user
(pp. 147-165). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M. (2004). Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive
control: Evidence from the Simon task. Psychology and Aging, 19, 290-303.
Bialystok, E., Majunder, S., & Martin, M. M. (2003). Developing phonological awareness: Is there a
bilingual advantage? Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 27-44.
Bialystok, E., Martin, M. M., & Viswanathan, M. (2005). Bilingualism across the lifespan: The rise
and fall of inhibitory control. International Journal of Bilingualism, 9, 103-119.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of
time. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

121

Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L. A., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex, syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner &
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought
(pp. 61-80). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Broota, K. D., & Pahwa, A. (1984). Socio-cultural factors in the development of colour, form, and size
perception. Indian Psychologist, 3, 8-16.
Caskey-Sirmons, L. A., & Hickerson, N. P. (1977). Semantic shift and bilingualism: Variation in the
colour terms of five languages. Anthropological Linguistics, 19, 358-367.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Reference to kinds across languages. Natural Language Semantics, 6, 339-405.
Cook, V. J. (1997). The consequences of bilingualism for cognitive processing. In A. M. B.
de Groot & J. F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives
(pp. 279-300). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cook, V. J. (2002). Background to the L2 user. In V. J. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of the L2 user (pp. 1-31).
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Cook, V. J., Bassetti, B., Kasai, C., Sasaki, M., & Takahashi, J.A. (2006). Do bilinguals have different
concepts? The case of shape and material in Japanese L2 users of English. International Journal
of Bilingualism, 10, 137-152.
Corbett, G. G. (2000). Number. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D'Angiulli, A., Siegel, L. S., & Sera, E. (2001). The development of reading in English and Italian
bilingual children. Applied Psycholinguistics, 22, 479-507.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Roberson, D. (1999). Colour categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398,
203-204.
Downing, P. A. (1996). Numeral classifier systems: The case of Japanese. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ervin, S. (1961). Semantic shift in bilingualism. American Journal of Psychology, 74, 233-241.
Fishman, J. A. (1960). A systematization of the Whorfian hypothesis. Behavioral Science, 4, 323-
339.
Galambos, S. J., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1990). The effects of learning two languages on metalinguistic
awareness. Cognition, 34, 1-56.
Gennari, S., Sloman, S., Malt, B., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). Motion events in language and cognition.
Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Goldstone, R. L. (2003). Learning to perceive while perceiving to learn. In R. Kimchi, M. Behrmann,
& C. Olson (Eds.), Perceptual organization in vision: Behavioral and neural perspectives
(pp. 233-278). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting conception and perception. Cognition, 65,
231-262.
Goldstone, R. L., Steyvers, M., Spencer-Smith, J., & Kersten, A. (2000). Interactions between conceptual and perceptual learning. In E. Diettrich & A. B. Markman (Eds.) (Cognitive dynamics:
Conceptual change in humans and machines (pp. 191-228). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words: Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306,
496-499.
Green, D. W. (1998). Bilingualism and thought. Psychologica Belgica, 38, 253-278.
Hunt, E., & Agnoli, F. (1991). The Whorfian hypothesis: A cognitive psychology perspective. Psychological Review, 98, 377-389.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A crosslinguistic study of early word meaning: Universal ontology
and linguistic influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Imai, M., & Mazuka, R. (2003). Re-evaluating linguistic relativity: Language-specific categories and
the role of universal ontological knowledge in the construal of individuation. In D. Gentner &
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought
(pp. 429-464). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaur, H., Broota, A., & Sinha, K. (1986). Development of colour and form perception as a function of
sex and socio-cultural background. Journal of Psychological Researches, 30, 1-7.
Kay, P., & McDaniel, C. K. (1978). The linguistic significance of the meanings of basic colour terms.
Language, 54, 610-646.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's question: Cross- linguistic evidence. In
P. Bloom, M. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.), Language and space (pp. 109-169).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., & Rasch, B. H. (2002). Returning the tables: Language
affects spatial reasoning. Cognition, 84, 155-188.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

122

Lucy, J. A. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition. A case study of the linguistic relativity
hypothesis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, J. A., & Gaskins, S. (2001). Grammatical categories and the development of classification
preferences: A comparative approach. In M. Bowerman & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition and conceptual development (pp. 257-283). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lucy, J. A., & Gaskins, S. (2003). Interaction of language type and referent type in the development
of nonverbal classification preferences. In D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language
in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought (pp. 465-492). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., & Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Munnich, E., & Landau, B. (2003). The effects of spatial language on spatial representation: Setting
some boundaries. In D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in
the study of language and thoughts (pp. 112-155). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Notman, L., Sowden, P. T., & Ozgen, E. (2005). The nature of learned categorical perception effects:
A psychophysical approach. Cognition, 95, B1-B14.
Oxford University Press. (2001). Quick Placement Test. Oxford: Author.
Ozgen, E., & Davies, I. R. L. (2002). Acquisition of categorical color perception: A perceptual learning
approach to the linguistic relativity hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
131, 477-493.
Pavlenko, A. (1999). New approaches to concepts in bilingual memory. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 2, 209-230.
Pilling, M., Wiggett, A., Ozgen, E., & Davies, I. R. L. (2003). Is color categorical perception really
perceptual? Memory & Cognition, 31, 538-551.
Ransdell, S., Arecco, M. R., & Levy, C. M. (2001). Bilingual long-term working memory: The effects of
working memory loads on writing quality and fluency. Applied Psycholinguistics, 22, 113-128.
Roberson, D. (2005). Color categories are culturally diverse in cognition as well as in language.
Cross-Cultural Research, 39, 56-71.
Roberson, D., & Davidoff, J. (2000). The categorical perception of colours and facial expressions: The
effect of verbal interference. Memory and Cognition, 28, 977-986.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Shapiro, L. (2004). The development of color categories
in two languages: A longitudinal study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133,
554-571.
Roberson, D., Davies, I., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Colour categories are not universal: Replications and
new evidence from a Stone-age culture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129,
369-398.
Rogosky, B. J., & Goldstone, R. L. (2005). Adaptation of perceptual and semantic features. In L. A.
Carlson & E. van der Zee (Eds.), Functional features in language and space: Insights from
perception, categorization & development (pp. 257-273). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schmidt, W. H., & Nzimande, A. (1970). Cultural differences in color/form preference and in classificatory behaviour. Human Development, 13, 140-148.
Sera, M. D., Berge, C., & del Castillo Pintado, J. (1994). Grammatical and conceptual forces in the
attribution of gender by English and Spanish speakers. Cognitive Development, 9, 261-292.
Sera, M. D., Elieff, C., Forbes, J., Burch, M. C., Rodriguez, W., & Dubois, D. P. (2002). When language
affects cognition and when it does not: An analysis of grammatical gender and classification.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 377-397.
Serpell, R. (1969). Cultural differences in attentional preference for colour over form. International
Journal of Psychology, 4, 1-8.
Slobin, D. I. (1971). Psycholinguistics. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman & Co.
Slobin, D. I. (1985). Cross-linguistic study of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From "thought and language" to "thinking for speaking." In J. J. Gumperz &
S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 70-96). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Slobin, D. I. (2003). Language and thought online: Cognitive consequences of linguistic relativity. In
D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the study of language
and thought (pp. 157-191). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:1
Athanasopoulos and Kasai: Language and thought in bilinguals

123

Soja, N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological categories guide young children's inductions of
word meaning: Objects names and substance terms. Cognition, 38, 179-211.
Subrahmanyam, K., Landau, B., & Gelman, R. (1999). Shape, material and syntax: Interacting forces
in children's learning in novel words for objects and substances. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14, 249-281.
Takano, H. (1994). Japanese common nouns and their unquantificational nature. In N. Akatsuka (Ed.),
Japanese/Korean linguistics (Vol. 4, pp. 379-394). Stanford, CA: Stanford University, Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
Yelland, G. W., Pollard, J., & Mercuri, A. (1993). The metalinguistic benefits of limited contact with
a second language. Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 423-444.

