Sustained Selective Attention Skills
of Preschool Children With Specific
Language Impairment: Evidence for
Separate Attentional Capacities
Tammie J. Spaulding
Elena Plante
Rebecca Vance
University of Arizona, Tucson

Purpose: The present study was designed to investigate the performance of preschool
children with specific language impairment (SLI) and their typically developing (TD)
peers on sustained selective attention tasks.
Method: This study included 23 children diagnosed with SLI and 23 TD children
matched for age, gender, and maternal education level. The children's sustained
selective attention skills were assessed with different types of stimuli (visual,
nonverbal-auditory, linguistic) under 2 attentional load conditions (high, low) using
computerized tasks. A mixed design was used to compare children across groups and
performance across tasks.
Results: The SLI participants exhibited poorer performance than their peers on the
sustained selective attention tasks presented in the auditory modality (linguistic and
nonverbal-auditory) under the high attentional load conditions. Performance was
comparable with their peers under the low attentional load conditions. The SLI group
exhibited similar performance to their peers on the visual tasks regardless of
attentional load.
Conclusion: These results support the notion of attention difficulties in preschool children
with SLI and suggest separate attentional capacities for different stimulus modalities.
KEY WORDS: preschool children, attention, specific language impairment,
capacity limitations

A

ttention is considered an essential precursor for a child's optimal
development and learning (Hagen & Hale, 1973; Lewis & Baldini,
1979) and is purported to be heavily involved in the development
of language (Campbell & McNeil, 1985; Robin & Rizzo, 1992; Torro, Sinnett,
& Soto-Faraco, 2005). Reduced attention skills have been widely documented
in children with learning disabilities (e.g., Copeland & Reiner, 1984;
Douglas, 1983; Kupietz & Richardson, 1978; Richards, Samuels, Turnure,
& Ysseldyke, 1990), a diagnosis that often includes compromised language
skills. However, specific language impairment (SLI), a disorder characterized
primarily by poor language skills, represents an ideal opportunity for examining the importance of attention in language development. To ascertain the
relationship between attention and language in SLI, a thorough understanding of the range of attentional functioning in this population is needed.

What Is Attention?
Although attention is a frequent word in our everyday vocabulary,
researchers exploring this skill have yet to agree upon its definition. For
16

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/08/5101-0016

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

example, attention has been conceptualized differently
depending upon whether it is studied within a working
memory or a perceptual framework. As a result, different investigators apply different research methodologies
to study attentional functioning.
A number of investigators acknowledge that attention plays a central role in memory functioning, most
notably in reference to working memory (e.g., Baddeley,
1986, 1993, 1996; Cowan, 1993, 1997; Engle, 2002; Engle,
Kane, & Tuholski, 1999; Redick & Engle, 2006). Redick
and Engle (2006) purported that working memory capacity equates with the ability to control attention. Similarly, Baddeley (1986) associated one component of the
working memory system, the central executive, with the
supervisory attentional system previously proposed by
Norman and Shallice (1986). Researchers considering
attention through a working memory framework employ
tasks requiring some degree of attentional control. However, they often fail to isolate attention skill as a distinct
variable of interest (e.g., Baudouin, Vanneste, Pouthas,
& Isingrini, 2006; Jeffries, Lamhon-Ralph, & Baddeley,
2004; Rosen & Engle, 1997). As a result, in these studies, attentional functioning can only be inferred through
working memory performance.
Other investigators, however, acknowledge the separate status of attention (e.g., Cooley & Morris, 1990;
Mirsky, 1996; Mirsky, Anthony, Duncan, Alhearn, &
Kellam, 1991; Strauss, Thompson, Adams, Redline, &
Burant, 2000). Those who ascribe to this conceptualization do not consider attention as a single entity limited
to attentional or executive control; rather, attention is a
general name given to a number of brain processes that
interact in the performance of perceptual, cognitive, and
motor tasks. Although there is no agreed upon taxonomy
of attention, this multifaceted system is said to involve--
at a minimum--alertness, sustained attention, focusing
attention, selective attention, attentional switching, and
divided attention (Coull, 1998; Van Zomeren & Brouwer,
1994). Investigators acknowledging attention as a distinct, measurable, multidimensional construct are able
to obtain a more direct association between task performance and attentional functioning, as tasks are
specifically designed to measure each type of attention
skill (e.g., Kieling, Roman, Doyle, Hutz, & Rohde, 2006;
Lindgren, Stenberg, & Rosen, 1996; Schul, Stiles,
Wulfeck, & Townsend, 2004).
Although no single definition of attention is universally accepted, there is general consensus that attention
is a limited-capacity system. Broadbent (1958) first introduced the limited-capacity hypothesis, proposing that
individuals possess a finite amount of attentional resources to expend on cognitive processing. According
to this hypothesis, as task demands increase there is
an associated increase in attentional effort and a reduction in the amount of available spare resources. The

hallmark of the limited capacity theory of attention is a
performance trade-off between two tasks that are carried
out simultaneously (Norman & Bobrow, 1975). This is
because allocating some attention to one task reduces
the amount of attentional resources available for the
other. However, capacity limitations do not manifest only
under dual-task conditions. According to the limited
capacity hypothesis, performance suffers if the requirements of even one task exceed an individual's attentional capacity.
Although attention is considered a limited capacity
system, there are disparate viewpoints as to the specifications of attentional capacity. Central capacity theorists
argue that tasks draw upon a single pool of attentional
resources that can be used flexibly across activities (e.g.,
Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968; Kahneman, 1973; Norman
& Bobrow, 1975). Therefore, applying attentional resources to one task will reduce those available for another concurrent task. The possibility of a supramodal
attentional system, however, is questionable, as a number of studies have provided counterevidence by using
concurrent tasks that tap resources in different modalities. Allport, Antonis, and Reynolds (1972) found that
participants could successfully learn to sight-read music
while engaging in auditory shadowing with no signs
of task interference. In addition, the participants in a
study conducted by Hirst, Spelke, Reaves, Caharack,
and Neisser (1980) were able to learn to read and take
dictation simultaneously. In addition, Wickens (1984)
found near-perfect dual-task performance between a visual tracking task and a concurrent acoustically based
memory search task. However, when the memory task
was adjusted to be visual in nature, task interference
ensued. To account for his findings, Wickens proposed
a multiple resource model of attention, suggesting that
tasks necessitating visual attention would draw upon
separate and independent resources from those requiring auditory attention skills. A recent study by Alais,
Morrone, and Burr (2006) supports Wickens's account
of the separation of attentional resources. Their results
indicated that visual discrimination thresholds were
virtually unaffected by concurrent auditory chord and
pitch discrimination tasks, and auditory pitch discrimination thresholds were unaltered by concurrent,
cross-modal visual search and visual discrimination tasks.
However, thresholds for both visual and auditory discrimination increased when the dual tasks were presented in the same modality. The results of these studies
suggest that, at least for some tasks, the visual and
auditory modalities recruit sensory-specific attentional
resources.
To assess an individual's attentional capacity, a task
must require sufficient attentional resources to tax the
attentional system. The amount of attentional resources
required for successful performance may be a function of

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

17

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

the type of processing required. A differentiation can be
made between automatic and effortful processes (Hasher
& Zacks, 1979). According to Schneider and Shiffrin
(1977), automatic processing is fast, spontaneous, and
involuntary. Tasks performed automatically involve few
attentional resources and require little effort. In contrast, controlled processing is slow, is under voluntary
control, and requires effort. As a result, tasks involving
controlled processing necessitate greater attentional
resources for successful performance. In addition to the
nature of processing required, researchers examining
capacity limitations can also manipulate the processing
requirements by adjusting the relative difficulty or complexity of a single task or by having the participants
engage in two tasks concurrently.

Importance of Attention
in Language Learning
It is likely that different aspects of language make
different demands on individuals' attentional resources,
with language acquisition operating by both simple, automatic processes and controlled mechanisms. It has been
suggested that automatic processing mechanisms may
be employed to extract the structural regularities from
speech (e.g., Christiansen & Chater, 2003; Dominey &
Ramus, 2000). Supporting this possibility, Saffran and
Newport (1997) found that young children and adults
were able to segment words using transitional probabilities of the phoneme sequences in the input without
having been given explicit instruction to attend to the
linguistic input. In contrast, semantic development is
thought to involve controlled processing mechanisms.
Dominey and Dodane (2004), for example, proposed that
controlled processing acts to direct the attention of the
language learner to specific aspects of the sentence
and its referents by taking advantage of child-directed
speech, joint attention, and the speaker's intentions.
Once the referent is determined, the language learner
is then able to map the meaning onto the linguistic
structure. The idea that semantic development necessitates controlled processing is further supported by W. A.
Johnston and Heintz's (1978) dichotic listening study.
They found evidence that selection of a target on the
basis of semantic cues appears to be more effortful than
selection on the basis of physical cues. Their research
attempting to quantify the amount of effort raises the
possibility that automatic and processing mechanisms
may not be binary phenomena but, rather, fall on a continuum. If so, Saffran and Newport's task may represent
the end of the continuum that reflects minimal allocation of attentional resources, given that their participants' performance suggests at least some attention was
allocated to the presence of the linguistic input, despite
a lack of intentional focus on it.

18

Although attentional demands may be minimal
for some processing tasks and substantial for others, it
seems logical to assume that language input that is
weakly or intermittently attended will be less well coded
than linguistic input that is attended. This has been demonstrated in dual processing paradigms designed to manipulate attentional capacity during language learning
tasks. Torro et al. (2005) found that when adult participants' attentional resources were depleted by diverting their attention to another unrelated task, their
ability to learn the characteristics of an artificial language suffered. In addition, Guion and Pederson (2005)
studied the interaction of attention and learning the
Hindi language in native English-speaking adults. They
found that when attention was directed toward the semantics of the Hindi language, the adults learned the
semantics and not the phonetic contrasts; similarly,
when attention was directed toward the phonetic contrasts, the participants learned the phonetic contrasts
and not the semantics. This study stresses the importance of attention in language learning and suggests that,
for some language domains, capacity for processing is
limited to that which is within the attentional focus.

Attention in SLI
Leonard (1998), referring to memory functioning,
proposed that children with SLI exhibit a general reduced capacity compared with their typical language
peers. Numerous other researchers have also provided
evidence of a general processing capacity limitation in
children with SLI (e.g., Ellis Weismer, 1996; Ellis
Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999; Lahey & Edwards,
1996; Montgomery, 2000). Despite the assertion that
attention is also a capacity-limited system, the notion
of reduced attentional capacity in children with SLI has
yet to be explored in a systematic fashion.
In addition, it is possible for children with SLI to
present with comparable performance with their typically developing (TD) peers on some types of attention
(e.g., attentional orienting) while exhibiting deficits in
others (e.g., sustained attention, divided attention). Studies of other developmental disorders including dyslexia
(e.g., Bednarek et al., 2004; Moores, Nicolson, & Fawcett,
2003), attention deficit disorder (e.g., Dechazo Barry,
Grofer Klinger, Lyman, Bush, & Hawkins, 2001;
Heaton, Reader, & Preston, 2001; Manly, Anderson, &
Nimmo-Smith, 2001), and autism (e.g., Courchesne et al.,
1994; Noterdaeme, Amorosa, Mildenberger, Sitter, &
Minow, 2000) have all provided evidence of disparate
levels of attentional functioning for different attention
types.
Despite its relevance to language development, research on the attentional functioning of children with
SLI is scarce. The majority of recent studies of this

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

population involve temporal processing, working memory, dual processing, and word learning tasks (Alt &
Plante, 2006; Burlingame, Sussman, Gillam, & Hay, 2005;
Conti-Ramsden & Durkin, 2007; Ellis Weismer, Plante,
Jones, & Tomblin, 2005; Gray, 2005, 2006; Hoffman &
Gillam, 2004; Stokes, Wong, Fletcher, & Leonard, 2000).
Although these studies have been focused on language
functioning, the methods employed require significant
attentional resources.
Various investigators have implicated attentional
difficulties to explain poor performance on tasks designed to measure language, memory, temporal processing, and the like. For example, Helzer, Champlin, and
Gillam (1996) suggested the influence of attentional
functioning on the auditory temporal resolution skills
of children with SLI. The children with SLI reached
similar auditory temporal resolution thresholds to their
age-matched peers but required more trials to do so.
However, attention was not measured as a unique construct of interest; therefore, limitations in attention could
only be inferred through poor performance on the temporal processing task. Likewise, Ellis Weismer, Evans,
and Hesketh (1999) suggested attentional differences
might have contributed to differences on measures of
verbal working memory skills of school-age children
with SLI. Again, attention was not measured directly
in this study. The investigator's interpretation, however,
is supported by subsequent findings from a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study (Ellis Weismer et al.,
2005). Adolescents with SLI who performed a verbal
working memory task exhibited significant activation
differences not only in areas associated with encoding
and recall of the verbal material but also in regions
associated with attention. This was the case despite the
fact that none of the participants had diagnoses of attention deficit disorder or attention-deficit / hyperactivity
disorder. These studies raise the possibility that what
may initially appear to be deficits in other cognitive constructs may be either due to, or exacerbated by, attention
difficulties. They also provide evidence of the difficulty
interpreting the contribution of attention to task performance if attention is not measured explicitly.
Only a small number of studies have directly examined the attention skills of children with SLI. In addition, the vast majority of studies have focused on the
school-age population, whereas the exploration of attention in preschool children with SLI has been minimal.
Nonetheless, the few available studies suggest that at
least some domains of attention are weak for children
with SLI, although the findings across studies have been
mixed. One descriptive study by Willinger et al. (2003)
explored a range of behavior problems in children age 4 -
6 years with mixed receptive/expressive and expressiveonly language impairments. Using the German version
of the Child Behavior Checklist (Dopfner, Schmeck, &

Berner, 1994), they found that 16% of the children with
mixed receptive-expressive deficits and 11% of the children with expressive language deficits only were reported
to exhibit problems of attention. These rates, although
not significantly different from each other, were significantly higher than those found in the TD controls. Although this study suggests frank attention problems in
general for some children with SLI, it does not rule out
more subtle attentional affects in the remaining children
or specify which types of attention might be weak.
A few experimental studies have considered specific
types of attentional functioning in SLI. Hanson and
Montgomery (2002) studied the sustained selective attention skills of 6- to 10-year-old children with SLI. These
children performed similarly to their TD peers on a measure of sustained selective attention. However, the lack
of significant group differences may have been because
of the limited power to detect group differences due to
small sample size. Stevens, Sanders, and Neville (2006)
studied the selective attention skills of children with SLI
using an enterprise resource planning paradigm. Although their behavioral data evidenced no differences
between the SLI and control groups, their enterprise resource planning results indicated that the SLI group, in
contrast to their controls, appeared to process attended
and unattended information similarly. Noterdaeme et al.
(2000) examined sustained selective attention in SLI in
both visual and auditory modalities. The children with
SLI performed significantly worse than the control children in the auditory attention tasks but similarly to
their TD peers in those tapping visual attention skills.
However, there is a potential problem with interpreting
the results. As the authors noted, the attention difficulties found may have been due to the working memory
demands of the tasks. For example, their attention paradigm involved the need to continually update and store
each stimulus as it was presented to compare it with the
subsequent stimulus. Children with SLI are known to
have reduced working memory capacity (e.g., Archibald
& Gathercole, 2006; Edwards & Lahey, 1998; Ellis
Weismer et al., 2005; Ellis Weismer, Tomblin, et al.,
1999; Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990; Montgomery, 1995).
Given this inherent confound, the results of this study
are difficult to interpret in terms of the role of attention.
The results of Noterdaeme et al. (2000), however,
support the possibility of a role for separate attentional
capacities as a function of stimulus modality. This is
also supported by Gomes, Duff, and Wolfson (2004), who
studied school-age children with poor receptive language skills. They found that the language-impaired
children performed significantly worse than their agematched controls on an auditory divided attention task
but performed significantly better on a task assessing
visual divided attention. Further support for the strong
visual attention skills of children with SLI comes from a

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

19

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

study of visuospatial attentional orienting. Schul et al.
(2004) found that school-age children with SLI performed at similar skill levels to those of the controls.
These studies strongly support the notion of sensoryspecific attention difficulties in children with SLI and
provide evidence for separate attentional capacities for
different modalities in this population.
In summary, the research conducted to date on the
attention functioning of children with SLI is far from
conclusive. It is entirely possible that children with SLI
exhibit comparable performance with their TD peers
on some types of attention while exhibiting deficits in
others. It is also likely that their attention skills may
vary across stimulus modalities.

Present Study
Substantial language growth occurs during the preschool years. Therefore, the preschool years represent
an important period for language learning and potentially a critical time at which attention and language
may interact. Only two studies to date have addressed the
attention skills of preschool children with SLI (Stevens
et al., 2006; Willinger et al., 2003), and one of which
solely assessed attention in general form using indirect
means (parent report of problems; Willinger et al., 2003).
Therefore, the range of attention skills within the preschool population is poorly understood.
Research into attentional functioning in SLI, however, needs to consider the working memory demands
of the tasks employed to isolate the unique contributions
of attention to task performance. This is especially true
for children with SLI, given their difficulties in the area
of working memory. Some aspects of attentional functioning, including divided attention and attentional shifting, place significant demands on working memory. In
contrast, other aspects of attention, such as sustained
and selective attention, can be more readily assessed with
tasks that minimize working memory requirements.
The present study uses an experimental methodology to explore specific aspects of sustained selective attention in the preschool population with SLI. The primary
aim of this study is to determine whether there is a
significant difference between preschool children with
SLI and their TD peers on measures of sustained, selective attention. Sustained attention refers to the continuous processing of information over time, whereas
selective attention involves choosing certain stimuli
amongst others from the environment for further processing (Halperin, 1991). Sustained selective attention
tasks, therefore, would require maintaining attention
over time and selecting certain stimuli amongst competing stimuli. Sustained selective attention can be assessed in a relatively straightforward manner, is
purported to be the least influenced by other aspects

20

of attentional functioning (Mirsky et al., 1991), and can
be assessed with minimal working memory demands.
Therefore, an understanding of sustained selective attention skills in the context of language impairment is
an important starting point for research in this underdeveloped area of study.
Previous studies have suggested that attention is
not always problematic for children with SLI. This may
be due to the heterogeneous nature of the SLI population, the variations in task demands across studies, or
the different types of attention assessed. However, it
may also be because deficits in attentional functioning
may be specific to the auditory modality. Prior studies
have suggested that school-age children with SLI do
evidence differences in attention in different stimulus
modalities. Although they exhibit significantly worse
performance than controls in auditory attention tasks,
they demonstrate commensurate or superior visual attention skills (Gomes et al., 2004; Noterdaeme et al.,
2000; Schul et al., 2004). In addition, previous research
on related constructs, such as memory, suggest a discrepancy between auditory-verbal and visuospatial memory
functioning. For example, children with SLI exhibit deficits in verbal but typical performance in visuospatial
short-term and working memory tasks (Archibald &
Gathercole, 2006). These types of discrepancies support
the call for the systematic exploration of attention skills
in multiple modalities (Mirsky, Fantie, & Tatman, 1995).
We hypothesized that preschool children with SLI, like
their older counterparts, would also exhibit disparate
functioning between visual and auditory sustained selective attention skills. To test this hypothesis, sustained
selective attention tasks are presented using both
auditory and visual stimuli.
Although there is reason to suspect modalityspecific attentional affects in SLI, it is also possible that
capacity limitations involving attentional resources
also play a role. If this is the case, then increasing attentional demands should decrease performance differentially for SLI children relative to their peers. One way
to tax the attentional system is to degrade the signal
with the addition of noise. The influence of noise on task
performance has been pervasive in the speech perception literature (e.g., Bradlow, Kraus, & Hayes, 2003;
Dean & McDermott, 2000; Salvi, Lockwood, & Frisina,
2002; Talarico et al., 2007). A recent study by Ziegler,
Pech-Georgel, George, Alario, and Lorenzi (2005) found
that, under optimal listening conditions (silence), children with SLI exhibited mild speech perception deficits.
However, under conditions of noise, they presented with
substantial speech perception difficulties. Indeed, normal listening conditions typically involve background
noise. Therefore, lab-created optimal listening conditions
that test attention skills in silence are not characteristic
of the common demands placed on children's attentional

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

systems. On the other hand, stimuli degraded by the
addition of white noise are more representative of the
conditions that children encounter daily. To determine
the influence of noise on sustained, selective attention
skills, stimuli are presented in standard and degraded
conditions. The degraded stimuli should place increased
demands on attentional processing and potentially manifest subclinical deficits that may not arise under conditions requiring low attention demands.
The effects of increased attentional demand may not
be equivalent under all processing conditions. Specifically, capacity limitations should become evident when
processing tasks tap skills that are known to be difficult
for children with SLI. Given that language is the defining deficit for the disorder, we expected that capacity
limitations would occur when auditory stimuli carried
linguistic information. However, there was also reason
to suspect that poor processing of nonlinguistic auditory
stimuli could also strain attentional resources. Documented difficulties processing nonlinguistic auditory stimuli (e.g., Hill, Hogben, & Bishop, 2005; Ludlow, Cudahy,
Bassich, & Brown, 1983; Tallal, 1976; Visto, Cranford, &
Scudder, 1996) could result from poor attention to nonverbal auditory stimuli (Helzer et al., 1996). If this is
true, preschool children with SLI may exhibit poor attention for nonlinguistic auditory stimuli in addition to
problems attending to linguistic stimuli. To determine
whether sustained selective attention skills are poor because of capacity limitations in the auditory modality
(in general) or whether auditory attention problems are
specific to linguistic information, both nonverbal auditory and auditory-linguistic stimuli are presented.
In summary, if preschoolers with SLI have a generalized deficit in sustained selective attention, then they
will perform significantly worse than their TD peers on
all types of stimuli regardless of modality and regardless
of attentional load. If general capacity limitations affect
performance, then children with SLI will only show deficits when attentional demand is high. However, prior
research also suggests separate attentional resources
exist for different modalities, and children with SLI may
show an additional affect for different sensory modalities. If so, then their performance should be relatively
strong in the visual modality compared with the auditory modality (where processing deficits are known to
occur). On the other hand, if deficits are confined to
linguistic material, preschoolers with SLI will only exhibit poor performance on the tasks involving linguistic
stimuli and comparable performance on the nonverbal
auditory and visual tasks.
Performance is assessed using accuracy (d) and
response time (RT) data. RT data were collected because
previous research has suggested a generalized slowing for children with SLI (see Miller, Kail, Leonard, &
Tomblin, 2001, for review). Therefore, it is possible that

the preschool children with SLI may not exhibit difficulties with sustained selective attention per se but
merely take longer to process the incoming information
(the general slowing hypothesis; see Kail, 1994).

Method
Participants
Forty-six native English-speaking preschool children participated in this study. Children with SLI were
recruited from a University of Arizona summer language program and from local daycare and preschool
programs. TD children were recruited from regional
daycare and preschool programs. Twenty-three children
(15 male, 8 female) had SLI. They had a mean age of
4;10 (years;months) and an age range of 4;1-5;7. Another 23 children (15 male, 8 female) presented with
TD language skills. They had a mean age of 4;10 and an
age range of 4;0-5;7. The children represented a range
of racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic backgrounds (see
Table 1 for a description of participant characteristics).
Children in the TD group were matched to the SLI
group on the basis of chronological age (3 months) and
gender. Language or cognitive matches were not used
because these matches would likely introduce methodological confounds (Plante, Swisher, Kiernan, & Restrepo,
1993). Most important to the purpose of this study, the
potential cognitive and attentional differences arising
from matching younger TD children to older children with
SLI would likely affect performance on the attention
tasks employed.
All children participating in this study passed a hearing screening at 25 dB HL at 500 Hz and at 20 dB HL at
1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz in each ear. According to parent,
Table 1. Description of participants.
Variable

SLI (n = 23)

TD (n = 23)

Race (n)
White
African American
American Indian
Unspecified

14
3
2
4

17.
3.
1.
2.

Ethnicity (n)
Hispanic
Non-Hispanic
Unspecified

8
12
3

7.
12.
4.

Mother's educational level (years)
M
SD
Range

14.21
1.60
11-17

14.80
1.74
12-17

Note.

SLI = specific language impairment; TD = typically developing.

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

21

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

teacher, and clinician reports, all were free of known
hearing, motor, behavioral, neurological, and cognitive
problems. None had a diagnosis of attention deficit disorder or attention-deficit / hyperactivity disorder.
The SLI status and TD status were determined by
converging evidence from both observation of conversational speech and the results of language and cognitive testing. Children with SLI met three criteria.
The first two criteria were as follows: (a) Their language
skills were judged to be impaired during conversational
speech by a certified speech-language pathologist; and
(b) the children obtained a standard score below 95 on the
Structured Photographic Expressive Language Test--
Third Edition (SPELT-3; Dawson, Stout, & Eyer, 2003).
This test has been validated for use with preschool children (Perona, Plante, & Vance, 2005). Perona et al. (2005)
found an upward shift of standard scores, relative to
published norms, for preschool children in the Tucson
(Arizona) area. Therefore, a relatively high cutoff score
of 95 maximized accurate identification of language status and resulted in 90% sensitivity and 100% specificity.
In addition, this test identifies children with either receptive or expressive language deficits and can therefore
be considered a test of general language functioning. The
final criterion included the following: (c) The children
scored above 75 (70  1 SEM) on the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children--Second Edition (KABC-II;
Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004), which is a measure of
nonverbal cognition. This criterion was used because the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(4th ed.; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) sets
the IQ portion of the criteria for mental retardation at
<70  1 SEM for the test employed.
TD children received the same battery of tests administered to the children with SLI. TD children met
the cognitive criteria listed above and the following additional criteria to establish typical language development: (a) Their language was judged to be within normal
limits during conversational speech by a certified speechlanguage pathologist; (b) they obtained a standard score
above 95 on the SPELT-3 (Dawson et al., 2003; Perona
et al., 2005); (c) they were not enrolled in speech and language or special education services; and (d) their parents
and teachers reported no history of diagnoses or concerns
about their speech, language, or cognitive functioning.
Additional testing was conducted to document skills
in particular areas of interest for children with SLI.
These included the Grammatical Understanding subtest of the Test of Language Development-Primary
(3rd ed.; Newcomer & Hammill, 1997) and the Nonword
Repetition Test (Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998). All tests
were administered in random order to control for possible order bias. Means and standard deviations obtained
by the SLI group and the control group are reported in
Table 2.

22

Table 2. Test results.
SLI group
Behavioral measure
KABC-IIa
SPELT-3a
TOLD-P (GU)b
NW REPc

TD group

M

SD

M

SD

96.26d
74.48d
8.43d
3.00d

9.85
9.95
2.63
1.95

114.87
113.09
12.43
9.70

9.92
7.93
3.09
2.67

Note. KABC-II = Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children--Second
Edition; SPELT-3 = Structured Photographic Expressive Language Test--
Third Edition; TOLD-P (GU) = Test of Language Development-Primary,
Grammatical Understanding subtest; NW REP = Nonword Repetition Test.
a

Standard scores with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
Standard scores with a mean of 10 and a standard deviation of 3. cRaw
score out of 16 possible. dSignificant difference (t test) from the TD group
at p < .05.
b

Procedures
The stimuli consisted of speech, environmental sounds,
and visual animations. The linguistic stimuli were recorded
and edited using Sony Sound Forge 7.0 (Sony Corporation,
New York, NY) to 16-bit resolution at a sampling rate of
44 kHz. The linguistic stimuli were trisyllabic words
recorded from a female speaker having a general American
dialect. These stimuli were spoken with the same stress
location and general affective tone. The linguistic stimuli were judged to be approximately 1,000 ms in duration through inspection of the acoustic waveforms. To
ensure that the maximum output levels were consistent
across stimuli, the waveforms for each individual word
were normalized. The normalization involved adjustment of the peak amplitude to approximately 70 dB SPL.1
All other amplitude values in each waveform were adjusted by the same amount as the peak in an attempt
to preserve the dynamic range of the speech signal for
each stimulus item. The nonverbal-auditory stimuli were
obtained from a directory of recorded environmental stimuli (http: //www.comparisonics.com; Comparisonics Corporation, Grass Valley, CA) and were also edited using
the Sony Sound Forge 7.0 (Sony Corporation, New York,
NY) program. The duration for the nonverbal-auditory
stimuli was edited to be 1,000 ms, and the intensity was
normalized to be commensurate with the intensity level
of the linguistic stimuli using the same normalization
procedure.
The visual stimuli consisted of a red cartoon plane.
It was obtained from a directory of two-dimensional
clipart pictures (http://www.animationlibrary.com) and
animated using Fireworks MX (Macromedia, Version
1
Although the stimuli were normalized to 70 dB SPL, adjustments were
made for some children who requested a louder or softer listening level.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

2004). The animations were calibrated so that each consisted of 25 frames of 40 ms per frame for a total duration
of 1,000 ms per animation. The cartoon plane (160 px x
120 px) was presented in horizontal-orientation facing
toward the right side of the computer screen. The plane
animations moved slowly in front of a high-contrast colored background.
For the degraded stimulus condition, Gaussian
noise was added to the linguistic, nonverbal-auditory,
and visual stimuli. For the linguistic and nonverbalauditory stimuli, the noise was synthesized digitally to
16-bit resolution at a sampling of 44 kHz by the Sony
Sound Forge 7.0 (Sony Corporation, New York, NY) program at a level of 14 dB SPL. For the visual stimuli, the
stimuli were degraded by substituting the noise for 20%
of the pixels in a random fashion using the Fireworks
MX (Macromedia, Version 2004) program.
Two Dell Latitude c840 laptop computers with 15 in.
[38.1 cm] screens were equipped with Direct RT Precision Timing Software (Version 2004.1.0.42; Empirisoft,
New York, NY) to present the stimuli and to record responses and RT data. The children were seated directly
in front of the computer screen. Visual animation stimuli
were presented on the computer screen, and the linguistic and nonverbal-auditory stimuli were emitted binaurally through headphones at a comfortable listening
level for the participants. Responses were made via button boxes attached to the computers. RTs were recorded
from the onset of the target stimulus until the button
press.

Simple RT Tasks
Because a number of other studies have indicated
that RTs can be slower for children with SLI compared
with their TD peers (see Miller et al., 2001, for review),
methodological elements were incorporated to control
for possible baseline RT differences. First, children were
trained to begin each trial with their hands placed on
two blue squares set at a standard distance from the
response button. Second, two simple RT tasks were
administered to the children prior to the experimental
conditions to serve as an index of motor RT to auditorybased and visual-based stimuli. If there was to be a
significant correlation between the simple RT tasks and
the RTs on the sustained selective attention tasks involving the same modality of stimuli, each participant's
median RT on the simple RT tasks was used as a covariate during analyses of the RTs in the sustained selective attention conditions.
In the simple visual RT task, the participants viewed
a box centered on the computer screen. They were instructed to press the button as quickly as possible when
they observed a cartoon snake rising out of the box.
In the simple auditory RT task, the participants were

instructed to press the button as quickly as possible
when they heard a person gargling.
The target stimulus for both simple RT tasks was
the only one presented and continued until the child
responded. Following a response, the interstimulus interval for the subsequent stimulus presentation varied
randomly at 1,500 ms, 2,000 ms, and 2,500 ms in an
attempt to prevent predictability. For each simple RT
task, a series of practice trials were presented followed
by 20 trials in which data were collected. RT was determined and recorded from the onset of the stimulus to the
button press response.

Sustained Selective Attention Tasks
Sustained selective attention was measured using
three different types of stimuli presented in stimulus
sequences. Sequences of linguistic, nonverbal-auditory,
and visual stimuli were presented. The use of stimulus
sequences was intended to hold constant stimulus conditions that are independent of input modality. For example, previous studies that have shown modality differences
for attention have compared static images, which are
wholistic and therefore nonsequential, to spoken stimuli,
which are inherently sequential and transient (e.g.,
Brodeur & Pond, 2001; Mattson, Calarco, & Lang, 2006).
Each sustained selective attention task was presented in
a standard (low load) and degraded (high load) condition.
The degraded condition was accomplished by adding visual white noise to the visual sustained selective attention task and auditory white noise to the auditory
sustained selective attention tasks. Incorporating the
same tasks in degraded form served the purpose of increasing the attentional demand relative to the standard
condition. This resulted in the following six sustained
selective attention tasks: visual low load, visual high
load, nonverbal-auditory low load, nonverbal-auditory
high load, linguistic low load, and linguistic high load.
For each sustained selective attention task, the
child was presented with 96 sequences of three items.
Sixteen of the sequences contained the infrequent target
stimulus, whereas the remaining 80 did not. Each stimulus within each sequence was presented for 1.0 s with
a 0.5-s interval between stimuli within the sequence
series. Each sequence was separated by a 2.5-s intersequence interval.
Each of the six sustained selective attention tasks
took approximately 12 min to complete. The children
completed each on different days with the order counterbalanced across children. The attention tasks were interdispersed with behavioral testing to reduce fatigue
effects.
Each of the attention tasks consisted of a familiarization phase, a training phase, and an experimental phase,
in that order. The familiarization phase was designed to

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

23

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

acquaint the child with the target stimulus. The training
phase was designed to elicit responses to the target stimulus and nonresponses to nontarget stimuli. Both the
familiarization phase and the training phase contained
accuracy feedback following each response. These phases
were intended to ensure an understanding of the demands of the task, comprehension of the directions, and
task compliance prior to engaging in the experimental
phase.
In the familiarization phase, the child was instructed to respond to a target stimulus by pressing a
button each time the stimulus appeared over the course
of six trials. The child needed to respond to all six presentations of the stimuli before progressing to the training phase. If the child did not, the familiarization phase
was repeated until this criterion was reached. Failure to
reach criterion occurred for 2 children with SLI, both of
whom reached criterion on their second attempt. Following the familiarization phase, the child began the
training phase with the task of responding only to the
target stimulus while ignoring other stimuli for six trials
consisting of three targets and three nontargets presented in random order. Each child had to correctly respond to five of the six stimuli by pressing the button
when the target was presented and refraining from
pressing the button when nontargets were presented. If
he or she did not, the training was repeated starting from
the familiarization phase until the criteria was reached.
Each child was provided with a maximum of two presentations of the familiarization and training phases per
session. If he or she did not reach criteria for both phases
after two presentations, the child stopped participating in
the task for that day. Failure to pass the training phase
occurred on 2 days for 1 child with SLI, 1 day for another
child with SLI, and 1 day for 1 child in the TD group.
However, on subsequent days, each was able to reach the
criteria for the familiarization and training phases and
progress to the attention tasks.
Upon completion of the familiarization and training phases, the experimental task was administered to
the child. This began with a "teacher" on the computer
telling the child that he/she would now play the game all
by himself/ herself. The children received no reinforcement for trial performance. However, they received periodic reinforcement for task compliance at decreasing
intervals through the task. This consisted of five items
(e.g., stars) that sequentially disappeared to mark progress throughout the experimental task.

Visual Sustained Selective Attention Task
This task involved attention to visual animation
stimuli with the sequences consisting of a series of three
animations. The child was instructed to watch animation sequences of a plane and to press the button when

24

he/she observed the target animation, the plane flipping.
In the nontarget trials, an animation of a plane floating was substituted for the plane flipping. The animations were arranged in the following three animation
sequences: (a) vertical takeoff, ( flipping/plane floating), vertical landing; (b) ( flipping/floating), flying forward, landing; and (c) regular takeoff, flying backwards,
(flipping/floating). Therefore, the target appeared in all
positions within the sequence.

Nonverbal-Auditory Sustained
Selective Attention Task
This task involved attention to nonverbal-auditory
sound sequences with the sequence pattern consisting of a series of three environmental sounds. The child
was instructed to press the button when he/she heard a
target sound, keys rattling, among other environmental
stimuli. In the nontarget sound sequences, the sound
of a car starting was substituted for the sound of keys
rattling. The environmental stimuli were arranged as
follows: (a) (keys rattling/car starting), racing car, tires
squealing; (b) car horn, (keys rattling/car starting), police
siren; and (c) car door opening, car alarm (keys rattling/
car starting). Therefore, the selective attention target
appeared in all positions within the sequence.

Linguistic Sustained Selective
Attention Task
This task involved sequences of linguistic stimuli.
The participants were instructed to press the button
when he /she heard the target word ladybug embedded
in three-word phrases. In the nontarget trials, the word
butterfly was substituted for ladybug. The linguistic stimuli were as follows: (a) (ladybug/ butterfly) easily disappears; (b) 70 (ladybug/ butterfly) calendars; (c) tiniest
wonderful (ladybug/ butterfly). Therefore, the selective
attention target appeared in all positions within the
sequence.

Results
Data Trimming Procedures
To obtain a more valid representation of RT for the
baseline conditions and attention tasks, button presses
with a RT >2 SD from each participant's median RT were
excluded from the analyses (cf. Kail, 1994). This was
because these outliers likely were due to extraneous errors (e.g., not pushing the response button hard enough
the first time) rather than an accurate reflection of RT.
Less than 2% of the data were eliminated on the basis of
this procedure.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Preliminary Analyses
Preliminary analyses yielded no significant differences in performance on the attention tasks as a function
of gender, race, or ethnicity. Therefore, the data were collapsed across these variables.

Simple RT
A mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted for the simple RT tasks with group (SLI, TD) as
the between-subjects variable and stimulus modality
(visual, auditory) as the within-subjects variable. The dependent variable was median RT in milliseconds.
The mean RT for the simple auditory RT task
was 1,991.52 ms (SD = 319.35) for the SLI group and
1,835.96 ms (SD = 331.05) for the TD group. The mean
RT for the simple visual RT task was 2,068.48 ms (SD =
289.34) for the SLI group and 2,017.13 ms (SD = 284.91)
for the TD group. Within-groups analyses revealed a stimulus modality effect, F(1, 44) = 8.99, p < .01, h2 = .17, with
the groups responding faster in the auditory, as compared with the visual, simple RT task. Although the SLI
group presented with slower RTs than their TD peers on
both tasks, there was not a significant group difference,
F(1, 44) = 1.69, p = .20, h2 = .04.

Sustained Selective Attention Tasks
RT results. We predicted that the children with
SLI would respond slower than their TD peers on the
sustained selective attention tasks and that the difference between the two groups would increase under conditions of high attentional load. A mixed ANOVA with
group (SLI, TD) as the between-groups factor and stimulus type (linguistic, auditory, visual) and attentional
load (low, high) as the within-groups factors were used
to test this hypothesis. The dependent variable was
median RT in milliseconds. In these tasks there was no
effect for stimulus type, F(2, 88) = 2.52, p = .09, h2 = .05,
indicating that, unlike what was observed in the
baseline RT tasks, the amount of time needed to respond
was similar across stimulus types. In addition, there was
no attentional load effect, F(1, 44) = 3.53, p = .07, h2 = .07,
signifying that the potential increase in attentional demand in the degraded stimulus conditions did not slow
the RT of the participants. Contrary to our expectation,
between-groups analyses revealed no significant difference in RT, F(1, 44) = 1.69, p = .20, h2 = .04.
Although the two groups did not significantly differ
in RT for the auditory and visual baseline RT tasks, in
general, the SLI group was slower on both tasks in comparison with the TD group. In addition, although none of
the visual sustained selective attention tasks correlated
significantly with the simple visual RT task, significant

correlations were observed between the simple auditory
RT task and the RTs observed in the sustained selective
attention tasks using auditory stimuli (see Table 3). For
this reason, we also conducted an analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA), controlling for simple auditory RT to accurately interpret potential group differences in RT for the
linguistic and nonverbal-auditory sustained selective
attention tasks that employed auditory stimuli. We conducted a mixed ANCOVA with diagnosis (TD vs. SLI) as
the between-groups variable and stimulus type and attentional load as the within-groups variables. The covariate was baseline auditory RT for the linguistic and
nonverbal-auditory attention tasks.
The mixed ANCOVA revealed a nonsignificant trend
in the RT for stimulus type, F(2, 84) = 3.02, p < .05, h2 =
.07. There was no significant difference observed for attentional load, F(1, 42) = 1.246, p = .271, h2 = .03. Even
with simple auditory RT added to the model as a covariate, the between-groups analyses failed to reach significance, F(1, 42) = 0.51, p = .48, h2 = .01.
Accuracy results. Another prediction was that the
SLI group would correctly respond to fewer targets than
the TD group and that the discrepancy in performance
between the two groups would increase under the high
attentional load conditions. To explore this possibility,
we conducted a mixed ANOVA with diagnosis (TD vs.
SLI) as the between-groups variable and stimulus type
(linguistic, nonverbal-auditory, visual) and attentional
load (high, low) as the repeated measures. The dependent variable for this analysis was accuracy, defined as
d [d = z(Hits) - z(False alarms)]. (See Table 4.) We predicted that the SLI group would perform poorly in general relative to the TD group. As predicted, the mixed
ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of diagnosis,
F(1, 44) = 10.12, p < .01, h2 = .19, with the SLI group
performing worse overall compared with the TD participants. We also proposed that performance differences
Table 3. Intercorrelations between simple RT tasks and
attention tasks.
Simple RT tasks
Attention task

Auditory

Linguistic low load
Linguistic high load
Auditory low load
Auditory high load
Visual low load
Visual high load

.44a
.35b
.36b
.43b

Note.

Visual

.27
.10

RT = response time.

a

Correlation is significant at the .01 level. bCorrelation is significant at
the .05 level.

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

25

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 4. Group performance on sustained selective attention tasks.
SLI group

TD group

Attention task

Mean d 

Mean hits

False alarms

Mean d 

Mean hits

False alarms

Linguistic
Low load
High load

3.12
1.99a

12.03
9.30

2.27
3.47

3.50
3.56

13.73
13.38

1.57
0.80

Nonverbal-auditory
Low load
3.48
High load
2.46a

13.21
9.90

1.52
2.57

3.87
3.62

14.01
13.60

0.78
0.70

Visual
Low load
High load

12.54
11.00

0.77
0.86

3.22
3.01

12.74
11.69

1.13
1.28

a

3.33
2.94

Significant between-groups difference at p < .01.

between the two groups may be apparent only in certain
stimulus modalities. In this regard, there was a significant main effect of stimulus type, F(2, 88) = 4.44, p = .02,
h2 = .09, indicating that when the groups were combined,
they performed differently as a function of the type of
stimulus presented. This was qualified by a significant
Group x Stimulus Type interaction, F(2, 88) = 11.87,
p  .01, h2 = .21, signifying that the two groups performed significantly different from each other, depending
upon which stimulus type was presented. A three-way
interaction is discussed that further qualifies the interpretation of this finding.

We further predicted that performance differences
may be greater under the high attentional load conditions and that the SLI group may be more affected by the
increased attentional demand. There was a main effect
of attentional load, F(1, 44) = 51.37, p  .01, h2 = .54,
indicating that when combined, the groups performed
worse in the high load conditions in comparison with the
low load conditions. This was qualified by a significant Attentional Load x Diagnosis interaction, F(1, 44) = 26.96,
p  .01, h2 = .38, signifying that the SLI group was indeed
more affected by the increased attentional load (see
Figure 1). In addition, there was a significant Stimulus

Figure 1. Group Performance x Attentional Load collapsed across stimulus types. TD = typically
developing; SLI = specific language impairment. Error bars represent SEM.

26

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Type x Attentional Load x Diagnosis interaction, F(2, 88) =
3.84, p = .03, h2 = .08. Post hoc analyses, with alpha correction for multiple comparisons, provided evidence that
the SLI group performed significantly worse than their TD
peers in the linguistic high load attention task, t(46) = 7.24,
p < .01 (two-tailed), and auditory high load attention task,
t(46) = 4.89, p < .01 (two-tailed), with comparable performance in the low load tasks and high load visual attention
task (see Figure 2).
To determine the relationship between accuracy and
RT for each group, Pearson product moment correlations
were performed between these two variables for each sustained selective attention task. This analysis resulted in
no significant correlations. Pearson product moment
correlations were also performed between performance
on the sustained selective attention tasks and language
ability (as determined by scores on the SPELT-3) and
performance on nonverbal cognition (as determined by
scores on the KABC-II) to determine the amount of
shared variance between task performance and general
measures of language and IQ (see Table 5 for results).
Performance on the high load linguistic and high load
auditory tasks was correlated with nonverbal cognition.
Nonverbal cognition contributed to 29% and 13% of the
variance for the linguistic and auditory high load tasks,
respectively. However, although accuracy on the high
load visual task correlated with nonverbal cognition
(r = .30, p < .05, r2 = .09), language ability did not. This
is not surprising given that nonverbal cognition tests
are designed to tap into the visual cognitive domain,
whereas the language test is designed to assess linguistic, and not visual, ability. Finally, although nonverbal

cognition did not correlate with reaction time on any of
the tasks, language ability correlated negatively with
the linguistic low load and auditory low load reaction
time tasks, indicating that those with higher language
skills exhibited faster RTs on these measures. Additional Pearson product moment correlations were conducted to determine the relationship between age and
performance on the attention tasks. An interesting finding is that the only significant correlation with age was
accuracy performance on the visual high load attention
task (r = .29, p = .05, r2 = .09), indicating that performance on this task slightly improved with increasing
age. In addition, there were no significant correlations
between accuracy and RTs in the same tasks for each
group.
As expected for SLI, nonverbal cognition, as indexed by scores on the KABC-II, was slightly depressed
compared with their TD peers. This resulted in a significant difference in nonverbal cognition between the
two groups, paired t(46) = -51.19, p < .01 (two-tailed). To
determine how much of the variance in performance on
the sustained selective attention tasks may be a function
of nonverbal cognition, an ANCOVA was conducted adding nonverbal cognition into the model as a covariate.
This analysis would allow us to determine whether group
differences remained after controlling for differences in
nonverbal cognition. When nonverbal cognition was controlled, the group difference was no longer significant,
F(1, 43) = 2.21, p = .14, h2 = .05.
To determine how much of the variance in performance may be a function of language ability, we conducted a second ANCOVA testing the effect of covarying

Figure 2. Accuracy for sustained selective attention tasks. Stars represent significant difference at p < .05.

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

27

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 5. Intercorrelations between language and nonverbal cognition
scores and accuracy performance on attention tasks.
Attention task

SPELT-3

KABC-II

Simple auditory RT
Simple visual RT

-.28
-.20

-.17
-.04

Linguistic low load
Accuracy
RT

.22
-.37a

.24
-.26

Linguistic high load
Accuracy
RT

-.63b
-.16

.54b
-.15

Auditory low load
Accuracy
RT

.16
-.29a

.15
-.08

Auditory high load
Accuracy
RT

.52b
-.26

.37a
-.12

Visual low load
Accuracy
RT

-.12
-.23

.14
-.29

Visual high load
Accuracy
RT

.04
-.05

.30a
.04

a
Correlation is significant at the .05 level. bCorrelation is significant at
the .01 level.

for language ability, as indexed by scores on the SPELT-3.
This would allow us to determine whether differences in
performance between the two groups remained after controlling for differences in language ability. An ANCOVA
revealed that performance differences between the two
groups also disappeared when language ability was controlled, F(1, 43) = 2.49, p = .12, h2 = .06.
Because covarying for either nonverbal cognition or
language eliminated the significant group differences,
an additional correlation was conducted to determine the
relationship between language ability and nonverbal
cognition. These measures were significantly correlated
(r = .59, p < .01, r 2 = .35), indicating that there is overlap
in what these two measures are assessing.

Discussion
The classic definition of SLI specifies that the
affected individuals exhibit significant limitations in
language abilities without accompanying physical, neurological, emotional, or intellectual impairments. However, with increasing knowledge of the spectrum of this
disorder, researchers have begun to explore additional
areas of nonverbal deficit that may be linked to the

28

language learning difficulties of those with the disorder.
In addition to linguistic difficulties, nonlinguistic deficits
including memory processing skills (e.g., Dollaghan &
Campbell, 1998; Edwards & Lahey, 1998; Ellis Weismer,
Evans, & Hesketh, 1999; Ellis Weismer et al., 2005;
Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990; Montgomery, 1995) and
temporal processing skills (e.g., Tallal, 1980; Tallal et al.,
1996; Tallal, Miller, Jenkins, & Merzenich, 1997) have
been widely reported. However, successful performance
on at least some of the tasks intended to measure these
constructs requires adequate attentional functioning
(e.g., Barrouillet, Bernardin, & Camos, 2004; Ellis
Weismer, Tomblin, et al., 1999; Helzer et al., 1996). It is
possible, therefore, that poor performance on these nonlinguistic tasks may be the result of, or at least exacerbated by, potential attentional limitations.
This study extended previous research documenting
general attention difficulties in preschool children with
SLI (Willinger et al., 2003) by studying sustained selective attention in different sensory modalities and under
different levels of attentional demand. The results indicate that preschool participants with SLI exhibited
significantly poorer performance on auditory sustained
selective attention tasks under the high attentional load
conditions. However, the SLI participants presented with
comparable performance with their peers when engaged
in all the sustained selective attention tasks involving
low attentional loads. In addition, both groups exhibited
similar RTs across all tasks.
This study provides preliminary evidence that the
sustained selective attention skills of preschool children
with SLI may vary as a function of the modality of the
input to be attended. The SLI group performed similarly
to their peers on the visual sustained selective attention tasks, regardless of attentional load. These findings
are consistent with previous research that documents
visual/visuospatial attention skills for older, school-age
children with SLI that are commensurate with or superior to those of their TD peers (Gomes et al., 2004;
Noterdaeme et al., 2000; Schul et al., 2004). Despite
similar performance on the visual sustained selective
attention tasks in our study, the SLI group exhibited
reduced performance in the auditory domain, performing significantly worse than their peers on both the high
load nonverbal-auditory and high load linguistic attention conditions. This provides evidence that preschool
children with SLI present with difficulties in auditory
sustained selective attention regardless of the nature of
the auditory input.
Previous research has provided evidence that SLI
children have difficulties processing auditory stimuli in
noise, including both speech and brief tones (e.g., Bradlow
et al., 2003; Cunningham, Nicol, Zecker, Bradlow, &
Kraus, 2001; Wright et al., 1997; Ziegler et al., 2005).
This led Ziegler et al. (2005) to propose that children

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

with SLI present with a noise exclusion deficit. Following
this line of reasoning, the reduction in the signal to noise
ratio characteristic of the degraded stimuli likely placed
an increased demand on their attentional resources by
requiring them to listen more closely to process degraded
stimuli relative to the standard, nondegraded stimuli.
Because sustained selective attention difficulties were
observed only under conditions requiring a high level of
attention, this suggests that children with SLI exhibit
relatively subtle limitations in this type of attention.
Attention is a basic resource needed to perform most
processing tasks (Shaywitz, Shaywitz, Pugh, et al., 2001).
Although many children with SLI do perform significantly worse than the controls on many of these tasks
(e.g., Ellis Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999; Hoffman
& Gillam, 2004; J. R. Johnston, 1994; Leonard, 1998;
Montgomery, 1995), there are a number of studies in
which SLI and control children, under certain conditions,
perform at similar levels (e.g., Archibald & Gathercole,
2006; Bishop, Carlyon, Deeks, & Bishop, 1999; Helzer
et al., 1996; Sussman, 1993; Tomblin, Abbas, Records, &
Brenneman, 1995). Our findings support the possibility
that differences in performance on tasks involving sustained selective attention may be, in part, a function
of the task's demands on their limited attentional resources. If task demands are low, the amount of attention needed to accomplish the task is reduced. In these
cases, the preschool children with SLI may possess the
needed attentional resources for successful performance.
In contrast, if task demands are high, the same children
may lack sufficient attentional resources to exhibit performance commensurate with that of their TD peers.
Poor performance under the high attention-demanding
conditions is consistent with the limited capacity hypothesis of attention (Kahneman, 1973), which dictates
that such limitations would manifest only when processing exceeds available resources. The finding that TD
children exhibited performance superior to that of children with SLI suggests that the latter children have
reduced attentional capacity.
The results of this study provide evidence that the
resources applied to the sustained selective attention
tasks likely arise from sensory-specific reservoirs of attention. The disparate performance as a function of stimuli
modality is consistent with Wickens's (1984) proposal
that there is not a centralized, single pool of attentional
resources but that each modality has its own pool of resources available for processing. Although the findings
of this study do not eliminate the possibility of a supramodal representation of attention at some point in the
attentional system, the results do suggest that, at least
for these tasks, the visual and auditory modalities appeared to apply sensory-specific attentional resources.
This view is consistent with the dissociation between
performance decrements in the auditory versus visual

modalities seen in the SLI group. This dissociation belies
the idea of general, modality-independent capacity limitations accounting for poor performance in SLI, as this
group performed similarly on the sustained selective attention visual tasks regardless of attentional load.
In addition to processing capacity, processing speed
was also examined for children with SLI. In the present
study, group differences in RTs failed to reach significance, although the preschool children with SLI exhibited somewhat slower RTs on all tasks compared with
their TD peers. The lack of a group difference in RT,
if taken at face value, suggests that preschool children
with SLI did not require significantly more processing
time to respond to the visual and auditory stimuli compared with their TD peers. This result is contrary to the
findings of many other studies that indicate SLI children
exhibit significantly slower RTs than their TD peers on a
variety of tasks (for reviews, see Leonard, 1998; Windsor,
Milbrath, Carney, & Rakowski, 2001). However, the
relationship between speed of processing, as indexed by
RT, and language impairment is not clear. For example,
Lahey, Edwards, and Munson (2001) failed to find a
direct relationship between processing speed and severity of SLI. In addition, their findings indicated that the
SLI group exhibited substantial variability in processing speed. Windsor et al. (2001) examined data from
previous studies and came to a similar conclusion. They
found that, although SLI groups tended to be slower
than the controls, the extensive variability in the data
contributed to the lack of significance. Perhaps preschool
children are, in general, less predictable and consistent
in the speed of their responses than older children, and
SLI children may be even less so. This notion is supported by the lack of correlation between RT and response accuracy in this study. Another possibility is that
individual differences in RT are masked in the group average. According to Kail (1992), comparing group means
to assess statistical significance provides only a global
estimate of RT and is not reflective of whether the RT
data of individuals within the group are characteristic of
general slowing (see also Miller et al., 2001). Despite this
caveat, the lack of significant differences in RT between
groups suggests that slowing was not a consistent characteristic of the SLI participants of this study.
Given that children with SLI exhibit slightly depressed range nonverbal cognitive skills compared with
their TD peers (Plante, 1998), the degree to which performance on experimental tasks is related to either the
child's nonverbal or verbal profile can be of interest in
understanding the nature of the task employed. When
nonverbal cognition was controlled statistically, the group
difference found on the auditory sustained selective attention tasks was no longer significant. One would expect this to be the case, as attention is often considered
an essential component of nonverbal cognition. Typically

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

29

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

tests examining this construct either include tasks that
directly assess domains of attention or indirectly require
attention skills for successful performance. For example,
the KABC-II, our metric of nonverbal cognition, does not
directly assess sustained selective attention skills. However, the Hand Movements and Triangles subtests required the children to maintain their attention over time
and to mimic gestural sequences and reproduce visual
displays, respectively. The Face Recognition and Pattern
Reasoning subtests required the children to maintain
their attention over time and to select the appropriate
item in a four-choice array. Performance on these subtests would likely be influenced by sustained selective attention limitations. Therefore, controlling for nonverbal
cognition would necessarily remove part of the variance
associated with sustained selective attention skills.
It should be noted that the attentional effect found
in this study is not uniquely related to the nonverbal
aspects of the disorder. When language ability was statistically controlled, the group difference in attention
was no longer significant. This result indicates that attention cannot be separated cleanly from either linguistic ability or nonverbal ability. The fact that the group
effect disappears when either nonverbal cognition or
language ability is covaried does not mean that this effect does not exist in the case of SLI. However, the results
make it difficult to determine whether the group effect is
a function of the disorder's verbal components, the nonverbal components, or some trait common to both components. The latter is suggested by the correlation between
our measures of language ability and nonverbal cognition, suggesting that there is a fair amount of overlap in
what they are measuring. Researchers have previously
suggested that, as children develop, the cognitive and
linguistic systems interact (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith, 1998;
Thomas & Karmiloff-Smith, 2002). Given that this
study's participants are preschool children, the cognitivelinguistic interactions observed are consistent with what
would be expected in this developing population.
Although this study does not disentangle the verbal
and nonverbal contributions to performance on the sustained selective attention tasks, it does provide strong
support for sustained selective attention difficulties in
preschool children with SLI. These findings provide a
basis of information to inform future studies, including the need to assess different subcomponents of attention across stimulus modalities and under varying levels
of attentional requirements. In addition, our findings
suggest that research into higher levels of attention in
children with SLI (e.g., divided attention, attentional
set-shifting), which require sustained selective attention
skills, needs to minimize the attentional loads of the tasks
to not exceed potential sustained selective attention limitations observed in this population.

30

Although the role of attention in language learning
has been studied using foreign and artificial language
learning paradigms (Guion & Pederson, 2005; Saffran &
Newport, 1997; Torro et al., 2005), exploring the attention skills of the language-impaired population provides another opportunity for examining the importance
of attention in language acquisition. Furthermore, the
study of the attentional functioning of children who have
difficulty with language has value for understanding the
nature of their disorder. In addition, ascertaining potential strengths in attention, such as in the visual modality, may provide an important insight to conditions
that may facilitate learning. However, because research
on the attentional functioning of children with SLI is
scarce, and only a few domains of attention have been
addressed at all, additional research needs to be conducted to establish which specific subcomponents of attention are weak for this population and which are strong.
Once we attain a more comprehensive view of the attention skills of children with SLI, we can begin to address
how attention may affect their difficulties with language
acquisition and how attentional strengths may be used
to facilitate their language development.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders Grant R01
DC04726. Additional support was provided through a fellowship to the first author from the Bamford-Lahey Children's
Foundation.

References
Alais, D., Morrone, C., & Burr, D. (2006). Separate attentional resources for audition and vision. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B--Biological Sciences, 273, 1339-1345.
Allport, D. A., Antonis, B., & Reynolds, P. (1972). On
the division of attention: A disproof of the single channel
hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
24, 225-235.
Alt, M., & Plante, E. (2006). Factors that influence lexical
and semantic fast mapping of young children with specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 49, 941-954.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
Archibald, L. M. D., & Gathercole, S. E. (2006). Visuospatial immediate memory in specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 49,
265-277.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory:
A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence
& J. D. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 2, pp. 742-775). New York: Academic Press.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (1993). Working memory and conscious
awareness. In A. Collins, S. Gathercole, M. Conway, & P.
Morris (Eds.), Theories of working memory (pp. 11-28).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the central executive. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49(A), 5-28.
Barrouillet, P., Bernardin, S., & Camos, V. (2004). Time
constraints and resource sharing in adults' working memory
spans. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 133, 83-100.
Baudouin, A., Vanneste, S., Pouthas, V., & Isingrini, M.
(2006). Age-related changes in duration reproduction:
Involvement of working memory processes. Brain and
Cognition, 62, 17-23.
Bednarek, D. P., Saldana, D., Quintero-Gallego, E.,
Garcia, I., Grabowska, A., & Gomez, C. M. (2004).
Attention deficit in dyslexia: A general or specific impairment? NeuroReport, 15, 1787-1790.
Bishop, D. V. M., Carlyon, R., Deeks, J., & Bishop, S.
(1999). Auditory temporal processing impairments: Neither
necessary nor sufficient for causing language impairments
in children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1295-1310.
Bradlow, A. R., Kraus, N., & Hayes, E. (2003). Speaking
clearly for children with learning disabilities: Sentence
perception in noise. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 46, 80-97.

Courchesne, E., Townsend, J. P., Akshoomoff, N A.,
Yeung-Courchesne, R., Press, G. A., Murakami, J. W.,
et al. (1994). A new finding: Impairment in shifting attention in autistic and cerebellar patients. In S. H. Broman & J.
Grafman (Eds.), Atypical cognitive deficits in developmental
disorders: Implications for brain function (pp. 101-137).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cowan, N. (1993). Activation, attention, and short-term
memory. Memory & Cognition, 21, 162-167.
Cowan, N. (1997). Attention and memory: An integrated
framework. Oxford, England: University Press.
Cunningham, J., Nicol, T., Zecker, S. G., Bradlow, A., &
Kraus, N. (2001). Neurobiologic responses to speech in
noise in children with learning problems: Deficits and
strategies for improvement. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112,
758-767.
Dawson, J. I., Stout, C. E., & Eyer, J. A. (2003). Structured
Photographic Expressive Language Test--Third Edition
(SPELT-3). Dekalb, IL: Janell Publications.
Dean, M. R., & McDermott, H. J. (2000). Preferred listening
levels: The effect of background noise for moderate-toprofoundly hearing impaired users. Scandinavian Audiology,
29, 139-149.
Dechazo Barry, T., Grofer Klinger, L., Lyman, R. D.,
Bush, D., & Hawkins, L. (2001). Visual selective attention
versus sustained attention in boys with attention-deficit /
hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Attention Disorders, 4,
193-202.

Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication.
New York: Pergamon Press.

Dollaghan, C., & Campbell, T. F. (1998). Nonword repetition
and child language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 41, 1136-1146.

Brodeur, D., & Pond, M. (2001). The development of selective attention in children with ADHD. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 29, 229-239.

Dominey, P. F., & Dodane, C. (2004). Indeterminacy in
language acquisition: The role of child-directed speech and
joint attention. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17, 121-145.

Burlingame, E., Sussman, H. M., Gillam, R. B., & Hay,
J. F. (2005). An investigation of speech perception in
children with specific language impairment on a continuum
of formant transition duration. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48, 805-816.

Dominey, P. F., & Ramus, F. (2000). Neural network processing of natural language: I. Sensitivity to serial, temporal,
and abstract structure of language in the infant. Language
& Cognitive Processes, 15, 87-127.

Campbell, T., & McNeil, M. (1985). Effects of presentation
rate and divided attention on auditory comprehension in
children with an acquired language disorder. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 28, 513-520.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2003). Constituency and
recursion in language. In M. A. Arbib (Ed.), The handbook of
brain theory and neural networks (2nd ed., pp. 267-271).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Conti-Ramsden, G., & Durkin, K. (2007). Phonological
short-term memory, language, and literacy: Developmental
relationships in early adolescence in young people with SLI.
Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 48, 147-156.
Cooley, E., & Morris, R. (1990). Attention in children: A
neuropsychologically based model for assessment. Developmental Neuropsychology, 6, 239-274.

Dopfner, M., Schmeck, K., & Berner, W. (1994). Handbuch:
Elternfragebogen uber das Verhalten von Kindern und
Jugendlichen. Forschungsergebnisse zur deutschen Fassung
der Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) [Handbook: Parents'
questionnaire over the behavior of children and youth.
Research results to the German version of the Child Behavior
Checklist]. Koln: Arbeitsgruppe Kinder-, Jugend- und
Familiendiagnostik.
Douglas, V. (1983). Attentional and cognitive problems. In M.
Rutter (Ed.), Developmental neuropsychiatry (pp. 289-329).
New York: Guilford Press.
Edwards, J., & Lahey, M. (1998). Nonword repetitions of
children with specific language impairment: Exploration of
some explanations for their inaccuracies. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 279-309.

Copeland, A., & Reiner, E. (1984). The selective attention
of learning disabled children: Three studies. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 12, 455-470.

Ellis Weismer, S. (1996). Capacity limitations in working
memory: The impact on lexical and morphological learning
by children with language impairment. Topics in Language
Disorders, 17, 33-44.

Coull, J. T. (1998). Neural correlates of attention and arousal:
Insights from electrophysiology, functional neuroimaging,
and psychopharmacology. Progress in Neurobiology, 55,
343-361.

Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. J. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

31

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Ellis Weismer, S., Plante, E., Jones, M., & Tomblin, J. B.
(2005). A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of verbal working memory in adolescents with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 48, 405-425.
Ellis Weismer, S., Tomblin, J., Zhang, X., Gaura, J.,
Buckwalter, P., & Jones, M. (1999, June). Nonword
repetition performance in second graders with and without
language impairment. Paper presented at the 20th Annual
Symposium on Research in Child Language Disorders,
Madison, WI.
Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive
attention. Current directions in Psychological Science, 11,
19-23.
Engle, R. W., Kane, M. J, & Tuholski, S. W. (1999). Individual differences in working memory capacity and what they
tell us about controlled attention, general fluid intelligence,
and functions of the prefrontal cortex. In A. Miyake &
P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory: Mechanisms
of active maintenance and executive control (pp. 102-134).
London: Cambridge Press.
Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1990). Phonological memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there a
causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language, 29,
336-360.
Gomes, H., Duff, M., & Wolfson, G. (2004, June). Performance on auditory and visual simple, selective and divided
attention tasks by children with poor and age appropriate
receptive language. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the Society for Research on Child Language Disorders,
Madison, WI.
Gray, S. (2005). Word learning by preschoolers with specific
language impairment: Effect of phonological or semantic
cues. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
48, 1452-1467.
Gray, S. (2006). The relationship between phonological
memory, receptive vocabulary, and fast mapping in young
children with specific language impairment. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 49, 955-969.
Guion, S. G., & Pederson, E. (2005). The role of orienting
attention for learning novel phonetic categories. In Institute
of Cognitive and Decision Sciences, University of Oregon,
Technical Reports (pp. 1-22). Eugene, OR: University of
Oregon.
Hagen, J. W., & Hale, G. H. (1973). The development of attention in children. In A. D. Pick (Ed.), Minnesota Symposia on
Child Psychology (Vol. 7; pp. 117-140). Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Halperin, J. M. (1991). The clinical assessment of attention.
International Journal of Neuroscience, 58, 171-182.
Hanson, R., & Montgomery, H. (2002). Effects of general
processing capacity and sustained selective attention on
temporal processing performance of children with specific
language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 75-93.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 108, 356-388.
Heaton, S. C., Reader, S. K., & Preston, A. (2001). The Test
of Everyday Attention for Children (TEA-Ch): Patterns of
performance in children with ADHD and clinical controls.
Child Neuropsychology, 7, 251-264.

32

Helzer, J. R., Champlin, C. A., & Gillam, R. B. (1996).
Auditory temporal resolution in specifically languageimpaired and age-matched children. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 83, 1171-1181.
Hill, P. R., Hogben, J., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2005). Auditory
frequency discrimination in children with specific language
impairment: A longitudinal study. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 46, 1136-1146.
Hirst, W., Spelke, E. S., Reaves, C. C., Caharack, G., &
Neisser, U. (1980). Dividing attention without alternation
or automaticity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 109, 98-117.
Hoffman, L. M., & Gillam, R. B. (2004). Verbal and spatial
information processing constraints in children with and
without specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 114-125.
Jeffries, E., Lamhon-Ralph, M. A., & Baddeley, A. D.
(2004). Automatic and controlled processing in sentence
recall: The role of long-term and working memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 51, 623-643.
Johnston, J. R. (1994). Cognitive abilities of children with
language impairment. In R. V. Watkins & M. L. Rice (Eds.),
Communication and language intervention series: Specific
language impairments in children (Vol. 4, pp. 107-121).
Baltimore: Brookes.
Johnston, W. A., & Heintz, S. P. (1978). Flexibility and
capacity demands of attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 107, 420-435.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kail, R. (1992). Processing speed, speech rate, and memory.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 899-905.
Kail, R. (1994). A method for studying the generalized slowing
hypothesis in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 418-421.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1998). Development itself is the key to
understanding developmental disorders. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2, 389-398.
Kaufman, A., & Kaufman, N. L. (2004). Kaufman Assessment
Battery for Children--Second Edition. Circle Pines, MN:
AGS Publishing.
Kieling, C., Roman, T., Doyle, A. E., Hutz, M. H., & Rohde,
L. A. (2006). Association between DRD4 gene and performance of children with ADHD in a test of sustained
attention. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 1163-1165.
Kupietz, S. S., & Richardson, E. (1978). Children's vigilance
performance and inattentiveness in the classroom. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 19, 145-153.
Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with
specific language impairment name pictures more slowly
than their peers? Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
39, 1081-1097.
Lahey, M., Edwards, J., & Munson, B. (2001). Is processing speed related to severity of language impairment?
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44,
1354-1361.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewis, M., & Baldini, N. (1979). Attentional processes and
individual differences. In A. H. Gordon & M. Lewis (Eds.),

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Attention and cognitive development (pp. 135-172). New
York: Plenum Press.

Language Test--Third Edition (SPELT-3). Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 103-115.

Lindgren, M., Stenberg, G., & Rosen, I. (1996). Effects of
nicotine in visual attention tasks. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental, 11, 47-51.

Plante, E. (1998). Criteria for SLI: The Stark and Tallal
legacy and beyond. Journal of Communication Disorders,
35, 453-462.

Ludlow, C. L., Cudahy, E. A., Bassich, C., & Brown, G. L.
(1983). Auditory processing skills of hyperactive, languageimpaired, and reading-disabled boys. In E. Z. Lasky &
J. Katz (Eds.), Central auditory processing disorders
(pp. 163-184). Baltimore: University Park Press.

Plante, E., Swisher, L., Kiernan, B., & Restrepo, M. A.
(1993). Language matches: Illuminating or confounding?
Research note. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36,
772-776.

Manly, T., Anderson, V., & Nimmo-Smith, I. (2001). The
differential assessment of children's attention: The Test
of Everyday Attention for Children (TEA-Ch), normative
sample and ADHD performance. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 42, 1065-1081.
Mattson, S., Calarco, K., & Lang, R. (2006). Focused and
shifting attention in children with heavy prenatal alcohol
exposure. Neuropsychology, 20, 361-369.
Miller, C. A., Kail, R., Leonard, L. B., & Tomblin, J. B.
(2001). Speed of processing in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 44, 416-433.
Mirsky, A. (1996). Disorders of attention: A neuropsychological perspective. In G. R. Lyon & N. A. Krasnegor (Eds.),
Attention, memory and executive function (pp. 71-96).
Baltimore: Brookes.
Mirsky, A., Anthony, B., Duncan, C., Alhearn, M., &
Kellam, S. (1991). Analysis of the elements of attention:
A neuropsychological approach. Neuropsychology Review, 2,
109-145.
Mirsky, A. F., Fantie, B. D., & Tatman, J. E. (1995). Assessment of attention across the lifespan. In R. L. Mapou &
J. Spector (Eds.), Clinical neuropsychological assessment:
A cognitive approach (pp. 17-48). New York: Plenum
Press.
Montgomery, J. W. (1995). Examination of phonological
working memory in specifically language impaired children.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 16, 355-378.
Montgomery, J. W. (2000). Relation of working memory to
off-line and real-time sentence processing in children with
specific language impairment. Allied Psycholinguistics, 21,
117-148.
Moores, E., Nicolson, R., & Fawcett, A. (2003). Attention
deficits in dyslexia: Evidence for an automatisation deficit.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 15, 321-348.
Newcomer, P. L., & Hammill, D. D. (1997). Test of Language
Development-Primary--Third Edition. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Norman, D. A., & Bobrow, D. G. (1975). On data-limited and
resource-limited processes. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 44-64.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action:
Willed and automatic control of behaviour. In R. J. Davidson,
G. E. Schwarts, & D. Shapiro (Eds.), Consciousness and
self-regulation: Advances in research and theory (pp. 1-18).
New York: Plenum Press.
Noterdaeme, M., Amorosa, H., Mildenberger, K., Sitter,
S., & Minow, F. (2000). Evaluation of attention in children
with autism and children with a specific language disorder.
European Journal of Child Psychology, 10, 58-66.
Perona, K., Plante, E., & Vance, R. (2005). Diagnostic
accuracy of the Structured Photographic Expressive

Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2006). Working memory
capacity and attention network test performance. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 713-721.
Richards, G., Samuels, S., Turnure, J., & Ysseldyke, J.
(1990). Sustained and selective attention in children with
learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 23,
129-136.
Robin, D., & Rizzo, M. (1992). Orienting in audition and
between audition and vision in young and elderly subjects.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 701-707.
Rosen, V., & Engle, R. W. (1997). The role of working memory
capacity in retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 126, 211-227.
Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1997). Incidental language
learning: Listening (and learning) out of the corner of your
ear. Psychological Science, 8, 101-105.
Salvi, R. J., Lockwood, A. H., & Frisina, D. R. (2002). PET
imaging of the normal human auditory system: Responses to
speech in quiet and in background noise. Hearing Research,
170, 96-106.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: I. Detection,
search and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1-66.
Schul, R., Stiles, J., Wulfeck, B., & Townsend, J. (2004).
How "generalized" is the "slowed processing" in SLI? The
case of visuospatial attentional orienting. Neuropsychologia,
42, 661-671.
Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Pugh, K. R., Fulbright,
R. K., Skudlarski, P., Mencl, W. E., et al. (2001). The
functional neural architecture of components of attention in
language-processing tasks. NeuroImage, 13, 601-612.
Stevens, C., Sanders, L., & Neville, H. (2006). Neurophysiological evidence for selective auditory attention deficits
in children with specific language impairment. Brain
Research, 1111, 143-152.
Stokes, S. F., Wong, A. M., Fletcher, P., & Leonard, L. B.
(2000). Nonword repetition and sentence repetition as
clinical markers of specific language impairment: The case
of Cantonese. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 49, 219-236.
Strauss, M., Thompson, P., Adams, N., Redline, S., &
Burant, S. (2000). Evaluation of a model of attention with
confirmatory factor analysis. Neuropsychology, 14, 201-208.
Sussman, J. E. (1993). Perception of formant transition cues
to place of articulation in children with language impairments. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36,
1286-1299.
Talarico, M., Abdilla, G., Aliferis, M., Balazic, I., Giaprakis,
I., Steganakis, T., et al. (2007). Effect of age and cognition
on childhood speech in noise perception abilities. Audiology
and Neuro-otology, 12, 13-19.

Spaulding et al.: Attention and SLI

33

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Tallal, P. (1976). Rapid auditory processing in normal and
disordered language development. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 19, 561-571.

Wickens, C. D. (1984). Processing resources in attention. In
R. Parsuraman & D. R. Davies (Eds.), Varieties of attention
(pp. 63-102). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.

Tallal, P. (1980). Perceptual prerequisites for language. In R.
Schiefelbusch (Ed.), Nonspeech language and communication analysis and intervention (pp. xx-xx). Baltimore:
University Park Press.

Willinger, U., Brunner, E., Diendorfer-Radner, G.,
Sams, J., Sirsch, U., & Eisenwort, B. (2003). Behaviour
in children with language development disorders. Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 607-614.

Tallal, P., Miller, S., Bedi, G., Byma, G., Wang, X.,
Nagarajan, S. S., et al. (1996, January 5). Language
comprehension in language-learning impaired children
improved with acoustically modified speech. Science, 271,
81-84.

Windsor, J., Milbrath, R. L., Carney, E. J., & Rakowski,
S. E. (2001). General slowing in language impairment:
Methodological considerations in testing the hypothesis.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44,
446-461.

Tallal, P., Miller, S., Jenkins, B., & Merzenich, M. (1997).
The role of temporal processing in developmental languagebased learning disorders: Research and clinical implications. In B. Blachman (Ed.), Foundations of reading
acquisition (pp. 49-66). New York: Erlbaum.

Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranik,
C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1997, May 8).
Deficits in auditory temporal and spectral resolution in
language-impaired children. Nature, 387, 176-178.

Thomas, M. S. C., & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2002). Are developmental disorders like cases of adult brain damage?
Implications from connectionist modeling. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 25, 727-750.
Tomblin, J. B., Abbas, P. J., Records, N. L., & Brenneman,
L. M. (1995). Auditory evoked responses to frequencymodulated tones in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 387-392.
Torro, J. M., Sinnett, S., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2005). Speech
segmentation by statistical learning depends on attention.
Cognition, 97, B25-B34.
Van Zomeren, A. H., & Brouwer, W. H. (1994). Clinical
neuropsychology of attention. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Ziegler, J. C., Pech-Georgel, C., George, F., Alario, F.-X.,
& Lorenzi, C. (2005). Deficits in speech perception predict language learning impairment. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 102, 14110-14115.
Received August 28, 2006
Revision received March 15, 2007
Accepted May 22, 2007
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/002)
Contact author: Tammie J. Spaulding, Department of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Sciences, P.O. Box 210071,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0071.
E-mail: spauld20@email.arizona.edu.

Visto, J., Cranford, J. L., & Scudder, R. (1996). Temporal
processing of non-speech acoustic information by children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 39, 510-517.

34

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 16-34 * February 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

