Late Childhood Stuttering
Peter Howell
Stephen Davis
University College London

Roberta Williams
City University London

Purpose: A study was conducted that examined factors that lead children who stutter
at around age 8 years to persist in the disorder when they reach age 12 years.
Method: Seventy-six children were verified to be stuttering at initial assessment. When
they reached 12 years of age, they were classified as persistent or recovered. A range
of measures was taken at the 2 age points, and measures were examined by recovery
group.
Results: Although the tendency for more males than females to stutter was confirmed,
the reasons for this tendency are not apparent for these speakers. Different patterns
in speech were observed: Severity ratings of the recovered speakers dropped by age
12+. The severity ratings for the persistent speakers remained high at 12+, and
dysfluency types tended to change from whole words to part words. Persistent and
recovered speakers differed on temperamental performance at around age 8 years
and performed differently on sensory and motor tasks at age 12+ years.
Conclusions: Stuttering in late childhood affects mainly males. The later a child attends
clinic, the longer he or she will stutter. Speech patterns of children who persist
diverge from those who recover or who are fluent. As speakers persist, there are
temperamental, sensory, and motor changes.
KEY WORDS: developmental stuttering, onset of stuttering, recovery and
persistence of stuttering, language development

E

xtensive information on early childhood stuttering has been available since the publication of Yairi and Ambrose (2005). Much less is
known about children in the age range of 8-12+. Selected aspects of
the literature are reviewed to identify potential risk factors for persistent
stuttering. The epidemiology and symptomatology for all children in a
longitudinal sample of children who stutter in this age range are then
reported. All of the children were confirmed as stuttering at the start of
the study and were designated as persistent or recovered at the end of
the study. Several etiological factors that put children at risk of persistent stuttering were identified in the review. These factors were
assessed on subsets of the sample to see which ones should be included in
a comprehensive package for determining prognostic outcome about stuttering for children in this age range.

Epidemiology
Incidence and point prevalence. Andrews and Harris (1964) studied
stuttering in 1,142 families in Newcastle-on-Tyne, United Kingdom, with
children born between May and June 1947. The study (usually referred to
as the 1,000-Family Survey) ended when the children were aged 15 years.
Point prevalence of stuttering was about 1%. Incidence up to age 15 years
was about 5%.
Two other large-scale studies on incidence and prevalence both drew
similar conclusions. Mannson (2000) examined 1,040 children (98% of all

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

669

1092-4388/08/5103-0669

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

births) born on a Danish island over a 2-year period. The
author and a team of four clinicians assessed speech,
hearing, and language in face-to-face interviews. Incidence of stuttering was estimated at 4.9% of the children
after their 3rd birthday and 5.09% after two follow-ups
several years later.
Dworzynski, Remington, Rijksdijk, Howell, and
Plomin (2007) analyzed stuttering data from the Twins
Early Development Study ( TEDS; Trouton, Spinath, &
Plomin, 2002). TEDS is a longitudinal study of all twins
born between 1994 and 1996 in the United Kingdom. A
total of 25,830 twins were surveyed with regard to stuttering at ages 2, 3, 4, and 7 years. The point prevalence of
stuttering was between 1% and 3% for the different ages.
Incidence across the test ages was 7%.
Sex ratio. Andrews and Harris (1964) showed that
more boys than girls stuttered (a ratio of 2.4:1 overall)
and that the ratio increased as the children got older
(indicating that girls recovered from stuttering at an
earlier age than boys). The predominance of males over
females has been confirmed by Yairi and Ambrose (2005),
who also reported that the sex ratio increased slightly
with age. The latter was also found by Dworzynski et al.
(2007), who found that for each girl who stuttered at ages
2 and 3 years, there were approximately 1.6 boys, whereas
at ages 4 and 7 years, there were approximately 1.8 boys
for every girl who stuttered (same value for the two ages).
Recovery rate. Andrews and Harris's (1964) 1,000Family Survey showed a 5% point prevalence and a 1%
annual incidence rate. Thus, 80% (4 of 5) of the respondents recovered from stuttering, and only 20% persisted.
For the Yairi and Ambrose (2005) study, recovery rates
were between 65% and 80% 3-5 years after onset.
Mannson (2000) reported that recovery rate was 71.6%
after 2 years and 85% after 5-6 years. Two smaller-scale
studies pointed to similar values for these age ranges.
Ryan (2001) followed up 22 two- to three-year-old children for 2 years and reported a 68% recovery rate. Rommel,
Hage, Kalehne, and Johannsen (2000) reported follow-up
results for 65 five-year-old children. Three years into their
study, the recovery rate was 71%.
Investigations that do not start from stuttering onset cannot produce an absolute estimate of recovery
rate (Yairi & Ambrose, 2005). They are useful if it is not
practicable to follow up children from approximately
age 2 years to age 12+. One study has examined an
older group. Fritzell (1976) followed children from age
7-9 years to their teenage years. He reported a recovery
rate of 47% between 7 years of age and their teenage
years. The lower recovery rate was as would be expected,
given that most recovery happened when the children
were young.
Age of onset. Andrews and Harris (1964) reported
that one modal onset age was 3 years and the other was

670

5 years, and early onset around these ages has been confirmed by Yairi and Ambrose (2005). Consistent with
this finding, Dworzynski et al. (2007) showed an increase in reported cases at ages 3-4 years. The results of
the 1,000-Family Survey showed, in addition, that onset
can occur up to at least age 11 years, with a high proportion who started stuttering at age 10 years. Overall,
25% of stuttering onsets up to age 15 years were in the
age range covered by the study that is reported later in
this article. Such cases are missed in studies that cease
at or below age 8 years.
Age of recovery. Andrews and Harris (1964) showed
that recovery can happen at any age into the teenage
years. Andrews, Craig, Feyer, Hoddinott, Howie, and
Neilson (1983) conducted a meta-analysis of the recovery
rates reported in several studies. They estimated that
75% of those stuttering at age 4 years, 50% of those
stuttering at age 6 years, and 25% of those stuttering at
age 10 years recovered by the time they reached 16 years
of age. If the problem continued into their teenage years,
the chance of recovery decreased. This finding was supported by the 1,000-Family Survey, in which no child
who was stuttering after 12 years of age recovered by age
16 years.
Length of time stuttered group and length of time
recovered group followed up postrecovery. Yairi and
Ambrose (2005) reported that the highest rate of recovery was 3 years after onset. They emphasized that it
is necessary to follow up recovered children to ensure
that true recovery has occurred rather than a temporary
remission. They continued to see their recovered children for an average of 40 months.
Research questions. Sex ratio, recovery rate, age of
stuttering onset, age of recovery, and length of time stuttered need to be determined separately for (a) genders
and ( b) persistent and recovered speakers, where appropriate, for children in the age range of 8-12+ years.

Symptomatology and Assessment
Classic signs of stuttering. The classic list of signs of
stuttering used by Johnson and associates (1959) was
(a) interjections (which includes filled pauses), ( b) word
repetitions, (c) phrase repetitions, (d) part-word repetitions, (e) prolongations, (f ) broken words, (g) incomplete
phrases (abandonments), and ( h) revisions. The World
Health Organization's (1992) International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
( ICD-10) included the first six of these signs in their definition of stuttering, which characterized the problem as
"disorders in the rhythm of speech, in which the individual knows precisely what he wishes to say, but at the
time is unable to say it because of an involuntary, repetitive prolongation or cessation of a sound" (p. F98.5). The

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

ICD-10 definition would not include incomplete phrases
and revisions as signs because these may result when the
speaker does not know what to say.
Development of signs of stuttering. Accepting that
revisions and incomplete phrases can be put to one side,
there is still no agreement about whether all of the remaining signs should be included in speech assessments
that establish whether stuttering is present. Yairi and
Ambrose's (2005) team differentiated stuttering-like dysfluencies (SLD) from other dysfluencies (OD). SLD are
part-word repetitions, single-syllable word repetitions,
and disrhythmic phonation (Ambrose & Yairi, 1999).
OD comprised interjections, multiple-syllable words and
phrase repetitions, revisions, or abandoned utterances.
They reported that the incidence of SLD was high near
onset of the disorder. This group also found that some
children showed characteristics that were previously
thought to emerge as children got older (e.g., prolongations) and, as such, were regarded as perpetuating signs
(Yairi, Ambrose, Paden, & Throneburg, 1996). Wingate
(2001) disputed whether the events included in the SLD
class were appropriate to index stuttering. In particular, he argued that whole-word and phrase repetitions
(Signs 2 and 3) should not be included. Yairi, Watkins,
Ambrose, and Paden (2001), however, defended their use.
Howell (2004) divided dysfluencies into those involving parts of words and those involving whole words
or pauses, which were called stallings. This division was
based partly on clinical observations. For instance, as
mentioned, prolongations are usually considered a feature of stuttering in older speakers for whom the disorder has persisted (Conture, 1990). Howell argued that
stuttering in young speakers involved mainly stallings.
These and the remaining dysfluencies all reduced in incidence in speakers who recovered.
Howell (2004) considered how such a progressive
change in the types of dysfluencies could occur in persistent, but not in recovered, speakers and also suggested
what central nervous system (CNS) structures were implicated. A brief resume is given, as this perspective
(called the EXPLAN theory) determined how symptomatology was examined and governed choice of some of
the factors investigated in the study reported later. According to Howell (2004), fluency problems resulted
from poor time coordination between linguistic and motor
planning processes that led to either (a) stallings or
(b) prolongations, part-word repetitions, and broken words,
referred to collectively as part-word dysfluencies. According to this view, speech is only dysfluent if linguistically
difficult material is being produced and if the speech
motor output is set to too high a rate. When this situation arises, speakers need to adjust speech rate before
they reach the difficult word. Stalling by repeating prior
words is the way this is done in early development.

Howell (2002) proposed that the cerebellum is responsible
for the required rate changes. Speakers who persist in
producing speech such as this will become less sensitive to the indications that speech breakdown is likely
to occur because of CNS adaptation (Howell, 2002).
Speakers then advance to the difficult word before they
are ready, so the form of the fluency problem changes to
occurrence on parts of words, and this form is difficult to
reverse.
According to this account, persistent speakers may
respond in a different way from fluent speakers and those
who have recovered (persistent speakers diverge from
fluent speakers). Alternatively, the recovered speakers
change from being like the persistent speakers to being
like fluent speakers subsequently (recovered speakers
converge on fluent speakers).
Research questions. Data are presented in the study
reported later on (a) changes in stuttering severity for
both persistent and recovered speakers that occur over
development and ( b) changes in dysfluency types across
ages for these groups. After recovery, speakers should
have lower severity than persistent speakers, but it is
not known whether dysfluency types change at different
rates for the two groups.

Etiological Factors
Genetics. Different incidence rates between monozygotic (share all genetic material) and dizygotic twins
have been used in several studies to partial out the
genetic factor from environmental sources (Andrews,
Morris-Yates, Howie, & Martin, 1991; Dworzynski et al.,
2007; Felsenfeld et al., 2000; Ooki, 2005). The studies
showed 70%-85% of variance in liability to stuttering
could be attributed to additive genetic effects, with the
remaining 15%-30% attributable to the individual's
unique environment.
Ambrose, Yairi, and Cox (1993) examined whether persistent and recovered forms of stuttering were transmitted
genetically. They found that individuals with a family
history of persistent stuttering also tended to persist,
whereas individuals with a family history of recovered
stuttering also tended to recover.
Temperament. In the past few years, there has been
some interest in whether language problems are associated with temperament (on the basis of an individual's
physiology). The Behavioral Style Questionnaire has
been used with 3- to 7-year-old children (McDevitt &
Carey, 1978), and the Middle Childhood Temperament
Questionnaire ( MCTQ) by Hegvik, McDevitt, and Carey
(1995) has been used with 8- to 12-year-old children. The
MCTQ measures temperament along nine dimensions:
activity level (amount of physical motion in the child's behavior), rhythmicity (regularity of physiological functions),

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

671

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

approach-withdrawal (the nature of the initial response
when in a new situation), adaptability (ease with which
the child changes his or her routines), intensity of reactions (reaction to disappointment or failure), quality of
mood (amount of positive or negative emotion), attention
span/persistence (time for which the child pursues a
particular activity), distractibility ( how easily diverted
from ongoing behavior by extraneous stimuli), and threshold of responsiveness (amount of stimulation necessary
to evoke a discernible response from the child). Comparison across three studies that compared fluent and
stuttering children showed that only the adaptability
dimension was significant, and in a corresponding direction (Anderson, Pellowski, Conture, & Kelly, 2003;
Embrechts, Ebben, Franke, & van de Poel, 2000; Howell
et al., 2004). An area that has not been investigated, to
date, is whether temperament dimensions that are based
on supposed physiological substrates differed between
persistent and recovered individuals. This was examined
in the study reported below.
Sensory. A number of reports have implicated the
auditory system in stuttering. The main line of support
was that fluency control improved in participants who
stuttered if the sound of the voice was altered before the
participant heard it. Noise maskers (Cherry & Sayers,
1956; Dewar, Dewar, Austin, & Brash, 1979), a frequencyshifted version of the voice (Howell, El-Yaniv, & Powell,
1987), or a delayed version of the voice (Ryan, 1974) all
improved control in participants who stuttered.
Attempts have been made to pinpoint the type of
auditory processing that is associated with stuttering.
Central auditory processing may differ between speakers
who stutter and controls. One measure of central auditory
processing is backward masking, which has been found
to be associated with specific language impairment (SLI;
Wright, Lombardino, King, Puranik, Leonard, & Merzenich,
1997). Wright et al. (1997) reported that children with
SLI had higher backward masking thresholds but similar simultaneous masking thresholds, compared with
control children. Backward masking deficits with children
with SLI have proved difficult to replicate, possibly because performance is more variable in clinical populations
(Hill, Hogben, & Bishop, 2005). Another possibility is
that performance deficits are more acute in certain subgroups within a disorder than in others. This seems to be
the situation with persistent and recovered speakers who
stutter. Differences between controls and groups containing children who subsequently persisted and recovered
from their stutter sometimes led to differences (Howell,
Rosen, Hannigan, & Rustin, 2000) and sometimes did not
(Howell & Williams, 2004). When comparison was made
between confirmed persistent and recovered speakers, a
statistically significant difference in backward masking
performance was found (Howell, Davis, & Williams,
2006). This may explain why differences are not always

672

found when persistent and recovered speakers are not
distinguished and comparison is made between controls
and heterogenous groups of speakers who stutter. To
date, no comparison has been made of backward masking performance of persistent and recovered speakers
with controls. These analyses are presented in the study
reported later.
Motor. Performance needs to be assessed in motor
tasks that depend on the cerebellum if this structure is
implicated in stuttering (Howell, 2004). Cerebellar functioning can be assessed using the battery of 10 tests used
by Dow and Moruzzi (1958). The battery is divided into
three components--tasks involving balance/posture,
complex movements, and hypotonia. No reports have
been made of cerebellar performance using the Dow-
Moruzzi battery on people who stutter (either when
stuttering first starts or when it perpetuates). However,
people with dyslexia have been reported to have deficits
on virtually every task in a slightly modified version of
the Dow-Moruzzi battery (Fawcett, Nicolson, & Dean,
1996). In the study reported later in this article, the
Dow-Moruzzi battery was administered to children who
stutter because cerebellar timing mechanisms have been
pinpointed as being involved in persistent stuttering
(Howell, 2004).
Research questions. Family history of stuttering was
examined to see if evidence could be provided about
whether persistence and recovery runs in families. Temperament, sensory, and motor performance data were
obtained at around 12+ years of age. All of this information was examined to see whether it distinguished
(a) all children who stutter from controls and ( b) persistent speakers from recovered speakers.

Assessment of a Group of Children
Who Stutter, Aged Between 8
and 12+ Years
A longitudinal study of children who stutter (aged
between 8 and 12+ years) was conducted. Epidemiology
and symptomatology were documented for all participants.
A range of etiological factors was examined which, the
literature suggested, could lead to persistence of the disorder at age 12 years and beyond. The latter were examined
on random selections of the participants to confirm
whether or not they were risk factors for persistent
stuttering. The 8-12 years age range was selected because there is less information about children at these
ages than about younger children (Andrews & Harris,
1964; Yairi & Ambrose, 2005), even though onset and recovery have been reported to occur for speakers in this
age range (Andrews & Harris, 1964).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Method
Participants. The longitudinal study was conducted
in collaboration with stuttering clinics in the United
Kingdom. The children were first seen as secondary
referrals to the specialist clinic from other speech-language
pathologists working in general practices. The children
were aged at least 8 years, and they were followed up to
12+ years, at which age each child was designated as
persistent or recovered. All children were confirmed as
stuttering at the earlier age. For a speaker to be considered to have persisted, he or she had to be confirmed as
still stuttering at 12+ years. Conversely, for a speaker to
be considered to have recovered, he or she had to be
confirmed as no longer stuttering at 12+ years. ( Further
details of these designations are given below.) The age of
12+ years was chosen because recovery was rare beyond
this age (Andrews & Harris, 1964).
All referrals (321 in total) to the stuttering clinics
were assessed, initially, by one of several trained speechlanguage pathologists located in London. The speechlanguage pathologists were part of a team who delivered
group therapy for treatment of stuttering. Samples of
spontaneous monologue, dialogue, and read speech were
obtained at every visit, although only the spontaneous
and read materials were used here. Age, gender, and the
other background details were collected at the first visit
(detailed later).
Selection criteria for this study were that a child had
to be in the stipulated age range, had to have been
confirmed to have been stuttering before they reached
12 years of age, had to have been retested when they
were aged 12+ after a minimum of 12 months since they
had received treatment, had to have received a course of
group therapy, and had to speak English as their first
language. Children who lived far from Central London
or who received individual therapy were excluded.
Seventy-six children met the criteria.
Clinical exposure. The 76 children lived mainly in
the southeast of England. They all attended either a 1- or
2-week clinic with at least one of their parents. Parents
were taught to identify the behaviors that they, as parents, were using that were helpful or detrimental to
their child's fluency. This method was an indirect approach that changed the communication environment
rather than attempted to work on the child's speech directly. During treatment, the parents and children were
given instructions, training, and exercises to deal with
the problem, including using slow rates of speech in family interactions; using different communication styles
(e.g., looking at the child during conversation); spending
more time talking directly with the child (in situations
where there was no television or other distractions); and
learning how to cope with bullying, teasing, and so forth.

In all cases, treatment was reported to be restricted to
that given at the clinic. The children were monitored at
specified periods after treatment for 12 months. Only
the initial (pre-treatment) speech samples and samples
taken 12 months or more after treatment were used, as
this has been suggested as the maximum time needed
to determine whether a child has responded to treatment (Finn, 1998).
Criteria for early, late, and very late groups. Three target age ranges were designated: 8-9 years, 10-11 years,
and 12+ years. Children for whom speech samples and
initial assessments were available at 8-9 years and
12+ years (whether or not they had a recording at
10-11 years) were grouped together and are referred to
as the early group. There were also children who were
first recorded at 10-11 years and who were also recorded
at 12+ years. These children are referred to as the late
group. Finally, there was a very late group who was first
seen when they were aged 12+ years. To be included in
this study, they also had to provide another speech sample
at least 12 months after treatment. Information provided
by respondents for the early, late, and very late groups
(Ns = 32, 22, and 22, respectively) was analyzed separately.
Assessments made for classifying participants as
persistent or recovered. Four assessments were made at
12+ years and were used to determine whether the child
was still stuttering: (a) participant's assessment; (b) parent's assessment; (c) researcher's assessment; and (d) a
measure of stuttering severity. All of these assessments
are described in more detail later in this article. The child,
parent, and researcher assessments were not done at the
initial assessment session (because they were not applicable to pre-treatment because they included questions
intended to determine whether the child had recovered
or not). Norms are available for these three assessments.
Initial screening ( before onset of treatment). The
initial diagnosis was made by a trained speech-language
pathologist. The criteria for stuttering were that (a) a
child had to have been referred to a clinic that specialized in childhood stuttering and ( b) the specialist
clinic had to confirm that diagnosis and admit the child
to group (rather than individual) treatment. This latter
criterion kept treatment and follow-up constant for all
participants.
Archive recordings obtained at intake. Monologue,
dialogue, and reading speech samples--each a minimum
of 200 syllables--were taken when the child first attended the specialist clinic. The samples were recorded on
a Sony DAT recorder using a Sennheiser K6 microphone.
A note was made of distracting sounds, facial grimaces,
head movements, and any other body movements. These
were used to assess the frequency and duration of stuttering and any associated physical concomitants. All of
this information was scored according to the Stuttering

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

673

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Severity Instrument for Children and Adults (3rd ed.;
SSI-3; Riley, 1994) using the specified guidelines. SSI-3
scores were obtained by a trained researcher who had
about 10 years' experience with stuttering. SSI-3 scores
were not used for diagnosis at intake.
Child 's assessment (minimum 12 months posttreatment). Assessments were based on Boberg and Kully's
(1994) questionnaire, which these authors used for assessing the impact of their therapy program on stuttering.
The original questionnaire assessed 15 attributes, some
of which were specific to their treatment. Seven were
directly applicable for the current assessment (2, 6, 9, 10,
11, 12, and 14), and three others (3, 4, and 5) were combined into one further attribute. All eight resulting attributes were assessed by giving a statement to which
participants chose a response that matched their view.
Table 1 presents the questions, the endpoint tags for the
scale, and the corresponding question numbers from Boberg
and Kully (1994). These were scored in the same way as
with the parents' assessments (see subsequent subsection).
Parents' assessments (minimum 12 months posttreatment). Parents' views about the fluency of their son
or daughter were assessed using the same eight attributes as those used with the child. The statements
given in Table 1 were changed from the first to the third
person (i.e., to refer to "the child"). The speech performance questionnaires were completed by the parents

and children at the time of the researcher's assessment.
The responses to all eight attributes were summed, and
a threshold (score of 21) was used to indicate recovery
(score of less than 21) or persistence (score of 21 or greater).
Researcher's assessment (minimum 12 months posttreatment). The researcher who made the initial SSI-3
assessments visited the child's home and recorded an
interview that lasted approximately 90 min. The researcher gave a rating that was designed to reflect what
speech-language pathologists do when assessing a client's
response to treatment. During his visit, the researcher
talked with a parent and the child about the speech problem and experience in clinic. He also sought their views
about communication style and self-confidence in a range
of typical environments. These included home and social
gatherings with adults and children in and out of school.
Performance and experience in school were assessed in
terms of interpersonal relationships with staff and other
children (including bullying). General health issues were
also examined, including frequent absence from school
and childhood illnesses. Factors taken into consideration
were speech fluency, social skills, and whether the child
had a positive self-image. Each of these three factors was
scored on a scale of 0-3. For example, a score of 0 on social
skills indicated outgoing and inquisitive, whereas a score
of 3 showed that the child was very shy, withdrawn, and
unresponsive. The scores for the three factors were

Table 1. Child's assessment form.

Question

Scale endpoints

Boberg & Kully (1994)
question number

How would you currently rate your speech?

1 = Terrific
5 = Terrible

2

How often are you able to speak fluently without thinking about your speech?

1 = Always
5 = Never

6

How much are you stuttering/stammering now compared
to before you first saw your therapist/pathologist?

1 = Much less
5 = Much more

9

How do you feel about your speech now compared to before you
first saw your therapist/pathologist?

1 = Much better
5 = Much worse

10

How would you describe your consultation with your therapist/pathologist?

1 = Very helpful,
5 = Of no help

11

Overall, how much of a problem to you is your stuttering/stammering now,
compared to before you first saw the therapist/pathologist?

1 = Much less
5 = Much more

12

At this time, do you consider yourself a person who stutters/stammers?

1 = Definitely not
5 = Definitely yes

14

Do you think you would benefit from seeing the therapist/pathologist again?

1 = Definitely not
5 = Definitely yes

3, 4, and 5

Note. The left column gives eight questions that speakers who stutter used to rate their speech. The scale endpoints are given in column 2, and the question
numbers from Boberg and Kully's (1994) questionnaire from which the questions were derived are given in column 3. A modified version of these questions
was also used by the parents to assess their child's stuttering.

674

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

summed to give one score between 0 (0 on all three
scales) and 9 (3 on all three scales); high scores indicated that the disorder was persistent.
SSI-3 (minimum 12 months post-treatment). During
the 90-min visit referred to, a second 20-min recording for
SSI-3 was made using the DAT recorder and Sennheiser
K6 microphone. This was scored in the same way as at the
initial assessment (Riley, 1994). This SSI-3 score was
used to separate persistent and recovered participants.
Participants who persisted had to score 24 or above. The
same cutoff was used to designate participants as recovered (scores lower than 24). Subsequent analysis
showed that at intake, most stutterers could be separated from controls using an SSI-3 criterion of 16 (all
stutterers had scores above this, but few of the controls
did). Hypothetically, a person who stuttered could score
16 at intake, increase to a score of 23 at 12+, and still
be considered to have recovered. To preempt this, the
additional constraint was added that for individuals
to be designated as recovered, SSI-3 scores had to
drop by at least 2 points relative to the original assessment. The 24-point criterion equates to approximately
3%-4% stuttered syllables in the speaking and reading
tasks, an average dysfluency length of 0.5-1.0 s, and
physical concomitants rated as "not noticeable unless
looking for it" or "barely noticeable to the casual
observer."
Combined criteria for designating participants as
recovered or persistent. To be designated as persistent,
the parent, child, and researcher all had to designate the
child as still stuttering, and SSI-3 score at the time of the
second assessment had to be 24 or greater. To be designated as recovered, the parent, child, and researcher
had to designate the child as not stuttering, and SSI-3
score at the time of the second assessment had to be less
than 24 and had to show a drop between assessments of
at least 2 points.
Control children. Age-matched control children were
obtained from schools in the same geographical area as
the children who stutter. Two age groups were recorded
and assessed by SSI-3. The first group had a similar age
distribution as the early and late stuttering groups at
intake. There were 35 speakers (21 male, 14 female). The
age range was 8;0 (years;months) to 11;9 (M = 9;11, SD =
13;0). The second group had ages that corresponded to
those at the second assessment of all the stuttering groups
(12+). There were 19 children in this group (11 male,
8 female), and age ranged from 12;2 to15;8 (M = 14;1,
SD = 14;0). All of the control children reported no history
of speech or hearing difficulty, and this was confirmed by
the child's teacher. The groups were similar to the children who stuttered in terms of spread of occupational
classifications (professional, managerial, skilled nonmanual, skilled manual, partly skilled, and unskilled).

Statistics on educational attainment of the schools were
compared with those that the children who stuttered attended, and there were no differences (assessment of
educational level of individual children at the time of the
recordings was precluded because of teaching schedules).
The control children were used to provide SSI-3 estimates
for a fluent population and were included in a pool to
supply age- and gender-matched fluent controls for the
etiological studies.
Dysfluency assessments. The children who stuttered
were divided into those who persisted and those who recovered. The speech was transcribed using conventions
described in detail in Howell and Huckvale (2004). Counts
were made of Johnson et al. 's (1959) dysfluency categories
2-3 (stallings) and 4-6 (part-word dysfluencies). Each of
these dysfluency types was tallied separately for persistent and recovered speakers at intake and at 12+. A
second judge reassessed eight randomly selected samples from intake and at 12+ from the children who
stutter. Interjudge fluency data were obtained on all
words and gave a kappa coefficient of .92, which is much
higher than chance (Fleiss, 1971).
Family history of stuttering. Family history data were
obtained for participants using questionnaires adapted
from Janssen, Kloth, Kraaimaat, and Brutten (1996).
The data were used to examine whether persistent and
recovered forms were transmitted to offspring (Ambrose
et al., 1993).
Temperament. The MCTQ, described in the Etiological Factors section, was administered ( Hegvik et al.,
1995) for assessing temperament in 8- to 12-year-old
children.
Auditory assessment. Auditory assessments were
made of children who stuttered (at intake and at 12+)
and of fluent controls matched to the age of the children
at 12+. Standard air-conducted pure-tone audiograms
were obtained, which indicated that hearing was within
normal limits for all the children whose data are reported
in the Sensory subsection of the Results section (children
who stutter and fluent controls). Further tests were
conducted to estimate absolute threshold, simultaneous
masking, and backward masking performance with a
broadband masking stimulus. The latter test condition
was an indication of central hearing difficulties, and the
others were standard assessments. Thresholds for detecting a stimulus that appeared in one of three intervals were
estimated in each of these conditions. In all cases, the
stimulus consisted of a brief probe tone that was present in
one interval (selected at random). The stimulus alone was
present in this interval in absolute threshold trials. In the
two masking conditions (simultaneous and backward masking), the tone was masked with a concurrent broadband
noise masker or with the same broadband masker that
appeared after the tone in the backward masking

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

675

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

condition. The intervals were signaled when one of
three faces displayed on a computer screen changed
from a neutral to an open-mouthed expression (these
appeared in left-to-right sequence). The participant
indicated which of the three intervals had contained
the tone by clicking on the corresponding face graphic.
Feedback was given by an appropriate change in the
selected graphic (smile or frown). Thresholds were determined using a Levitt (1971) tracking procedure and
estimated to within 2 dB. ( Further details of the procedure are given in Howell & Williams, 2004, and Howell
et al., 2006, which used the same procedures.)
Cerebellar assessment (Dow-Moruzzi motor battery).
The modified form of the Dow and Moruzzi (1958) battery, as described by Fawcett et al. (1996), was used. A
description of the three components of the battery
( balance, posture, and complex movement) follows.
Balance. An electronic force platform, SwayWeigh
( Raymar Healthcare Products, London), was used to
measure wobble, defined by the variation in weight distribution over time. Participants removed their shoes
and stood upright on the active plate of the SwayWeigh
while it was calibrated for their weight. Following calibration, each participant took his / her shoes off and
stood with the right foot on the active plate and the left
foot on the fixed one ( left and right feet were approximately 10 cm apart). The experimenter blindfolded them.
They looked straight ahead and stood as still as possible. They were allowed time to become accustomed
to the blindfold; this was determined by the experimenter based on when the child was stable with body
weight equally distributed between left and right legs.
They continued balancing while variation in weight
distribution was recorded via a link to a Dell PC onto a
Picolog data-recording program for 30 s. The dependent
variable was the variation in weight distribution over
the 30 s of the measurement epoch. Balance measurements were obtained (a) with arms by the side and (b) with
arms outstretched and the palms of the hands facing
down.
Posture. Posture tasks equivalent to the two balance
tasks were performed. The tasks were the same except
that during a 30-s trial period, the participant was pushed
between the second and fourth lumbar vertebrae and on
the upper arm from the right and left side by the experimenter. Pressure was applied with the palm of the
hand to each contact point for 1 s and then released. The
experimenter exerted approximately 2 kg of pressure
(previously calibrated by practicing pushing at 2 kg on
kitchen scales). Analysis for reliability of the researcher's pushing pressure showed that this was accurate
to 3%. The dependent variable was the variation in
weight distribution over the 30 s of each measurement
epoch.

676

Complex movement. The complex movement tasks
used were past pointing, finger-to-finger pointing, and
finger-to-thumb opposition. Although it is conceivable
that these tasks involve memory as well as motor movement, Ramus, Pidgeon, and Frith (2003) have shown
(using factor analysis of four cerebellar tasks) that most
variance was accounted for by a motor factor.
For the past-pointing task, a bull's-eye target with
10 concentric rings with radii increasing in 10-mm steps
was fastened onto a wall at eye level and at arm's length
from the participant. A marker pen was held in the dominant hand. The participant had five practice attempts
and was then blindfolded and made 10 test attempts to
hit the bull's-eye with the marker pen. The marker pen
provided a permanent record of performance. The attempts were scored as 10 for the bull's-eye, and then the
score decreased by 1 for each ring. Attempts that fell
outside the target received no points. The 10 attempts
for each participant were totaled to give a score of between 0 and 100 for each participant. The dependent
variable for this task was the cumulative score over
10 attempts.
In the finger-to-finger task, the participant placed
the index finger of the nondominant hand through a
10-mm-radius hole at the center of a bull's-eye target.
The target had four concentric rings that increased in radius by 10 mm. The participant brought the hands together in front of the body and attempted to touch the
index fingers together as quickly as possible. Each participant had two practice attempts and was then blindfolded and made five experimental attempts. Attempts
were scored as 5 when fingers touched and 1 less for each
concentric ring. Attempts that fell outside the target
received no points. The dependent variable for this task
was the cumulative score over five attempts (giving a
score of between 0 and 25 for each participant).
The finger-to-thumb task required the index finger
and thumb of one hand to be placed on the thumb and
finger, respectively, of the other hand. The top thumb
and finger were kept together, and one hand was turned
clockwise and the other counterclockwise until the finger and thumb touched again. Then, the direction of the
moving thumb and finger was reversed. Participants
practiced the sequence until they completed five movements fluently. Then they performed the successive
opposition 10 times, as fast as possible. The time taken
to do this was recorded by stopwatch. The dependent
variable for this task was the total time taken to perform
10 movements.
Reliability of the estimate was assessed relative to
six independent raters who timed these actions from
video recordings of 7 participants. The times recorded
by the independent raters and the experimenter varied
by 0.25 s (approximately 4%), which was not significant

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

by a paired-sample t test, t(6) = -2.28, ns. Interrater reliability was 1.00 (to two decimal points; p < .001). The
experimenter timed the videos on two separate occasions 1 week apart. These were used for estimating
intrarater reliability. The times varied by 0.11 s (approximately 2%). A paired-sample t test revealed no significant difference between the two times, t(6) = 1.40, ns.
Intrarater reliability was 1.00 (to two decimal points
again).

Results
Epidemiology
Sex ratio. A higher number of males (64) than females (12) stuttered (a ratio of 5.33 males to each female),
and the difference was significant by sign test (p < .00001).
Recovery rate. Recovery rates were around 50% overall, for both genders and for each age group (see section A
of Table 2). The differences in recovery rates between
early, late, and very late age groups were not significant.
Most of the epidemiological findings were not significant
(exceptions are indicated in the text). However, it was
notable that recovery rate was about 12% higher for the
late and very late groups than for the early group.
Age of onset. Of the 76 participants, 62 (81.6%) indicated the age at which their stuttering started (the
remainder were asked but could not remember). Section
B of Table 2 shows that age of onset was about 4.5 years,
overall, and this was about the same for both genders,
for persistent and recovered speakers and for each age
of referral group (the differences were not statistically
significant).
Age of recovery. All 41 recovered participants
reported the age at which they had recovered. It was
notable that the range was large. As seen in section C of
Table 2, once again, there was little difference between
the two genders. There was an insignificant trend across
the three age groups for age of recovery to happen later,
the later the age of referral.
Length of time stuttered and length of time recovered
group followed up postrecovery. It was possible to determine the length of time that the recovered participant
stuttered for 32 participants (78% of the recovered group);
the age at which their stuttering started was not supplied
for the remainder. Speakers who recovered stuttered for
8 years, 11 months, on average. No analysis was made
across genders, as only 2 females provided data. The differences in length of time that participants stuttered did
not differ significantly between early, late, and very late
age groups (all results are given in section D of Table 2).
All 41 children who recovered were followed up for a
minimum of 2 years up to a maximum of 11 years. The
average follow-up time was 5 years, 10 months. Females

were followed up for significantly longer than males,
t(30) = 2.024, p < .05. Statistically, all age groups were
followed up for the same amount of time. Statistics are
summarized in section E of Table 2. To summarize the
epidemiological results, only gender had effects on eventual stuttering outcome.

Symptomatology (SSI-3 Scores
and Dysfluency Counts)
A summary of the SSI-3 scores is given in Figure 1 as
box-and-whisker plots. The plot at the left gives the intake scores separately for (a) the children subsequently
identified as persistent and recovered and ( b) the intake
controls. The plot at the right of Figure 1 gives the comparisons between persistent and recovered speakers at
age 12+ and their age-matched controls.
At the first recording, every participant who stuttered
(persistent and recovered) scored 16 or higher on SSI-3.
An SSI-3 score of 16 is rated as mild and reflects about
1%-3% stuttered syllables in the speaking and reading
tasks, an average dysfluency length of less than 1 s, and
physical concomitants rated as noticeable when looking
for them. Of the 35 intake controls, 2 controls scored 16 and
6 controls scored greater than 16. The 16-point criterion
divided the two fluency groups approximately. The
participants in the stuttering groups were divided at
intake into persistent or recovered using the information
obtained subsequently. Statistical comparisons were
made by independent t test for the three pairs of groups
(shown in the first column of Table 3). The intake scores
of those speakers who went on to persist differed from
those of the controls and from those speakers who went
on to recover. The persistent speakers also differed from
the recovered ones.
Comparisons were made next on the 12+ SSI-3 scores
for the three pairs of groups using age-matched control
speakers (19 total). The results are shown in the second
column of Table 3 and revealed a different pattern from
those at intake. At 12+, the control speakers had significantly lower scores than the persistent speakers, but
here the controls did not differ from the recovered speakers. Also, the scores of the persistent speakers were significantly higher than those of the recovered speakers.
The different pattern of results was not because a different control group was used because when the younger
intake control group was used for the present comparisons (third column in Table 3), the same pattern of
results was obtained as just reported. Thus, the control
speakers had significantly lower scores than the persistent speakers but not lower than the recovered speakers.
The persistent speakers differed significantly from the
recovered speakers. This showed that the SSI-3 scores of
the recovered speakers decreased and became indistinguishable from either group of controls. As groups were

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

677

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2. Summary of epidemiological findings.
Section A: Recovery rates overall, by gender and by age of attendance group.
Recovery rate

Recovered/total

Percentage

Across all speakers

41/76

53.9%

By gender
Number of males/all males
Number of females/all females

37/64
4/12

57.8%
33.3%

By age of attendance
Number recovered in early group/total
Number recovered in late group/total
Number recovered in very late group/total

15/32
13/22
13/22

46.9%
59.1%
59.1%

Section B: Age of onset overall, by gender, by persistent/recovered, and by age of attendance group.
Age of onset

M (months)

SD

Across all speakers

54.8

20.9

By gender
Males
Females

54.0
58.5

21.1
20.9

By recovered types
Persistent
Recovered

57.0
52.7

24.5
17.0

By age of attendance group
Age of onset for early
Age of onset for late
Age of onset for very late xxxxxxx

50.1
56.6
60.7

16.6
25.4
22.5

Section C: Age of recovery overall, by gender and by age of attendance group.
Age of recovery

M (months)

SD

Across all speakers

158.6

25.5

By gender
Males
Females

159.9
148.0

25.2
31.8

By age of attendance group
Age of recovery for early
Age of recovery for late
Age of recovery for very late xxx

148.0
162.5
167.0

28.2
20.4
25.3

(Continued on the following page)

divided at 12+ into persistent / recovered using an SSI-3
criterion, differences between these groups would have
been expected. It would not follow, however, that the
scores of the recovered speakers would be the same as
the controls.
Counts of stalling and part-word dysfluency types
were made on the 2-min spontaneous speech samples of
each speaker. Figure 2 shows the means and standard

678

errors at initial (left) and final (right) assessments. Speaker
groups are labeled on the abscissa. Data from the persistent speakers are presented on the left, and data from the
recovered speakers are presented on the right. Stallings
and part-word dysfluencies are given separate symbols and
can be identified from the inset panel.
Statistical analysis confirmed the impression in
Figure 2 that there was no significant difference between

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2 Continued. Summary of epidemiological findings.
Section D: Length of time stuttered overall, by gender and by age of attendance group.
Length of time stuttered

M (months)

SD

Across all speakers

106.7

35.5

By gender
Males
Females

108.5
79.5

31.4
(only two cases)

By age of attendance group
Time early group stuttered
Time late group stuttered
Time very late group stutteredxxxxxxx

96.7
112.9
114.0

35.5
31.5
24.3

Section E: Length of time followed up overall, by gender and by age of attendance group.
Length of time followed up

M (months)

SD

Across all speakers

69.9

28.1

By gender
Males
Females

67.1
96.0

27.2
25.9

By age of attendance group
Time early group followed up
Time late group followed up
Time very late group followed up

67.2
76.6
66.5

29.7
23.8
31.2

Note.

Differences that were significant are indicated in the text.

(a) stallings and (b) part-word dysfluencies for persistent
and recovered speakers at intake. At the later attendance, for the persistent speakers, part-word dysfluencies
increased, whereas stallings decreased. The persistent
speakers showed a crossover interaction pattern in
which part-word dysfluencies started low and increased
over time, whereas stallings showed the opposite

pattern. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) on these speakers with factors session (intake/12+) and dysfluency type
(stalling/part-word) confirmed this, as the interaction
term was significant, F(1, 136) = 31.70, p < .001. There
was also a significant effect of session, which showed
that dysfluency rate decreased for this group, F(1, 136) =
14.33, p < .001.

Figure 1. Box-and-whisker plots showing SSI-3 scores and variability for persistent, recovered, and control speakers. Intake
scores are on the left, and scores at 12+ are on the right.

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

679

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 3. Summary of statistical analyses of SSI-3 scores.

Groups that were compared
Persistent versus controls
Recovered versus controls
Persistent versus recovered
Note.

Stuttering groups at intake,
controls at intake
(where appropriate)

Stuttering groups at 12+,
controls age-matched
to this group (where appropriate)

Stuttering groups at 12+,
controls at intake
(where appropriate)

t (68) = 18.84, p < .001
t (74) = 12.14, p < .001
t (74) = 5.46, p < .001

t (52) = 14.57, p < .001
t (58) = 1.90, ns
t (74) = 14.91, p < .001

t (68) = 18.67, p < .001
t (74) = 1.754, ns
t (74) = 14.91, p < .001

SSI-3 = Stuttering Severity Instrument for Children and Adults (3rd ed.).

The corresponding data for the recovered participants showed a decrease for both types of dysfluency
over time. A similar ANOVA to that conducted on the
persistent speakers confirmed that the interaction was
not significant but there was a significant effect of session again, showing that dysfluency rate decreased over
time for this group, F(1, 160) = 4.77, p < .05.
SSI-3 scores showed that the recovered group shifted
away from the persistent speakers and toward the fluent
controls. At 12+, the SSI-3 scores of recovered speakers
were not distinguishable from those of controls. Persistent speakers were different from controls insofar as they
maintained high SSI-3 scores. The persistent speakers
also showed an increased number of part-word dysfluencies over time, whereas the recovered speakers showed a
reduction in both stallings and part-word dysfluencies
over time to the level of those of fluent speakers.

Etiological Factors
Genetics. Of the 76 children who stuttered, 41 provided family history data (33 male, 8 female). Eighteen
were persistent (12 males, 6 females), and 23 were
recovered (21 males, 2 females). Twenty-three were from
the early group, 10 were from the late group, and 8 were
from the very late group. Family history data were
obtained for 42 control probands matched in age to the
stuttering probands (20 male, 22 female).

The Ambrose, Cox, and Yairi (1997) data showed
that individuals with a family history of persistent stuttering also tended to persist, whereas individuals with a
family history of recovered stuttering also tended to
recover. This claim was checked on the current data with
older probands than those used by Ambrose et al., and
age-matched controls were also available for analysis.
There was a similar ratio of persistent to recovered relatives in each of the three proband groups. There was no
association between (a) persistent versus recovered probands and (b) persistence/recovery of relatives, c2 = 0.07,
df = 1, ns. When the control probands were included as a
third stuttering-type group, there was still no significant association between the stutter type of the proband
(persistent /recovered/not stuttering) and persistence/
recovery of relatives, c2 = 0.09, df = 2, ns. To summarize,
for this group no evidence was found that persistent and
recovered forms of stuttering run in families.
Temperament. MCTQ data were available for 15 children who stuttered (12 male, 3 female; M = 11;8, SD =
16.0) and from 14 age-matched fluent controls (8 male,
6 female; M = 10;10, SD = 25.0). Eight of the children who
stuttered were subsequently classified as persistent, and
7 had recovered.
When controls were compared with children who
stuttered (persistent and recovered in one group), there
were significant differences between groups on approach/
withdrawal and threshold. Examination of the means

Figure 2. Mean stalling and part-word counts across test sessions (time 1 = initial assessment, time 2 = assessment at 12+) for persistent and recovered
speakers. The connected lines are for stalling or part-word dysfluency types that can be identified by the symbol (indicated in the inset).

680

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

indicated that the children who stuttered were significantly more withdrawn than controls and had a significantly higher threshold when reacting to changes in
light, temperature, and sound. This and the rest of the
statistics on temperament that were significant are given
in Table 4.

difference in thresholds was small, at 1.6 dB, and the estimates were unexpected in that children who stuttered
had slightly lower thresholds than the control speakers.
On this basis, it may be concluded that there were only
minor differences in hearing ability when stuttering groups
were not distinguished.

When the persistent group was compared with fluent
controls, the significant differences reported earlier remained (and these were in the same direction as those
found for the analysis before stuttering groups were differentiated). Additionally, it was found that the persistent group was significantly different from controls on
intensity of mood. Examination of the means indicated
that the persistent group expressed significantly less
emotion than fluent controls.

When the children who stuttered were separated
into the recovery groups, the difference between persistent and recovered participants was significant for the
backward masking condition, t(28) = 2.58, p < .025. In
this condition, the persistent group had higher thresholds ( by about 10 dB) than the recovered group, although
there was overlap in performance between the two
groups. No differences between controls and either persistent or recovered speakers were significant. In summary, by 12+, the persistent group showed about 10-dB
poorer thresholds with a broadband backward masker
compared with controls and recovered speakers.

When the recovered group was compared with the
controls, a significant difference in the same direction to
that obtained in the earlier analysis on all speakers occurred on the approach/withdrawal factor. It was also
found that the recovered group was significantly less
adaptable than controls.
Comparison between the persistent and recovered
groups also showed a significant difference on the adaptability dimension. The recovered group was again less
adaptable than the persistent group.
The main features of the temperament data as they
pertain to predicting persistence/recovery are that speakers who recovered had less adaptable temperaments than
did controls and persistent speakers. Speakers who persisted did not have less adaptable temperaments than
controls, but they did have less intense mood swings than
this group.
Sensory. Standard pure-tone audiometry showed
that hearing was within normal limits for all participants. More detailed psychoacoustic assessments were
made on 48 children who stuttered (40 boys, 8 girls) and
36 controls (21 boys, 15 girls). They all provided threshold in absolute, simultaneous masker and broadband
backward masker conditions. They were all aged 12+ when
the hearing assessments were made.
The difference between age-matched controls and
all stuttering children was only significant for the absolute threshold condition, t(82) = -2.16, p < .05. The

Motor. Thirty-eight controls and 41 of the children
who stuttered (15 who persisted and 26 who recovered)
performed the Dow-Moruzzi battery of tests. Data were
not available for all tests in the battery due to occasional
equipment malfunction (4.3% of the total). The tests
were only performed at 12+, and controls were age matched.
Analyses were conducted that compared (a) controls
against all the children who stuttered; ( b) persistent
versus controls; (c) recovered versus controls; and (d) persistent versus recovered. Tests in which there were significant differences between groups are summarized in
Table 5.
When controls were compared with all of the children who stuttered, there were differences in past pointing and balance time with arms by the side. In both
cases, controls performed significantly better than children who stutter.
When persistent and control speakers were compared,
there were significant differences on the past pointing
task, with controls performing significantly better than
persistent speakers. There were also differences on
balance time with arms by the side and balance time
with arms outstretched. In both the latter cases, persistent speakers showed significantly more variability
than controls.

Table 4. Temperament variables that differed significantly for comparisons between different groups.
Groups that were compared

Approach/withdrawal

Threshold

Intensity of mood

Controls versus all stutterers
Persistent versus controls
Recovered versus controls
Persistent versus recovered

t (27) = 2.328, p < .025
t (20) = 1.997, p < .05
t (19) = 2.180, p < .025

t (27) = -2.245, p < .025
t (20) = -2.745, p < .01

t (20) = 2.843, p < .01

Note.

Adaptability

t (19) = 2.110, p < .025
t (13) = -1.769, p < .05

Blank cells indicate that results were not significant.

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

681

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 5. Motor performance variables from the Dow-Moruzzi battery of tasks that differed significantly for comparisons between different groups.
Groups that were compared
Controls versus all stutterers
Persistent versus controls
Recovered versus controls
Persistent versus recovered

Past pointing

Balance (arms by side)

Balance (arms outstretched)

t (75) = -2.95, p < .05
t (51) = -3.03, p < .05
t (60) = 2.22, p < .05

t (77) = 1.67, p < .05
t (51) = -2.59, p < .05

t (51) = 1.91, p < .05

t (39) = -2.05, p < .05

When recovered and control speakers were compared,
there was a significant difference between performance
on the past-pointing task, with controls performing significantly better than the recovered speakers. There
were no significant differences on any of the balance
tasks.
Finally, when persistent and recovered groups were
compared, there were differences for balance with arms
by the side and postural stability with arms by the side.
In both cases, recovered speakers showed significantly
more variability than persistent speakers.
In terms of persistent/recovered differences, cerebellar motor deficits occurred in children who persisted
in their stutter in balance with arms by the side and the
body-posture task with arms by the side.

Discussion
The principal goal was to identify risk factors for
persistent stuttering in the areas of epidemiology, symptoms, and etiology. Several factors were identified that
suggested how differential diagnosis of stuttering from
fluent speech could be made. Details are given here of
ongoing work that uses these and other factors to predict
persistence and recovery of stuttering through use of
structural equation modeling (SEM).
One of the main findings of this study was that there
was remarkably little difference between children who
persisted or recovered from stuttering in the age range
8-12+ in epidemiology. There was a chance of approximately 50% of persistence or recovery, and this did not
depend on gender or on age of attendance at clinic.
Recovery rate was lower in this study than in others with
younger children (Andrews & Harris, 1964; Yairi &
Ambrose, 2005), which is consistent with the view that
most recovery happened when the children were young.
It is also of note that, at 53.9%, the estimate of recovery
rate was close to the 47% reported by Fritzell (1976) for
children with similar ages to those in the current study.
Age of onset was roughly the same for both genders and
did not depend on age of attendance at clinic. Also, age of
onset of 4 years, 7 months was comparable with those
reported in other studies, including those with younger
children (Andrews & Harris, 1964; Yairi & Ambrose,

682

Postural stability (arms by side)

t (37) = 2.49, p < .05

2005). Age of recovery was the same for gender and age of
referral groups, although there was a hint that later
attendance at clinic was associated with lower recovery
rates. The reason for late attendance at clinic for the
children in the current study was not clear, given that
onset age was comparable to that reported by Yairi and
Ambrose (2005). The children who recovered had stuttered for nearly 9 years, and they had been followed up,
on average, for nearly 6 years to ensure that there was no
relapse (the time in which the children were followed up
was longer than the 40-month period reported by Yairi &
Ambrose, 2005). In fact, the only epidemiological factor
that was significant was that more boys were affected
than girls (5.33:1). This has been reported elsewhere and
is considered a major risk factor in other research. The
sex ratio in the current study was higher than in Andrews
and Harris (1964). This was expected, as females recover
at a younger age than males (Andrews & Harris, 1964), so
an older sample should consist predominantly of males.
A score of 16 points on the SSI-3 at intake separated
persistent and recovered children from 77% of the agematched fluent controls. At the final assessment, the
SSI-3 scores of the recovered group had reduced and
were not statistically distinguishable from their agematched controls. At this later age, the SSI-3 scores of
the persistent group were significantly higher than those
for both the recovered and the age-matched control
groups. Use of persistent / recovered designations determined from the information obtained at later attendance
showed that the recovered speakers' SSI-3 scores were
about 7 points lower than those of the persistent speakers at intake. Although there was overlap in SSI-3 scores
for the two groups of children, the SSI-3 scores at intake
could be used in conjunction with other measures for
assessing risk of persistent stuttering. SSI-3 scores have
been used for contrasting the fluency of speakers who
stutter and control speakers by our own and other
research groups (Arnold, Conture, & Ohde, 2005; Davis,
Shisca, & Howell, 2007; Howell, 2007; Howell et al.,
2006). In addition to the symptom changes that were apparent in SSI-3 scores, there was also a change in counts
of different dysfluency types for the persistent speakers.
Part-word dysfluencies increased relative to stallings for
the persistent group of speakers. Both types of dysfluency
reduced in speakers who recovered, and the counts of the
two types were not distinguishable from age-matched

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

fluent controls at the earlier or later age. Therefore, the
increase in counts of part-word dysfluencies across sessions is another risk factor for persistent stuttering, as
noted elsewhere (Conture, 1990; Howell, 2007).
Of the etiological factors examined as potentials for
risk, persistence and recovery showed no tendency to
run in families. The reason why the current study failed
to find fewer persistent relatives in the recovered than in
the persistent proband group could be due to Ambrose
et al.'s (1997) sample being younger than the current
one, so recovery of the speakers was not fully resolved in
their study. That is, a shift of some speakers from their
recovered group, who had high numbers of recovered
relatives, to the persistent group, who had few recovered
relatives, would reduce the reported differences between
proband groups. Family history (genetics) was not a risk
factor for persistence for speakers in this age range, although there are indications from other literature (Yairi
& Ambrose, 2005) that it would be useful, particularly
when working with younger children.
In all but one case where etiological factors for
persistence/recovery were identified, the persistent
group performed differently from the recovered and the
control groups. The exception was for the temperamental
dimension of adaptability, in which recovered speakers
were less adaptable than control speakers or persistent
speakers (tests made from age 10 years and upward).
This temperament dimension was the only one that was
significant and in the same direction in three previous
studies (Anderson et al., 2003; Embrechts et al., 2000;
Howell et al., 2004). This was the only temperamental
variable that was specific to recovery. In addition, approach and threshold distinguished all of the speakers
who stuttered from controls. Thus, these temperamental
variables were not sensitive to persistence/recovery,
although they were for stuttering in general. They
should be included in a model intended to distinguish
the gross-fluency groups.
At the time when persistence and recovery were
established, backward masking thresholds were about
10 dB worse for persistent speakers than for recovered
speakers, as also found by Howell et al. (2006). Signal
intensity needed to be about 10 dB higher to be detected
by persistent participants compared with recovered ones.
Backward masking threshold is an additional risk factor
that should be used for predicting risk of persistence. It
does not appear useful for distinguishing children who
stutter in general from fluent speakers, as the scores for
the control speakers were not statistically different from
the scores of either of the groups of children who stuttered, as reported elsewhere (Howell & Williams, 2004).
Assessments of cerebellar performance were also
made at the times when persistence and recovery were
established. Variability when balancing with arms by

the side was the only factor that differed between persistent and recovered children (recovered children were
poorer) and between persistent and controls (persistent
children were poorer). Poor performance on balance
when arms were held by the side appears to be a risk
factor for persistent stuttering. Deficits on the Dow-
Moruzzi battery that distinguished between the three
fluency groups potentially implicate different cerebellar
control in stuttering, as predicted by the EXPLAN
theory. Past pointing appears to be a candidate for differentiating controls from all children who stutter but
not for persistent/recovered groups. Apart from these findings on cerebellar tasks, there were only two other significant effects (postural stability with arms by the side for
persistent versus recovered speakers, and balance time with
arms outstretched for persistent versus control speakers).

Future Work and Limitations
The primary goal of the current research was to assess epidemiology, symptoms, and etiological variables
as risk factors for persistent stuttering. Epidemiology
and symptomatology were examined on all participants.
Etiological factors were examined only for subsamples of
the participants. This allowed a wide range of potential
risk factors to be explored. More remains to be done with
the current data. In particular, examination of the linguistic and acoustic properties of the speech sample is
ongoing.
The approach of trawling a wide range of factors in
subsamples allowed those that are associated with a
high risk of persistence to be identified. Others that do
not appear to be important for this purpose do not need
to be collected further. The current results suggest that
most epidemiological factors are not relevant for risk of
persistence, nor are many of the temperament dimensions and standard measures of auditory function. There
are other factors that the literature suggests may also be
relevant for predicting persistence, such as state anxiety, which has been reported to differ between persistent
and recovered speakers at 12+ (Davis et al., 2007). Anxiety could only be a risk factor for persistence if it was
present at an early stage. To establish whether this is
the case or not, suitable tests that can be used for measuring children's anxiety would need to be developed;
parental report tests have been used by others (Yairi &
Ambrose, 2005). Speakers who go on to persist in their
stuttering would have to show higher anxiety levels than
recovered speakers at the earlier age.
After the set of risk factors has been defined and
data have been obtained, their success at predicting persistence and recovery can be assessed retrospectively (on
available data) and prospectively (on newly collected data).
One appropriate technique is SEM (Levine, Petrides,

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

683

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Davis, Jackson, & Howell, 2005), which allows models to
be set up in terms of how variables relate to each other in
the form of a path diagram. The pattern of correlations
between variables can then be inspected to see whether
the model is a reasonable fit to the data. SEM distinguishes observed variables (actually measured) from
latent variables ( hypothetical constructs). If EXPLAN
were set up as an SEM model for predicting persistence
versus recovery, the latent variables would be (a) linguistic planning and ( b) motor programming and execution. Language factors that are measured should
correlate together and with the planning latent variable.
Similarly, motor factors should correlate together and
with the execution latent variable. According to EXPLAN,
fluency problems arise from poor coordination between the
two processes inherent in the latent variables. Thus,
observed variables that affect both latent variables
(correlate with planning and execution) should occur.
One method for locating variables that affect both latent
variables would be to insert a phrase in a syntactically
easy or complex frame (Kleinow & Smith, 2000) and
assess variability in how the utterance is spoken at two
speech rates (Smith & Kleinow, 2000). The condition in
which linguistic and motor processing demands are high
should correlate with planning and execution variables.
The condition in which linguistic demand is high but
motor demand is low should correlate with the planning
variable alone. The condition in which linguistic demand
is low but motor demand is high should correlate with
the execution variable.
Specification of an SEM model also focuses attention on what observable output variables are appropriate for determining the state of stuttering as persistent
or recovered. Some authors advocate speech measures
as paramount (Wingate, 2001), whereas clinicians often
emphasize the importance of a person's self-esteem in
speaking situations. Some fundamental questions about
outcome measures can be addressed using SEM techniques: Can one have cases in which self-esteem is improved but speech performance is not, and vice versa?
Does persistent stuttering affect one of these variables
(speech performance) and recovered forms affect the
other (self-esteem)?
Apart from modeling persistence and recovery,
these data are also valuable for (a) subtyping different
forms of stuttering and ( b) comparing with other groups
of individuals reported to be stuttering. An example of
the former would be to divide the sample into stutterers
and clutterers and to see whether they show the same
pattern of epidemiology, symptomatology, and etiology
to answer questions about the relationship between
these forms of dysfluent speech. Examples of the latter
would be comparison with individuals whose primary
home language is not English to determine whether they
are truly stuttering.

684

The main limitation in these data is that many of
the tests cannot be conducted at early and late ages. This
was mentioned in connection with anxiety, for which
there are no tests suitable for young children. Similar
limitations apply to sensory and motor tasks. Availability of tests that can be carried out at a range of ages
would allow research questions raised by this study to be
examined. For example, they could be used to address
why recovered speakers acquired a problem in past
pointing (a complex movement task). Hypothetically, it
is possible that maintaining fluency focuses attention on
speech control. This may be at the expense of other complex movement tasks such as past pointing. This possibility is worth further investigation as, if it is correct, it
would indicate that achieving fluency can affect movement complexity tasks.
The current study has also been limited to assessment of persistence and recovery. All individuals had
treatment to keep this factor constant. Thus, there were
no individuals who had no treatment. Therefore, the impact of treatment versus lack of it on recovery rates
cannot be determined.

Clinical Implications
Clinicians may monitor the following six factors (identified in the current study), all of which put a speaker at
risk of persisting in stuttering: (a) gender; (b) SSI-3 scores
(those of persistent stutterers were higher than those of
speakers who recovered); (c) part-word repetition rate and
how it changes over time (this increased in persistent
speakers); (d) persistent speakers had more adaptable
temperaments than recovered speakers at intake; (e) the
persistent speakers had worse backward masking
thresholds than the recovered speakers at 12+; and
(f ) balance with arms by the side was more variable in
recovered than persistent speakers at 12+. Bear in mind
that Factors 4-6 were identified from randomly selected
subsets of the overall sample rather than from the entire
sample.
At the first recording, all children scored 16 or higher
on the SSI-3, and 72 of the 76 (95%) scored 21 or higher,
which would be classified as moderate stuttering using
SSI-3. The Epidemiology section showed that the children
were, generally speaking, well past the age where they
reported stuttering had started and that chance of
persistence did not depend on age group. It is surprising
that these children attended late at clinic, given that
they clearly had a problem, as revealed by the SSI-3
scores at their first attendance, and the earlier they
attended, the less time they stuttered. The late attendance may be, as Yairi and Ambrose (2005) observed,
due to the often repeated cliche of "Leave stuttering
alone and it will go away." Progressive speech, motor,
sensory, and temperamental changes occur. The main

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

lesson for the speech-language pathologist, then, is how
to get the message across that it is important not to delay
treatment.
It seems important to attempt a comparison of the
present results for older children who stutter with those
of Yairi and Ambrose (2005) for young, preschool-age
children. To begin, the children in the current study all
received treatment, as did 89.5% of the participants in
Yairi and Ambrose. In both studies, children who persisted did not respond to treatment. For obvious reasons,
it is not known whether the persistent children in the
present study would have recovered if they had received
treatment earlier. In addition, it is not known whether
some of the persistent children in Yairi and Ambrose's
study showed unassisted recovery at later ages. The
most cautious assumption, given the different possible
pathways that persistence and recovery may take in
older and younger children, is that the factors that put a
child at risk for persistent stuttering apply at all ages.
It is also worth considering how both age and developmental changes across the children in both studies,
along with the risk factors for persistence and recovery,
may have influenced the outcome of the treatment received. One possibility assumes that divergence between
recovered and persistent children occurs at older ages
(i.e., the present sample) but does not differ in form from
that reported by Yairi and Ambrose (2005) for younger
children. In the present study, children who recovered
across the range of ages exhibited similar proportions of
stalling and part-word dysfluency types. In this sense,
they did not change their pattern of stuttering. Conversely, children who persisted changed their patterns of
stuttering over time, as did the younger children in Yairi
and Ambrose's study.
The observation that changes in stuttering type and
proportion over time characterize persistence may suggest that protracted and perhaps habituated production
of stuttering leads to adaptations in the CNS and that
such adaptations reduce the chance of recovery, either
naturally or as the result of therapy (e.g., Howell et al.,
2000). Such adaptations may arise from the cerebellum,
which has traditionally been linked to sensory-motor
integration (Stein & Glickstein, 1992). Adaptations in
other areas of the brain, such as the arcuate fasciculus
(Watkins, Smith, Davis, & Howell, 2007), might also potentially be involved. It may be the case that adaptive
modifications in CNS functioning occurring up to and
beyond age 12 yield more intransigent stuttering behavior that requires different treatments from those
that are effective for younger ages. Reports in the clinical
literature suggest that this is the case.
A second possibility is that a positive family history
of persistent stuttering is associated with a genetic predisposition for no, or limited, response to treatment.

Presently, this speculation is in need of empirical support. It is possible that children in families with a history
of persistence may exhibit temperament, speech, and
CNS behaviors and adaptations that interact through
family history and that therapy specifically designed for
such intransigent forms is required.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant 072639 from the
Wellcome Trust, awarded to the first author.

References
Ambrose, N. G., Cox, N. J., & Yairi, E. (1997). The genetic
basis of persistence and recovery in stuttering. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 567-580.
Ambrose, N. G., & Yairi, E. (1999). Normative disfluency
data for early childhood stuttering. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 895-909.
Ambrose, N. G., Yairi, E., & Cox, N. (1993). Genetic aspects
of early childhood stuttering. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 36, 701-706.
Anderson, J. D., Pellowski, M. W., Conture, E. G., & Kelly,
E. M. (2003). Temperamental characteristics of young
children who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 46, 1221-1223.
Andrews, G., Craig, A., Feyer, A-M., Hoddinott, S., Howie, P.,
& Neilson, M. (1983). Stuttering: A review of research
findings and theories circa 1982. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders, 48, 226-246.
Andrews, G., & Harris, M. (1964). The syndrome of stuttering. [Clinics in Developmental Medicine, No. 17]. London:
Heinemann.
Andrews, G., Morris-Yates, A., Howie, P., & Martin, N.
(1991). Genetic factors in stuttering confirmed. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 48, 1034-1035.
Arnold, H. S., Conture, E. G., & Ohde, R. N. (2005). Phonological neighborhood density in the picture naming of
young children who stutter: A preliminary study. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 30, 125-148.
Boberg, E., & Kully, D. (1994). Long-term results of stuttering treatment program. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 37, 1050-1059.
Cherry, C., & Sayers, B. (1956). Experiments upon the total
inhibition of stammering by external control and some
clinical results. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 1,
233-246.
Conture, E. G. (1990). Stuttering (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Davis, S., Shisca, D., & Howell, P. (2007). Anxiety in speakers who persist and recover from stuttering. Journal of
Communication Disorders, 40, 398-417.
Dewar, A., Dewar, A. W., Austin, W. T. S., & Brash, H. M.
(1979). The long-term use of an automatically triggered
auditory feedback masking device in the treatment of
stammering. British Journal of Disorders of Communication, 14, 219-229.

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

685

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Dow, R. S., & Moruzzi, G. (1958). The physiology and pathology of the cerebellum. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
Dworzynski, K., Remington, A., Rijksdijk, F., Howell, P.,
& Plomin, R. (2007). Genetic and environmental etiology
in cases of recovered and persistent stuttering in an unselected longitudinal sample of young twins. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 169-178.
Embrechts, M., Ebben, H., Franke, P., & van de Poel, C.
(2000). Temperament: A comparison between children who
stutter and children who do not stutter. In H.-G. Bosshardt,
J. S. Yaruss, & H. F. M. Peters ( Eds.), Fluency disorders:
Theory, research, treatment, and self-help. Proceedings of
the Third World Congress on Fluency Disorders in Nyborg,
Denmark ( pp. 557-562). Nijmegen, the Netherlands:
Nijmegen University Press.
Fawcett, A. J., Nicolson, R. I., & Dean, P. (1996). Impaired
performance of children with dyslexia on a range of cerebellar tasks. Annals of Dyslexia, 46, 259-283.
Felsenfeld, S., Kirk, K. M., Zhu, G., Statham, D. J., Neale,
M. C., & Martin, N. G. (2000). A study of the genetic and
environmental etiology of stuttering in a selected twin
sample. Behavior Genetics, 30, 359-366.
Finn, P. (1998). Recovery without treatment: A review of
conceptual and methodological considerations across disciplines. In A. K. Cordes & R. J. Ingham ( Eds.), Treatment efficacy for stuttering: A search for empirical bases
( pp. 3-25). San Diego, CA: Singular.
Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring nominal scale agreement
among many raters. Psychological Bulletin, 76, 378-382.
Fritzell, B. (1976). The prognosis of stuttering in schoolchildren: A 10-year longitudinal study. In Proceedings of
the XVI Congress of the International Society of Logopedics
and Phoniatrics ( pp. 186-187). Basel, Switzerland:
Karger.
Hegvik, R. L., McDevitt, S. C., & Carey, W. B. (1995). The
Carey Temperament Scales. Scottsdale, AZ: BehavioralDevelopmental Initiatives.
Hill, P. R., Hogben, J. H., & Bishop, D. M. V. (2005).
Auditory frequency discrimination ability in children with
specific language impairment: A longitudinal study. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48, 1136-1146.
Howell, P. (2002). The EXPLAN theory of fluency control
applied to the treatment of stuttering by altered feedback
and operant procedures. In E. Fava ( Ed.), Pathology and
therapy of speech disorders ( pp. 95-118). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Howell, P. (2004). Assessment of some contemporary theories
of stuttering that apply to spontaneous speech. Contemporary Issues in Communicative Sciences and Disorders, 39,
122-139.
Howell, P. (2007). Signs of developmental stuttering up to
age eight and at 12 plus. Clinical Psychology Review, 27,
287-306.
Howell, P., Davis, S., Patel, H., Cuniffe, P., DowningWilson, D., Au-Yeung, J., & Williams, R. (2004). Fluency
development and temperament in fluent children and
children who stutter. In A. Packman, A. Meltzer, & H. F. M.
Peters ( Eds.), Theory, research, and therapy in fluency disorders ( pp. 250-256). Nijmegen, the Netherlands: Nijmegen
University Press.

686

Howell, P., Davis, S., & Williams, S. M. (2006). Auditory
abilities of teenage speakers who persisted, or recovered,
from stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31,
257-270.
Howell, P., El-Yaniv, N., & Powell, D. J. (1987). Factors
affecting fluency in stutterers when speaking under altered
auditory feedback. In H. Peters & W. Hulstijn ( Eds.), Speech
motor dynamics in stuttering ( pp. 361-369). New York:
Springer.
Howell, P., & Huckvale, M. (2004). Facilities to assist people
to research into stammered speech. Stammering Research,
1, 130-242.
Howell, P., Rosen, S., Hannigan, G., & Rustin, L. (2000).
Auditory backward-masking performance by children who
stutter and its relation to dysfluency rate. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 90, 355-363.
Howell, P., & Williams, S. (2004). Development of auditory
sensitivity in children who stutter and fluent children. Ear
and Hearing, 25, 1-10.
Janssen, P., Kloth, S., Kraaimaat, F., & Brutten, G. (1996).
Genetic factors in stuttering: A replication of Ambrose, Yairi,
and Cox's (1993) study with adult probands. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 21, 105-108.
Johnson, W., & Associates. (1959). The onset of stuttering.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Kidd, K., Kidd, J., & Records, M. (1978). The possible causes
of the sex ratio in stuttering and its implications. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 3, 13-23.
Kleinow, J., & Smith, A. (2000). Influence of length and
syntactic complexity on the speech motor stability of the
fluent speech of adults who stutter. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 548-559.
Levine, S. Z., Petrides, K. V., Davis, S., Jackson, C., &
Howell, P. (2005). The use of structural equation modeling
in stuttering research: Concepts and directions. Stammering Research, 1, 344-363.
Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
49, 467-477.
Mannson, H. (2000). Childhood stuttering: Incidence and
development. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 25, 47-57.
McDevitt, S. C., & Carey, W. B. (1978). The measurement
of temperament in 3-7 year old children. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 19,
245-253.
Ooki, S. (2005). Genetic and environmental influences on
stuttering and tics in Japanese twin children. Twin
Research, 8, 69-75.
Ramus, F., Pidgeon, E., & Frith, U. (2003). The relationship
between motor control and phonology in dyslexic children.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 712-722.
Riley, G. D. (1994). Stuttering Severity Instrument for Children and Adults (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Rommel, D., Hage, A., Kalehne, P., & Johannsen, H.
(2000). Developmental, maintenance, and recovery of childhood stuttering: Prospective longitudinal data 3 years after
first contact. In K. Baker & L. Rustin ( Eds.), Proceedings
of the Fifth Oxford Disfluency Conference ( pp. 68-182).
Windsor, Berkshire, England: Chappell Gardner.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 669-687 * June 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Ryan, B. (1974). Programmed stuttering therapy for children
and adults. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Ryan, B. (2001). A longitudinal study of articulation, language,
rate, and fluency of 22 preschool children who stutter.
Journal of Fluency Disorders, 26, 107-127.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering. I: Persistence and recovery rates. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1097-1112.
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (2005). Early childhood stuttering.
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Smith, A., & Kleinow, J. (2000). Kinematic correlates of
speaking rate changes in stuttering and normally fluent
adults. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
43, 521-526.

Yairi, E., Ambrose, N. G., Paden, E. P., & Throneburg,
R. N. (1996). Predictive factors of persistence and recovery:
Pathways of childhood stuttering. Journal of Communication Disorders, 29, 51-77.

Stein, J. F., & Glickstein, M. (1992). Role of the cerebellum
in visual guidance of movement. Physiological Reviews, 72,
972-1017.

Yairi, E., Watkins, R., Ambrose, N., & Paden, E. (2001).
What is stuttering? Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 44, 585-592.

Trouton, A., Spinath, F. M., & Plomin, R. (2002). Twins
Early Development Study ( TEDS): A multivariate, longitudinal genetic investigation of language, cognition, and
behavior problems in childhood. Twin Research, 5, 444-448.

Received June 6, 2006

Watkins, K., Smith, S., Davis, S., & Howell, P. (2007).
Structural and functional abnormalities of the motor system
in developmental stuttering. Brain, 131, 50-59.
Wingate, M. E. (2001). SLD is not stuttering. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 381-383.

Revision received November 1, 2006
Accepted September 17, 2007
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/048)
Contact author: Peter Howell, Department of Psychology,
University College London, Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, England. E-mail: p.howell@ucl.ac.uk

World Health Organization. (1992). International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision ( ICD-10). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wright, B. A., Lombardino, L. J., King, W. M., Puranik,
C. S., Leonard, C. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1997, May 8).
Deficits in auditory-temporal and spectral resolution in
language-impaired children. Nature, 387, 176-178.

Howell et al.: Late childhood stuttering

687

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

