Language-Specific Effects of Task
Demands on the Manifestation
of Specific Language Impairment:
A Comparison of English and Icelandic
Elin Thordardottir
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, and
ReykjavikurAkademian, Reykjavik, Iceland

Purpose: Previous research has indicated that the manifestation of specific language
impairment (SLI) varies according to factors such as language, age, and task. This
study examined the effect of task demands on language production in children with SLI
cross-linguistically.
Method: Icelandic- and English-speaking school-age children with SLI and normal
language (NL) peers (n = 42) were administered measures of verbal working memory.
Spontaneous language samples were collected in contexts that vary in task demands:
conversation, narration, and expository discourse. The effect of the context-related
task demands on the accuracy of grammatical inflections was examined.
Results: Children with SLI in both language groups scored significantly lower than
their NL peers in verbal working memory. Nonword repetition scores correlated with
morphological accuracy. In both languages, mean length of utterance (MLU) varied
systematically across sampling contexts. Context exerted a significant effect on the
accuracy of grammatical inflection in English only. Error rates were higher overall in
English than in Icelandic, but whether the difference was significant depended on the
sampling context. Errors in Icelandic involved verb and noun phrase inflection to a
similar extent.
Conclusions: The production of grammatical morphology appears to be more taxing
for children with SLI who speak English than for those who speak Icelandic. Thus,
whereas children with SLI in both language groups evidence deficits in language
processing, cross-linguistic differences are seen in which linguistic structures are
vulnerable when processing load is increased. Future research should carefully
consider the effect of context on children's language performance.
KEY WORDS: specific language impairment, cross-cultural issues, Icelandic

S

pecific language impairment (SLI) is diagnosed in children who
present with a significant language deficit in the absence of other
clinically identifiable cognitive, perceptual, or neurological deficits
(cf. Leonard, 1998). As a condition presumed to affect language selectively,
SLI is seen as providing a unique opportunity to examine the boundaries
of the linguistic system. However, as research findings accumulate, it
proves increasingly difficult to provide a consistent description of the
characteristics of SLI. Important differences in the typical manifestation
of SLI have been documented across languages as well as across age
groups of children speaking the same language. In addition, the performance of children with SLI has been observed to vary across tasks. Thus,
it emerges that one of the characteristics of SLI appears to be its changing

922

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1092-4388/08/5104-0922

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

manifestation as a function of factors such as language,
age, and task. Another major issue that has arisen concerns how selective the impairment really is, as cognitive deficits are uncovered in children with SLI that are
not detected by a clinical test of nonverbal cognition but
may be sufficiently significant to impact the acquisition
and use of language (e.g., Hoffman & Gillam, 2005;
Johnston & Smith, 1989; Kail, 1994).

(Elin Thordardottir, 2001; Elin Thordardottir & Namazi,
2007; Lindner & Johnston, 1992; Leonard, Sabbadini,
Leonard, & Volterra, 1987; Rom & Leonard, 1990). Additionally, studies of other languages have pointed to problem areas in SLI which are not problematic in English.
For example, Hansson, Nettelbladt, and Leonard (2000)
reported a prominence of word-order errors in children
with SLI who speak Swedish.

As many researchers have pointed out, the diagnostic
criteria for the identification of SLI are largely exclusionary in nature, consisting of ruling out other developmental deficits. Although the principal criterion, that of a
significant language impairment, is certainly inclusionary, this criterion is unspecific in terms of which area or
areas of language must be affected for the diagnosis to be
made. Many authors have noted that the population
fitting the diagnostic criteria of SLI is a heterogeneous
one. Proposals have been made as to potential subgroups
of SLI (e.g., Rapin, Dunn, & Allen, 2003). However, membership in such subgroups has been reported to be unstable over time. In a longitudinal study, Conti-Ramsden
and Botting (1999) used cluster analysis to identify a set
of subgroups among children with SLI. On follow-up testing a year later, the same subgroups emerged, but close to
half of the children now belonged to a different subgroup
than they did at the initial test time. This observation fits
well with clinical observations of changing symptoms of
language impairment over time in individual children,
such that the symptoms of school-age children differ from
those of preschoolers, often rendering the impairment
less visible and leading to the assignment of different
diagnostic labels from ones focusing on language to ones
focusing on school-related difficulty such as reading or
learning disability (Paul, 2001). For English-speaking
children, a prominent deficit in grammatical morphology is a well-documented characteristic of children with
SLI in the preschool period (Leonard, Eyer, Bedore, &
Grela, 1997; Rice, Wexler, & Cleave, 1995). However,
even this well-known hallmark characteristic of SLI has
been shown to change with time. In a longitudinal study,
Rice, Tomblin, Hoffman, Richman, and Marquis (2004)
demonstrated that children with specific and nonspecific
language impairment improved their production of verb
inflection in an elicitation task from kindergarten to 4th
grade, with the oldest children performing close to ceiling levels.

Within a given language, the performance of children with SLI has been shown to be influenced by a number of task-related factors. In several studies, linguistic
complexity and/or sentence length have been manipulated. For example, Grela and Leonard (2000) showed
that the performance of English-speaking children with
SLI in the use of auxiliary verbs was influenced by the
argument structure complexity of the sentences they
were producing. Deevy and Leonard (2004) demonstrated
that the length of wh-questions of comparable syntactic
complexity affected the ability of children with SLI to understand these questions. A similar finding on sentence
comprehension was reported by Montgomery (2000). The
results of these studies were interpreted as suggesting
that the greater difficulty of children with SLI with the
more complex and/or longer materials was related to
their limited processing ability. Discrepant findings on
the performance of children with SLI across studies in
many cases seem to be related at least partly to the particular tasks in which the structures are examined. For
example, whereas studies of SLI in French that use elicitation tasks have reported significant morphological difficulty (e.g., Jakubowicz, Nash, Rigaut, & Gerard, 1998),
Elin Thordardottir and Namazi (2007) found little evidence of such errors in the spontaneous speech of Frenchspeaking preschoolers (however, see Paradis & Crago,
2001). Similarly, a number of studies are available which
have demonstrated that individual children's performance varies significantly across tasks, such as spontaneous language versus imitation or elicitation (Masterson,
1997; Masterson & Kamhi, 1992), as well as across different sampling contexts of spontaneous language (Hadley,
1998; Leadholm & Miller, 1992; MacLachlan & Chapman,
1988; Marinellie, 2004; Masterson & Kamhi, 1991;
Nippold, Hesketh, Duthie, & Mansfield, 2005; Scott &
Windsor, 2000).

An increasing number of cross-linguistic studies of
SLI similarly indicate that the manifestation of SLI is
not uniform across languages. Low accuracy rates in the
production of grammatical morphology have been documented repeatedly as a major characteristic of SLI in
English-speaking preschoolers. A number of reports have
indicated a tendency for grammatical morphology to be
less severely affected in highly inflected languages, including German, Italian, Hebrew, French, and Icelandic

Task-related effects are often not considered extensively in the interpretation of research findings on normal and disordered language. However, it is clear that
communicative contexts can differ sharply. It has been
proposed that contextual variation should be included
routinely in the clinical evaluation of children to obtain a
fuller and more representative picture of the children's
language production abilities than can be obtained from
observation in a single context. Hadley (1998) suggested
that language assessment include the use of short samples collected in conversation, narration, and expository

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

923

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

discourse and demonstrated that these contexts provide
complementary information on the children's language
production abilities. These three sampling contexts differ in several aspects of complexity, including the dimensions of amount of planning at the utterance and text
level, the level of decontextualization resulting in differences in the nature of the information conveyed, the
level and kind of detail included, and the typical length
and complexity of utterances and speaking turns (see
review in Hadley). Conversation is typically relatively
unstructured and unplanned beyond single utterances,
whereas narrative and expository contexts require larger
planning units, including both longer and more complex
utterances and multiple utterances per speaking turn,
use of cohesive ties, distinction between central and peripheral objects and events, provision of background information, and proper temporal or causal relationships.
Leadholm and Miller (1992) point out that conversation
appears first in development, with narratives developing considerably later. They rank conversation as the
least demanding discourse context and expository discourse as among the most complex discourse types required of children, with narratives in between. In the
Leadholm and Miller normative database spanning ages
3-13 years, narratives (which are elicited in a similar
manner as in this study) consistently produced significantly longer mean lengths of utterance (MLUs) than
conversation. Both narratives and expository discourse
typically elicit more complex syntax than conversation
and are thus considered the method of choice over conversation when the goal is to examine the limits of children's
syntactic abilities (e.g., Elin Thordardottir, Chapman, &
Wagner, 2002). However, it is less clear how these two
contexts compare in length and complexity of utterances.
Studies focusing on expository discourse have employed
T-units rather than MLU (Nippold et al., 2005; Scott &
Windsor, 2000); thus, direct comparisons of MLU levels
are not readily available. In spite of the wide use clinically
and in research of these various language-sampling contexts, individual studies most often use samples from a
single context, and little attention has been paid to whether
variations across contexts are similar in groups of children with NL and children with SLI. The use of more
than one context provides a way to examine children's
performance under conditions of different task demands.
In sum, the available research on SLI shows variations in its manifestation across age groups, tasks, and
languages. Cross-linguistic studies have tended to focus
on a search for cross-linguistic similarities in areas of
difficulty presumed to reflect breakdown in linguistic
rules common to the languages being studied. However,
systematic study of cross-linguistic differences as well as
task-dependent variability may be equally informative,
revealing ways in which a common factor can underlie
different manifestations of the disorder known as SLI.

924

Notably, if it is observed that children's ability to produce
particular forms breaks down only or more noticeably
under certain task-related conditions, then this suggests
that the source of the difficulty is not adequately explained as incorrect representation of a linguistic rule
but, rather, that additional factors must contribute to
the resulting language behavior.
A considerable body of research has indicated that
processing limitations are a contributing factor in SLI.
Children with SLI have been shown to evidence significantly poor performance on a number of processingdependent measures, including nonword repetition as
well as other tasks involving the processing and/or storage and manipulation of verbal information (Dollaghan
& Campbell, 1998; Ellis Weismer et al., 2000; Ellis
Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999). Nonword repetition
has been proposed as a phenotypic marker of inherited
language impairment (Bishop et al., 1999) and has been
shown to have high performance characteristics as a diagnostic test of SLI, with a higher rate of correct identification than standardized tests of language knowledge
(Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998; Ellis Weismer et al.,
2000). In language production, it has been argued that
trade-off effects between language domains observed in
children with SLI--where increased complexity in one
domain results in decreased performance in another
area of language--reflect the effect of a limited processing capacity on language formulation and production (Elin Thordardottir & Ellis Weismer, 2002; Grela,
2003; Namazi & Johnston, 1996). If processing limitations are a factor, then variability in the manifestation
of SLI is not surprising but, rather, expected. Indeed,
given the differences between languages in their structure and patterns of use, it is reasonable to expect languages to vary in terms of which structures are most
difficult at particular points in development and thus
most vulnerable to breakdown in the face of insufficient
resources.
The goal of the present study was to examine the
effect of varying task demands on the manifestation of
SLI in children speaking Icelandic and English, respectively, two languages that are related but that differ
markedly in the extent to which they are inflected. The
study focuses on school-age children, a relatively understudied age range, examining the children's verbal working memory abilities as well as their language production
in spontaneous contexts that vary in task demands.
Given the prominent focus on grammatical morphology
in the study of SLI and the fact that the languages differ
importantly in this respect--with Icelandic possessing a
far more complex system of both verb- and noun-phrase
morphology--analyses of spontaneous language focused
on the accuracy rate of production of inflectional morphology across elicitation contexts. It was anticipated
that the increased processing load of the more demanding

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

contexts would lead to trade-off effects involving breakdown in the accuracy of inflectional morphology, with the
extent of the trade-offs observed reflecting the degree to
which this aspect of language is vulnerable to task demand effects in each language.

Method
Participants
Participants included 42 school-age children: 20
English-speaking children (M = 9;9 [years;months])
and 22 speakers of Icelandic (M = 9;2). The Englishspeaking children included 9 children with specific language impairment (E-SLI) and 11 children with normal
language development (E-NL). The Icelandic-speaking
children included 13 children with specific language impairment (I-SLI) and 9 with normal language development (I-NL). English-speaking children were recruited
and tested in Quebec and Ontario, Canada; Icelandicspeaking children were recruited and tested in Reykjavik,
Iceland. Testing was conducted by trained research assistants who were native speakers of English and Icelandic,
respectively. The diagnostic status of the children was verified as part of this study by certified speech-language
pathologists. Background characteristics of the children
are reported in Table 1, including age, scores on tests of
language and nonverbal cognition, and maternal education. The same diagnostic criteria were used for both
language groups: Diagnosis of SLI required a positive
history of serious concerns related to language development and a score of -1 SD or lower on the Test of
Language Development-Intermediate (TOLD-I), a test
available with norms for both of the languages of the study
(Hamill & Newcomer, 1997, Ingibjorg Simonardottir
& Einar Gumundsson, 1996). In addition, children with
SLI were required to obtain a standard score of 70 or
above on a test of nonverbal cognition, the Leiter International Performance Scale-Revised (Leiter-R; Roid &

Miller, 1997), and to pass a hearing screening at 10 dB HL
at octave frequencies from 500 to 4000 Hz. Administration of the Leiter-R, including test items and instructions given to the child, is entirely nonverbal. Although a
nonverbal IQ criterion of a standard score of 85 is used
widely in research on SLI, several researchers have discussed the arbitrary nature of this criterion, noting that
the purpose of the nonverbal IQ criterion in the identification of SLI is to exclude children with mental retardation. A criterion of 85 is unnecessarily restrictive for
that purpose, resulting in a focus on a subsample of the
population of children with primary language impairment and limiting the generalizability of the findings
(Bishop, 2004; Plante, 1998; Tager-Flusberg & Cooper,
1999). Support for the use of a lower IQ score comes, for
example, from studies of the heritability of language impairment and IQ (Bishop, 2004; Bishop et al., 1999) as
well as evidence that the phenotype of language impairment is similar in children with IQs above and below 85
(Tomblin & Zhang, 1999). The criterion of a standard
score of 70 ensures that no children are included who
have mental retardation. Among the children in this study,
the nonverbal IQ of children with SLI ranged from 71 to
115 for English-speaking children and from 74 to 121 for
Icelandic-speaking children. One of the English-speaking
children and 2 of the Icelandic-speaking children with
SLI had IQ scores below 79. Nonverbal IQ scores of the
English-speaking NL children ranged from 82 to 133, and
those of the Icelandic-speaking children ranged from 71
to 139. Hearing screening was conducted using portable
audiometers in a quiet but not soundproof room. As a result of ambient noise, a threshold of 10 dB HL could not
be verified in all cases at 500 Hz. The Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1997), a test of
comprehension of vocabulary, was administered as well.
This test is available in an Icelandic adaptation that has
not been validated or normed but has been used extensively by clinicians in Iceland. Scores on the PPVT are
reported for both language groups. For the Icelandic

Table 1. Participant characteristics.
Group

I-SLI

I-NL

E-SLI

E-NL

Age (months)*
TOLD-I Standard score
PPVT Standard score
PPVT Raw score
Leiter-R Brief IQ
Maternal educ. (years)

111.2 (8.9)
68.1 (10.2)
--
83.2 (25)
91.9 (16.1)
13.6 (4.3)

108.7 (5.9)
106.8 (12.8)
--
116.9 (20.8)
109.1 (21.8)
16.1 (3.8)

117.0 (16.5)
70.1 (8.1)
86.7 (14.0)
--
89.3 (14.9)
13.0 (2.5)

118.0 (11.9)
99.9 (11.1)
108.4 (6.9)
--
99.1 (15.0)
15.2 (3.2)

Note. For each language group, the SLI and NL groups did not differ from each other in age, nonverbal
cognition (Leiter International Performance Scale-Revised [Leiter-R]), or maternal education, but they differed
significantly on the Test of Language Development-Intermediate [TOLD-I]) and Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (PPVT).
*The age difference between English-speaking and Icelandic-speaking children is statistically significant.

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

925

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

children, as no applicable norms are available, raw scores
are reported. These are offered for information purposes
with the previously mentioned caveat that this test has
not been validated for Icelandic. Given that children with
SLI have been reported to vary in their performance in
language comprehension, PPVT scores below the normal
range were not required for inclusion in the study.
The Icelandic children with SLI were recruited
through clinical settings and through speech-language
pathologists in schools. English-speaking children with
SLI were recruited through speech-language pathologists
in schools. Children with NL were required to have no
previous history of language impairment and to score
within normal limits (above -1 SD) on the TOLD-I and
the PPVT. Children with an ambiguous profile, involving
a mismatch between current scores and history information, were not included in the study in either SLI or NL
groups. Although this study did not aim to investigate bilingualism, it did include children who possess some level
of bilingual proficiency, and in this sense, these children
represent the norm in their respective populations. In
Canada, it is commonplace for children from Englishspeaking homes to attend French-immersion programs in
school. Therefore, it is unrealistic to recruit school-age
children who have had no significant exposure to a second
language. For inclusion in this study, it was required that
children be from homes where both parents spoke English and English was identified as the child's first and
preferred language. Similarly, for the Icelandic children,
foreign-language instruction in the schools starts early,
with English being the first foreign language to be introduced, followed by Danish. In addition to this school exposure, the prevalence of English in popular culture is
sufficient that even fairly young school-age children may
develop some proficiency in spoken English. Icelandicspeaking children were, however, not included if they had
had regular exposure to a language other than Icelandic
in their homes or if they had lived in other countries.

Procedures
Children were tested individually in two sessions
during which the diagnostic tests detailed previously as
well as measures of verbal working memory were administered and spontaneous language samples were collected,
in addition to other measures administered as part of
a larger study. The measures of working memory included tests of nonword repetition and listening span.
Language samples were collected in three different contexts: conversation, narration, and expository discourse,
as is described in subsequent paragraphs.

Nonword Repetition
For the English-speaking children, the nonword repetition test used was that constructed by Dollaghan and

926

Campbell (1998), which includes 16 words ranging in
length from 1 to 4 syllables. The constituting syllables of
the nonwords do not correspond to real English words,
and no unstressed syllables are included, resulting in
the multisyllabic words lacking familiar English stress
patterns. This pattern contributes to low predictability
and lack of resemblance to English words. The test was
administered from a recording obtained from the test's
authors and was scored as directed. The Icelandic nonword repetition test was constructed for this study following Gathercole, Willis, Baddeley, and Emslie (1994)
and Gathercole (1995), including a list of word-like
items, and a list of nonword-like items. Each list consisted of 25 words with 5 at each length from 1 to
5 syllables. The word-like nonwords had familiar Icelandic
word endings and stress patterns such that they could
easily be assimilated into the Icelandic inflectional system, and multisyllabic words were constructed such that
they resembled Icelandic compound words, with nonsense syllables joined together with appropriate inflectional endings (genitive ending on the first word and
nominative ending on the second), resulting in a characteristically Icelandic word structure and stress pattern.
Nonword-like words were constructed by stringing together syllables without Icelandic inflectional endings.
In addition, many of the nonwords had uncharacteristic
stress patterns with a string of equally stressed syllables
or a rising intonation rather than the characteristic pattern of alternating stressed and unstressed syllables.
Initially, a total of 136 words were constructed and their
degree of word-likeness was judged on a 6-point scale by
10 adult native speakers of Icelandic, with 6 denoting
the highest degree of word-likeness. Words selected for
the nonword-like list obtained an average score of 1.5 or
lower, and words selected as word-like received average
scores of 4 or higher. In each case, all words selected for
the final list had a high degree of agreement among
raters. The resulting word lists are displayed in the
Appendix. The Icelandic nonword lists were administered from a tape recording on which they were spoken by
a female speaker who had previously practiced speaking
the words at an even rate and intonation pattern. The
words were scored according to the same rules as the
English nonwords (Dollaghan & Campbell, 1998).

Competing Language Processing Task
The competing language processing task (CLPT),
developed by Gaulin and Campbell (1994), is an adaptation for children of the listening-span task constructed
by Daneman and Carpenter (1980). This test involves a
dual task in which children give "yes" or "no" responses
to simple questions while at the same time being required to memorize the last word of each question. A total of 42 questions are presented in increasingly long
sets, ranging in length from 1 to 6 questions/words to be

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

recalled. The test is scored in two ways: as the number of
questions answered correctly and as the percentage of
words correctly recalled. Gaulin and Campbell documented
developmental increases in performance on word recall
from age 6 to 10 among children with normal language
development. At the same time, response accuracy on the
yes/no questions remained stable at high levels in all age
groups. The main purpose of the yes/no questions is to
ensure that children are processing the questions rather
than focusing solely on memorizing the last word. Ellis
Weismer and Elin Thordardottir (1998) and Ellis Weismer
et al. (1999) showed that school-age children with SLI performed significantly more poorly than NL peers on the
word-recall aspect of this test. The Icelandic version of
this test was constructed as part of this study initially as
essentially a translation of the English test, using simple
vocabulary familiar to children and sentences involving
the same construction as those used in the English test
(subject-verb-object, subject-verb-modifier, subject-
auxiliary-verb). Although this resulted in three-word
questions in most cases, as in the English version, 8 of the
42 questions have an additional fourth word, such as the
infinitive particle a or a preposition, to comply with typical wording in Icelandic. In addition, Icelandic does not
allow the use of monosyllabic words to the extent that
English does, partly because of the requirement for inflectional endings. Thus, the Icelandic questions are overall
longer in terms of number of syllables than the English
models. Therefore, the Icelandic adaptation of the CLPT is
not viewed as a direct equivalent of the English test. Similar issues were encountered in the adaptation of this test
to Spanish (Gutierrez-Clellen, Calderon, & Ellis Weismer,
2004). The test was piloted on 2 children and 2 adults
to verify the appropriateness of the wording of the
questions--that is, that they constitute simple questions
that are answered correctly without hesitation or ambiguity of interpretation with subsequent minor modifications.

Spontaneous Language Samples
In order to sample language production under conditions of varying task demands, spontaneous language
samples were collected in three different contexts, following the procedure proposed by Hadley (1998), with
minor modifications. A language sample of a total length
of 15 min was divided into three parts with 5 min each of
conversation, narration, and expository discourse (samples of longer duration were conducted with children who
were reluctant to talk and were perceived by the examiner to produce little talk-per-unit time relative to other
participants in the study). Hadley, using 4 min per context, reported sample lengths of some 30 utterances per
context and recommended the use of samples of this
length in different contexts over a 100-utterance sample
in a single context. A recent study by Miller et al. (2006) indicates that samples of an average length of 40 utterances

are reliable and a useful source of information when collected under consistent conditions. The average length of
samples obtained in this study was, for SLI and NL groups,
respectively: for Icelandic, 61 and 60 utterances for conversation, 55 and 43 for narration, and 57 and 48 for expository discourse; for English-speaking children, 73 and 112
utterances for conversation, 95 and 68 for narration, and
60 and 59 for expository discourse. Analysis in this study
was based on entire samples to maximize use of the available data.
In the conversational sample, the interchange generally focused on the child's family, summer vacations,
friends, and so forth. In the narrative segment, children
were asked to retell the plot of a book (or books) that they
had recently read or a movie or television program they
had recently watched. In the expository discourse segment, children were asked to explain the rules of a game
they play (e.g., the rules of soccer or hockey, the rules of a
favorite computer game, the rules in effect at school) or
explain in detail the procedure of how a particular task is
done (e.g., opening and playing a favorite computer game).
In order to elicit these different kinds of language samples,
the interview procedure proposed by Hadley (1998) was
followed, whereby the examiner models the target behavior by providing short accounts of personal experiences
falling into each of the three categories. Language samples
were transcribed orthographically and coded for correct
and incorrect use of grammatical morphology using the
Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT)
computer program (Miller & Chapman, 1984-2002). SALT
conventions were followed for the segmentation of utterances and coding of mazes in both languages. Coding of
grammatical morphology in each language followed SALT
conventions, using the original English conventions and
their Icelandic adaptation (Elin Thordardottir & Ellis
Weismer, 1998; Elin Thordardottir, 2003). The aim was
to use, in each language, an established coding system
targeting the development and accuracy of grammatical
morphology. SALT coding in English targets Brown's
morphemes (for verbs: contracted copula forms, third
person -s, regular past tense -ed, progressive -ing; for
nouns: plural -s and possessive -s). It should be noted
that following English SALT conventions, the irregular
forms (irregular past tense, irregular plural) were not
coded as grammatical morphemes but as different words.
Accordingly, errors involving irregular forms, notably the
irregular past tense, were not included in the error count
in English. This is consistent with the coding used in a
large number of studies of SLI in English. Verb errors in
both languages do include instances of omission of the
contracted and the freestanding copula.
The Icelandic adaptation of SALT conventions was
designed to use similar principles as English SALT coding while at the same time capturing the complexity of
the Icelandic inflectional system. Verbs are coded for

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

927

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

person, tense (if other than the present), and mood (if
other than the indicative). Noun-phrase coding targets
nouns, which can be marked for number (plural only)
and case (if other than the nominative), and adjectives
and pronouns, which can be marked for gender, number
(plural only), and case (if other than the nominative; see
further details in Elin Thordardottir & Ellis Weismer,
1998). Given that noun-phrase morphology is far more
complex in Icelandic than in English, with nouns, pronouns, and adjectives being marked for case, and pronouns and adjectives being marked for gender as well,
the accuracy of verb- and noun-phrase morphology was
tallied separately. Beyond this, analysis of error types
was beyond the scope of this study.
Reliability. Reliability procedures for the English samples followed the procedure recommended by Heilmann,
Miller, Nockerts, and Andriacchi (2004), involving a relisten and recheck of the entire set of samples rather than
a recoding from scratch of a subset of samples. One sample
from each child was relistened to by a second independent
scorer who verified both the transcription and the coding,
making changes as needed and with disagreements settled
by consensus by the recoder and original coder. This resulted in an interrater agreement of 98.5% for transcription and 94% for coding. Given the near-perfect agreement
for transcription, further reliability checks focused on coding only. An independent scorer reread all remaining
samples and verified coding. Again, disagreements were
reviewed by the original coder and settled by consensus.
The interrater agreement for this procedure was 95%.
Reliability of coding the Icelandic samples was verified by the traditional method, whereby a subset of the
samples was scored independently by a second scorer
trained in the procedure. Reliability of transcription was
verified periodically during the transcription process with
interrater agreement exceeding 95%. To verify the reliability of coding, 10% of the total samples were selected randomly for rescoring with the restriction that they represent
children from both groups. This procedure resulted in interrater agreement of 89.6%. The majority of disagreements did not involve morphemes coded as incorrect but
rather involved oversights in the coding of the correct use
of grammatical morphemes where one of the coders missed
the presence of morphemes--for example, coding the case
marking on a pronoun but failing to also code the gender
marking. Given the sheer volume of grammatical morphemes in Icelandic, the coding task does require a high
level of sustained attention on the part of the coder.

(4.3) for the I-SLI group and 97.8% (2.9) for the I-NL
group. Word recall scores were 40.8% (SD = 14.5) for the
I-SLI group and 57.4% (SD = 6.1) for the I-NL group. The
groups differed significantly on both measures: yes/no,
t(20) = -2.753, p = .012; word recall, t(20) = -3.217, p =
.004. For the English-speaking children, accuracy of CLPT
yes/no responses was 93.9% (8.2) for the E-SLI group and
99.1% (1.7) for the E-NL group, a nonsignificant difference
( p = .095). Word recall scores for the English-speaking children were 57.4% (SD = 8.9) for the E-SLI group and 74.0%
(SD = 8.5) for the E-NL group. This difference was statistically significant, t(18) = 4.241, p = .000.
As for nonword repetition, group means on the Icelandic word-like lists were 91.4% (7.5) for the I-SLI group
and 97% (2.9) for the I-NL group. Group means on the
nonword-like lists were 85.4% (SD = 9.5) for the I-SLI
group and 95.1% (SD = 2.7) for the I-NL group. The group
difference is larger on the nonword-like list. However, a
significant group difference was found for both lists: wordlike, t(18) = -2.248, p = .042; nonword-like, t(17) = -3.09,
p = .011. The nonword repetition scores for the Englishspeaking children were 85.2% (SD = 11.4) for the E-SLI
children and 93.5% (SD = 3.3) for the E-NL children, a
difference that failed to reach statistical significance
( p = .064). Contributing to this nonsignificance is the
large standard deviation in the E-SLI group.

Language Sample Analysis
The main interest of the language sample analysis
was in the effect of context on the overall accuracy rate
of grammatical morphology within each of the two languages. Results were analyzed separately for English and
Icelandic, examining the effect of context and group by
means of mixed-model analyses of variance (ANOVAs),
with group SLI-NL as the between-subjects factor and
context (conversation-expository-narration) as the withinsubjects factor, treated as repeated measures. Post hoc
comparisons used Fisher's least significant difference
(LSD) procedure. It was also of interest to compare the
accuracy rates across contexts cross-linguistically for children with SLI. In the cross-linguistic comparisons, age
was entered as a covariate, in light of the fact that the
English-speaking children were some 6 months older
than the Icelandic-speaking children. The dependent
variables tested were MLU in morphemes and words,
percent correct accuracy of verb morphology, and percent correct accuracy of noun-phrase morphology.

MLU

Results
Processing Measures
The CLPT scores of the Icelandic-speaking children
were as follows: accuracy of yes/no responses was 93.3 %

928

MLU results are shown in Table 2. As expected, the
different contexts used produced systematic differences
in MLU in both SLI and NL groups and in both languages, such that the conversational MLU was lowest
and narrative MLU the highest. For English-speaking

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2. Mean length of utterance in morphemes (MLU) and
in words (MLUw) across contexts.
English
SLI

Table 3. Accuracy of production of noun phrase and verb
morphology across contexts for English- and Icelandic-speaking
children, showing group means.

Icelandic
NL

SLI

English

NL

CONV
MLU
MLUw

5.34 (1.6)
4.83 (1.5)

6.67 (1.5)
5.34 (1.6)

6.31 (1.7)
4.48 (1.1)

7.96 (2.0)
5.34 (1.3)

EXPO
MLU
MLUw

6.67 (2.4)
6.09 (2.1)

9.11 (1.3)
8.22 (1.18)

8.85 (2.8)
6.27 (1.9)

10.12 (4.7)
7.01 (3.0)

NARR
MLU
MLUw

6.69 (2.1)
6.01 (1.9)

9.35 (1.3)
8.40 (1.7)

9.19 (3.1)
6.23 (1.9)

11.66 (4.24)
7.85 (2.8)

Note. CONV = conversation; EXPO = expository discourse; NARR =
narration. Values in parentheses represent standard deviations.

Noun inflection

Verb inflection

% Correct

% Correct

CONV
E-SLI
E-NL

97.7 (.04)
98.4 (.03)

91.2 (.15)
97.3 (.04)

EXPO
E-SLI
E-NL

94.0 (.10)
98.3 (.03)

84.0 (.16)
94.0 (.04)

NARR
E-SLI
E-NL

90.7 (.14)
97.5 (.03)

84.3 (.16)
95.2 (.03)
Icelandic

children, MLU in morphemes produced a significant
main effect of group, F(1, 18) = 9.78, p = .006, h2 = .54, and
of context, F(2, 36) = 27.42, p = .000, h2 = .56. The interaction was nonsignificant. The group effect reflects a significantly lower MLU in the SLI group. Post hoc tests
on the context effect revealed that MLU is significantly
lower in conversation than in each of the other contexts.
No significant difference was found in MLU between expository discourse and narration. MLU in words (MLUw)
produced the same pattern of effects: group, F(1, 18) =
9.53, p = .006, h2 = .34, and context, F(2, 36) = 28.18,
p = .000, h2 = .57.
For the Icelandic children, MLU in morphemes
yielded a significant main effect of context only, F(2, 40) =
18.20, p = .000, h2 = .46. Post hoc tests revealed the same
pattern as seen for the English-speaking children, with
conversation producing a lower MLU than each of the
other contexts, which did not differ from each other. Although the SLI group did exhibit a lower mean MLU
than the NL group in each context, the group effect was
not significant ( p = .152). The same pattern was observed for MLUw, with a significant effect of context,
F(2, 40) = 19.16, p = .000, h2 = .47.
Cross-linguistic comparison of the E-SLI and I-SLI
groups revealed a significant effect of group, F(1, 19) = 6.33,
p = .021, h2 = .25, with the I-SLI group consistently producing a higher MLU than the E-SLI group. No other effects
were significant. Cross-linguistic comparison of MLUw
for the children with SLI produced no significant effect.

Accuracy of Verb Morphemes
Table 3 reports the accuracy of production of both
verb morphology and noun phrase morphology. For the
English-speaking children, a significant effect of group

Noun inflection

Verb inflection

% Correct

% Correct

CONV
I-SLI
I-NL

93.1 (.04)
97.7 (.02)

93.0 (.08)
98.4 (.02)

EXPO
I-SLI
I-NL

95.6 (.02)
98.4 (.02)

93.6 (.05)
99.0 (.02)

NARR
I-SLI
I-NL

94.6 (.04)
98.3 (.02)

96.0 (.06)
98.5 (.03)

Note.

Values enclosed in parentheses represent standard deviations.

was found for verb morphology, F(1, 18) = 4.76, p = .043,
h2 = .20, as well as a significant context effect, F(2, 36) =
3.58, p = .038, h2 = .16. The interaction was not significant. The group effect reflects lower accuracy rates
achieved by the children with SLI. Post hoc tests on the
effect of context revealed that the accuracy of verb morphemes was significantly lower in both the expository
and narrative contexts than in conversation. However,
the expository and narrative contexts did not differ in
terms of verb morpheme accuracy. For Icelandic-speaking
children, no significant effect was found. However, the
group effect approached significance ( p = .054).
Comparison of the E-SLI and I-SLI groups on verb
morphemes revealed a significant Context x Language
Group interaction, F(1, 38) = 3.66, p = .035, h2 = .15. Post
hoc tests revealed the source of this interaction to be that
the language groups differed significantly in accuracy of
verb morphemes in the narrative context only. No other
effects were significant.

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

929

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Accuracy of Noun Phrase Morphemes
Noun phrase morpheme accuracy rates are reported
in Table 3. The English-speaking children evidenced no
statistically significant effect. Thus, noun morphology
was not found to be sensitive to group or to context. For
Icelandic-speaking children, in contrast, a significant effect of group emerged, F(1, 20) = 16.54, p = .001, h2 = .15,
revealing that Icelandic-speaking children with SLI were
less accurate in their noun phrase morphology than were
their NL counterparts. No other effect was significant.
Cross-linguistic comparison of noun morpheme accuracy
in the I-SLI and E-SLI groups revealed a significant Context x Language Group interaction, F(2, 38) = 3.42, p =
.043, h2 = .18, with no other effects significant. Post hoc
tests indicated that the interaction stems from a significant difference between the I-SLI and E-SLI groups in
the conversational context only, where the I-SLI group
achieved a lower accuracy rate than the E-SLI group. The
groups did not differ in accuracy in the other contexts.

Correlations Between Processing
Measures and Morphological Accuracy
Correlational analyses were conducted to investigate the association of verbal processing ability and the
use of grammatical morphology. To limit the number of
correlations, this analysis was limited to the accuracy
scores for verb and noun phrase morphology, respectively,
in the narrative samples. Bivariate Pearson correlations for the entire group of Icelandic children (SLI and
NL combined) revealed a significant correlation between
nonword repetition and accuracy of noun phrase morphology (r = .484, p = .036) and accuracy of verb morphology (r = .582, p = .009). The CLPT was more strongly
associated with noun phrase morphology than verb
morphology (r = .302 vs. .039), but neither association
was statistically significant. For English-speaking children as a whole, nonword repetition scores correlated
significantly with accuracy of verb morphology (r = .504,
p = .024) but not with noun phrase morphology (r = .121,
p = .611). The association of the CLPT and morphology was not significant (nouns: r = .304, p = .193; verbs:
r = .293, p = .210). Children with SLI and NL were then
analyzed separately. For Icelandic children with SLI,
the association between the CLPT and morphology was
negligible (r = .099 for verbs; r = .074 for nouns). In contrast, stronger correlations were found for nonword repetition, with a significant correlation for verbs (r = .637,
p = .048) and a nonsignificant finding for nouns (r = .301,
p = .398). For the Icelandic children with NL, the only
significant correlation was a near-perfect association
between the CLPT and verb morphology (r = .905, p =
.001). More modest nonsignificant associations were
found between the CLPT and noun phrase morphology
(r = .317, p = .406) and nonword repetition and verb

930

morphology (r = .480, p = .191). For English-speaking
children with SLI, the strongest association was that
between nonword repetition and verb morphology (r =
.365, p = .335), with all other associations being much
weaker. For English-speaking NL children, the strongest associations were between the CLPT and noun morphology (r = .470, p = .144) and nonword repetition and
verb morphology (r = .512, p = .108).

Discussion
The central question of this study concerned whether
the accuracy of production of grammatical morphology by
children with SLI is affected by the demands of the communicative context and whether a similar effect in this
respect is seen in English and in Icelandic. The study also
examined the children's language processing abilities
and investigated the relationship between scores on the
processing measures and the accuracy of production
of grammatical morphology. The main findings of this
study are summarized as follows: In both language
groups, children with SLI evidenced significantly lower
performance on two measures of verbal working memory than the children with NL. This extends crosslinguistically the finding that children with SLI are
characterized by limitations in verbal working memory.
Nonword repetition was correlated with inflectional accuracy in both languages, suggesting an association between morphological accuracy and processing ability. In
language samples collected under conditions of varying
task demands, the accuracy of production of grammatical morphology varied significantly across contexts for
the English-speaking children such that the error rate
was higher in the more demanding contexts. This is consistent with a trade-off effect involving breakdown in the
area of morphology as task demands exceed the available resources. This confirms that grammatical morphology is a vulnerable area of language for English-speaking
children with SLI. No such trade-off was observed in
Icelandic, suggesting that, in contrast to English, grammatical morphology is less vulnerable in Icelandic. Overall morphological accuracy was higher in Icelandic than
in English. However, whether this cross-linguistic difference was significant depended on the sampling context.
Morphological errors in English overwhelmingly involved
verbs, whereas in Icelandic, both verbs and noun phrase
morphology were involved to a similar extent, but both
were unaffected by context.
Children with SLI speaking English and Icelandic
were found to be similar in that they each scored significantly lower on measures of verbal working memory than
their NL counterparts. The results for English-speaking
children on nonword repetition and on the CLPT replicate
previous findings, showing children with SLI to perform

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

more poorly than their NL counterparts. This study extends this finding to Icelandic, suggesting that processing measures such as the ones developed in this study
are a useful addition to the available diagnostic measures in that language as well. The English-speaking
children with SLI differed from their NL counterparts
in particular on the CLPT, involving the processing
of meaningful linguistic material in a dual task (Ellis
Weismer et al., 1999, 2000). Although the SLI group
obtained a lower group mean than the NL group, the
group difference for the English nonword repetition task
failed to reach statistical significance. This may be due,
in part, to relatively large variability in the SLI group.
Alternatively, it may be that a list containing nonwords
longer than four syllables is required to sufficiently tax
children in this age range. Previous studies have supported the diagnostic utility of the nonword repetition
test as an adjunct to other measures rather than as a
primary diagnostic measure (Ellis Weismer et al., 2000).
Of the two nonword repetition tests developed in Icelandic, the set of nonword-like nonwords produced a
larger group difference, indicating that the set of words
that more highly resembled real Icelandic words did not
prove as taxing to children with SLI. However, the group
difference was significant for both lists. The Icelandic
version of the CLPT was essentially a translation with
some modifications of the original CLPT in English. Although both the English and the Icelandic versions resulted in significant group differences between children
with SLI and NL, the scores of the Icelandic children
were somewhat lower than those of the English-speaking
children, suggesting that the Icelandic version of this test
may be more difficult overall. This may be related to the
fact that the questions used in the Icelandic version are a
bit longer due to the characteristics of the language that
adds to the processing load, thus making it harder for
children to memorize the words to be recalled.
The claim that limited processing skills have a detrimental effect on language development has been around
for some time. One possibility is that limited processing
skills hinder the efficient learning of language, resulting
in incomplete or incorrect representations. This might
mean that processing limitations would affect children
the most early on in development during a period of rapid
learning of grammar. Another possibility is that limited
processing ability hinders the efficient use of language,
such that children might have correct representations
but might not be able to analyze the grammatical requirements of their language production in real time,
and, thus, they would not be successful in implementing
the rules that they have learned, especially when task
demands are high and competition for the available resources is increased (Lahey, Edwards, & Munson, 2001).
These two possibilities are not mutually exclusive. It
may be that processing limitations affect both learning

and subsequent use of language. In this study, the potential effect of processing ability on the correct use of
grammatical morphology was investigated in two ways:
by examining the effect of increasing task demands on
the accuracy of production of grammatical morphology
and by correlational analysis.
Previous studies have used different ways to manipulate processing demands in order to examine their
effect on language comprehension and production. In
comprehension studies, stimuli presented to children
have varied in presentation rate, linguistic complexity,
and length (Deevy & Leonard, 2004; Montgomery, 1995,
2000, 2003). In production tasks, sentences of different
complexity and length have been elicited, for example,
by the use of a story-completion task that involved strategies to encourage children to include or not include certain information in order to vary the complexity and
length of the sentences produced (Grela & Leonard,
2000). In this study, the method used to manipulate the
processing demands associated with the children's language production was to have them produce language
under different spontaneous conditions that have been
shown previously to produce marked differences in
sentence complexity, average sentence length, and the
number of sentences produced per speaking turn. Using
this method, language varying in these respects is elicited in a naturalistic manner that mimics the children's
everyday use of language and maintains a high level of
true communicative intent as opposed to a contrived elicitation context. At the same time, although these contexts are spontaneous, the particular communicative
context introduced by the examiner imposes certain task
requirements that vary across contexts. The contexts
produced a consistent effect on MLU in both languages
across children with SLI and children with NL, with conversation producing a significantly lower MLU than the
other contexts. This confirms that the language-sampling
procedure used was successful in eliciting communicative
contexts varying in task demands. Indeed, narratives and
expository discourse are known to produce a longer MLU
than conversation (Leadholm & Miller, 1992).
The first important finding here was that of a significant effect of context on the accuracy of grammatical
morphology in English, where the accuracy of verb morphology was considerably and significantly lower in the
expository and narrative contexts than in conversation.
Thus, the hypothesis that the accuracy of grammatical
morphology is compromised when task demands increase
is borne out. This finding is consistent with previous
reports of trade-off effects between linguistic domains
in English involving morphology and linguistic complexity (e.g., Namazi & Johnston, 1996) as well as of
findings showing aspects of grammatical morphology
in English to be affected by increases in the complexity
and/or length of the sentence (Grela & Leonard, 2000).

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

931

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

The observation of this trade-off effect is particularly
interesting in light of the fact that the children in this
study are past the age at which verb morphology is
most problematic for English-speaking children with
SLI. Indeed, children of this age have been reported to
perform close to NL levels in morphology (Rice et al.,
2004). Such high performance under certain conditions
suggests that the relevant grammatical rules are now
correctly represented, including the understanding that
their use is obligatory. However, the observation of a
context-dependent drop in performance indicates that
this skill is still fragile in these children when demands
in other aspects of language compete for the available
resources.
A second major finding relative to these context effects is that in contrast to English, context exerted no
significant effect on morphological accuracy in Icelandic.
No statistically significant effects were found, and inspection of the data does not suggest a trend in that direction either. Another cross-linguistic difference that
emerged is that in Icelandic, morphological errors were
not found to be restricted to verbs as they are in English
for the most part, but instead they affected verbs and
noun phrases to a similar extent. This is not surprising
given the great complexity of both the verb and noun
systems, but it does differ from previous observations
that the morphological difficulty of children with SLI is
particularly tied to the rules of verb inflection and thus
warrants future study. The statistical tests indicate that
Icelandic-speaking children with SLI differed significantly from their NL counterparts in noun phrase morphology but not in verb morphology. However, inspection
of Table 3 in fact suggests that the difference in accuracy
rates of noun phrase and verb morphology are very small,
and both were unaffected by variations in context.
Compared with the English-speaking children, the
Icelandic children evidenced higher accuracy rates overall. These findings are consistent with a number of previous studies that have found grammatical morphology
to be more robust in SLI in languages that are highly inflected as compared with English (e.g., Elin Thordardottir
& Namazi, 2007; Lindner & Johnston, 1992; Rom &
Leonard, 1990). Several explanations have been advanced for this somewhat perplexing finding (Leonard,
1998). Grammatical morphology plays an important role
in conveying meaning in highly inflected languages. It
has been argued that this leads learners to concentrate
their efforts on this aspect of the language in order to
maximize their communicative efficiency. According to a
morphology richness account, children learning a language such as English in which morphology is sparse
focus their resources mainly on other aspects such as
word order. Thus, when demands compete for and exceed the available resources, morphology does not receive priority (Fletcher, Leonard, Stokes, & Wong, 2005).

932

This could affect both the learning of morphology over
time and the subsequent use of morphology when task
demands are high. It may be that the higher accuracy
rates of the Icelandic-speaking children stem from a relatively strong focus on morphology in acquisition, which
may be related to the important meaning component of
morphology in Icelandic. Alternatively, it is not hard to
imagine that this morphology advantage seen in Icelandic
may result, in part, from the sheer number of grammatical morphemes in the language. The very high frequency
of grammatical morphemes in the input that children
receive as well as in their own production does allow for
much more practice than is available to children who
speak English and may contribute to making these morphemes more salient. Thus, although it may seem intuitively that the high frequency of grammatical morphemes
in Icelandic should make the acquisition of morphology
difficult, it may, in fact, also be what makes it possible.
This study offers additional insight by the examination
of accuracy across contexts. The fact that the production
of morphology by the Icelandic children is unaffected by
the increased demands related to context appears to
indicate that their production of morphology may be less
deliberate and more automatic than it is for Englishspeaking children and thus less demanding of processing
resources.
Nevertheless, the findings indicate that grammatical morphology is a vulnerable aspect of language for
English-speaking children with SLI, even for school-age
children who appear to have reached full mastery of this
aspect of language in relatively simple tasks. However,
grammatical morphology does not appear to be an area
of particular vulnerability for children with SLI who
speak Icelandic. It is worth recalling here that children
in both language groups were diagnosed using comparable methods and diagnostic criteria and that both
groups evidenced similar deficits in verbal working memory. At the same time, differences are evident in the
manifestation of SLI in these two languages, which may
have to do with differences in which aspects of these languages are most demanding of processing resources.
Correlational analysis was conducted to further investigate the association between processing ability and
accuracy of production of grammatical morphology. This
revealed a significant association between nonword repetition scores and accuracy of use of grammatical morphemes when the SLI and NL groups were combined.
For English-speaking children, the correlation was only
significant for verb morphology, whereas it was significant for both verb and noun phrase morphology for
Icelandic children. This finding essentially mirrors the
findings of the group comparisons. If children with SLI
and NL are viewed as belonging to a continuum of low
to high language ability (Leonard, 1998), then it could
be concluded that language ability on this continuum is

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

correlated with a continuum of processing ability of the
type tapped by nonword repetition. However, correlations conducted separately for the SLI and NL groups
are not consistent across the groups or across languages.
For SLI groups in both languages, the strongest association with morphological accuracy is still with nonword repetition, and the correlation is significant for
verbs for the Icelandic children. No association is seen
with the CLPT. The SLI groups thus display a similar
pattern as the analyses involving the combined groups.
The NL groups, in contrast, show a different and inconsistent pattern. This pattern, including the puzzling finding of a near-perfect relationship between the CLPT and
verb morphology use in Icelandic NL children, may be
most appropriately viewed as a spurious finding, resulting from the small number of participants and the low
variability in scores. In the case of the CLPT and verb
morphology, the verb morphology accuracy scores are
uniformly high, with 5 children scoring 100%, and the
CLPT scores are around 60% for most of the children.
The correlational analyses must be interpreted in light
of these considerations, in particular for the NL groups,
given their low variability of scores, but also for the SLI
groups.
Previous studies have shown both nonword repetition and CLPT scores to correlate significantly with scores
on language tests in English (Dollaghan & Campbell,
1998; Ellis Weismer et al., 1999). Similar to our findings,
Ellis Weismer and colleagues (1999) found a correlation
between the CLPT and language scores when NL and
SLI groups were combined, but when the groups were
analyzed separately, the correlation was significant only
for the NL group. Ellis Weismer and colleagues hypothesized that the lack of relationship in the SLI group
might represent an abnormal dissociation in children
with SLI or, alternatively, might reflect limitations in
the measures--either the processing measures or the
language tests. In our findings, nonword repetition is
consistently found to be associated with morphological
accuracy, although the association does not reach significance in all groups. This finding extends previous
findings of an association between nonword repetition
and scores on standardized language tests to grammatical morphology in spontaneous language. This finding
suggests that phonological encoding and/or storage abilities are important components of the development and
use of grammatical morphology in the two languages examined here. The role of skills tapped by the CLPT is
much less clear from our data. As compared with nonword repetition, the CLPT does involve the processing of
meaningful linguistic material, but it is also a dual task
and thus may rely significantly on executive control.
Several limitations of this study must be considered
as well as alternative interpretations of the findings.
The study is limited by the small number of participants,

which inevitably limits the statistical power. Also, it
could be argued that the tasks used here, with naturalistic manipulation of processing load, may not have
created a sufficiently taxing context to bring out vulnerability in the Icelandic children's production of grammatical morphology. In terms of power, it should be noted,
however, that the Icelandic children outnumbered the
English-speaking children; still, significant context effects emerged only for the latter. Also, although it may be
that with a more taxing context, breakdowns in grammatical morphology may be produced in Icelandic children, it
remains of interest that the naturalistic context used
here was sufficiently taxing to produce a context effect in
English but not in Icelandic. Another issue to consider is
that the participants in this study are of school age and
thus are past the age range during which verb-inflection
errors are most prominent in English. Younger children
might thus be argued to have been more ideal candidates
for this study. However, this is not necessarily the case. It
is noteworthy that at the age of 9 years, when Englishspeaking children with SLI tend to be approaching their
NL counterparts in the accuracy of verb morphology, their
accuracy is still shown to be vulnerable when the task
demands are increased. This indicates that their now
relatively well-developed ability to use grammatical morphemes correctly does not result simply from a more correct representation of the underlying linguistic rule or of
its application being obligatory, but it also requires the
allocation of processing resources to be adequately implemented. It may be speculated that had the participants in
this study been in the 4- to 6-year age range, no context
effect might have been seen because such an effect might
have been overshadowed by an overall low accuracy of use
of verb morphology resulting from incomplete learning.
The presence of context effects may thus be more visible
at a developmental stage where high performance has
been reached in some contexts rather than being uniformly low.
Just as the presence of a context effect in English
points to morphology as an area of particular vulnerability, the absence of such an effect in Icelandic, together
with the overall high accuracy rate, suggests that this is
not the case for Icelandic. The logical next question to
ask is whether, if grammatical morphology is not a vulnerable aspect in Icelandic, there is another aspect of
language that is. Further study focusing on more aspects
of language may uncover additional areas that may be
especially difficult in Icelandic and that would, therefore, be sensitive to increases in processing demands.
One indication that emerged in this study is noun phrase
morphology. To the extent that morphological errors were
made by Icelandic children, they did involve noun phrase
morphology to a similar extent as they did verb morphology. However, noun phrase morphology was unchanged
across contexts. Word order may be another possible

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

933

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

candidate given previous findings on Swedish, a closely
related language (Hansson et al., 2000). Alternatively,
the idea that SLI necessarily involves particular areas of
difficulty may be misguided and may be colored by the
finding of a particular problem with verb morphology in
English, giving rise to the expectation that SLI must be
characterized by particular circumscribed problem areas.
It may be, instead, that SLI in certain languages and/or
age ranges involves a more even profile of generalized
difficulty, as has been argued to be the case for French
in the preschool period (Elin Thordardottir & Namazi,
2007). Much further study of SLI in Icelandic is in order,
focusing on areas beyond grammatical morphology.
Yet another possible confound suggested by an anonymous reviewer is that the contextual variation between
conversation and narration may not have produced equivalent changes in processing load in the two languages,
given reports of exceptionally high levels of literacy in
Iceland, which may be associated with a cultural difference in narrative tradition. There are at least two reasons to believe that the context effect was, in fact, similar
in both languages. First, MLU varied systematically
with context in both languages, and in a similar way.
Second, children of both language groups came from similar backgrounds with respect to maternal education.
However, the point is well taken and underscores the
need to examine language development and use not only
with respect to the grammatical structure of the language but also within the broader context of the cultural
traditions in which children learn to use that language.
Finally, the analysis of grammatical morphology employed established coding systems in each language:
English SALT analysis and its Icelandic adaptation. Although these are designed to be parallel coding systems,
they are not identical due to the fact that they apply to
languages that vary considerably in their structure. This
fact is not seen as a weakness in this study. The purpose
was to examine overall accuracy rates of grammatical
morphology, knowing at the outset that the frequency and
complexity of these rates varies across the languages.
Therefore, the goal is not that the coding systems be identical but rather that they each capture the morphological
structure of their respective language. One difference in
the systems, however, is that the English SALT coding
system does not include errors involving irregular verbs.
The effect of this difference is in the direction of underestimating the error rate in English. Therefore, given the
fact that in those contexts where cross-linguistic differences in error rates were found, the error rates were
higher in English than in Icelandic; counting the irregular errors would not have changed this effect.
The results of this study have revealed important cross-linguistic differences in the manifestation of
SLI in English and Icelandic and have suggested that
whereas children with SLI who speak both languages

934

have limitations in linguistic processing that are related
to their language skills, the languages differ in the areas
that are most vulnerable when processing demands exceed the supply. The findings indicate that continued
cross-linguistic study of the use of processing-based measures is warranted and that such measures hold promise
for the assessment of children with SLI across languages.
This is supported as well by findings in several languages,
including Spanish (Girbau & Schwartz, 2007), Swedish
(Sahlen, Reuterskjold-Wagner, Nettelbladt, & Radeborg,
1999), and French (Elin Thordardottir, Kehayia, Lessard,
Sutton, & Trudeau, 2007)--see, however, the study on
Cantonese by Stokes, Wong, Fletcher, and Leonard (2006),
whose findings differ but also suggest that further crosslinguistic study of processing tasks can contribute to a
more refined understanding of the skills tapped by these
tasks. Finally, the findings provide a reminder that task
effects should be considered carefully in the interpretation of children's performance and in comparing results
across studies.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by grants awarded to the author
by The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) and Rannsoknarra Islands--The Icelandic
Centre for Research (RANNIS). The author acknowledges
the assistance of Ester Sighvatsdottir, Valgerur Olafsdottir,
Rebecca Naves, Julia Levy, and Mahchid Namazi. Many thanks
to the children and parents who participated in the study.

References
Bishop, D. (2004). Specific language impairment: Diagnostic
dilemmas. In L. Verhoeven & H. van Balkom (Eds.), Classification of developmental language disorders: Theoretical
issues and clinical implications (pp. 309-326). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Bishop, D., Bishop, S., Bright, P., James, C., Delaney, T.,
& Tallal, P. (1999). Different origins of auditory and phonological processing problems in children with language impairment: Evidence from a twin study. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 155-168.
Conti-Ramsden, G., & Botting, N. (1999). Classification of
children with specific language impairment: Longitudinal
considerations. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1195-1204.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual differences
in working memory and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Deevy, P., & Leonard, L. (2004). The comprehension of wh-
questions in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47,
802-815.
Dollaghan, C., & Campbell, T. (1998). Nonword repetition
and child language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 1136-1146.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: AGS.
Elin Thordardottir. (2001, June). Morphological errors by
Icelandic children with specific language impairment: A
question of information value? Presented at the Symposium
on Research in Child Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Elin Thordardottir. (2003). Malfraeigreining fyrir mals]ni
[Unpublished guidelines for language samples analysis in
Icelandic]. Reykjavik, Iceland: ReykjavikurAkademian.
Elin Thordardottir, Chapman, R., & Wagner, L. (2002).
Complex sentence production by adolescents with Down
syndrome. Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 163-183.
Elin Thordardottir, & Ellis Weismer, S. (1998). Mean
length of utterance and other language sample measures in
early Icelandic. First Language, 18, 1-32.
Elin Thordardottir, & Ellis Weismer, S. (2002). Content
mazes and filled pauses in the spontaneous speech of schoolage children with specific language impairment. Brain and
Cognition, 48, 587-592.
Elin Thordardottir, Kehayia, E., Lessard, N., Sutton, A.,
& Trudeau, N. (2007, June). Diagnostic accuracy of French
language measures for the identification of SLI at age 5.
Presented at the Symposium on Research in Child Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Elin Thordardottir, & Namazi, M. (2007). Specific language impairment in French-speaking children: Beyond
grammatical morphology. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 50, 698-715.
Ellis Weismer, S., & Elin Thordardottir. (1998, June).
Limitations in linguistic processing by children with specific
language impairment. Poster presented at the Symposium
on Research in Child Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. (1999). An
examination of verbal working memory capacity in children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1249-1260.
Ellis Weismer, S., Tomblin, B., Zhang, X., Buckwalter, P.,
Chynoweth, J., & Jones, M. (2000). Nonword repetition
performance in school-age children with and without language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 865-878.
Fletcher, P., Leonard, L., Stokes, S., & Wong, A. (2005).
The expression of aspect in Cantonese-speaking children
with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 48, 621-634.
Gathercole, S. (1995). Is nonword repetition a test of phonological memory or long-term knowledge? It all depends on
the nonwords. Memory and Cognition, 23, 83-94.
Gathercole, S., Willis, C., Baddeley, A., & Emslie, H. (1994).
The children's test of nonword repetition: A test of phonological working memory. Memory, 2, 103-127.
Gaulin, C., & Campbell, T. (1994). Procedure for assessing
verbal working memory in normal school-age children: Some
preliminary data. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 55-64.
Girbau, D., & Schwartz, R. (2007). Non-word repetition in
Spanish-speaking children with specific language impairment (SLI). International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 42, 59-75.
Grela, B. (2003). The omission of subject arguments in children with specific language impairment. Clinical Linguistics
& Phonetics, 17, 153-169.

Grela, B., & Leonard, L. (2000). The influence of argumentstructure complexity on the use of auxiliary verbs by children with SLI. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 43, 1115-1125.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V., Calderon, J., & Ellis Weismer, S.
(2004). Verbal working memory in bilingual children.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47,
863-876.
Hadley, P. (1998). Language sampling protocols for eliciting
text-level discourse. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services
in Schools, 29, 132-147.
Hamill, D., & Newcomer, P. (1997). Test of Language
Development-Intermediate (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hansson, K., Nettelbladt, U., & Leonard, L. (2000). Specific
language impairment in Swedish: The status of verb morphology and word order. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 848-864.
Heilmann, J., Miller, J., Nockerts, A., & Andriacchi, K.
(2004, June). Agreement and reliability of language sample analysis revisited. Presented at the Symposium on Research in Child Language Disorders, Madison, WI.
Hoffman, L., & Gillam, R. (2005). Verbal and spatial information processing constraints in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 47, 114-125.
Ingibjorg Simonardottir and Einar Gudmundsson.
(1996). TOLD-I, Malroskaprof, islensk stafaersla [Language Assessment Test, Icelandic adaptation]. Reykjavik,
Iceland: Rannsoknastofun uppeldis-og menntamala.
Jakubowicz, C., Nash, L., Rigaut, C., & Gerard, C.-L.
(1998). Determiners and clitic pronouns in French-speaking
children with SLI. Language Acquisition, 7, 113-160.
Johnston, J., & Smith, L. (1989). Dimensional thinking in
language impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 32, 33-38.
Kail, R. (1994). A method for studying the generalized slowing
hypothesis in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 418-421.
Lahey, M., Edwards, J., & Munson, B. (2001). Is processing
speed related to severity of language impairment? Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 1354-1361.
Leadholm, B., & Miller, J. (1992). Language sample analysis:
The Wisconsin guide. Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department
of Public Instruction.
Leonard, L. (1998). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L., Eyer, J., Bedore, L., & Grela, B. (1997). Three
accounts of the grammatical morpheme difficulties of
English-speaking children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40, 741-753.
Leonard, L., Sabbadini, L., Leonard, J., & Volterra, V.
(1987). Specific language impairment in children: A crosslinguistic study. Brain and Language, 32, 233-252.
Lindner, K., & Johnston, J. (1992). Grammatical morphology
in language-impaired children acquiring English or German
as their first language: A functional perspective. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 13, 115-129.
MacLachlan, B., & Chapman, R. (1988). Communication
breakdowns in normal and language learning-disabled

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

935

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

children's conversation and narration. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Disorders, 53, 2-7.
Marinellie, S. (2004). Complex syntax used by school-age
children with specific language impairment (SLI) in childadult conversation. Journal of Communication Disorders,
37, 517-533.
Masterson, J. (1997). Interrelationships in children's language production. Topics in Language Disorders, 17, 11-22.
Masterson, J., & Kamhi, A. (1991). The effects of sampling
conditions on sentence production in normal, readingdisabled, and language-learning-disabled children. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research, 34, 549-558.

Rapin, I., Dunn, M., & Allen, D. (2003). Developmental language disorders. In S. J. Segalowitz & I. Rapin (Eds.),
Handbook of neuropsychology (2nd ed., Vol. 8, Part II,
pp. 593-630). New York: Elsevier Science.
Rice, M., Tomblin, B., Hoffman, L., Richman, W. A., &
Marquis, J. (2004). Grammatical tense deficits in children
with SLI and non-specific language impairment: Longitudinal considerations. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 47, 816-834.
Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language
impairment as a period of extended optional infinitive.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43,
1126-1145.

Masterson, J., & Kamhi, A. (1992). Linguistic trade-offs in
school-age children with and without language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 1064-1075.

Roid, G., & Miller, L. (1997). Leiter International Performance Scale-Revised. Wood Dale, IL: Stoelting Co.

Miller, J., & Chapman, R. (1984-2002). Systematic Analysis
of Language Transcripts: Software for analyzing English
and Spanish language transcripts. Madison, WI: University
of Wisconsin, Language Analysis Laboratory.

Rom, A., & Leonard, L. (1990). Interpreting deficits in grammatical morphology in specifically language-impaired children: Preliminary evidence from Hebrew. Clinical Linguistics
& Phonetics, 4, 93-105.

Miller, J., Heilmann, J., Nockerts, A., Iglesias, A.,
Fabiano, L., & Francis, D. (2006). Oral language and
reading in bilingual children. Learning Disabilities Research
and Practice, 21, 30-43.

Sahlen, B., Reuterskjold-Wagner, C., Nettelbladt, U., &
Radeborg, K. (1999). Nonword repetition in children with
language impairment: Pitfalls and possibilities. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders,
34, 337-352.

Montgomery, J. (1995). Sentence comprehension in children
with specific language impairment: The role of phonological
working memory. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 38, 187-199.
Montgomery, J. (2000). Verbal working memory and sentence
comprehension in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
43, 293-308.
Montgomery, J. (2003). Working memory and comprehension in children with specific language impairment: What
we know so far. Journal of Communicative Disorders, 36,
221-231.
Namazi, M., & Johnston, J. (1996, June). The relationship
between grammatical morphology and semantic complexity
in the utterances of language-impaired children. Poster presented at the Symposium on Research in Child Language
Disorders, Madison, WI.
Nippold, M., Hesketh, L., Duthie, J., & Mansfield, T. (2005).
Conversational versus expository discourse: A study of syntactic development in children, adolescents, and adults.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48,
1048-1064.
Paradis, J., & Crago, M. (2001). The morphosyntax of specific language impairment in French: An extended optional
infinitive account. Language Acquisition, 9, 269-300.
Paul, R. (2001). Language disorders from infancy through
adolescence: Assessment and intervention. St. Louis, MO:
Mosby.
Plante, E. (1998). Criteria for SLI: The Stark and Tallal legacy
and beyond. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 41, 951-957.

936

Scott, C., & Windsor, J. (2000). General language performance measures in spoken and written narrative and expository discourse of school-age children with language
learning disabilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43, 324-339.
Stokes, S., Wong, A., Fletcher, P., & Leonard, L. (2006).
Nonword repetition and sentence repetition as clinical
markers of specific language impairment: The case of
Cantonese. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 49, 219-236.
Tager-Flusberg, H., & Cooper, J. (1999). Present and future
possibilities for defining a phenotype for specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1275-1278.
Tomblin, J. B., & Zhang, X. (1999). Language patterns and
etiology in children with specific language impairment. In
H. Tager-Flusberg (Ed.), Neurodevelopmental disorders
(pp. 361-382). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Received February 2, 2007
Revision received July 14, 2007
Accepted January 7, 2008
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/068)
Contact author: Elin Thordardottir, School of Communication
Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, 1266 Pine
Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A8 Canada.
E-mail: elin.thordardottir@mcgill.ca.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 51 * 922-937 * August 2008

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Appendix. Icelandic nonword lists.
Word-Like

Nonword-Like
1 syllable

lan
kos
jind
fe
nel

ba
li
no
he
to
2 syllables

longi
voppur
storra
ampar
setta

rimas
vukat
jolla
vopgem
potem
3 syllables

hokkari
muppanar
volminur
laranur
gokkanol

inasan
belegem
koldesit
onnegam
moria
4 syllables

tilasakkur
sokamali
bottageifa
keinargolli
vapanakki

fessadipa
mutivuli
panaluke
monelafi
vunelare
5 syllables

halustumpingur
gengisartefur
seikulankarar
dimupaskina
felmunarvattur

sikemofana
enneputena
kobbelvanika
fiapoleta
bikaleniva

Elin Thordardottir: Effects of Task Demands on SLI

937

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/09/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

