Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Journal of
Memory and
Language
www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Control of access to memory: The use of task interference
as a behavioral probe
Shayne Loft *, Michael S. Humphreys, Susannah J. Whitney
The School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld 4072, Australia
Received 18 August 2006; revision received 3 April 2007
Available online 22 May 2007

Abstract
Directed forgetting and prospective memory methods were combined to examine differences in the control of
memory access. Between studying two lists of target words, participants were either instructed to forget the first list,
or to continue remembering the first list. After study participants performed a lexical decision task with an additional
requirement to respond with a designated key to targets from one or both of the lists. List discrimination performance
supported the assumption that contextual representations associated with the two lists are more differentiated following
forget instructions. Test instructions which directed participants towards both lists or to particular list(s) were more or
less compatible with these contextual representations. Lexical decisions on non-target trials were slower when test
instructions were compatible with study contexts compared to when incompatible, indicating that contexts reinstated
by test instructions influenced the complexity of memory access. This finding is most compatible with theories of
memory which locate an important component of control at the pre-decision stage.
 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Memory access; Task interference; Context reinstatement; Recognition memory; Prospective memory; Directed forgetting

A vast amount of information is stored in an adult
human memory, including semantic information, information about one's life history, and specific episodic
memories relating to recent and possibly not so recent
events. If this information is to be useful there must be
some control processes which determine which information is used. Jacoby, Shimizu, Daniels, and Rhodes
(2005) have proposed that memory can be controlled
in two ways. Memory output can be examined to determine if it is appropriate using post output decision
processes, such as confidence judgments (Koriat &
Goldsmith, 1996) and source monitoring (Johnson,

*

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lofts@psy.uq.edu.au (S. Loft).

Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993). Conversely, pre-access
control processes can be allocated that place constraints
on what information is likely to be retrieved from
memory.
Recent work has started to establish the importance
of pre-access control processes (e.g., Banks, 2000;
Humphreys et al., 2003; Marsh & Hicks, 1998; Jacoby
et al., 2005; Jacoby, Shimizu, Velanova, & Rhodes,
2005). Dennis and Humphreys (2001) proposed that
memory decisions in a variety of memory tasks, including
recognition, are based on a match between a reinstated
context, and a context that is retrieved using the probe
item as a cue. The reinstated context, at least in part,
depends on the nature of the test instructions--what
individuals are asked to do. Humphreys et al. tested this
idea by asking participants to study a list containing

0749-596X/$ - see front matter  2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.04.002

466

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

visually and auditorally presented words. Participants
then received a remember-know test (Test 1) followed
by a source monitoring test (Test 2) presented in an
exclusion format. If participants responded remember
on Test 1 they were more likely to respond yes on Test
2 than if they had responded know on Test 1, regardless
of whether instructions were congruent (e.g., a remember response was made to an auditorially presented
word on Test 1 and the Test 2 question requested auditory information) or incongruent with test item study
status. According to a prominent post-access theory
(the generic ideas about recollection embedded in the
process dissociation procedure; Jacoby, 1991) a remember response on Test 1, as compared to a know response,
should have been an indicator of those items for which
recollection was more likely on Test 2. The result should
then be a higher probability of a yes response to a
congruent question and a lower probability to an
incongruent question than the same probabilities following
a know response. Instead, it appeared that participants
were reinstating only the context specified in the test
instructions, and based their decision on the degree to
which the retrieved context matched the reinstated
context (Dennis & Humphreys, 2001; Humphreys
et al., 2003; Weeks, Humphreys, & Hockley, in press).
Expectations at test regarding the kinds of information
needed to be looked for in memory constrained the
manner in which test items were processed.
In the current paper we provide evidence that converges with this view. In two experiments, we use methods from the directed forgetting (hereafter abbreviated
as DF) and prospective memory (hereafter abbreviated
as PM) literatures to measure the complexity of the
preparations or processes required to access memory
when contexts reinstated by test instructions varied in
their congruency with contexts established at study. This
paper depends on three assumptions: (a) That we can
specify something about the contexts established during
study; (b) That we can specify test trial instructions that
are more or less compatible with these contexts, and (c)
That we can measure any ensuing difficulty with
memory access. We will first review the DF literature
to demonstrate the plausibility of controlling the context
associated with studied items. We then review the PM
literature to show that we can plausibly measure the
complexity of memory access. Finally we present an
argument as to why the contexts reinstated by certain
test instructions should be more or less compatible with
different study contexts.

Establishing study context through DF instructions
We use a version of the DF paradigm called the list
method. A typical list method DF study presents
participants with two lists of items to study. Between

administrations of the two lists, participants are
instructed to either forget the first list, or continue
remembering the first list. After study, participants recall
or recognize items from both lists. Participants given
forget instructions typically recall fewer items from List
1 than those given remember instructions (the costs of
DF). Conversely, participants given forget instructions
typically recall more items from List 2 than those given
remember instructions (the benefits of DF). However,
list method DF effects are generally not found on recognition tests (e.g., Basden & Basden, 1996; Geiselman,
Bjork, & Fishman, 1983). In contrast, the item method
(when the instruction to remember or forget is given
after each item presentation) typically yields DF effects
on both recall and recognition tests (see MacLeod,
1998). Our concern was to use test instructions which
were more or less compatible with the DF determined
study contexts as a possible surrogate for contextual
reinstatement effects in recognition. We chose the list
method because it produces results more like contextual
reinstatement effects found in recognition and recall than
does the item method. That is, with a few exceptions
such as incidental learning paradigms, very low levels
of learning, and novel stimuli, contextual reinstatement
effects are more likely to be observed in recall than in
recognition (e.g., Godden & Baddeley, 1980; Smith,
Glenberg, & Bjork, 1978; Smith & Vela, 2001).
Researchers have made a number of proposals
regarding the representational changes that result from
the processing of forget instructions using the list
method. Bjork's (1970) original theory proposed that
participants given a forget instruction segregate List 1
and List 1 items, and selectively rehearse List 2. Subsequently, Bjork (1989) proposed retrieval inhibition as
an alternative mechanism, claiming that the forget
instruction initiates a process that inhibits access to List
1. Recently the retrieval inhibition account of list
method DF has been challenged by a two-factor account
which proposes different mechanisms for the costs and
benefits of the forget instruction (Sahakyan & Delaney,
2003, 2005; Sahakyan & Kelley, 2002). Costs in recall
are attributed to a mental context change. Upon processing the forget instruction, participants forget the
preceding List 1 items by establishing a new mental context. The processing context at test mismatches the List 1
context and more closely matches the List 2 context,
leading to costs to List 1. In addition, the processing
of the forget instruction leads participants to adopting
a deeper encoding strategy for List 2, leading to benefits
to List 2.
A common denominator in many of these accounts is
that processing of a list method forget instruction leads
to the separation of the two lists. For selective rehearsal
to take place the lists need to be segregated. Under the
two-factor account, sampling of new contextual cues
or changes in encoding strategy serves to segregate lists.

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Thus, participants given the forget instruction segregate
List 1 from List 2, and participants given the remember
instruction are likely to view the two lists as part of the
same event. On this basis, we assumed that list method
instructions could be used to control the contexts
established at study that were associated with list items.
Furthermore, as argued below, the PM literature
provided us with a useful technique for measuring the
complexity of the preparations or processes required to
access or maintain these contextual representations.

Task interference in PM
In a typical laboratory event-based PM task, participants are required to perform a specific action (e.g.,
press the F1 Key) upon presentation of a specific target
event (e.g., the word ``dog'') whilst performing an ongoing task (e.g., rating words) (Einstein & McDaniel,
1990). The critical question is whether attention to the
target interrupts ongoing activity and the individual
becomes aware of its relevance. The defining feature of
PM tasks is that, unlike retrospective memory tasks,
there are no external requests from the experimenter
directing participants to engage in a memory search.
As a result, PM tasks have a greater emphasis on the
maintenance of the intention to remember, or the ability
of the target to initiate the intent to remember. However, this difference is likely to be a matter of degree.
Instructions are usually only given at the start of retrospective memory tasks and thus must still be maintained
by the participant.
There is evidence that attention to targets can lead to
their spontaneous detection under certain conditions
(see Einstein et al., 2005). However, under other conditions, there is evidence that target detection requires
some form of resource-demanding control process. For
example, PM task demands embedded in ongoing tasks
have been shown to slow performance on ongoing tasks,
even on non-target trials that are some distance from the
presentation of targets (Loft & Yeo, in press; Marsh,
Hicks, Cook, Hansen, & Pallos, 2003; Smith, 2003;
Smith & Bayen, 2004). For example, Loft and Yeo
found that participants who held an intention to detect
studied targets took 30-140 ms longer to make lexical
decisions on non-target trials compared to participants
only performing lexical decisions, indicating that some
form of control process was being engaged. This slowing
on non-target ongoing task trials is commonly referred
to as task interference (Hicks, Marsh, & Cook, 2005).
There are several theories regarding the cognitive
mechanisms that give rise to task interference. According to the Preparatory Attentional and Memory Processes (PAM) theory (Smith & Bayen, 2004, 2006),
task interference arises from the engagement of a preparatory attention process that serves to maintain the

467

intention to detect targets while performing ongoing
tasks. Other researchers have proposed similar processes
that serve preparatory functions such as maintaining the
memory system in retrieval mode (Guynn, 2003). In
addition, at least part of the task interference effect
may be driven by the stimulus. For example, McDaniel,
Guynn, Einstein, and Breneiser (2004) contend that
attention to ongoing task items invokes processes similar
to those involved in everyday experiences of familiarity,
which may then stimulate the allocation of attention to
determine what that familiarity signifies.
These accounts all hail from the basic idea that having an intention to detect targets within the context of
performing an ongoing task involves the engagement
of control processes that draw on a limited resource
capacity. As a consequence, individuals have fewer
resources available to perform ongoing tasks, and
response costs to ongoing tasks are incurred. We argue
that task interference can provide a behavioral probe
into the complexity of memory access. Next, we present
our task paradigm. In doing so, we present an argument
as to why contexts reinstated by various test instructions
will be more or less compatible with different study contexts. We also state our hypotheses regarding the preparations or processes that will be required to access
memory (and the subsequent task interference) under
these conditions.

The present paradigm and hypotheses
We combined features of list method DF and PM
into a single paradigm. The ongoing task was a lexical
decision task, which is commonly used in PM research
(e.g., Hicks et al., 2005; Loft & Yeo, in press). In this
task, strings of letters were presented and participants
determined whether they were words or non-words.
When participants were given lexical decision instructions, they were also given an additional requirement
to respond with a designated key to target words that
they would study (target detection task). Thus, for the
target detection task component, some of the words presented in the lexical decision task were targets, and some
were non-targets, but all non-words presented in the lexical decision task were non-targets.
Between studying two lists of 10 target words, participants were either instructed to forget the first list, or to
continue remembering the first list (memory instruction). After studying the second list, participants
completed an arithmetic task as a filler activity. Next,
participants were given the test instruction. In Experiment 1, participants were told to respond to both lists
(with the F1 key) during the lexical decision task
(respond-all), or to selectively respond to List 2
(respond-list2). In Experiment 2, all participants
were told to respond to both lists. However, half the

468

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

participants were required to discriminate list membership (respond-all-discriminate), while the other half was
not (respond-all). After completing a second arithmetic
task, participants completed the lexical decision task in
which targets from both lists were presented.
Fig. 1 presents the primary and secondary contextual
representations that we argue are likely to be established
as a result of processing the memory instructions.
According to DF theory (e.g., Bjork, 1970; Sahakyan
& Kelley, 2002), participants given the remember
instruction are likely to view the two lists as part of
the same event and thus are unlikely to attempt to create
different contexts for the two lists at study. In contrast,
participants given the forget instruction are more likely
to view the two lists as being definitely distinct and thus
should be more likely to deliberately create different contexts for the two lists at study. Therefore, as illustrated
in Fig. 1, the primary contexts associated with the two
lists are likely to be more distinct with forget than with
remember instructions.
Participants given remember instructions and
required to respond only to List 2 targets or to discriminate between List 1 and List 2 targets may reinstate
separate contexts for the two lists by segregating their
primary contextual representation of the experiment
wide list. To do so may require them to think back to
what they were doing or thinking that was different
during study of List 1 as compared to List 2. In contrast,
a test instruction that requires targets from both lists to
be recognized is more compatible with their primary
contextual representation of the experiment wide list.
It is possible that secondary representations may be
more difficult to reinstate, or once reinstated more
difficult to maintain, than primary representations. If
so, then the effects of context compatibility should show
up as task interference to non-target items on the lexical
decision task. Therefore, task interference should be
greater when the remember condition is required to
respond selectively to List 2 (Experiment 1) or to

discriminate list membership (Experiment 2), as
compared to when required to respond to both lists
(Experiments 1 and 2).
Participants given forget instructions and required
to recognize targets from both lists may reinstate an
experiment wide list context by combining their separate
primary representations of List 1 and List 2. In contrast,
a test instruction that requires these participants to
selectively respond to List 2 targets, or to discriminate
between List 1 and List 2 targets, is more compatible
with their relatively distinct primary contexts of the
two lists. Therefore, task interference should be greater
when the forget condition is required to respond to both
lists (Experiments 1 and 2), as compared to when
required to respond selectively to List 2 (Experiment 1)
or to discriminate list membership (Experiment 2). This
is opposite to what we predicted for participants given
the remember instruction. Thus, we predicted an interaction between memory instruction and test instruction in
Experiments 1 and 2, in that task interference to
non-target items should be greater when test instructions
are incongruent with the contextual representations
established at study and associated with targets,
compared to when congruent.
We have argued that participants may have more difficulty reinstating and/or maintaining the requisite context(s) when a secondary contextual representation has
to be used as compared to a primary contextual representation. However, it does not follow that recognition
accuracy will necessarily be lower when secondary as
compared to primary contextual representations are
used. Although secondary representations may be less
complete or nosier than primary presentations, the general failure to find list based DF costs in recognition
(e.g., Geiselman et al., 1983) and the almost universal
failure to find contextual reinstatement effects in recognition (e.g., Smith & Vela, 2001) indicates that recognition may be insensitive to the amount of degradation
that occurs. For example, combining two contextual

REMEMBER INSTRUCTION

PRIMARY CONTEXTUAL
REPRESENTATION

SECONDARY CONTEXTUAL
REPRESENTATION

EXPERIMENTAL LIST

LIST 1

LIST 2

FORGET INSTRUCTION
LIST 1

LIST 2

EXPERIMENTAL LIST

Fig. 1. Primary contextual representations and secondary contextual representations assumed to be established a result of processing
remember and forget memory instructions.

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

representations together to form a single experiment
wide contextual representation may be more complex
but it might lead to the same level of accuracy in deciding about whether or not a word occurred in either list.

Experiment 1
In designing Experiment 1 we used some procedures
which were standard in the PM literature, and other procedures which were standard in the DF literature, and
others which were a compromise between procedures
in the two literatures. For example, we use five study
trials which is standard for the PM literature but not
for the DF literature. Here our intuition was that weaker
items may not show effects against the background of
the ongoing task. In addition, the list length is short
for the DF literature but quite long for the PM literature. Here our intention was to stay fairly close to the
PM literature while getting enough observations to test
some of the issues which have been addressed in the
DF literature. The overall intention was to create a
workable paradigm which could address memory access
issues, with the ability to address issues traditionally
examined in either the PM or the DF literatures being
a secondary consideration.
Method
Participants
A total of 112 students enrolled in undergraduate
psychology classes at the University of Queensland volunteered to participate in return for course credit. Two
participants were excluded from the forget conditions
because they did not make a single F1 key response.
Design
The design was a 2 (memory instruction: remember
vs. forget) * 2 (test instruction: respond-all vs.
respond-list2) between-subjects design. There were 28
participants in each of the remember conditions, and
27 in each of the forget conditions.
Materials
The presentation of stimuli and the collection of
responses were accomplished through a program written
with E-Prime (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto,
2002). Two hundred medium frequency words (4-6
letter length) were randomly chosen from the 1994 issues
of the Sydney Morning Herald (Dennis, 1995). For each
participant, 10 words were randomly chosen to serve as
List 1 targets, and 10 words randomly chosen to serve as
List 2 targets. Two hundred non-words (4-6 letter length)
were randomly chosen from English Lexicon Project
Database (Balota et al., 2002). Four hundred letter
strings (200 words, 200 non words) were presented in

469

the lexical decision task. The order of presentation was
random except for the presentation of targets. There
were 10 blocks of 40 trials. Two targets were randomly
chosen from List 1 or List 2 to be presented in each
block. The 10 targets from List 1 and the 10 targets from
List 2 were presented once each over the course of the
lexical decision task.
Procedure
Table 1 outlines the procedure that was followed by
participants in Experiments 1 and 2. Participants were
informed that letter strings would be displayed on a
computer screen and they were required to decide as
quickly and as accurately as possible whether or not each
string was a word. Responses were made by pressing one
of the two home keys (D = word, K = non-word). Each
trial contained three displays. The first display instructed
participants to press the space bar to initiate the next
trial. The next display was a focus point, ``+'', displayed
in black on the centre of the screen on a white
background. The duration of each focus point was
randomly selected from a set of possible display times
(437, 500, 562, 625, 687, 750, 822, or 886 ms) to ensure
participants could not anticipate the appearance of
strings. The focus point was replaced by a string which
remained on the screen until the participant made an
appropriate response.
Next, participants were given the target detection
instructions. These instructions were identical to those
used previously in the PM literature to study task
interference (e.g., Loft & Yeo, in press; Marsh et al.,
2003). The experimenter told participants that she was
interested in their ability to remember to perform
actions in the future, and that they would soon study
target words. The instructions specified that when a
target word was detected in the lexical decision task,
the word response to the lexical decision task should
be made first, and that the `F1' key should be pressed
during the subsequent waiting message between trials.
Participants were instructed that if they mistakenly
pressed the space bar instead of the F1 key after detecting
a target, they could press the F1 key on the next trial
(instead of making a lexical decision).
Table 1
Procedure for Experiments 1 and 2
Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Procedure
Lexical decision task instructions
Target detection task instructions
Study List 1
Memory instructions
Study List 2
2-min arithmetic task
Test instructions
2-min arithmetic task
Lexical decision task/target detection task

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Participants then studied List 1. Each of the 10
targets from List 1 were presented a total of five times,
for 2-s each presentation. Specifically, targets were
randomly selected for presentation once each in five
blocks of back to back study trials. After presentation
of these five blocks, participants were verbally presented
the memory instructions. The forget instruction specified
that List 1 was ``only for practice'' to familiarize participants with the task and that there was no need to
remember those words for the target detection task component. The remember instruction specified that List 1
included only the first half of the words from the study
list and that those words needed to be remembered for
the target detection task component. Next, all participants studied List 2, which were presented in the exact
same manner as List 1.
Following the presentation of List 2, participants
completed a 2-min arithmetic task. Next, participants
were verbally presented with the test instructions. The
respond-all test instruction specified that the F1 key
was required to be pressed in response to both List 1
and List 2 targets. The respond-list2 test instruction
specified that the F1 key was required to be pressed only
in response to List 2 targets, but not in response to List 1
targets. Participants were instructed to follow this test
instruction, regardless of whether it was congruent or
incongruent with the memory instruction they were previously administered. Participants then completed a second 2-min arithmetic task. The experimenter then
initiated the lexical decision task, without reference to
the target detection task component.
Results and discussion
Task interference
There was no evidence of task interference when the
accuracy of lexical decisions was examined, and
accuracy was at ceiling (95%). Therefore, consistent with
previous PM research (e.g., Loft & Yeo, in press; Marsh
et al., 2003; Smith, 2003) the average response time to
the lexical decision task (non-target trials) was the
dependent measure. Also consistent with previous PM
research, several trials were excluded. First, we excluded
trials that contained List 1 or List 2 targets, and non-target trials where the F1 key was pressed (6.75%
excluded). These trials were excluded in order to avoid
response costs associated with target recognition-verification processes that are evoked on target trials, retrieval of responses (i.e., press F1), and co-ordination of
target detection responses with ongoing task responses
(see Einstein et al., 2005; Loft & Yeo, in press; Marsh
et al., 2003). Second, we excluded the two trials that
followed these aforementioned trials (13.5%). These
trials were excluded in order to avoid response costs
associated with post-output target detection monitoring
processes (see Einstein et al., 2005). Third, we excluded

responses greater than 3SD from a participant's grand
mean, and trials that contained a lexical decision error
(6.5%). On the basis of effect sizes in the PM literature,
power calculations were based on the detection of medium size effects (Cohen, 1988).
Fig. 2 presents the task interference data. We proposed
that contexts reinstated by test instructions would vary
in their compatibility with the contexts established
at study, and that task interference would provide a
behavioral probe into the complexity of accessing the
targets associated with these study contexts. The task
interference data supported this proposal. A 2 (memory
instruction) * 2 (test instruction) ANOVA revealed a
significant interaction between memory instruction and
test instruction, F(1, 106) = 4.32, MSE = 64500.32,
p < .05. Neither main effect were significant, Fs < 1. As
predicted, task interference was greater when test
instructions were incongruent with study contexts,
compared to when congruent. This interaction remained
significant when yes responses to words were analyzed
separately, F(1, 106) = 4.1, MSE = 101338.62, p < .05.
The interaction effect for no responses to non-words
approached significance, F(1, 106) = 3.02, MSE =
34077.95, p = .08 (power = .45)
Follow up simple effect tests (words/non-words
combined) for the forget condition indicated that task
interference was significantly greater when responding
to both lists (M = 767.38, SD = 137.73), compared to
when responding selectively to List 2 (M = 701.87,
SD = 122.78), t(52) = 1.85, p < .05. However, for the
remember condition, the predicted increase in task
interference when responding selectively to List 2
(M = 745.89, SD = 128.77), compared to when responding to both lists (M = 714.51, SD = 96.45), did not reach
significance, t(54) = 1.03, p = .15 (power = .58). While

780

Response Time (ms)

470

RespAll
RespList2

740

700

660

620
Remember

Forget

Memory Instruction
Fig. 2. Response times to non-target trials (task interference) as
a function of memory instructions and test instructions in
Experiment 1. Error bars represent standard errors.

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

the manipulation of test context does not appear to be as
sensitive for tapping into the memory structures established by the remember instruction as it was for tapping
into the memory structures established by the forget
instruction, this may alternatively be due to a lack of
power.
Target detection
Targets were scored as correctly detected if participants remembered to press the F1 key on the target trial
(92.1% of correct responses), or for late responses where
the F1 key was pressed on the trial that followed (7.9%
of correct responses). Exclusion of late responses did not
significantly influence the results reported, so we scored
them as correct. In this and the subsequent experiment
the parameter d 0 was used as the measure of sensitivity
(Green & Swets, 1966). In cases where d 0 was calculated
we used the loglinear method to adjust for extreme Hit
(=1) and FA (=0) values (Stanislaw & Todorov,
1999). The loglinear method involves adding 0.5 to the
number of hits and false alarms, and adding 1 to the
number of signal (target) and noise trials (non-target).
Uncorrected Hits and false alarms, as a function of
memory and test instructions, are presented in Table 2.
Benefits of DF (List 2). A 2 (memory instruction) * 2
(test instruction) ANOVA on hits for List 2 revealed a
main effect of memory instruction, F(1, 106) = 5.51,
MSE = .276, p < .05, and test instruction, F(1, 106) =
4.84, MSE = .242, p < .05. The interaction was not significant, F(1, 106) = 2.34, MSE = .117, p = .13. Analysis
of false alarms revealed a main effect of memory instruction, F(1, 106) = 15.68, MSE = .035, p < .01. Participants in the forget condition recognized more List 2
targets and made fewer false alarms than those in the
remember condition (mirror effect). Greater learning of
List 2 by participants in the forget condition was confirmed by a main effect of memory instruction on d 0 ,
F(1, 106) = 23.67, MSE = 13.99, p < .01, indicating that
participants in the forget condition (M = 2.65,
SD = .86) discriminated List 2 targets from non-targets

Table 2
Uncorrected Hits on List 1 and List 2, and Uncorrected False
alarms, as a function of memory and test instruction in
Experiment 1
Study instructions

Test instructions
Hits: List 1

Hits: List 2

False alarms

Remember
Forget

.73
.72

Respond-all
.57
.74

.06
.03

Remember
Forget

.28
.33

Respond-List 2
.54
.58

.05
.01

471

better than those in the remember condition (M = 1.94,
SD = .65). This finding converges with recent studies
that have found benefits of the forget instruction on recognition performance with longer lists (Benjamin, 2006;
Sahakyan & Delaney, 2005).
Inspection of hit rates in Table 2 indicates that List 2
targets were not detected as often as List 1 targets by
participants in the remember condition when responding
to both lists. In contrast, detection of List 2 and List 1
targets were almost identical for those in the forget condition when responding to both lists. This pattern of
data suggest that, in addition to the possible use of more
elaborate encoding strategies following forget instructions (Sahakyan & Delaney, 2003), participants in the
remember condition may have been rehearsing List 1
targets while List 2 was being presented (Benjamin,
2006; Bjork, 1970), or were not paying as much attention to List 2 as they had to List 1 (Underwood,
1978). Regardless of the explanation it is apparent that
participants in the remember condition did not learn
List 2 targets as well as List 1 targets, whereas List 1
and List 2 targets were equally learned by those in the
forget condition.
Costs of DF (List 1). In order to facilitate the interpretation of the List 1 data separate analyses were conducted for the two test conditions. It is clear from Table
2 that participants in the forget condition made fewer
false alarms than those in the remember condition,
under both respond-all, F(1, 53) = 4.66, MSE = .002,
p < .05, and respond-list 2 test conditions, F(1, 53) =
12.31, MSE = .002, p < .01. However, when participants
were responding to both lists at test, there was no difference in hits to List 1 or d 0 (Fs < 1) between forget and
remember conditions. This is consistent with DF
research (e.g., Sahakyan & Delaney, 2005), and the common failure to find contextual reinstatement effects in
recognition (e.g., Smith & Vela, 2001).
When participants were instructed to only respond to
List 2, although there was no significant difference in
hits, F(1, 53) = 1.21, MSE = .04, p > .05, analysis of d 0
indicated that participants in the forget condition
(M = 1.97, SD = .60) discriminated List 1 targets from
non-targets better than those in the remember condition
(M = 1.17, SD = .68), F(1, 53) = 21.45, MSE = .41,
p < .01. However, participants following the test instructions should have been saying no to List 1 targets so this
represents poorer performance. Further, the difference
between the means for the List 2 and List 1 distributions
(measured in d 0 units) for the forget condition (M = .66,
SD = .92) was not significantly different from that of the
remember condition (M = .75, SD = .64), F < 1. This
trend is actually suggestive of slightly poorer list discrimination performance following forget instructions not
the better performance that an enhanced contextual discriminability of List 1 from List 2 targets would seem to
predict.

472

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

However, according to the reasoning behind the
process dissociation procedure, neither of these measures is a pure measure of list discrimination (Humphreys, Dennis, Chalmers, & Finnigan, 2000a; Jacoby,
1991). We required one group of participants to say
yes to List 2 targets (exclusion condition) and a second group to say yes to both List 1 and List 2 targets
(inclusion condition). When we subtract the exclusion
probability from the inclusion probability the result
is .16 for the forget condition and .03 for the remember condition. According to Jacoby (1991) this is an
estimate of recollection which is the memory component which produces list discrimination. More generally, as Humphreys et al. showed, it is the
probability of successful list discrimination conditional
on successful recognition. Thus it does look like list
discrimination performance is better following forget
than remember instructions. This finding is consistent
with our assumption that participants create more
highly differentiated List 1 and List 2 contexts following forget instructions. However, because participants
in the forget condition better learnt List 2 targets,
we cannot rule out the possibility that this better list
discrimination performance is due to the superior
learning, and not to a more discriminating List 2
context.

Experiment 2
A second experiment was conducted to replicate
the task interference effects found in Experiment 1
using an alternative manipulation of test context. In
Experiment 2, the test instructions informed all participants to respond to both lists during the lexical decision task. Half of the participants were also told that
they would be required to discriminate list membership (respond-all-discriminate; Whetstone, Cross, &
Whetstone, 1996), while the other half were not given
this additional requirement (respond-all). The reason
for choosing this specific manipulation is that the
respond-all-discriminate condition gives us a direct
measure of list discrimination. That is, it measures
the probability of successful list discrimination conditional on successful recognition. Note that the use of
a condition where participants responded to only List
1 targets was not used as it may be more complex to
do this than responding to only List 2 targets (see
Dennis & Humphreys, 2001) and because neither of
the exclusion tasks provides a direct measure of list
discrimination.
Participants given remember instructions and
required to discriminate between List 1 and List 2 targets may be required to reinstate separate contexts for
the two lists by segregating their primary contextual
representation of the entire experimental list. In con-

trast, participants given the forget instruction will
already have two relatively distinct contexts associated
with the two lists. Identical to Experiment 1, we predicted an interaction between memory instruction
and test instruction, in that task interference should
be greater when test instructions are incongruent with
the contextual representations established at study and
associated with targets, compared to when they are
congruent. We also hoped to get converging evidence
on the process dissociation analysis in Experiment 1
by showing that list discrimination accuracy was
greater following forget than following remember
instructions.
Method
Participants
A total of 116 students from the same population as
Experiment 1 participated in return for course credit. No
participants in Experiment 2 had previously participated
in Experiment 1. Two participants were excluded
(forget/respond-all, & remember/respond-all-discriminate)
because they did not make a single F1 key response.
Design
The design was a 2 (memory: remember vs.
forget) * 2 (test: respond-all vs. respond-all-discriminate)
between-subjects design. For participants given
respond-all test instructions, there were 29 participants
in the remember condition and 28 participants in the
forget condition. For participants given respond-all-discriminate test instructions, there were 28 participants in
the remember condition and 29 participants in the forget
condition.
Materials and procedure
The materials and procedure were identical to
Experiment 1, with two exceptions. There were a relatively large number of late responses in Experiment 1.
In order to improve both the reliability of our recognition accuracy data and the generality of our findings,
instructions in Experiment 2 did not specify that if participants mistakenly pressed the space bar instead of the
F1 key after detecting a target, then they could press
the F1 key on the next trial. Instead, they were told
to press F1 on actual target trials in order to be scored
correct. Second, test instructions were modified. Identical to Experiment 1, the respond-all test instruction
specified that the F1 key was to be pressed in response
to both List 1 and List 2. The respond-all-discriminate
test instruction also specified that the F1 key was
required to be pressed in response to both List 1 and
List 2. However, the respond-all-discriminate test
instruction also stated that if the F1 key was pressed,
a response box would be presented asking from which
study list the target originated.

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Results and discussion
Task interference
Consistent with Experiment 1, there was no evidence
of task interference when the accuracy of lexical decisions was examined and accuracy was at ceiling (95%).
Using the same criteria as Experiment 1, we excluded trials that contained List 1 or List 2 targets, and non-target
trials where the F1 key was pressed (6.32% excluded).
Second, we excluded the two trials that followed these
aforementioned trials (12.64%). Third, we excluded
responses greater than 3SD from a participant's grand
mean, and trials that contained a lexical decision error
(6.4%).
Fig. 3 presents the task interference data. A 2 (memory instruction) * 2 (test instruction) ANOVA revealed a
significant interaction between memory instruction and
test instruction, F(1, 110) = 4.1, MSE = 61691.89,
p < .05. Neither main effect was significant, Fs < 1. Replicating Experiment 1, task interference was greater
when test instructions were incongruent with study contexts, compared to when congruent. This interaction
remained significant when yes responses to words were
analyzed separately, F(1, 110) = 4.1, MSE = 77520.98,
p < .05. Although the trends in means were in a consistent direction, the interaction for no responses to nonwords did not reach significance, F(1, 110) = 2.51,
MSE = 39035.56, p = .12 (power = .46).
Follow up simple effect tests (words/non-words combined) for the remember condition indicated that task
interference was significantly greater when required to
respond to both lists and discriminate list membership
(M = 756.84, SD = 172.86), compared to when only
responding to both lists (M = 688.77, SD = 73.13),
t(55) = 1.95, p < .05. However, for the forget condition,

RespAll
RespAll-Discrim

Response Time (ms)

780

473

the predicted increase in task interference when responding to both lists (M = 735.28, SD = 127.67), compared
to when responding to both lists and discriminating list
membership (M = 710.27, SD = 96.07), did not reach
significance, t(55) = .84, p = .20 (power = .59). Thus
the manipulation of test context in Experiment 2 does
not appear to be as sensitive for tapping into the memory structures established by the forget instruction as it
was for tapping into the memory structures established
by the remember instruction. This is the opposite pattern
to that obtained in Experiment 1. However, at this stage
we cannot tell whether this is a real difference produced
by the ways we manipulated test context or simply represents a lack of power in the individual experiments.
Combined experiment analysis
To increase power, analyses were conducted on the
combined data for Experiments 1 and 2, with a total
of 224 subjects. An ANOVA for non-word trials
revealed a significant interaction between memory
instruction and test instruction, F(1, 220) = 5.51,
MSE = 72967.01, p < .05. Thus, even on non-word trials, task interference was greater when test instructions
were incongruent with study contexts, compared to
when congruent. Simple effects tests were also conducted
(words/non-words). For the remember condition, the
test instruction to respond to both lists (Experiments 1
and 2) was congruent with study context, whereas the
test instruction to respond selectively to List 2 (Experiment 1) or to discriminate list membership (Experiment
2) was incongruent. For the forget condition the reverse
was true. Simple effect tests confirmed that task interference was significantly greater for the remember condition when test instructions were incongruent with
study (M = 751.36, SD = 151.13), compared to when
congruent (M = 701.42, SD = 85.60), t(111) = 2.17,
p < .05. The same simple effect test for the forget condition reached significance (incongruent, M = 751.04,
SD = 132.46; congruent, M = 706.22, SD = 108.83),
t(109) = 1.95, p < .05.
Target detection

740

700

660

620
Remember

Forget

Memory Instruction
Fig. 3. Response times to non-target trials (task interference) as
a function of memory instructions and test instructions in
Experiment 2. Error bars represent standard errors.

Targets were scored as correctly detected if participants remembered to press the F1 key on the target trial
(99.3%), or on the trial that immediately followed
(0.7%). It is clear that the change in instruction was
effective in decreasing late responding (in Experiment 1
7.9% of correct responses were made late). Uncorrected
Hits and false alarms, as a function of memory and test
instructions, are presented in Table 3.
Benefits of DF (List 2). A 2 (memory instruction) * 2
(test instruction) ANOVA conducted on hits for List 2
revealed no main effect for memory instruction,
F(1, 110) = 1.68, MSE = .11, p > .05. However, inspection of hit rates in Table 3 indicates that, consistent with

474

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Table 3
Uncorrected Hits on List 1 and List 2, and Uncorrected False
alarms, as a function of memory and test instruction in
Experiment 2
Study instructions

Test instructions
Hits: List 1

Hits: List 2

False alarms

Remember
Forget

.67
.66

Respond-all
.59
.66

.04
.03

Remember
Forget

.70
.69

Respond-all-discriminate
.63
.03
.68
.01

Experiment 1, List 2 targets were not detected as often
as List 1 targets by participants in the remember condition under either test condition. In contrast, detection of
List 2 and List 1 targets were almost identical for participants in the forget condition under both test conditions.
Consistent with Experiment 1, analysis of false alarms
revealed a main effect for memory instruction,
F(1, 110) = 6.62, MSE = .01, p < .05, with participants
in the forget condition making fewer false alarms than
those in the remember condition. A main effect was also
found for test instruction, F(1, 110) = 5.87, MSE = .007,
p < .05, indicating that participants required to discriminate list membership made fewer false alarms than
those not required to discriminate list membership.
Although the mirror effect found in Experiment 1 was
not as strong in Experiment 2, greater learning of List
2 by participants in the forget condition was confirmed
by a main effect of memory instruction on d 0 ,
F(1, 110) = 4.28, MSE = 3.28, p < .05, with participants
in the forget condition (M = 2.67, SD = .74) discriminating List 2 targets from non-targets better than those
in the remember condition (M = 2.32, SD = 1).
Costs of DF (List 1). Analysis of hits revealed no
effects, Fs < 1. Analysis of d 0 for List 1 revealed that
there was no main effect for memory instruction,
F < 1, no main effect for test instruction,
F(1, 110) = 3.3, MSE = 2.4, p = .07, and no interaction,
F < 1. This is consistent with the respond-all test condition in Experiment 1, DF research (e.g., Sahakyan &
Delaney, 2005), and the lack of context reinstatement
effects in recognition (e.g., Smith & Vela, 2001).
List discrimination. List discrimination was scored as
correct if participants correctly identified the source
(List 1, List 2) of a detected target. Participants in the
forget condition (M = 81, SD = 13) discriminated list
membership more accurately than those in the remember condition (M = 73, SD = 16), t(55) = 2.10, p < .05,
conditional on successful recognition. Experiment 2 provides converging evidence on the process dissociation
analysis in Experiment 1 by showing that list discrimination accuracy was greater following forget than remem-

ber instructions. However, this finding is still
complicated by the superior learning of List 2 following
the instruction to forget, which makes it difficult to
determine whether the enhanced ability to discriminate
between lists is due to the creation of more highly distinct contexts or the greater learning of List 2.

General discussion
We have used the Dennis and Humphreys (2001) theory to motivate the experiments in this paper. This was
done because the Dennis and Humphreys theory along
with other writings by Humphreys and colleagues (Bain
& Humphreys, 1988; Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989;
Humphreys et al., 2003; Humphreys, Tehan, O'Shea,
& Bolland, 2000b; Tehan, Humphreys, Tolan, & Pitcher,
2004; Weeks et al., in press) directly addresses the role of
context in human memory, including the role played by
instructions in reinstating experimental context. This
body of work has produced specific support for the
assumption that the use of context with explicit but
not implicit retrieval instructions is a major factor in
the processes differentiating the effects of these instructions (Humphreys et al., 2000a, 2000b; Tehan et al.). It
has also supported the idea of pre-access control processes (Humphreys et al., 2003; Weeks et al.). Most
importantly it has provided guidance in the design of
the current set of experiments. However, there is no contention that the results uniquely support the Dennis and
Humphreys theory. In addition there is no contention
that a specific role for instructions cannot be identified
in other theoretical approaches such as source monitoring (Johnson et al., 1993), dual processing theory
(Jacoby, 1991), and transfer appropriate processing
(Roediger, Weldon, & Challis, 1989). Nevertheless the
role of instructions has been better developed in the
work of Humphreys and his colleagues than it has in
these other approaches, and thus provided more guidance to the design of experiments.
Although most if not all memory researchers would
support a role for context and for the test instructions
in reinstating the experimental context, quality demonstrations of this have been lacking. The problem is due
to the insensitivity of the recognition paradigms to contextual reinstatement effects (e.g., Godden & Baddeley,
1980; Smith et al., 1978; Smith & Vela, 2001). That is,
it has not been possible to consistently demonstrate that
recognition accuracy is higher when the recognition context matches the study context than when it mismatches,
other than in incidental learning conditions, when initial
learning of stimuli are poor, or when novel stimuli are
used (see Smith & Vela, 2001). These equivocal effects
of context change on recognition accuracy are potentially problematic for theories of memory where context
plays a critical role (e.g., Dennis & Humphreys, 2001;

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Hintzman, 1988; Humphreys et al., 1989; Gillund &
Shiffrin, 1984; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981).
Across two experiments we have been able to demonstrate this long sought after interaction between study
and test contexts. However, the interaction was not in
recognition accuracy but in the interference with a concurrent ongoing task. As argued earlier, it is probable
that primary representations were easier to reinstate or
maintain in an active format than secondary representations, leading to differences in task interference. However, it is also probable that secondary representations
could be reinstated or maintained, and sufficiently
accessed, given the allocation of a certain amount of
resources, thus producing no decrement in recognition
accuracy. For example, while the secondary representation of the combined lists may have been slightly
degraded following forget instructions, the lack of costs
of DF indicate that recognition memory was not sensitive to this level of degradation. Task interference could
be used in future research to investigate the kinds of contextual reinstatement effects (e.g., physical environment,
background context, state dependence) on recognition
performance which have long eluded memory researchers. This alternative approach to examining context reinstatement in recognition may prove more sensitive than
traditional measures of recognition accuracy.
This not withstanding, the concept of `context' is
often imprecise and difficult to define, and has been used
to refer to varying phenomena across different research
settings. Thus, it is important to be clear regarding what
context might represent in the current study. Dual-processing approaches emphasize the way in which a participant has been instructed to process words within a list
as a source of context and list discriminating information (Johnson et al., 1993). In this manner, context
may be linked to participants' representation of the task
that they perform, possibly represented as a cue or tag
attached to a word or word lists in memory (Anderson
& Bower, 1973). In the current study, contexts may
include any or all of the following: (a) summaries of
memory and test instructions, (b) task descriptions
established by participants in response to these instructions, (c) temporal codes, or (d) explicit symbolic tags
(Bain & Humphreys, 1988; Dennis & Humphreys, 2001).
List discrimination following forget instructions,
compared to following remember instructions, was better in Experiment 2 which used a direct measure and
in Experiment 1 which used an indirect measure. This
finding supports our assumption that contextual representations were more sharply differentiated following
forget instructions than following remember instructions. Unfortunately it may also result from the superior
learning of List 2 targets following forget instructions,
though this is less likely in Experiment 2 where there
was less of a List 2 learning difference than in Experiment 1. Note that in some models such as REM (Shiffrin

475

& Steyvers, 1997) features are learned probabilistically.
As more features are learned there is an increase in discriminability. This is the reason we are hesitant to claim
that we have evidence that the contexts established by
the forget instructions are more discriminable as long
as there is evidence for greater List 2 learning following
these instructions. The benefits of DF (greater List 2
learning following forget instructions) for recognition
that we demonstrated here have generally not been
found in the DF literature, although some research has
found that benefits emerge with longer study lists
(30+) (Benjamin, 2006; Sahakyan & Delaney, 2005).
We used comparatively short lists of 10 words per list,
but this was coupled with multiple (five) study trials.
Thus, our study duration, and subsequent opportunity
for the effects of encoding strategy (Sahakyan & Delaney, 2003), selective rehearsal (Benjamin, 2006; Bjork,
1970) or task fatigue/boredom (Underwood, 1978) to
occur, was comparable to those studies that used longer
lists. Most importantly, the benefits of DF clearly do not
represent context reinstatement effects as they were
found irrespective of test condition.
Our results also allow us to reject an extreme form of
post-access decision making which would be compatible
with at least some ideas about source monitoring (Johnson et al., 1993) or dual process theory (e.g., Jacoby,
1991; Mandler, 1980). Suppose that the decision about
whether or not a test stimulus is a target only takes place
after the memory access process is complete. That is,
after recollection has occurred and after the familiarity
of the test stimulus is known. The match or mismatch
of the test instructions (press the F1 key for both List
1 and List 2 targets, or press the F1 key for List 2 targets
only) may influence the speed of the decision if it is
based on recollection. That is, if asked to say yes to List
2 targets only, the participant must decide what kind of
thoughts or reactions constitute evidence for List 2. This
decision may be easier after forget instructions than
after remember instructions. For example, if a participants thoughts or reactions change more after a forget
instruction than after a remember instruction, the decision about whether to accept or reject a List 1 and List
2 target might be easier and faster after forget than after
remember instructions.
However, a critical point and innovation of the current paper is that it made testable predictions regarding
response times to non-target trials. That is, the task
interference was not measured on List 1 and List 2 targets (for demonstrations of this in the DF literature see
Cruse & Jones, 1976; Howard, 1976), but rather on nontargets, items which had not been previously presented.
These items might vary in familiarity but they should
support little or no recollective experience. A decision
based on familiarity (is the observed familiarity greater
than or less than the criterion) should not vary as a function of the match between study and test conditions. In

476

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

the current study this would be especially true for nontargets that were non-words. These non-words can be
readily distinguished from the targets and it is unlikely
that participants would ever make a decision about
which list they came from. While the interaction between
study and test condition for the task interference nonwords did not reach significance in either experiment,
in the combined analysis this interaction was significant.
Thus, the task interference is not compatible with theories of memory where context (source) is assumed to be
recollected only at the late decision stage. We are not
disputing the fact that post-access decision processes
play a clear and large role in controlling memory output.
However, the problem is that these post-access decision
theories are silent to the operation of pre-access processes, and in our view, over-emphasize the importance
of post-access processes.
Thus, we contend that task interference to non-targets
is better explained by a theory that locates an important
component of control at the pre-decision stage. According to Dennis and Humphreys (2001), the contexts reinstated by test instructions would have influenced
individual's expectations about what kinds of information they were looking for in memory (e.g., all words,
List 2 only), thus changing how memory was inspected.
This interpretation converges with Humphreys et al.
(2003), who argued that individuals in their study
accessed modality-specific information at test in accordance with the context reinstated by test instructions.
Similarly, Jacoby et al. (2005) argue that specification
to individuals regarding how information is previously
encoded (e.g., meaning-based vs. semantic-based) influences the manner in which items are processed on memory tests, constraining what information comes to mind
during retrieval (source-constrained retrieval).
Although we can reject an extreme form of a late selection theory in favor of some form of early selection, it is
difficult at this stage to pinpoint the precise nature of
the cognitive mechanisms that operate on non-target trials to give rise to task interference. PM theories differ considerably in their proposals, and none of these accounts
have been well detailed. PAM theory claims that task
interference arises from the engagement of a preparatory
attention process that serves to maintain the intention to
detect targets (Smith & Bayen, 2006). In line with this,
Guynn (2003) proposed that a prerequisite for the successful detection of targets is that individuals maintain
their memory system in a retrieval mode (cf. Tulving,
1983), described as a general preparedness or a readiness
to treat ongoing task items as retrieval cues.
What it actually entails to `maintain an intention', or
to `maintain a retrieval mode', is difficult to specify. One
possibility is that these preparatory functions require
that representations of targets are maintained at an
increased level of activation, which persists until each
stored target is detected in the ongoing task. In line with

this view, Goschke and Kuhl (1993) proposed that targets (intentions) are maintained in memory at a higher
level of sub threshold activation than other information.
In the current study participants were presented with a
higher number of targets (20 targets) than in traditional
PM tasks (typically one to four targets are presented). It
is unlikely that participants maintained such a high
number of targets at an increased level of activation.
Instead, participants may have maintained a contextual
cue or pointer (tag) to the information that needed to be
retrieved as well as maintaining intent to use this pointer
(tag). In this theory the contextual cue is maintained at a
higher level of activation but the targets subsumed by
the contextual cue are not. Successful target detection
would occur because a memory retrieval process using
the contextual cue and maintained context would be initiated whenever an ongoing task item is presented,
regardless of whether the item is a target or non-target.
The initiation of this retrieval process would thus slow
ongoing task performance on both target and non-target
trials. The greater slowing on non-target trials in the
incongruent conditions as compared to the congruent
conditions would occur due to the greater complexity
involved in maintaining or using a secondary representation of context, as opposed to maintaining or using a
base level representation of context.
Other researchers would contend that the memory
access processes involved in identifying a presented
ongoing task item as a target would only occur for a
minority of the ongoing task items. The idea here is that
targets and some non-targets would elicit a sense of
familiarity (McDaniel et al., 2004). This sense of familiarity would initiate the memory retrieval process
required to identify a target. The greater interference
in the incongruent conditions as compared to the congruent conditions would occur because the memory
retrieval process is more difficult when a secondary contextual representation has to be reinstated or used than
when a base-level representation has to be reinstated or
used. In this version the greater amount of task interference which commonly occurs with an increased emphasis on the importance of detecting targets in ongoing
tasks (Loft & Yeo, in press; Smith & Bayen, 2004) would
occur because participants set a lower threshold for the
initiation of a retrieval attempt. That is, participants
require less familiarity before attempting to retrieve
the information that is needed in order to identify an
ongoing task item as being a target.
Of course, it is equally plausible that a portion of
the task interference effect arose from preparatory processes, and a portion created anew by familiarity with
attended items. One potentially diagnostic test would
be to present consonant strings as non-words, making
discrimination between words and non-words easier.
We demonstrated intermediate task interference effects
(trend in consistent direction) for pronounceable

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

non-words. If task interference reflects general
preparations made for memory access (perhaps via
an attention allocation policy set at encoding; Marsh,
Cook, & Hicks, 2007), than we should find similar
task interference for non pronounceable non-words
as for pronounceable non-words. In contrast, if task
interference is created anew by a sense of significance
or familiarity with attended items, we would not
expect to find task interference with non pronounceable non-words. An alternative could be to have participants link their intention to detect targets to a
particular stimulus class (e.g., pictures, words), or a
pre-specified block of trials. It has been demonstrated
that task interference can be reduced by warning participants on a trial by trial basis of the relevance of
ongoing task items to target detection (Marsh et al.,
2007), and even eliminated by informing participants
that targets will not be presented in an upcoming
block of trials (Marsh, Hicks, & Cook, 2006). Thus,
preparatory attention can be adjusted when participants can predict the relevance of upcoming trials to
target detection. An interesting twist would be to present stimuli relevant to target detection (but not actual
targets) on blocks of trials where targets are not
expected. If task interference effects are demonstrated
on such trials it would suggest that at least part of
the task interference effect is created by a sense of
significance or familiarity with attended stimuli, in
addition to any control processes prepared in advance.
In conclusion, there has been more emphasis in the
memory literature on post-output decision processes
than on pre-access control processes. The current study
has contributed to addressing this imbalance. We successfully merged methods from the DF and PM literatures to create a task paradigm that could be used to
examine the processes involved in the control of memory
access. Contexts reinstated by test instructions influenced the complexity of the preparations or processes
required to access memory, and we measured the emergence of this complexity through task interference. Several avenues were raised for further enquiry. Continued
systematic investigation using the experimental task paradigm introduced here has potential for continuing to
delineate how individuals constrain and select information that is stored in memory, and how context reinstatement affects recognition memory.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1973). Human associative
memory. Oxford, England: V.H. Winston & Sons.
Bain, J. D., & Humphreys, M. S. (1988). The relational context
effect: Cues, meanings or configurations. In G. Davis & D.
Thomson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context in memory
(pp. 97-138). London: Wiley.

477

Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Neely, J. H.,
Nelson, D., & Simpson, G. B., et al. (2002). The English
lexicon project: A web-based repository of descriptive and
behavioral measures for 40,481 English words and nonwords. Available from http://elexicon.wustl.edu/.
Banks, W. P. (2000). Recognition and source memory as
multivariate decision processes. Psychological Science, 11,
267-273.
Basden, B. H., & Basden, D. R. (1996). Directed forgetting:
Further comparisons of the item and list methods. Memory,
4, 633-653.
Benjamin, A. S. (2006). The effects if list-method directed
forgetting on recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13, 831-836.
Bjork, R. A. (1970). Positive forgetting: The noninterference of
items intentionally forgotten. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 9, 255-268.
Bjork, R. A. (1989). Retrieval inhibition as an adaptive
mechanism in human memory. In H. L. Roediger, 111 &
F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp. 309-330).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Cruse, D., & Jones, R. A. (1976). Intentional forgetting of tones
in a choice recognition-time task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2, 577-585.
Dennis, S. (1995). The Sydney Morning Herald Word Database. Noetica: Open Forum, 1(4). Retrieved February 2
2005. Available from http://psy.uq.edu.au/CogPsych/
Noetica.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model
of episodic word recognition. Psychological Review, 108,
452-478.
Einstein, G. O., & McDaniel, M. A. (1990). Normal aging and
prospective memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 717-726.
Einstein, G. O., McDaniel, M. A., Thomas, R., Mayfield, S.,
Shank, H., Morrisette, N., et al. (2005). Multiple processes
in prospective memory retrieval: Factors determining monitoring versus spontaneous retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 327-342.
Geiselman, R. E., Bjork, R. A., & Fishman, D. L. (1983).
Disrupted retrieval in directed forgetting: A link with
posthypnotic amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 112, 58-72.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for
both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1980). When does context
influence recognition memory? British Journal of Psychology, 71, 99-104.
Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (1993). Representation of intentions:
Persisting activation in memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19,
1211-1226.
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and
psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Guynn, M. J. (2003). A two-process model of strategic
monitoring in event-based prospective memory: Activation/retrieval mode and checking. International Journal of
Psychology, 38, 245-256.

478

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479

Hicks, J. L., Marsh, R. L., & Cook, G. I. (2005). Task
interference in time-based, event-based, and dual intention
prospective memory conditions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53, 430-444.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and recognition memory in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 95, 528-551.
Howard, D. V. (1976). Search and decision processes in
intentional forgetting: A reaction time analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2,
566-576.
Humphreys, M. S., Bain, J. D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory for
episodic, semantic and procedural tasks. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233.
Humphreys, M. S., Dennis, S., Chalmers, K. A., & Finnigan, S.
(2000a). Dual processes in recognition: Does a focus on
measurement operations provide a sufficient foundation.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 593-603.
Humphreys, M. S., Dennis, S., Maguire, A. M., Reynolds, K.,
Bolland, S. W., & Hughes, J. D. (2003). What you get out of
memory depends on the question you ask. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
29, 797-812.
Humphreys, M. S., Tehan, G., O'Shea, A., & Bolland, S. W.
(2000b). Target similarity effects: Support for parallel
distributed processing accounts. Memory & Cognition, 28,
798-811.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework.
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513-541.
Jacoby, L. L., Shimizu, Y., Daniels, K. A., & Rhodes, M. G.
(2005). Modes of cognitive control in recognition and source
memory: Depth of retrieval. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12, 852-857.
Jacoby, L. L., Shimizu, Y., Velanova, K., & Rhodes, M.
G. (2005). Age differences in depth of retrieval:
Memory for foils. Journal of Memory and Language,
52, 493-504.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3-28.
Koriat, A., & Goldsmith, M. (1996). Monitoring and control
processes in the strategic regulation of memory accuracy.
Psychological Review, 103, 490-517.
Loft, S., & Yeo., G. (in press). An investigation into the
resource requirements of event-based prospective memory.
Memory & Cognition.
MacLeod, C. M. (1998). Directed forgetting. In J. M. Golding
& C. M. MacLeod (Eds.), Intentional forgetting: Interdisciplinary approaches (pp. 1-57). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous
occurrence. Psychological Review, 87(3), 252-271.
Marsh, R. L., Cook, G. I., & Hicks, J. L. (2007). Task
interference from event-based intentions can be material
specific. Memory & Cognition, 1, 1636-1643.
Marsh, R. L., & Hicks, J. L. (1998). Test formats change
source-monitoring decision processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24,
1137-1151.
Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., & Cook, G. I. (2006). Task
interference from prospective memories covaries with con-

textual associations of fulfilling them. Memory & Cognition,
34, 1037-1045.
Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., Cook, G. I., Hansen, J. S., & Pallos,
A. L. (2003). Interference to ongoing activities covaries with
the characteristics of an event-based intention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 861-870.
McDaniel, M. A., Guynn, M. J., Einstein, G. O., &
Breneiser, J. (2004). Cue-focused and automatic-associative processes in prospective memory retrieval. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 605-614.
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93-134.
Roediger, H. L., Weldon, M. S., & Challis, B. H. (1989).
Explaining dissociations between implicit and explicit measures of retention: A processing account. In H. L. Roediger
& F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp. 3-41). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sahakyan, L., & Delaney, P. F. (2003). Can encoding
differences explain the benefits of directed forgetting in the
list method paradigm? Journal of Memory and Language, 48,
195-206.
Sahakyan, L., & Delaney, P. F. (2005). Directed forgetting
in incidental learning and recognition testing: Support
for a two-factor account. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31,
789-801.
Sahakyan, L., & Kelley, C. M. (2002). A contextual change
account of the directed forgetting effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28,
1064-1072.
Schneider, A., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-prime
reference guide. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology Software Tools.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition
memory: REM: Retrieving effectively from Memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Smith, R. E. (2003). The cost of remembering to remember in
event-based prospective memory: Investigating the capacity
demands of delayed intention performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 347-361.
Smith, R. E., & Bayen, U. J. (2004). A multinomial model of
prospective memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 756-777.
Smith, R. E., & Bayen, U. J. (2006). The source of adult age
differences in event-based prospective memory: A multinomial modeling approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 623-635.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A. M., & Bjork, R. A. (1978).
Environmental context and human memory. Memory &
Cognition, 6, 342-353.
Smith, S. M., & Vela, E. (2001). Environmental contextdependent memory: A review and meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 203-220.
Stanislaw, H., & Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of signal
detection theory measures. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments and Computers, 31, 137-149.
Tehan, G., Humphreys, M. S., Tolan, G. A., & Pitcher, C.
(2004). The role of context in producing item interactions

S. Loft et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2008) 465-479
and false memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 107-119.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Underwood, B. J. (1978). Recognition memory as a function of
length of study list. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 12,
89-91.

479

Weeks, C. S., Humphreys, M. S., & Hockley, W. E., (in press).
Buffered forgetting: When targets and distracters are both
forgotten. Memory & Cognition.
Whetstone, T., Cross, M. D., & Whetstone, L. M. (1996).
Inhibition, contextual segregation, and subject strategies in
list method directed forgetting. Consciousness and Cognition,
5, 395-417.

