Applied Psycholinguistics 29 (2008), 341-365
Printed in the United States of America
doi:10.1017/S0142716408080168

Elicitation of the passe compose in
French preschoolers with and without
specific language impairment
PHAEDRA ROYLE
Universite de Montreal, CHU Sainte-Justine, and CRLMB
ELIN T. THORDARDOTTIR
McGill University and CRLMB
Received: June 20, 2006

Accepted for publication: January 15, 2008

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Phaedra Royle, Universite de Montreal, Faculte de Medecine, Ecole d'orthophonie et d'audiologie,
C.P. 6128, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada. E-mail: phaedra.royle@
umontreal.ca
ABSTRACT
This study examines inflectional abilities in French-speaking children with specific language impairment (SLI) using a verb elicitation task. Eleven children with SLI and age-matched controls (37-
52 months) participated in the experiment. We elicited the passe compose using eight regular and eight
irregular high frequency verbs matched for age of acquisition. Children with SLI showed dissimilar
productive verb inflection abilities to control children (even when comparing participants with similar
verb vocabularies and mean length of utterance in words). Control children showed evidence of overregularization and sensitivity to morphological structure, whereas no such effects were observed in the
SLI group. Error patterns observed in the SLI group demonstrate that, at this age, they cannot produce
passe compose forms in elicitation tasks, even though some participants used them spontaneously.
Either context by itself might therefore be insufficient to fully evaluate productive linguistic abilities
in children with SLI.

Specific language impairment (SLI) is characterized by below normal language
proficiency in the presence of preserved general cognitive development that cannot
be explained as caused by other factors such as autism, neurological impairment,
or lack of linguistically relevant input (Leonard, 1998). Children with SLI have
difficulty producing inflected verbs, among others. Although patterns vary across
languages and across morphemes within languages, the research consistently reports difficulties with this aspect of acquisition and processing (see below). A
number of linguistically motivated theories have been put forward to explain
why children with SLI present these inflectional difficulties. Rice and colleagues
(Rice, Noll, & Grimm, 1997; Rice & Wexler, 1996; Rice, Wexler, & Cleave, 1995)
proposed that children with SLI show an acquisition pattern called the extended
(c) 2008 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/08 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

342

optional infinitive (EOI). According to the EOI hypothesis, children with SLI show
protracted development of tense-marking operations, such that they produce them
optionally. Young children acquiring English normally go through an OI stage,
where both finite and nonfinite root sentences are used optionally in contexts
requiring finite tense marking (Wexler, 1994, 1998) and infinitives or bare stems
(kick) are produced instead of appropriately inflected forms (kicked or kicks) in
contexts like *He kick the ball. When this pattern is found in older children with
SLI, it is interpreted as an extension of the OI period into later ages, at a time when
normally developing children have assimilated the obligatory nature of TENSE.
Paradis and Crago (2001) adapted this theory to French acquisition data. They propose that SLI be characterized as a stage of extended optional default (EOD). Error
types observed in French-speaking children with SLI are the production of verb
stems (use of the present in a past or future context) and bare participles (without
the auxiliary). Both patterns are found in SLI and language-matched (younger)
control children. Paradis and Crago (2001) conclude that the production of verb
stems (with no overt inflection) and bare participles are the French equivalent of
the OI stage in English. An alternative syntactic account of French SLI, proposed
by Jakubovicz (2003), explains verb production difficulties in French children as
a processing overload caused by the computational complexity (CC) of inflecting
verbs for tense, especially when auxiliaries with past participles or infinitives are
involved.
Gopnik and colleagues (Gopnik, Dalalakis, Fukuda, Fukuda, & Kehayia, 1997;
Ullman & Gopnik, 1994) proposed an SLI model based on dual-route language
processing theories. Dual-route theories postulate that at least two different processes are involved in language processing, one rule based and language dedicated,
and the other memory based and domain general (Marcus et al., 1992; Pinker,
1999). According to Gopnik and colleagues, general cognitive processes are not
impaired in people with SLI. However, language-specific modules are impaired,
more particularly the productive morphosyntactic rules such as tense marking.
Thus, people with SLI can learn and memorize words in the same way that young
children do, without internal morphological structure (see, e.g., Kim, Marcus,
Pinker, Hollander, & Coppola, 1994; Marcus et al., 1992). Difficulties arise when
morphosyntactic rules do not kick in to reduce the associative-based processing
load and upgrade it with a rule-based system. Children with language deficits have
to learn each and every past tense form for all the verbs they use. An important
factor mediating the learning of specific forms is token frequency. The higher
the frequency is in the child's language, the more likely the production of an
appropriate form. (This strategy could backfire, however, as overreliance on the
most frequent forms in a verbal paradigm inevitably leads to variable and erroneous
production in the absence of a grammar to verify contextual appropriateness.)
Other language-processing hypotheses have been proposed to account for SLI.
According to the surface account (Leonard, 1998; Leonard, Bortolini, Caselli,
McGregor, & Sabbadini, 1992; Leonard, Eyer, Bedore, & Grela, 1997), the structural properties of the morphemes and their linguistic environments influence the
child's ability to process them. In addition, children with SLI are believed to
have limited processing capacities. For example, English morphemes are typically found in unstressed positions and are not syllabic. They are therefore not

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

343

highlighted in the sound stream. Because of processing limitations (reduced processing speed), less salient morphemes are processed with more difficulty. These
difficulties result in weak representations of inflectional morphemes and their
omission in the output. However, this account cannot be generalized across different languages and morphemes (Gopnik et al., 1997). Leonard's own research
on Italian has shown that children with SLI tend to produce less salient morphemes (cant-a "sing-3s.f ") instead of more salient ones (cant-ano "sing-3p.f ")
in spontaneous speech (Leonard et al., 1992). In French, because morphemes
are often vocalic (e.g., past participle suffix -e ), syllabic (usually containing a
vowel) and stressed (word final stress falls on the suffix), they should pose no
saliency problems during processing. Auxiliaries are separate lexical items that
carry word stress. However, they are also monosyllabic and therefore unstressed
within the inflectional phrase. French children and adults with SLI show difficulty
producing inflected verb forms during elicitation tasks (Jakubovicz, 2003; Rose
& Royle, 1999) and in spontaneous speech output (Paradis & Crago, 2001; see,
however, Thordardottir & Namazi, 2007), although spontaneous speech errors are
less commonly seen in French than in English. The surface hypothesis is therefore
difficult to maintain in light of the crosslinguistic data. More recently, Leonard and
colleagues (Leonard, 1998; Leonard, Dromi, Adam, & Zadunaisky-Ehrlich, 2000)
proposed that a language's morphological richness can explain crosslinguistic differences in the abilities of children with SLI. If the language has a rich morphology
(e.g., Hebrew or Italian), children focus their energies on this aspect, because it
is structurally important. If the language has a sparse morphology (e.g., English),
children focus their energies on other structural aspects, such as word order. However, this explanation does not account for the obligatory versus optional nature
of morphological marking across different languages. For example, Hebrew verbs
are obligatorily marked for person, number and tense, whereas English verbs can
be bare (stem forms). Children never hear an uninflected form in Hebrew, whereas
they do in English. We should therefore expect to observe more stem forms in
spontaneous speech samples of English-speaking children with SLI compared to
their Hebrew-speaking counterparts, as these forms are part of the English input
and grammatically correct in certain configurations.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON VERB ACQUISITION IN FRENCH

The research on French acquisition in unimpaired speakers reveals acquisition
patterns that differ from those in English. From the outset, unimpaired Frenchspeaking children produce inflected verb forms for person, number, and tense.
Optional infinitives are quite rare in the spontaneous speech of young children (see
Thordardottir, 2005). In early spontaneous speech, French-speaking children produce the present indicative ( je roule [j@ rul] "I roll"),1 the imperative (roule! [rul]
"roll!"), the infinitive (rouler [rule] "to roll"), and bare past participles (without
the auxiliary, e.g., *roule [rule] "rolled"). This stage is followed by the appearance
of auxiliaries and modals in syntactic constructions (e.g., the passe compose, j'ai
roule "I have rolled," the periphrastic future, je vais rouler "I will roll," and modal
structures je veux manger "I want to eat") in addition to other syntactically complex
structures (e.g., verb + prepositional phrase + infinitive, c'est pour rouler "it's for

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

344

rolling"). Only after these stages, usually during the third year, are tense-marking
suffixes produced (e.g., imperfect, je roulais "I rolled"; Bassano, 1998; Bassano,
Maillochon, Klampfer, & Dressler, 2001; Gregoire, 1937; Kilani-Schoch, 2003;
Legendre, Hagstrom, Vainikka, & Todorova, 2002; Thordardottir, 2005). Finally,
auxiliary and modal-based inflection is the most frequent mode of inflecting the
past tense in all modern varieties of spoken French, and remains so throughout all
age strata after 4 years.
French children produce overregularizations of the passe compose, infinitive
forms and past participles in spontaneous speech (Gregoire, 1937) and during
elicitation tasks (Hiriarteborde, 1972). This occurs when a child inflects an irregular verb form using a regular (-er) or subregular (-ir) pattern (e.g., *il a voule for
il a voulu "he AUX want-PP" or *il a ouvri for il a ouvert "he AUX open-PP").
(See below for a discussion of conjugation groups.) Children overregularize less
frequently in spontaneous early French than in spontaneous early English (Royle,
2007; Thordardottir, 2005).
The passe compose is the first syntactically complex (i.e., auxiliary-based)
structure used by French children (Kilani-Schoch, 2003; Thordardottir, 2005).
They produce it using a present tense auxiliary form ( j'ai "I have" or je suis "I
am") in conjunction with the past participle of the main verb ( j'ai bu "I drank/have
drunk"). As mentioned above, children who have not fully acquired this structure
produce the bare past participle without the auxiliary, which is ungrammatical in
adult French. The French passe compose is the rough equivalent of the English
preterit in terms of meaning (perfective event), timing of acquisition and type frequency in everyday use. By studying this structure, we can uncover crosslinguistic
evidence on the acquisition of inflection in emerging grammars. In addition, we
can measure the relative effect of verb regularity on linguistic productivity in
acquisition patterns in languages other than English. A number of differences
exist between English and French verbs. First, most irregular French forms have
identifiable suffixes (e.g., buv-ait "drink-past"), whereas English irregulars are
more often portmanteau morphs, with a blurred distinction between stem and
affix (e.g., drank = drink-past). Thus, overregularization patterns can be observed
either in the stem (i.e., use of inappropriate stem) or the suffix, in French. A
second important difference is that the structure of the French passe compose is
more syntactically complex than the English past tense. However, this does not
seem to pose a problem in terms of acquisition, because French children produce
it at early stages of acquisition. Finally, and more importantly, the French verbal
system is made up of distinct conjugation patterns.
French verbs are divided into verb conjugation groups. The first conjugation is
regular and productive, and contains the overwhelming majority of French verbs.
All verbs in this class end in -er [e] in the infinitive, with the verbal paradigms
preserving a constant stem throughout (see Example 1a). The second conjugation
contains regular verbs ending in -ir [ir] in the infinitive, and can be described
as subregular, as it contains forms with constant stems throughout the paradigm,
novel forms are occasionally coined into it, and children can overregularize verbs
using this pattern (see Royle, 2007, for a discussion of the subregular status
of this conjugation group). Approximately 300 verbs are found in this class (see
Example 1b). A number of French verbs ending in -ir can also be irregular, and thus

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

345

belong to the third conjugation, which also contains verbs ending in -dre, -re, and
-oir(e) in the infinitive. Irregular French verbs exhibit stem changes on vowel(s) or
consonant(s). Some irregular verbs (auxiliaries, semiauxiliaries and modals) are
suppletive. Examples of irregular verbs are shown in Examples 1c (-ir irregular),
and 1d (other irregular).
1.
a.
b.
c.
d.

Infinitive
parler [paKle]
finir [finiK]
ouvrir [uvKiK]
boire [bwaK]

Present 3s
parle [paKl]
fini [fini]
ouvre [uvK]
boit [bwa]

Present 2p
parlez [paKle]
finissez [finise]
ouvrez [uvKe]
buvez [b4ve]

Past participle
parle [paKle]
fini [fini]
ouvert [uvEK]
bu [b4]

"to speak"
"to finish"
"to open"
"to drink"

When discussing verb regularity in French, we use the notion of stem consistency
throughout the paradigm. As illustrated above, regular -er and sub-regular -ir verbs
have a constant stem in all forms. Irregular verbs show stem changes that modify
vowels, consonants, or both.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON VERB USE IN FRENCH SPEAKERS
WITH SLI

Studies on SLI in French-speaking populations are relatively sparse. However,
several studies have shown that children with SLI who are learning French present
difficulties with inflection, particularly verb inflection (Jakubovicz & Nash, 2001),
but also with subject-verb agreement (Franck et al., 2004). Paradis and Crago
(2001) studied the acquisition of tense marking in spontaneous-speech samples
of French speakers with SLI. They showed that children with SLI used fewer
past and future than present tense forms (which are equivalent to stem forms
without a suffix, except in the second person plural) compared to control children,
but that this difference was less marked in French than English children with
SLI. Thordardottir and Namazi (2007) point out that most studies showing verbmorphology deficits in French-speaking children with SLI have focused on schoolaged children. They found that inflectional errors are even less prevalent in the
spontaneous speech samples of French preschool children with SLI (age 3 years,
1 month [3;1] to 4;6, mean length of utterance in words [MLUW] = 2;12).
A number of researchers have elicited past tense production in children with
and without linguistic impairments to determine which factors play a role in
verb processing. In 1994, Kim and colleagues showed that English-speaking
children were sensitive to the distinction between regular and irregular verbs,
and that this distinction could not be explained solely by phonological structure
(Kim et al., 1994). In particular, they showed that children between 3;2 and
5;2 years are sensitive to word-internal structure and that they overregularize
denominal verbs (I flied the board, meaning "to cover with flies") more readily
than extended meanings of homophonous irregular verbs (he flew/flied down the
road, meaning "he drove fast"). A possible explanation for this difference is that
children are sensitive to the verb's internal structure (in this case, zero-marked
noun-verb derivation). In a study eliciting past tense in English-speaking children
with and without language impairment, van der Lely and Ullman (2001) controlled
for both verb conjugation class (regular/irregular) and frequency. Twelve children

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

346

aged 9;3 to 12;10 with grammatical SLI participated in the study (van der Lely &
Stollwerck, 1996). They were matched with three control groups for morphological production, expressive vocabulary, and vocabulary comprehension. Ages
ranged between 5;5 and 8;9 in control groups. It was found that children without
language impairment responded differently to regular and irregular verbs, showing
frequency effects (more errors and overregularizations) on irregulars only, whereas
they appropriately inflected regular verbs regardless of frequency (except in young
children, who showed an inconsistent frequency effect on these items). The authors
also found that impaired speakers were not sensitive to verb conjugation class,
did not produce overregularizations and were sensitive to verb frequency only.
This corroborates previous studies by Ullman and Gopnik (1994) and Clahsen
and Almazan (1998), which verified past tense production of real and novel verbs
in English-speaking patients with familial language impairment and SLI. Results
obtained by Rose and Royle (1999) show that French speakers with familial language impairment aged 8 to 45 had persistent difficulties producing appropriate
past and present forms of real and novel verbs in an elicitation task, and showed
high sensitivity to verb frequency (see also Royle, Jarema, & Kehayia 2002a,
2002b, 2003, for frequency effects found in online studies of verb processing in
French speakers with familial language impairment). Jakubovicz and Nash (2001)
showed that French school-aged children with SLI, especially younger cohorts
(mean ages 6;8 and 8;2), had more difficulties producing passe compose versus
present tense forms, whereas control children showed full mastery of present
and passe compose production after age 6 (mean age 6;7). Young speakers with
SLI also had difficulties in a sentence-picture-matching task for passe compose
comprehension (below 65% correct), whereas control children as young as 3 years
of age scored over 85% correct on this measure. A subsequent elicitation study
comparing the production of the passe compose and the pluperfect (il avait bu,
"he had drunk") in children with SLI (mean age 6;10) and two control groups
(mean ages 3;5 and 4;5) revealed that language-impaired children had significant
difficulties producing the passe compose along with complete inability to produce
the pluperfect (Jakubovicz, 2003). Although some children were able to produce
a number of appropriate responses, they performed inconsistently across items.
Errors noted include responding with present tense forms or bare past participles
and refusal to respond. In sum, school-aged children and adults with language
impairment have difficulties producing inflected verb forms in elicitation tasks
and seem to be insensitive to verb internal structures (conjugation group), while
remaining sensitive to verb frequency.
To date, verb conjugation group effects on production abilities in children with
SLI have not been systematically studied in preschool children learning French.
In her study of school-aged children, Jakubovicz (2003) includes regular and
irregular verbs in her design but does not consider verb conjugation group effects.
Rose and Royle (1999) observed no verb conjugation effects on their task, but had
not developed stimuli to specifically address this issue. The present study aimed
to identify early linguistic markers of language impairment in French-speaking
preschoolers. We addressed children's ability to produce regular and irregular
verbs in French while controlling stimuli for age of acquisition. The idea was to
verify whether French-speaking children with SLI are sensitive to the morphological properties of verbs. We developed an experiment in which French-speaking

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

347

preschool children with SLI were prompted to produce passe compose forms of
frequent regular and irregular verbs. Other measures of linguistic maturity such as
MLU, verb and overall vocabulary size, and spontaneous use of inflected forms
were included to control for factors previously correlated with emerging linguistic
ability in children. We used an elicitation task for a number of reasons. First, it
allowed us to control stimuli for factors such as age of acquisition and conjugation
group. Second, although children with SLI can produce morphosyntactically appropriate forms in spontaneous speech output, they often have difficulty extending
their linguistic abilities to novel forms and less well-known verbs (Rose & Royle,
1999; van der Lely & Ullman, 2001). This suggests that they do not have a
productive rule for inflection. The use of an elicitation task allowed us to address
this issue. In addition, when morphophonological features are controlled for in
the stimuli, results often reveal an absence of productive linguistic rules (see, e.g.,
Goad, 1998, and her analysis of allomorphic variation on English plurals produced
by the KE family). Therefore, an elicitation task can be quite useful in revealing
linguistic abilities and limitations in children with SLI.
PREDICTIONS

A number of specific predictions for expected output can be made under the different language acquisition models in the presence of SLI (Table 1). According to the
implicit rule deficit (RD) theory of SLI, neither rule-generating nor grammaticalchecking processes are available to children with SLI. These children would be
expected to have great difficulty performing this task. A number of specific patterns
should arise in the responses of children with impairment. First, they would show
a lack of sensitivity to the verbal conjugation group. Regular and irregular verbs of
similar frequency should be equally difficult (or easy) to produce in the presence
of a language deficit.2 Second, children with SLI should not produce overregularizations, as these are believed to be linked to the acquisition of a productive rule for
inflection (at least in dual-route language acquisition models). Third and finally,
they would be expected to make more random errors in their output, for example,
producing inappropriate verb tenses and ungrammatical structures (including bare
past participles) instead of target responses, because they are unable to check for
grammatical appropriateness.
According to the optional default (OD) theory, children with SLI should exhibit
patterns similar to those of control children, but with protracted acquisition. Expected error patterns would be past participles produced without the auxiliary and
infinitive and present (stem) forms produced in contexts requiring other tenses, as
seen in all children acquiring French (Paradis & Crago, 2001). This theory does
not specifically relate to the issue addressed here, that is, a potential distinction
between regular and irregular inflection. Nor is the notion of default related to this
distinction.
According to the CC account, children with SLI should exhibit different patterns than controls (rather than protracted patterns), production of bare past
participles only, with few syntactically complex structures. Again, no link is
made between verb conjugation group and production pattern. In other words,
no differences should be found between regular and irregular verbs. Finally,
according to the surface/sparse morphology (SM) account, we expect to observe

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

348

Table 1. Overview of predictions based on SLI theories
Unimpaired

SLI

Model

Reg. Vs. Irreg.

Acquisition
Patterns

CC
RD

?
R>I

=
=

?
R=I

OD

?

>

?

SM

R>I

>

R>I

Reg. Vs. Irreg.

Error Patterns
*AUX PP
Inflection and
random errors
*AUX PP, infinitive,
stem
*AUX PP, stem

Note: *AUX, no auxiliary produced.

generally good production of the passe compose, because French is an inflecting
language with salient morphemes, provided the children have reached a level of
linguistic development appropriate for the emergence of this form. Similar to the
OD account, the linguistic behavior of children with SLI should be protracted but
similar to that of children without language difficulties. However, children with
a language disorder would be expected to be sensitive to morphological structure
and to produce overregularizations (if these are also found in children without a
disorder), in addition to stem (present) forms and past participle forms without
auxiliaries, because they are unstressed. According to this hypothesis, neither
random errors nor morphologically and syntactically more complex structures
would be expected.
METHODS
Participants

The children in this study had participated in a larger study on SLI in Frenchspeaking children (Thordardottir & Namazi, 2007). Participants with SLI (9 boys,
2 girls, ages 37-52 months, mean = 45;5) were recruited from a hospital clinic
and a pediatrician's office. Some children had a previous diagnosis of language
impairment or severe language delay, and some of them had received intervention.
The remaining children were on a waiting list for language evaluation for late
speech onset or poor language development. Language-impairment status for this
study was verified by a certified speech-language pathologist, based on history and
language scores. MLU scores were compared to a database of preliminary norms
for Quebec French (Thordardottir, 2005; Thordardottir et al., 2005). Presence of
language impairment was confirmed in 12 out of a total of 17 children who were
referred for the SLI group. The remaining 5 children were excluded from the
study. One of the 12 children refused to participate in the verb elicitation task.
An age-matched control group was included (7 boys, 4 girls, ages 36-52 months,
mean = 44;4). The two groups did not differ significantly in age, t (20) = .55,
p > .1, but differed significantly in MLU, t (20) = -.596, p < .001. Children were
matched for age rather than MLU or vocabulary size because they were at very

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

349

early stages of language development. Normally developing children matched
for MLU would have been too young to perform the elicitation task. However,
we performed post hoc comparisons on results between certain children from
both groups that showed overlaps on MLU or vocabulary measures. All children
underwent a hearing screening on the day of testing. A detailed description of the
participants is provided in Thordardottir and Namazi (2007).
Procedure

Children were asked to perform a verb-production task prompting use of the passe
compose form for specific verbs. Verbs were controlled for conjugation group and
age of acquisition (see below in Materials). Children also participated in individual
play sessions designed to gather spontaneous speech samples. Measures obtained
from the spontaneous speech samples included overregularization errors, MLU
in morphemes, MLUW, and ability to use the passe compose (see Thordardottir,
2005, for a description of transcription procedures). Parents were asked to fill out
a questionnaire on their child's language history and the Quebec French version
of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory parental checklist for
language (Trudeau, Frank, & Poulin-Dubois, 1999). Measures extracted from this
list included vocabulary size, verb vocabulary size, and vocabulary sizes for regular
and irregular verbs.
Past-tense elicitation task

During the task, the experimenters prompted the participants to produce past forms
by acting out verbs using props: two dolls and a puppet (Zobo). One of the dolls
would comment on the other doll's actions, using the targeted verb in the third
person singular present tense (e.g., Isabelle: Regarde, il boit du jus, "Look, he is
drinking juice"). The puppet commented on the activity using the second person
plural present form of the verb (e.g., Zobo: Vous buvez du jus tous les jours,
"You.pl drink juice every day"). The doll acting out the verb then mentioned
how s/he liked performing the activity, using the infinitive form of the verb (e.g.,
Nicolas: Moi j'aime boire du jus, "Me, I like to drink juice"). Finally, the first
doll asked Zobo what the other doll just did. Zobo always forgot, as much as
he might try to remember, and had to ask the child for help in answering the
question. We held the child's attention throughout testing by using the puppet as
an interlocutor and by introducing the props one at a time. We presumed that, after
hearing the three forms produced, (a) Infinitive (e.g., boire [bwar] "to drink"),
(b) third person singular present (e.g., bois [bwa]), and (c) second person plural
present (e.g., buvez [byve]), the child would realize whether the verb was regular
or irregular and then produce the appropriate passe compose form. A training
session with four frequent regular and irregular verbs preceded the testing session
proper. The task included 16 high-frequency verbs (8 regular, 8 irregular).3 In
all trials, children were scored correct for producing the full passe compose with
the target verb in the first utterance. All responses were recorded and error types
were compiled. In the error analysis, all multiple answers on the same item were
analyzed. Responses included (a) target (full passe compose with the auxiliary4 and

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

350

past participle; pronouns were not scored), (b) overregularization (e.g., il a ouvre
[uvKe] for il a ouvert [uvEK] "opened"), (c) bare past participle (no auxiliary,
e.g., *mange for il a mange), (d) production of another tense (e.g., present),
(e) production of another verb in the appropriate tense, (f ) production of another
verb with overregularization, (g) production of another verb with a bare past
participle, (h) production of another verb in another tense (e.g., il mange "he is
eating"), (i) production of a noun (e.g., jus "juice"), ( j) no response or refusal to
respond, and (k) uninterpretable/other (onomatopoeia, prepositional phrases and
adverbs, e.g., tatata; dedans le sable "in the sand"; en haut en bas "up down").
Materials

Regular (first conjugation) and irregular (third conjugation) verbs (see Appendix A) were selected based on age of acquisition, as determined by a spontaneous
speech corpus of 28 normally developing monolingual French-speaking children
ages 21-46 months (Thordardottir, 2005). All verbs were produced at or before
30 months of age by at least one child, and they were produced by at least two
children in the sample (except boire, "to drink"). We matched items on the number
of a given verb's tokens used in the corpus, number of children using the verb, age
at first production, number of graphemes, syllable length, and thematic structure.
Neighborhood density, surface frequency, and lemma frequency were verified
for all past participle forms in the Frantexte database (New, Pallier, Ferrand, &
Matos, 2001). On most measures, both verb groups were roughly equivalent, with
irregular verbs having fewer tokens on average in the corpus than regular verbs, but
with higher surface and lemma frequencies in the Frantexte database. On average,
irregular verbs were also slightly shorter and had more phonological neighbors
than regular verbs.
RESULTS

The percentage of correct responses on the verb elicitation task was used as the
dependent variable and entered into a repeated-measures analysis of variance,
with verb conjugation group as the within-subject variable (regular, irregular) and
participant group as the between-subject variable (SLI, control). A significant main
effect of participant group was observed, F (1, 20) = 37.41, p < .001, confirming
that children with SLI had difficulty producing appropriate inflected forms (M =
5.58%, SD = 5.9) compared to controls (M = 45.45%, SD = 20.75). A significant
main effect of verb conjugation group was found, F (1, 1) 48, p < .001, with target
regular verbs produced (M = 35.8%, SD = 35.21) more often than irregular verbs
(M = 15.34%, SD = 17.22). These main effects were subsumed by a significant
participant group by verb conjugation group interaction, F (1, 20) = 37.93, p <
.001. Only the control group showed a significant difference in ability to inflect
regular (M = 64.77%, SD = 26.11) over irregular verbs (M = 26.14%, SD =
18.08), whereas children with SLI did not show this pattern (regular: M = 5.68%,
SD = 18.18; irregular: M = 4.55%, SD = 5.9). However, these results should
be interpreted with caution, as children with SLI evidenced floor levels for target
responses on this task.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

351

Response patterns

Because participants with SLI and, to a certain extent, typically developing children had difficulties producing target verb forms, an error analysis was performed.
Multiple responses to items were included in the analysis. This added 32 responses
to our data (18 for the SLI group and 14 for controls, including 2 target responses
for the SLI group and 4 for the control group). Three of the additional responses
(all from children with SLI) were not verbs. Errors were coded for each verb
conjugation group and participant group. Response types are presented in Table 2.
As shown, error types included overregularization, bare past participle production,
production of another tense (present stems accounted for 72% of these), production
of another verb in the target or other tense (again, usually the present, at 84%),
noun production, refusal to respond and uninterpretable response.
Focusing on types found in each group (the two overall rows), it is clear that
patterns differ widely depending on the presence or absence of a language disorder.
Apart from the observation that control children produced more correct responses,
we can see that children with SLI produced more bare past participles (on target and
other verbs) than control children. In addition, although both groups substituted
other verbs for target verbs, control children generally produced the target structure
(the passe compose; 2d), whereas children with SLI tended to produce the bare
past participle and other tenses, usually the present, more often than the target
tense. Examples of present (2a), periphrastic future (2b), and modal structures
(2c) are given below.5 Inflection production patterns are illustrated in Figure 1.
2. a. Il joue piano "he plays piano" for il a joue du piano "he played the piano"
(SLI, 51)6
b. Il va manger du pain "he will eat bread" for il a mange du pain "he ate bread"
(SLI, 43)
c. Veut l'ouvrir "wants to open it" for elle a ouvert la boite "she opened the box"
(SLI, 47)
d. Al a roule l'autobus "she rolled the bus" for elle a vu l'autobus "she saw the
bus"
(C, 38)

Children with SLI also produced nouns instead of verbs over 8% of the time (see
Example 3). Control children almost never did this (one child aged 36 months
produced one token coco papa "egg daddy" for il a casse l'oeuf "he broke the
egg"). Only children with SLI overtly refused to respond (see Example 4) or
occasionally ignored the experimenter's requests for a response. This was the
most commonly found response type in children with SLI. The Uninterpretable
response category (see Example 5) accounted for close to 13% of responses in
children with SLI, but was quite rare in the control group. "Other" responses
accounted for less than 5% of responses in both groups, including onomatopoeia
(Examples 6a, 6b) and the production of other syntactic structures or categories
(not including nouns) such as (Examples 6c-6e).
3. a. Du jus oui oui "juice yes yes" for il a bu du jus "he drank juice"
b. L'auto "the car" for elle a tenu l'auto "she held the car"

(SLI, 38)
(SLI, 43)

Table 2. Mean percentage of response types for each verb group in both participant groups
Target Verb
Group
SLI
Regular
Irregular
Overall
Control
Regular
Irregular
Overall

Other Verb

Other Responses

T

PP

OR

TNS

PC

PP

OR

TNS

Noun

No R

Uninterp.

Other

7.77
4.44
6.22

15.53
4.44
10.36

--
1.11a
0.52

12.62
8.89
10.88

7.77
4.44
6.22

3.88
7.78
5.7

--
--
--

7.76
13.33
10.36

4.85
12.22
8.29

25.24
23.33
24.35

10.68
15.56
12.95

3.88
4.44
4.15

59.22
26.67
44.74

2.91
--
1.58

9.71
7.78
8.42

10.68
36.67
23.16

--
1.11
0.53

2.91
1.11
2.1

0.97
11.11
5.78

0.97
--
--

--
--
--

0.97
2.22
1.58

3.88
5.56
4.73

--
13.33
6.31

Note: T, target; PP, past participle without AUX; OR, overregularization; TNS, other tense; PC, passe compose; No R, no response; Uninterp.,
uninterpretable; Other, other response.
a
Bare past participle.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

353

Figure 1. The proportion of response types on target and nontarget verbs in both participant
groups. PC, passe compose; OR, overregularization; PP, bare past participle.

4. Je ne sais pas "I don't know" or Non! "No!"
5. [a je kom] l'auto "she he-is like (?) the car" for elle a tenu l'auto "she held the
car"
(SLI, 50)
[kapja aje] pain ca "[kapja aje] bread that" for il a mange du pain "he ate bread"
(SLI, 43)
6. a. Glinggling for il a joue du piano "he played the piano"
(SLI, 47)
b. Nanana for il a mange du pain "he ate bread"
(C, 36)
c. En haut, en bas "up, down" for il a glisse "he slid"
(SLI, 49)
d. A la boite "to/of the box" for elle a sorti le jouet "she took out the toy"
(SLI, 43)
e. Dedans le sable de meme "in the sand this way" for elle a sorti le jouet (C, 36)

Taking a closer look at verb production patterns, Figure 1 highlights verb forms
produced as a proportion of all verbs produced (other response types were excluded from these metrics). As can be seen, 70% of target and nontarget verbs
produced by controls are in the passe compose. This behavior is the dominant
pattern in control children. Children with SLI produced the bare past participle
and other tenses (usually the present) for approximately 80% of target verbs and
the passe compose for only 21% of target verbs. On nontarget verbs, they produced other tenses for more than 40% of forms, whereas bare past participles

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

354

and the passe compose account for 28% each of nontarget verb production.
Clearly, verb production patterns differ substantially between the two groups of
children.
With respect to response types for the different verb conjugation groups, we
observe that control children produced regular forms more accurately than irregular
forms, even though we took great care to match our items for age of acquisition.
A second pattern that emerges is that control children commonly substituted a
known (Example 7), a semantically similar (Example 8a), or an underspecified
verb (Example 8b) in the passe compose for irregular targets. Control children
were almost three times as likely to replace irregular than regular verbs (regular =
16, irregular = 47), whereas SLI children were equally likely to replace regular and
irregular verbs with nontarget lexemes (regular = 18, irregular = 22). Replacement
verbs tended to be irregular in both groups, although this trend was more marked
in the SLI group (regular = 13, irregular = 27) than in controls (regular = 25,
irregular = 37).
7. Elle a mis le jouet . . . elle a joue avec le jouet "she put the toy . . . she played with
the toy" for elle a sorti le jouet "she took out the toy"
(C, 46)
8. a. Al a pris ce jouet "she took this toy" for elle a tenu l'auto "she held the car"
(C, 48)
b. Il l'a fait "he did it" for il a dormi "he slept"
(C, 43)

Fourth, control children overregularized irregular verbs, not only into the first
conjugation group (Example 9a) but also into the subregular -ir conjugation
(Example 9b).
9. a. Elle a *tene [tene]/tenu [ten4] l'auto "she held the car"
b. Il a *ouvri [uvKi]/ouvert [uvEK] la boite "he opened the box"

(C, 51)
(C, 47)

Children with SLI did not produce overregularizations into either of the regular
conjugations. One child with SLI (SLI, 44) produced the form ouve7 for ouvert
"opened." However, because ouv- is not a possible stem for the verb ouvrir, this
is not an entirely legitimate example of overregularization. Finally, a pattern that
emerged in the SLI children was a more frequent production of the bare past
participle of regular versus irregular verbs. Control children showed this behavior
quite rarely (only four responses by three participants).
Our results show that production abilities and patterns differ strongly between
the two groups of children. Differences were observed in number of target responses, use of target tense versus other forms, sensitivity to verb conjugation
class and production of grammatically appropriate forms (e.g., verbs versus other
response types).
Correlation analyses

The question remains as to how and when children develop the ability to produce
inflected verbs. Recall that Hiriarteborde (1973) proposed that the production of
four tokens of the passe compose in a spontaneous speech corpus signifies the

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

355

Table 3. Correlations between age, MLUW, PC types and tokens in corpus,
vocabulary measures, and produced target responses by verb group
for participants with SLI and controls
SLI

Age
MLUW
PC types in corpus
PC tokens in corpus
Total MacArthur vocabulary
Total MacArthur verbs
Regular verbs in MacArthur
Irregular verbs in MacArthur

Control

Regular

Irregular

Regular

Irregular

ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns

ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns

.675*
.702*
ns
ns
.711*
.835**
.791**

ns
.679*
ns
ns
ns
ns

ns

ns

*p < .05 (two-tailed Pearson correlation).
**p < .01 (two-tailed Pearson correlation).

emergence of productive rule use for this inflection in French-speaking children
from France. This underscores the difficulties in detecting rule acquisition based on
spontaneous speech samples. For example, children with SLI who participated in
our study did not produce many passe compose forms in their spontaneous speech
data, but neither did controls, and no errors were observed in these forms (see
Thordardottir & Namazi, 2007, for a discussion of the spontaneous speech data in
12 children with SLI, 11 of whom participated in our study). It is therefore difficult
to infer certain structural language production abilities from spontaneous speech
alone. We wanted to verify potential correlations between previously proposed
measures of the emergence of productive use of tense and our results. More
recent proposals linking vocabulary acquisition to productive rule use in children
have been put forward by Bates and colleagues (see, e.g., Bates & Godham, 1997;
Bybee, 1995). Following Marchman and Bates (1994), we ran correlations between
vocabulary measures taken from parental vocabulary checklists and correct verb
production. In addition, we ran correlations between age, MLUW, and correct
productions. Finally, following Hiriarteborde (1972), we ran correlations between
the use of the passe compose in the spontaneous speech corpus and the ability to
produce the passe compose in the task. Correlations are presented in Table 3.
First, no correlations were found between measures in participants with SLI,
whereas a number of correlations are present for controls. After a Bonferroni
adjustment ( = .05, p = .0036), only two significant correlations were found:
between production of the passe compose of regular verbs and MacArthur verb
vocabulary size, and between production of the passe compose of regular verbs
and MacArthur regular verb vocabulary size. These correlations seem to be the
result of regular verb acquisition, because irregular verb acquisition, as measured
by the MacArthur checklist, does not correlate with the correct production of
irregular targets. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the correlation for control children and
lack of same for SLI participants.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

356

Figure 2. The correlation between regular verb vocabulary in the MacArthur checklist and
target regular verb production in control children.

Figure 3. The correlation between regular verb vocabulary in the MacArthur checklist and
target regular verb production in participants with specific language impairment.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

357

These results show that control children start producing target inflected regular
verb forms some time after they have acquired a vocabulary of approximately 40
regular verbs and can reliably produce correct responses on our task when they
have acquired over 65 regular verb items in the parental checklist. The data from the
three SLI children with regular verb vocabulary sizes over 69 does not follow this
pattern, with only one producing regular verbs in the passe compose, and at lower
accuracy than control children. These results may indicate differential acquisition
patterns between the two participant groups. The lack of significant correlations
in the SLI group must be interpreted with great caution, however, because of the
uniformly low scores on the elicitation probe. It remains to be seen whether a
group of SLI children with larger vocabularies would show patterns similar to the
control children or to the three children with SLI discussed here. In contrast, these
results support the importance of a system for the acquisition of morphology that
is sensitive to regular patterns in unimpaired language acquisition, because there
is no apparent correlation between irregular verb acquisition and correct passe
compose inflection in control children. Again, this result must be interpreted with
caution, as there were fewer irregular (n = 23) than regular (n = 86) verbs in the
parental checklist, which could explain the stronger correlations observed.
The strong correlations between the ability to inflect regular verbs and verb
vocabulary size supports the contention of Marchman and Bates that vocabulary
size is an important factor in the emergence of overregularization patterns in the
English past tense (1994), while refining it somewhat. Because of the effect found
for regular verbs only, it seems that, at least in French, the acquisition of productive
rules is sensitive to morphological structure.
Age, MLUW, and total MacArthur vocabulary were significantly correlated with
target production in control children, although not as strongly as the verb vocabulary measures, and after Bonferroni adjustment, correlations were not significant.
However, MLUW was the only measure that correlated significantly with target
production of irregular verbs in controls. At an MLUW of approximately 2.6, each
control child was already producing passe compose forms of regular verbs at 50%
correct or more (in elicitation), whereas irregular forms were produced at this level
by only one child, at an MLUW of 4.09. The SLI group did not show these trends:
target responses on regular verbs did not exceed 37.5%, even at MLUWs above
2.6 (two children in the SLI group).8 These results indicate that passe compose
developmental patterns are delayed compared to MLU development in children
with SLI.
DISCUSSION

We found that children with SLI had the expected difficulties producing passe
compose forms. They produced significantly fewer target forms than control children. We could argue that the children with SLI had not yet acquired inflectional
rules, because they did not produce these forms in spontaneous speech. However,
two children with SLI respectively produced three and two types of the full passe
compose and four tokens each in the spontaneous speech sessions. These same
children produced only one target response each in our task. All control children produced passe compose forms in their spontaneous speech (1-8 types,

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

358

2-14 tokens), and only one, the youngest, scored below 50% on regular verbs
during elicitation. We may conclude that the early spontaneous use of inflected
forms by young children with SLI does not necessarily signal the existence of
a productive rule for the passe compose. In addition, control children produced
more correct responses on regular verbs and overregularized irregular verbs. Better
production of regular and overregularized subregular patterns (see Example 9b)
suggests that French-speaking children are sensitive to morphological patterns
with low type frequencies in the input, can extract them and can productively use
them to inflect verbs (see Royle, 2007, for a detailed discussion). Based on the RD
account of SLI, it was expected that typically developing children, and not children
with SLI, would produce overregularizations on irregular verb prompts. Similarly,
we did not expect to find sensitivity to morphological patterns in children with
SLI. Based on previous research (Rose & Royle, 1999), we expected that they
would produce more random erroneous outputs than control children.
We also observed that, although some production patterns were found in all
the children, both groups showed distinct performance patterns. In particular, we
found that French-speaking children with SLI did not produce the passe compose
in linguistically constrained contexts and tended to produce other tenses (usually
the present) and bare past participles, in addition to nouns and other incongruous
structures. Control children tended to produce the passe compose, either with the
target verb or another form, but showed better performance on regular verbs. Relating these results to the hypotheses, we see first that production patterns differed
between the control and SLI groups, which provides little support for the argument
that children with SLI have protracted but normal acquisition patterns (OD and SM
hypotheses). However, because there was no control group of children matched for
language abilities, these hypotheses cannot be fully evaluated in light of our data.
The lack of sensitivity to verb conjugation group also goes against the SM hypothesis, because if linguistic typology affects language acquisition, we would expect
better results on regular and recurring patterns in children with SLI. Focusing on
error patterns, the OD and RD accounts are both supported by the data, particularly
in terms of production of past participle and present (or stem) forms. However,
infinitives were rarely produced (n = 3), and by only one child with SLI during the
task (see Examples 10a and 10b for infinitives and 10c for an infinitive used for the
past participle). According to the OD hypothesis, we expected more of these forms.
Recall, however, that past participles of regular verbs are homophonous with the
infinitive, and that only irregulars can be used for this type of comparison. Even so,
although there were many opportunities to produce infinitives, they did not appear.
10. a. Il dormir "he sleep-INF" for il a dormi "he slept"
(C, 38)
b. Tenir l'auto "hold-INF the car" for elle a tenu l'auto "she held the car"
(SLI, 47)
c. Al a mettre un tablier "she AUX put-INF an apron"
for elle a mis un tablier "she put an apron on"
(C, 44)

Noun production is not predicted under any account of SLI. However, under
the RD account, based on the notion of operations over variables (Marcus, 2001;
Pinker, 1999), the grammatical abilities of children with SLI can be affected

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

359

in spheres other than inflection. Here, the choice of a different variable (noun,
etc.), albeit semantically close to the target (the child is talking about an event
containing a reference to an object), would be inappropriate. Under this account,
children with SLI are expected to err outside the normal cluster of appropriate
responses (i.e., verb) to a given question. Alternatively, the use of nouns instead
of verbs may indicate an early developmental pattern that control children have
outgrown.9 Future studies including children matched for language level could
explore this issue.
The production of more regular than irregular past participles in children with
SLI could be construed as support for the hypothesis that passe compose forms
are computationally complex to produce, and that a child with a language disorder produces a form as close as possible to the output, while eliminating some
structure. Alternatively, the child could be producing an OD form. However, this
interpretation does not explain the difference we found between regular and irregular verbs for this response type (17 regular tokens vs. 4 irregular ones). We argue
instead that the child most probably echoes the input. Because the past participle,
infinitive, and 2pp present forms of regular French verbs are homophonous and
were provided as input, it is likely that the child produced this phonological form
following activation in the child's lexicon, not realizing that it was ungrammatical
in the absence of an auxiliary. Finally, because children with SLI showed no correlations between vocabulary (and other measures) and task scores, and because a
number of children with SLI with vocabulary and MLU levels similar to controls
produced fewer passe compose forms than their peers, we can take this as an
indication that the SLI children were less able to extract a rule from a recurrent
pattern, and that they needed more information than the control group to perform
the task correctly.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

We found differences between SLI and control groups on a number of linguistic
measures. In particular, they differed in their abilities to produce regular and irregular verbs and in the relation of these abilities to MLUW and vocabulary scores.
Response patterns on the passe compose elicitation task also differed between the
two groups, not only in the production of target outputs, but also in response type.
Control children showed emerging productive rule use, sensitivity to word-internal
structures (conjugation patterns) and sensitivity to grammatical constraints. This
was seen in their emerging ability to produce appropriate responses and overregularization patterns. The SLI participants seemed not to have developed the same
grammatical abilities or sensitivity as controls. They produced target forms with
difficulty, omitted auxiliaries, and produced inappropriate responses after prompting. It also appears that French-speaking children with SLI had disproportionate
problems producing verb inflections. Even when their vocabulary or MLU was
larger, children with SLI showed dissimilar acquisition patterns to controls. This
may reflect a deficit in productive rule use resulting from a grammar unable to
perform operations over variables, or it might reflect a lesser ability than typically
developing children to extract patterns from input. To further investigate this effect,
SLI children with more advanced language skills should be studied.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

360

Results on the elicitation task in this study should be interpreted with caution, as
the participants were quite young. However, some children with SLI overlapped
with controls on either MLUW or verb vocabulary measures. They showed no
evidence of comparable linguistic ability with matched controls. In a number of
children with SLI, we observed a distinction between the ability to produce the
passe compose in spontaneous speech and to use it as a response to prompting.
Given their performance on spontaneous speech (see Thordardottir & Namazi,
2007), this indicates that spontaneous speech corpora and elicitation tasks can
produce conflicting results for language abilities in French-speaking children with
SLI. Elicitation and spontaneous production differ in several ways, including the
child's control over what is said and the "naturalness" of the interaction. The children in this study performed more poorly on elicitation than spontaneous language
tasks. We could conclude that the two contexts provide different information on
the children's abilities and that early use of forms such as the passe compose
in spontaneous language may not reflect the emergence of a fully productive
inflectional rule. Alternatively, the contrived nature of the elicitation task may
have taxed these young children, and they might have performed better in a more
natural setting.
The elicitation results do not clearly determine whether children with SLI are
sensitive to the distinction between different verb conjugation groups, because
they produced few correct responses for both target types. However, in contrast to
the control group, there were no significant differences between the strategies they
used to produce responses on regular and irregular verbs. Error analyses revealed
that the only effect of verb conjugation pattern observed in SLI participants was
the production of more forms resembling the past participles of regular targets.
This might be due to the repetition of the homophonous (infinitive and 2ppl)
form in the input. Other patterns unseen or unusual in control children were the
production of nouns instead of verbs and refusals to respond. These are similar to
patterns observed by Rose and Royle (1999) in a real- and novel-verb elicitation
task in older French-speaking participants with familial language impairment, and
by Jakubovicz (2003) in older children with SLI. Faced with a verb elicitation
task, participants with SLI have enormous difficulties producing appropriate responses, even after many years of exposure to their mother tongue. The absence
of overregularization and the observed insensitivity to obligatory tense marking,
even at comparable MLU levels, points to disproportionate difficulties in this area.
Thordardottir and Namazi (2007) analyzed the spontaneous use of verb inflection in the children with SLI that participated in this study and compared them
with a control group matched for MLU. Overall, accuracy rates were similar (and
high) in both groups. However, the use of bare past participles or infinitives, albeit
quite uncommon, was more characteristic of children with SLI than age-matched
or MLU-matched controls. Because the children in our study were very young,
a control group matched for linguistic measures such as MLU was not included,
as such a group would be too young to complete the elicitation task. It would
be worthwhile to pursue this experiment with older cohorts matched for MLU
measures. It is likely that older children with SLI would perform better on the
elicitation task than the young children in this study. Further studies could explore
how older children with SLI compare with MLU-matched controls on accuracy
and error patterns, and would enable more meaningful conclusions on the nature

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

361

of the deficit. However, based on previous studies by Jakubovicz (2003) and Rose
and Royle (1999), we would expect SLI participants to produce different patterns
of correct responses and errors from controls.
With regard to the correlations on the results, the control children showed
correlations between vocabulary measures, MLUW measures, and age and linguistic development (i.e., productive use of the passe compose). These results are
consistent with those by Marchman and Bates (1994), and they underscore the
importance of linguistic input for language development, especially concerning
the differential effects of regular and irregular verbs. The children with SLI did not
show these correlations. However, given their floor results on the elicitation task,
it is unclear whether this noncorrelation was caused by the absence of productive
rules or simply by a delayed language acquisition process.
A first step to avoid floor effects in the future would be to study children at
a slightly older age. A closer look at children without language disorders would
be useful. Royle (2007) analyzed the inflectional ability of 15 French-speaking
children (11 of whom were controls in this study) to produce the passe compose.
She found that children under the age of 38 months were unable to perform the
task. She also observed that, although older children could reliably inflect highfrequency regular and irregular verbs, they were not necessarily able to inflect
low frequency (regular and irregular) verbs. Only a subset of older children could
provide the passe compose on low-frequency verbs. Based on Royle's data, we
propose that French-speaking children develop the ability to productively inflect
verbs between 44 and 48 months. Therefore, this task should not be run on children
with or without language disorder before that age, as the results would presumably
not offer useful data. However, this leaves us with the problem of identifying
language disorders in young children. One solution would be to elicit structures
that are produced by all children at the initial stages of French language acquisition.
The complex noun phrase, with its attributive adjectives and determiners that
agree with the noun (including gender features), is a structure produced at the
beginning of the two-word stage. Results of pilot studies eliciting the complex
noun phrase are promising: French-speaking 30-month-old children can reliably
produce simple structures containing adjectives such as la petite maison "the.fem
small.fem house" or le cheval vert "the.masc horse green.masc" (Royle, Vial, &
Valois, in press). A spontaneous-speech study of Spanish-speaking children with
SLI revealed agreement errors in attributive adjectives (Bedore & Leonard, 2001),
and we also found this in a French-speaking child with SLI in our elicitation task
(Bouffard & Royle, 2007; Royle, 2005-2007). An adjective elicitation task could
therefore identify language difficulties in very young children with suspected
language disorders, while verb elicitation tasks could confirm a language disorder
diagnosis in older preschoolers.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the acquisition of productive verb inflection in French is disrupted in children with SLI, in terms of more than just
acquisition timing. Some linguistic behaviors in the SLI children were atypical
of normal development. Lack of sensitivity to verb conjugation group and the
production of inappropriate structures, even when presented with early acquired
verbs, set the children with SLI apart. Our data also show that different data gathering techniques can bias our understanding of a child's linguistic abilities. We
should thus use them with a clear understanding of their purpose and limitations.

APPENDIX A
Verbs used for the elicitation task

Verb
Irregular
bu (drink)
dormi (sleep)
mis (put)
ouvert (open)
parti (leave)
sorti (take out)
tenu (hold)
vu (see)
Mean
SD
Regular
cache (hide)
casse (break)
glisse (slide)
joue (play)
lave (wash)
mange (eat)
monte (go up)
tourne (turn)
Mean
SD
a
b

Tokens in
Corpus

Children
Using
Verb
(N)

Age at 1st
Token

Phonemes
(N)


(N)

Phono.
Neighbors
(N)

Freq.a

Lemma
Freq.b

1
6
25
8
9
6
12
12
9.875
7.079

1
5
9
6
4
4
9
4
5.25
2.712

26
23
26
27
26
33
26
33
27.5
3.585

2
5
2
4
5
5
4
2
3.625
1.408

1
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1.625
0.517

15
2
13
3
7
3
3
13
14.75
10.333

21.77
13.74
199.74
64.13
112.71
38.06
55.81
282.71
98.584
95.703

482.66
145.44
944.56
431.13
1210.10
748.70
615.19
1726.48
788.033
499.758

10
5
17
16
4
20
23
4
12.373
7.614

3
4
7
9
2
9
8
2
5.5
3.070

27
24
25
33
33
26
26
26
27.5
3.505

4
4
5
3
4
4
4
5
4.125
0.641

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0

30
29
8
16
17
13
16
9
17.25
8.242

21.94
13.26
12.23
33.13
7.06
15.87
20.52
26.84
18.856
8.477

134.68
79.21
132.41
353.68
51.16
160.73
289.18
277.15
184.775
108.752

Grapheme (surface) frequency per million (New et al., 2001).
Cumulative frequency per million (New et al., 2001).

Transitivity
T/I
I
T(2)
T
I
T/I/T(2)
T
T

T/R
T/R
I
I
T
T/I
T/I
T/I/R

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

363

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was made possible by a postdoctoral fellowship (SSHRC ref. 756-2002-0338)
awarded to the first author and an FCAR research grant (2002-NC-727222) awarded to the
second author. Marie-Eve Rivard participated in the data collection and transcription. We
thank all of the children and family members who volunteered to participate in this research,
as well as Peter Gordon and three anonymous reviewers for their comments.

NOTES
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

An anonymous reviewer notes that these forms are tensually ambiguous. However, our
experiment was not designed to verify this issue.
Two anonymous reviewers maintain that, according to the RD theory, children with SLI
should perform better on irregular than regular forms. However, we disagree with this
interpretation. In particular, with high-frequency forms, we believe that both irregulars
and regulars would be treated in a similar fashion (i.e., item based). The reviewers'
interpretation of this is a logical error (nonsequitur). The model posits that children with
SLI should have difficulties inflecting verbs using regular inflectional processes. This
does not imply that they would have less difficulty producing irregulars than regulars.
"To the extent that regular and irregular forms are equally frequent, they will both be
available to the same degree because they are both memorized. There is no reason
for one to be more impaired than the other." (M. Paradis, personal communication,
September 9, 2007). Although children with no language impairment should be able
to deal with regulars using either lexically based or rule-based procedures, what we
would not expect is better performance on regulars than irregulars in children with
SLI, because rule-based procedures are not available to them (Paradis & Gopnik, 1997;
Ullman & Gopnik, 1999).
A second section of the task contained 16 low-frequency verbs. Participants with SLI
were unable to score over 50% correct on the first section of the task and did not
proceed to the less frequent verb section. See Royle, Rivard, and Thordardottir (2004)
and Royle (2007) for a discussion of frequency effects in verb production in French
children without language impairment.
Auxiliary choice errors (e.g., etre "to be" for avoir "to have") were not considered.
Modal, future, and periphrastic future forms were quite rare (n = 6). Other tenses were
occasionally produced by control children (n = 4).
All examples indicate participant group and age in months.
An anonymous reviewer notes that this form might be an example of difficulties in coda
production. We reviewed this child's verb production and found that he did produce
codas (e.g., mange [maZ] un pain "eats a bread," [e] cache [kaS] "[e] hides," bu du
gaz [gaz] "drank gas," a va en voyage [vwojaZ] "she is going on a trip," il glisse [glis]
vite ca "he slides quick that," and so forth. However, [K] codas were not included in
the verb task and might still be problematic).
The child with SLI who produced 37.5% correct responses on regular verbs had an
MLU of 2.13.
Another interpretation of this, following Paradis and Gopnik (1997), is that children
with SLI might rely heavily on pragmatic aspects of language to compensate for
their morphosyntactic weaknesses, thus producing a conceptually appropriate noun
describing some aspect of the event rather than the expected verb.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

364

REFERENCES
Bassano, D. (1998). Semantique et syntaxe dans l'acquisition des classes de mots: L'exemple des
noms et des verbs en francais. Langue Francaise, 118, 26-48.
Bassano, D., Maillochon, I., Klampfer, S., & Dressler, W. U. (2001). L'acquisition de la morphologie
verbale en francais et en allemand autrichien: II. L'epreuve des faits. Enfance, 53, 117-148.
Bates, E., & Godham, J. C. (1997). On the inseparability of grammar and the lexicon: Evidence
from acquisition, aphasia, and real-time processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12,
507-584.
Bedore, L. M., & Leonard, L. B. (2001). Grammatical morphology deficits in Spanish-speaking
children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research,
44, 905-924.
Bouffard, J., & Royle, P. (2007) La flexon des adjectifs: Etude de cas. Journee de la recherche des
stagiaires de 1er cycle a la Faculte de medecine [Research colloquium for undergraduate
trainees at the Faculty of Medicine]. Montreal: Universite de Montreal.
Bybee, J. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 425-
455.
Clahsen, H., & Almazan, M. (1998). Syntax and morphology in Williams syndrome. Cognition, 68,
167-198.
Franck, J., Cronel-Ohayon, S., Chillier, L., Frauenfelder, U. H., Hamann, C., Rizzi, L., et al. (2004).
Normal and pathological development of subject-verb agreement in speech production: A
study on French children. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17, 147-180.
Goad, H. (1998). Plurals in SLI: Prosodic deficit or morphological deficit? Language Acquisition: A
Journal of Developmental Linguistics, 7, 247-284.
Gopnik, M. (1999). Familial language impairment: More English evidence. Folia Phoniatrica et
Logopaedica, 51, 5-19.
Gopnik, M., Dalalakis, J., Fukuda, S. E., Fukuda, S. & Kehayia, E. (1997). Genetic language impairment: Unruly grammars. In W. G. Runciman & J. Maynard (Eds.), Evolution of social behavior
patterns in primates and man: 88. Proceedings of the British Academy (pp. 223-249). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gregoire, A. (1937). L'Apprentissage du langage. Paris: Droz.
Hiriarteborde, A. (1973). Sur la generalisation de quelques marques grammaticales dans le langage
d'enfants de 3 ans 1/2. Etudes de Linguistique Apliquee, 9, 101-124.
Jakubovicz, C. (2003). Computational complexity and the acquisition of functional categories by
French-speaking children with SLI. Linguistics, 41, 175-211.
Jakubovicz, C., & Nash, L. (2001). Functional categories and syntactic operations in (ab) normal
language acquisition. Brain and Language, 77, 321-339.
Kilani-Schoch, M. (2003). Early verb inflection in French: An investigation of two corpora. In
D. Bittner, W. U. Dressler, & M. Kilani-Schoch (Eds.), Development of verb inflection in
first language acquisition: A cross-linguistic perspective. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kim, J. J., Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., & Coppola, M. (1994). Sensitivity of children's
inflection to grammatical structure. Journal of Child Language, 21, 173-209.
Legendre, G., Hagstrom, P., Vainikka, A., & Todorova, M. (2002). Partial constraint ordering in
child French syntax. Language Acquisition: A Journal of Developmental Linguistics, 10, 189-
227.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L. B., Bortolini, U., Caselli, M. C., McGregor, K. K. & Sabbadini, L. (1992). Morphological
deficits in children with specific language impairment: The status of features in the underlying
grammar. Language Acquisition, 2, 151-179.
Leonard, L. B., Dromi, E., Adam, G., & Zadunaisky-Ehrlich, S. (2000). Tense and finiteness in the
speech of children with specific language impairment acquiring Hebrew. International Journal
of Language and Communication Disorders, 35, 319-335.
Leonard, L. B., Eyer, J., Bedore, L. & Grela, B. (1997). Three accounts of the grammatical morpheme
difficulties of English-speaking children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 741-753.
Marchman, V. A., & Bates, E. (1994). Continuity in lexical and morphological development: A test of
the critical mass hypothesis. Journal of Child Language, 21, 339-366.
Marcus, G. F. (2001). The algebraic mind: Integrating connectionism and cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Applied Psycholinguistics 29:3
Royle & Thordardottir: Verb elicitation in French

365

Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M., Rosen, T. J., & Xu, F. (1992). Overregularization
in language acquisition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 57(4,
Serial No. 228).
New, B., Pallier, C., Ferrand, L., & Matos, R. (2001). Une base de donnees lexicales du
francais contemporain sur internet: LEXIQUE. L'Annee Psychologique, 101, 447-462
(http://www.lexique.org)
Paradis, J., & Crago, M. (2001). The morphosyntax of specific language impairment in French: An
extended optional default account. Language Acquisition, 9, 269-300.
Paradis, M., & Gopnik, M. (1997). Compensatory strategies in genetic dysphasia: Declarative memory.
Journal of Neurolinguistics, 10, 173-185.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and rules: The ingredients of language. New York: Basic Books.
Rice, M., Noll, K. R., & Grimm, H. (1997). An extended optional infinitive stage in German-speaking
children with specific language impairment. Language Acquisition, 4, 255-295.
Rice, M., & Wexler, K. (1996). Toward tense as a clinical marker of specific language impairment in
English-speaking children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 850-863.
Rice, M., Wexler, K., & Cleave, P. L. (1995). Specific language impairment as a period of extended
optional infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 850-863.
Rose, Y., & Royle, P. (1999). Uninflected structure in familial language impairment: Evidence from
French. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 51, 70-90.
Royle (2005-2007). Outils morphosyntaxiques pour le depistage de la dysphasie chez les jeunes
francophones [Morphosyntactic tools for the identification of SLI in young French speakers].
Unpublished manuscript.
Royle, P. (2007). Variable effects of morphology and frequency on inflection patterns in French
preschoolers. The Mental Lexicon Journal, 2, 103-125.
Royle, P., Jarema, G., & Kehayia, E. (2002a). Auditory verb recognition in developmental language
impairment. Brain and Language, 81, 487-500.
Royle, P., Jarema, G., & Kehayia, E. (2002b). Frequency effects on visual word access in developmental
language impairment. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 15, 11-41.
Royle, P., Jarema, G., & Kehayia, E. (2003). Verb reading in developmental language impairment.
Brain and Language, 87, 311-322.
Royle, P., Rivard, M.-E., & Thordardottir, E. (2004). Perfect acquisition in French-speaking preschoolers. Paper presented at the 4th International Conference on the Mental Lexicon, Windsor,
ON, Canada, June 31-July 4, 2004.
Royle, P., Vial, M., & Valois, D. (in press). The acquisition of concord in French and Spanish determiner phrases, two elicitation experiments. Revista de la Asociacion Espanola de Linguistica
Aplicada.
Thordardottir, E., Gagne, A., Levy, L., Kehayia, E., Lessard, N., Sutton, A., et al. (2005) Spontaneous
language sample measures for French-speaking 5-year-olds. Paper presented at the annual
convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), San Diego, CA.
Thordardottir, E. T. (2005). Early lexical and syntactic development in Quebec French and English:
Implications for cross-linguistic and bilingual assessment. International Journal of Language
and Communication Disorders, 40, 243-278
Thordardottir, E. T., & Namazi, M. (2007). Specific language impairment in French-speaking children:
Beyond grammatical morphology. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50,
698-715.
Trudeau, N., Frank, I., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (1999). Une adaptation en francais du MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory. Revue d'Orthophonie et d'Audiologie, 23, 61-73.
van der Lely, H. K. J., & Stollwerck, L. (1996). A grammatical specific language impairment in
children: An autosomal dominant inheritance? Brain & Language, 52, 484-504.
van der Lely, H. K. J., & Ullman, M. T. (2001). Past tense morphology in specifically language
impaired and normally developing children. Language & Cognitive Processes, 16, 177-217.
Ullman, M. T., & Gopnik, M. (1999). Inflectional morphology in a family with inherited specific
language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics, 20, 51-117.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head movement, and economy of derivations. In N.
Horenstein & D. Lightfoot (Eds.), Verb movement (pp. 305-362). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wexler, K. (1998). Very early parameter setting and the unique checking constraint: A new explanation
of the optional infinitive stage. Lingua, 106, 23-79.

