J. Child Lang. 36 (2009), 85-112. f 2008 Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S030500090800888X Printed in the United Kingdom

How the parts relate to the whole: Frequency effects on
children's interpretations of novel compounds*
ANDREA KROTT
University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
C H R I S T I N A L. G A G N E

AND

ELENA NICOLADIS

University of Alberta, Canada
(Received 1 August 2007. Revised 20 December 2007. First published online 11 September 2008)

ABSTRACT

This study explores different frequency effects on children's
interpretations of novel noun-noun compounds (e.g. egg bag as ` bag
FOR eggs'). We investigated whether four- to five-year-olds and adults
use their knowledge of related compounds and their modifier-head
relations (e.g. sandwich bag (FOR) or egg white (PART-OF)) when
explaining the meaning of novel compounds and/or whether they are
affected by overall frequency of modifier-head relations in their
vocabulary. Children's interpretations were affected by their
experience with relations in compounds with the same head, but not
by overall relation frequency. Adults' interpretations were affected by
their experience with relations in compounds with the same modifier,
suggesting that children and adults use similar but different knowledge
to interpret compounds. Furthermore, only children's interpretations
revealed an overuse of visually perceivable relations.

The acquisition of words and linguistic constructions appears to be affected
by input frequency. For example, children's first words are often the most
frequently used words in their language input (e.g. Harris, Barrett, Jones &
Brookes, 1988). Similarly, the first verbs that children correctly mark for
the past tense are often the verbs that are high in frequency (e.g. Kuczaj,
1977). There is also evidence that linguistic constructions are learned earlier
[*] We would like to thank Helen Breadmore for her help in conducting the experiment
and transcribing participants' responses and Harald Baayen for his help with the
statistical analysis. This research was supported by a British Academy Joint Activities
Grant, NSERC Discovery Grant 203054 and NSERC Discovery Grant 245058.
Address for correspondence : Andrea Krott, School of Psychology, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom. tel : +44 (0)121 414
4903. fax : +44 (0)121 4144897. e-mail a.krott@bham.ac.uk.

85

K R O T T E T A L.

when children hear many different exemplars. For example, the passive
construction is learned earlier in Inuktitut than in English and one of the
likely reasons for this is that passive constructions are more frequent in
Inuktitut than in English (Allen, 1996). Similarly, English-speaking
children can use the regular past tense morpheme -ed productively, even
though many regular verbs are rarely used (see Marchman, 1997). In sum,
this research suggests that input frequency influences the acquistion of
words, morphemes and syntactic phrases. The present study extends
previous work by investigating the role of frequency in children's
acquisition of a construction that is situated between words and syntactic
phrases, i.e. novel English noun-noun compounds such as egg bag or
birthday roomi. In particular, we focus on children's understanding of the
relations between the constituents of these constructions (e.g. `bag FOR
eggs ' for egg bag or ` soup MADE OF chocolate ' for chocolate soup) and how
this understanding is affected by their experience with similar compounds.
Noun-noun compounds are composed of at least two nouns. The
constituent nouns do not play the same semantic role ; one plays the role
of a modifier, while the other plays the role of the head and specifies the
category to which the construct in its entirety belongs. For example apple
juice is a kind of juice. In English, the noun on the left is usually the
modifier and the noun on the right is usually the head. There can be
exceptions to this general rule; for example, a jailbird is not a type of bird
and it is not obvious how straw modifies berry in strawberry. These
compounds are (partly) semantically opaque, meaning the right noun is not
the superordinate category (jailbird) or the meanings of the parts do not
fully contribute to the meaning of the construct (see Clark, 1981, for
discussion on how transparency is important for children's compound
coinages). While children encounter both transparent and opaque
compounds, this study focuses on novel transparent compounds.
To understand the relation between the constituents of a transparent
compound, children need to know that compounds are complex words. It
has been argued that children first do not have such an understanding, but
initially learn compounds as holophrases or chunks (Berman, 1987). In
other words, while children might understand the meaning of football, foot
and ball, and that one uses it to play, they might not understand that football
refers to a ball that one kicks with a foot. There is even some evidence that
children have some difficulty parsing some compounds into the early school
years (e.g. birthday ; Berko, 1958), suggesting that the chunking stage is not

[i] While some scholars might refer to these constructions as phrases instead of compounds
because they do not, for instance, have an established meaning, we opted for the term
compound because it is the term previously used in the literature on compound
acquisition.

86

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

limited to the initial stage in the acquisition of compounds, at least for
specific words. Nevertheless, children appear to understand the roles of
modifiers and heads within compounds from quite early on, which rather
suggests an early understanding of compound complexity. For example,
English-speaking children can create novel compounds in spontaneous
speech such as cup egg for a boiled egg as young as 2;0 (e.g. Clark, 1981). In
these early compounds, the rightmost constituent usually indicates the
category of the object. This has been taken as evidence that two-year-olds
already understand the ordering of modifiers and heads (e.g. E. V. Clark,
1981, 1983 ; Clark, Gelman & Lane, 1985 ; Mellenius, 1997).
Children's understanding of compound complexity appears to be affected
by frequency, both frequency within a language and an item-based
frequency. Across languages, knowledge about compounding appears to be
affected by the relative frequency of compounding as a word-formation
device. In a language like English, compounds are very common and
children reveal knowledge about the role of heads and modifiers in both
production and comprehension tasks from the age of 2; 0 or 3; 0 (e.g. E. V.
Clark, 1981, 1983 ; Clark, Gelman & Lane, 1985 ; Mellenius, 1997). In
French or Hebrew, on the other hand, compounds are much less common
and children spontaneously coin their first compounds around 5;0 and
perform well in a comprehension experiment from around 3;0 on (Clark,
1998 ; Clark & Berman, 1987 ; cf. Nicoladis, 2002).
There is also evidence for an item-based frequency effect on children's
understanding of compound complexity. Krott & Nicodadis (2005) and
Nicoladis & Krott (2007) showed that four- to five-year-olds' understanding
of the structure of familiar compounds appears to be affected by other
compounds they know with the same constituents. They asked children to
explain the meaning of familiar compounds. Children were likely to
mention a compound constituent in their explanations if they knew a
number of other compounds with the same constituent, which suggests that
this knowledge helped them to recognize that the familiar compound is
complex.
To be able to interpret novel compounds, one must not only understand
the distinction between heads and modifiers, but also the possible types of
subcategorizations, i.e. the possible thematic relations between heads and
modifiers. What makes it difficult for children to learn how to infer relations
is that there are many possible relations (e.g. a chocolate muffin is a muffin
that HAS chocolate in it, a mailbox is a box FOR mail, a cardboard box is a
box that is MADE OF cardboard). In addition, a compound can have
several likely interpretations (e.g. chocolate bowl could be a bowl FOR
chocolate, a bowl MADE OF chocolate and a bowl that looks LIKE
chocolate because of its colour). Consequently, children must learn how to
choose the correct or most likely relation for the compound. For some kinds
87

K R O T T E T A L.

of compounds, morphological structure can guide the interpretation
(Lieber, 1983; Roeper & Siegel, 1978). Our focus is on novel noun-noun
compounds such as chocolate bowl, which have no morphological markers
that indicate how the modifier and head should be linked. In these cases,
modifier-head relations need to be inferred on the basis of other knowledge.
Research on adults' conceptual combination has pointed to the
importance of the availability of the modifier-head relation in
interpretations of novel noun-noun combinations. Gagne & Shoben (1997)
demonstrated that knowledge about the types of relations with which the
modifier is typically used affects the ease of comprehending a novel
combination. For example, the modifier mountain is frequently used with
the relation LOCATED (e.g. mountain bird, as determined by Gagne &
Shoben's corpus) but is not often used with the relation ABOUT (e.g.
mountain magazine). Items that exhibit a high-frequency relation for the
modifier (e.g. mountain bird) took less time to interpret than items that
required a relation that was not frequently used with the modifier (e.g.
mountain magazine). Furthermore, recent exposure to a phrase with the
same modifier and relation as the to-be-interpreted phrase reduces the time
required to interpret novel compounds (e.g. Gagne, 2001; Gagne &
Shoben, 2002) as well as familiar compounds (Gagne & Spalding, 2004 b).
Although the bulk of the studies have demonstrated only relation priming
with the modifier noun, one study has found evidence of relation priming
with the head noun (Gagne & Shoben, 2002). Unlike the previous studies,
this study used novel combinations that are ambiguous (e.g. a student vote
can be a vote BY students or a vote FOR students).
Thus far, there has been little research on how children understand the
relations between the modifier and head in compounds. It has been
suggested that children as young as 2; 6 understand that the head and
modifier of a compound are related and they can use novel compounds to
name several different relations (e.g. Clark et al., 1985). Clark (1981) gives
the example of a young child saying fire-dog to refer to a dog found at the
site of a fire. However, while children might understand relatively early that
compounds refer to two concepts that are somehow related (but see Berko,
1958), it appears that their understanding of what a likely relation is still
differs from that of adults. For example, for adults a compound is an
unlikely label of two objects that do not interact. Nicoladis (2003) found
that 30 % of the four-year-olds and 35% of the three-year-olds in her study
accepted objects that did not interact (e.g. a dragon next to a box). Parault,
Schwanenflugel & Haverback (2005) found that even six-year-olds'
explanations of novel compounds are not necessarily adult-like. In 10 % of
their explanations heads and modifiers were not integrated with each other.
Instead children used a coordination function, explaining, for instance, book
magazine as ` a big magazine and a little book'. What remains unclear from
88

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

previous research is how younger children infer relations for novel
noun-noun compounds.
The aim of our research is to examine which sources of information
children draw on when they infer a relation for a novel compound without
being provided with a contextii. We can see several sources of information.
Children might use other compounds with the same modifier or head as an
analogical basis, being affected by the frequency of relations in these
compounds, or they might choose the most frequent relation type in their
vocabulary. They might also have a preference for particular relations.
They might, for instance, prefer concrete relations such as HAS or
LOCATED.
The present study examines the relevance of these different sources of
information for children's interpretations of novel compounds, by asking
them to explain the meaning of those compounds. First, we investigate the
effect of the frequency of relations for specific modifier and head nouns by
examining thematic relations in the sets of compounds that share the same
constituents with a novel compound. We will refer to these sets as
constituent families. For example, the modifier family for chocolate
consists of compounds of the form chocolate Y such as chocolate cake,
chocolate milk and chocolate muffin, while the head family of bread consists of
compounds of the form X bread such as banana bread, wheat bread and
sandwich bread (see also De Jong, Feldman, Schreuder, Pastizzo & Baayen,
2002 ; Krott, Baayen & Schreuder, 2001). Previous findings suggest that
adults' default interpretation of a novel noun-noun combination proceeds
by analogy with the modifier family and to some extent with the head family
of the novel combination, and that even the processing of familiar
compounds is affected by these families (see above). Given the findings of
Krott & Nicoladis (2005), we assume that children build up patterns that
relate to head families or modifier families (e.g. modifier+muffin or
chocolate+head) and that they can use those to infer relations for new
compounds. The present study therefore investigates children's inference
processes for novel compound interpretations and compares them with
those of adults.
[ii] It has been argued that the meaning of a novel compound is determined by the context it
is used in and should therefore not be studied in isolation (e.g. H. H. Clark, 1983).
Although it is certainly true that pragmatics and context do play a role in the
interpretation of compounds, past research has shown that the ease of processing a
compound in a discourse context is still influenced by its out-of-context meaning (Gagne
& Spalding, 2004a). It has been argued that the function of context is to help readers
narrow down a likely set of relationships between the two constituents of a compound to
the correct one (e.g. Gagne & Spalding, 2004a; Gerrig & Murphy, 1992), but this likely
set of relationships needs to be established first. We have opted to present our stimuli in
isolation and not in context in order to study whether children can arrive at a meaning
without contextual clues.

89

K R O T T E T A L.

If children's interpretations are already based on similar inference
processes as those of adults, then we expect them to rely more strongly on
modifier families than on head families. To directly compare family effects
on adults' and children's interpretations, we tested both participant groups
on the same compounds and with the same methodology. Note that
children's and adults' constituent families might not only be different in
size. Earlier studies suggest that children do not necessarily understand
familiar compounds the way adults do (Berko, 1958; Krott & Nicoladis,
2005 ; Nicoladis & Krott, 2007). We cannot be sure that children fully
understand that a lunch box is a box that one uses to bring lunch in. They
might only understand that the box has something to do with lunch but not
exactly what that something is. If that was the case, one would not expect
constituent families to have any effect on children's interpretations of novel
compounds. We assume, however, that the knowledge of different kinds of
boxes and the consistency of modifier-head relations in the compounds used
to refer to these boxes (crayon box, cereal box, treasure box etc.) helps
children to understand the relations in these compounds.
The effect of constituent families for children might be twofold. As
shown in Krott & Nicoladis' (2005) study, children appear to have a better
understanding of the thematic relations in familiar compounds that are
part of larger families. A larger family means a better understanding of
the relations of the family members as well as a larger analogical basis
for the inference of the most likely relation for the novel compound. For
example, if a child knows a large modifier family of chocolate and if many
members of the family (e.g. chocolate milk, chocolate cake and chocolate
muffin) use the relation HAS, he/she might have an increased understanding
of the relation HAS in these compounds and he/she might have a larger
analogical basis to predict that compounds starting with chocolate usually
refer to something that HAS chocolate. The findings of Krott &
Nicoladis (2005) suggest that four- to five-year-olds have developed such
analogical bases. We therefore focus in the present study on four- to fiveyear-olds.
The second factor affecting relation selection for novel compounds that
we consider in the present study is the overall frequency of modifier-head
relations in children's vocabulary. If children are more successful with
frequent relations than infrequent relations and if they use frequent
relations when expected to use other relations, then this would be
evidence that they (over)generalize one or more frequent relations. That
would be consistent with the hypothesis that children have a general pattern
for compounds.
An alternative or additional factor on relation selection is an overall
preference for one or more particular relations. In a study that investigated
children's interpretations of Swedish compounds, Mellenius (1997) found
90

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

evidence that children used the LOCATED relation almost as a default
relation (e.g. djuret bor pa palsen ` the animal lives on the fur ' as an
explanation for palsdjur ` fur animal '). Because not much is known yet about
whether some relations might be more difficult than others for children, we
will analyze their success rate and overuse of particular relations.

METHOD

To study what affects compound interpretations, it is first necessary to
adopt a categorization scheme for classifying and identifying relations.
Linguists and psycholinguists have identified between ten and twenty
common relation categories that capture the majority of semantically
transparent compounds (Downing, 1977 ; Gleitman & Gleitman, 1970 ;
Kay & Zimmer, 1976 ; Lees, 1960 ; Levi, 1978 ; Warren, 1978)iii. Examples
of relations in English compounds include MADE OF (paper bag=bag
made of paper), FOR (computer screen=screen for a computer), and HAS
(chocolate muffin=muffin that has chocolate in it). We based our relation
codings scheme on that of Levi (1978), although we used slightly different
categories and category names. A full list of the codes plus examples, based
on the codes of the child compound list described below, is shown in
Appendix B.
Some scholars have argued that such finite sets of relations are too
restrictive. One example that is often cited for this argument is apple-juice
seat, which Downing (1977) reports as having been used by a friend to refer
to a particular place at a table. However, this example and Downing's work
in general does not preclude the use of a set of common relations in
psychological research. Even though people can (especially with the aid of
context) potentially create a wide variety of interpretations, this does not
entail that one cannot identify a set of relations that tend to exist for most.iv
Indeed, even Downing (1977 : 836) observed that `a small set of
relationships is generally favored ; and the appropriateness of a given
relationship is also dependent on its permanence, its predictability in
context, and on the semantic class of the head noun ' and she lists a set of
twelve categories that she believes can account for most compounds (e.g.
Composition - stone furniture, or Time - summer dust).

[iii] Note that the meanings of semantically opaque compounds are not combinations of the
meanings of the constituents. Therefore modifier-head relations do not exist for these
compounds.
[iv] There is empirical evidence to suggest that, even when interpreted out of context,
compounds do not have a wide range of meaning (Stekauer, 2005). Therefore, a theory
of meaning predictability is feasible and stands in contrast to previous claims that the
number of possible meanings for a novel word out of context is potentially infinite.

91

K R O T T E T A L.

Participants
Twenty-seven monolingual British-English-speaking children (age range
4 ; 9 to 5; 8, mean 5; 4, SD 0 ; 3) took part in the experiment. All were
deemed typically developing by their parents and teachers. When asked for
interpretations of novel compound words, three of the children responded
mostly with explanations that did not define the word. For instance, a boy
(age 5; 4) explained the meaning of snow seat as `uhm, there it's snowing,
and it - all boys or girls come out to play outside and make snowballs and
throw it at each other'. Because these children were 5;4 or older, one would
expect them to be able to identify and relate the constituents of the
compounds. Their answers therefore indicate that they did not understand
the task very well. Two other children always responded with the same
relation (FOR or MADE-OF). We excluded the data from these five
children from all analyses.
Apart from the children, thirty-six adults (age 17-26), mostly
undergraduate students of the University of Birmingham and all native
speakers of British English, took part in the experiment.

Material
We constructed thirty novel noun-noun compounds using constituents
that we expected children to know (see Appendix A). Novel compounds
can be interpreted in various ways and constituent families support these
interpretations to different degrees. In order to investigate whether the
family support has an effect, we needed one likely interpretation for
each compound against which we could compare participants' (both adults'
and children's) responses. We determined likely interpretations for the
compounds by presenting our adult participants with randomized lists
of the thirty compounds and asking them to write down their
interpretations. We selected the relations that dominated their responses
as the most likely interpretation (see procedure below and Appendix A).
Choosing the adults' preferred relations as the comparison relations also
allowed us to directly compare children's and adults' interpretations. The
next step was to determine the support that the dominant relations
receive from modifier and head families. Because children and adults
differ in terms of vocabulary, we needed to determine these families
for both groups separately. For the children, we amended a compound
database created for Krott & Nicoladis' (2005) study. The original database
lists about 2500 North-American compounds that children are likely to
know. It is composed of : (a) all compounds occurring in the transcripts
of the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000); (b) compounds taken
from the CELEX lexical database (Baayen, Piepenbrock & Gullikers,
92

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

1995),v but only those likely to be known by children ; plus (c) further
compounds that were added by two native North-American-English
speakers (for further details see Krott & Nicoladis, 2005). Two native
British speakers deleted from this list all American compounds and added
British equivalents and missing compounds. The final list contained 2118
British compounds.
For adults, we created a list of modifier and head families using the
CELEX database (Baayen et al., 1995). Two native English speakers
deleted from this list all compounds that they did not know. Subsequently
they and a fluent English speaker coded the thematic relations of all head
and modifier families in both the child list (533 compounds) and the adult
list (752 compounds) using our coding scheme in Appendix B. For the child
compound list, the three coders agreed on the relation for 82.9% of the
compounds (Fleiss' K=0.84, p<0.001). For the adult compound list, all
coders agreed on the code for 78.7 % of all compounds (Fleiss' K=0.80,
p<0.001). In case of disagreement, the majority choice was taken as the
correct relation. In case of no majority, coding differences were resolved by
discussion.
The experimental compounds were constructed with varying head family
and modifier family support in the child compound list because we were
interested in effects of modifier and head families on children's
interpretations. A third of the compounds had dominant modifier-head
relations that were supported by both a bias of the modifier family in the
database (mean number of supporting family members 6.0, SD 1.6) and a
bias of the head family in the database (mean number of supporting family
members 8.5, SD 5.4) (condition High-High). Another third (condition
Low-High) had dominant relations that were supported by only a bias of
the head family (modifier family : 1.0, SD 1.7; head family : 10.0, SD 4.0)
and the remaining third (condition High-Low) had dominant relations that
were supported only by a bias of the modifier family (modifier family : 6.6,
SD 1.4; head family : 0.4, SD 0.7). Note that there was no condition
Low-Low because it is very difficult to construct easily interpretable
compounds that do not have any support of modifier or head families.
We checked the contrasts between the conditions by counting supporting
family members that occur in the British part of the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). This part of CHILDES contains various types of
transcripts from 160 children across the United Kingdom, most of which
were either of the same age or younger than the children tested in the
present study. Twenty-four were older (age 7), but the transcripts of those
children amounted to less than 2% of the transcribed speech. Table 1 lists
[v] The CELEX database contains 4843 noun-noun compounds taken from the Oxford
Advanced Learner's Dictionary and the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English.

93

K R O T T E T A L.

1. Mean number of supporting modifier and head family members in
CHILDES and according to parental report for novel noun-noun compounds
with varying Modifier Support and Head Support (High-High, High-Low,
Low-High ; standard deviations in parentheses)

TABLE

Mean modifier family size

Mean head family size

Family bias

CHILDES

Parental report

CHILDES

Parental report

High-High
Low-High
High-Low

2.5 (1.8)
0.3 (0.4)
3.0 (2.4)

2.3 (1.4)
0.2 (0.5)
2.2 (1.4)

2.5 (2.1)
3.1 (3.0)
0.6 (1.3)

2.0 (1.7)
2.1 (1.9)
0.02 (0.05)

the mean number of modifier and head family members for the three
subsets of compounds. We checked the differences between the conditions
by conducting analyses of variance for the numbers of supportive family
members (i.e. supportive modifier or head family) with family bias
(High-High, High-Low and Low-High) as the independent variable. In
case of the modifier contrast, there was a significant main effect of family
bias on supportive modifier family (F(2, 27)=7.0, p=0.004, gp2=0.34).
Planned comparisons of the conditions confirmed that the supportive
modifier family of condition Low-High was significantly smaller than the
supportive modifier family of conditions High-High and High-Low
(F(1, 27)=13.6, p=0.001, gp2=0.34), and that there was no difference
between conditions High-High and High-Low (F<1). In case of the head
contrasts, there was a significant main effect of family bias on supportive
head family (F(2, 27)=3.4, p=0.049, gp2=0.20). Planned comparisons of
the conditions confirmed that the supportive head family of condition
High-Low was significantly smaller than the supportive head family of
conditions High-High and Low-High (F(1, 27)=6.4, p=0.017, gp2=0.19),
and that there was no difference between conditions High-High and
Low-High (F<1). Thus, the compounds occurring in CHILDES
confirmed the contrasts of our experimental design.
To investigate the effect that overall frequencies of modifier-head
relations might have on children's interpretations, we estimated the
frequency of thematic relations in children's compound vocabulary. For
that, we gathered all noun-noun compounds in both child-speech and
child-directed speech in the British part of the CHILDES database (629
compounds). The thematic relations of the compounds were coded by five
native English speakers (British), using the same coding scheme as above
(Fleiss' K=0.45, p<0.001). The majority relation was taken as the correct
relation. If there was no majority relation, the compound received the
coding ` OTHER'.
94

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S
TABLE

2. Family members of egg bag on parental checklist
egg ________

________ bag

egg carton*
egg timer*
eggbeater*
eggcup*
egg white
egg yolk
eggshell
egg noodles
egg salad

sandwich bag*
lunch bag*
shopping bag*
sports bag*
shoe bag*
handbag*
punching bag*
saddlebag
teabag
canvas bag
cloth bag
sandbag
ice bag

* Indicates the same relation as the dominant relation of the target compound egg bag (FOR)
according to our compound database.

Parental vocabulary report. We asked the parents of the children to give
us information about the actual vocabulary knowledge of the children. For
that, we presented to them a vocabulary checklist that contained the
constituents of the experimental compounds together with the constituents'
modifier and head family members taken from our compound database.
We asked the parents to indicate which words they thought their children
knew well enough to say spontaneously. This way we were able to
determine modifier and head families more accurately than on the basis
of our compound database or CHILDES. For example, for each child,
we knew his/her modifier family of the experimental compound egg bag,
i.e. all the compounds he/she knew that contain the modifier egg. Table 2
lists the compounds that were included in the questionnaire for the novel
combination egg bag. The parental report also provided the number of
compounds in the modifier family that match the dominant relation of
egg bag (bag FOR eggs), i.e. the size of the supportive modifier family.
Similarly, we determined the head family of egg bag for each child by
gathering all compounds that the child knew with the head bag and
determined the number of compounds that contained the dominant
relation (FOR), i.e. the size of the supportive head family. The parents of
the twenty-two children we included in our analyses had filled in the
vocabulary list.
Table 1 lists the mean sizes of the supportive families according to
parental report for the three experimental compound sets (High-High,
High-Low and Low-High). Similar to the examination of the families
occurring in CHILDES, we checked whether the contrasts of our
95

K R O T T E T A L.

experimental conditions that we had determined on the basis of our
compound database were confirmed by the estimates of the parental report.
As for the CHILDES compounds, we conducted analyses of variance for
the reported numbers of supportive family members (i.e. supportive
modifier or head family, averaged over participants) with family bias
(High-High, High-Low and Low-High) as the independent variable.
Results again confirmed the contrasts initially based on the database. In
case of the modifier contrast, there was a significant main effect of family
bias on supportive modifier family (F(2, 27)=10.1, p=0.001, gp2=0.43).
Planned comparisons of the three conditions confirmed that the supportive
modifier family of condition Low-High was significantly smaller than the
supportive modifier family of conditions High-High and High-Low
(F(1, 27)=20.2, p<0.001, gp2=0.43), and that there was no difference
between conditions High-High and High-Low (F<1). In case of the head
contrasts, there was a significant main effect of family bias on supportive
head family (F(2, 27)=7.2, p=0.003, gp2=0.35). Planned comparisons of
the three conditions confirmed that the supportive head family of condition
High-Low was significantly smaller than the supportive head family of
conditions High-High and Low-High (F(1, 27)=13.9, p=0.001, gp2=0.34),
and that there was no difference between conditions High-High and
Low-High (F<1).
Procedure
Children were tested individually. The experimenter, a native speaker of
British English, asked them to explain to her the meaning of the
experimental compound words. She introduced them to the task by
explaining that we say coffee cup because it is a cup for coffee. She then
asked the children what bear trousers are and corrected the child if he/she
did not give a response that explained the relation between head and
modifier (e.g. ` trousers for bears '). Following these examples, the
experimental compounds were presented to each child in a different
random order. For each compound, the experimenter asked ` What does X
mean ?' If a child did not respond with an explanation of the meaning of the
compound, she repeated the same question later in the experiment. As
mentioned, adults were tested with a written version of the task, i.e. they
were given instructions and the two examples above in writing and asked to
write down their interpretations.
Both children's and adults' interpretations were coded by two native
English speakers and one fluent English speaker, using the coding scheme
in Appendix B. For example, one adult explained the meaning of fire foil
as ` foil for making fire ', which was coded with the relation FOR, while
one child said ` it is foil, but it is made out of fire', which was coded as
96

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

3. Mean number of dominant relation responses (out of 10) for
combinations of relational biases in modifier family and head families for novel
compounds (High-High, High-Low, Low-High)

TABLE

Family bias

Mean

Standard deviation

High-High
Low-High
High-Low

4.5
4.2
3.2

1.9
1.7
1.7

MADE OF. Another adult explained birthday room as `a room in which
birthdays are celebrated ', while a child said `you got a room for your
birthday ', which were both coded with the relation FOR. The agreement
among the three coders for children's responses was 71 % (Fleiss' K=0.68,
p<0.001), for adults' responses it was 86% (Fleiss' K=87.1, p<0.001).
The codes for the remaining responses were decided by taking the majority
code (15% of all child responses and 13% of all adult responses) or by
discussion.

RESULTS

Of all child responses, 39.7 % were dominant interpretations, i.e.
interpretations that were preferred by adults in our adult pretest of the
materials. In 18.5% of the responses children reversed the roles of modifiers
and heads in their explanations (e.g. ` an animal what has got a helmet on '
for animal helmet or ` it's cheese and I think it is made out of fish ' for cheese
fish), suggesting that even five-year-olds still have some problems
distinguishing between heads and modifiers when exposed to novel
compounds.
Effect of modifier and head families
We first examined whether children base their interpretations on their
knowledge of existing noun-noun compounds with either the same modifier
or head noun while interpreting the novel compound. We averaged the
number of responses with dominant relations for the different conditions of
our experiment by participants and conducted an analysis of variance with
family support for the dominant relation (High-High, High-Low and
Low-High) as the independent variable and number of responses with the
dominant relation as the dependent variable. Table 3 lists the mean number
of those responses for the conditions. The analysis showed a main effect
of family support (F(2, 42)=9.0, p=0.001, gp2=0.30). Planned comparisons
revealed that the condition High-Low led to fewer responses with
97

K R O T T E T A L.

the dominant relation than conditions High-High and Low-High
(F(1, 21)=18.7, p<0.001, gp2=0.47), indicating that a larger number of
supportive head family members led to more responses with the supported
relation. In contrast, comparing Low-High with High-High and
High-Low showed no significant difference (F(1, 21)=1.5, p=0.237,
gp2=0.066), indicating that the number of supportive modifier family
members had no significant effect on the responses.
Parental report and comparison with adults
Our finding for children's interpretations is different from that found for
adults in previous studies, which revealed an influence of adults' experience
with modifiers in existing combinations (e.g. Gagne, 2001 ; Gagne &
Shoben, 2002). We therefore directly compared effects of modifier and head
families on adults' and children's interpretations. We conducted a
generalized linear mixed-effect (multilevel) analysis (e.g. Pinheiro & Bates,
2000) because it allows us to predict children's and adults' responses on the
basis of different modifier and head families, combining children's and
adults' responses in a single analysis. It also has the advantage that we can
predict children's responses on the basis of individual modifier and head
families, using parental reports. We included the match with the dominant
relation (matching or not matching) as the dependent variable into the
analysis, participants and items as crossed random effects, and the number
of supportive head family members (head support), the number of
supportive modifier family members (modifier support), and age group
(children vs. adults) as fixed factors. The results revealed significant main
effects of modifier support (F(1, 1734)=55.6, p<0.001)vi and age group
(F(1, 1734)=15.3, p<0.001), and the interaction head supportrage group
(F(1, 1734)=6.0, p=0.01). Adults responded more often with the dominant
relation (70 %) than children (39.7%), and a larger modifier support
increased the number of matching responses.
Because of the interaction of head support and age group, we conducted
separate mixed-effect analyses for children and adults. An analysis of
children's responses with response (dominant interpretation versus other
interpretation) as the dependent variable, participants and items as crossed
random effects, and head support and modifier support as fixed factors
showed that head support was a good predictor of children's responses, with
larger support leading to more responses that matched the dominant
relation (F(1, 657)=6.5, p<0.001). However, modifier support was not a

[vi] In this and all further analyses, we used the ` Laplace' algorithm to calculate the
parameters of the model.

98

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

good predictor of responses (F(1, 657)=1.7, p=0.19). This shows that
children's interpretations were affected by their knowledge of supportive
head family members, which is in line with the analysis of variance
above. The lack of a significant effect of modifier support for children
needs to be viewed in the light of the main effect of modifier support
and the lack of an interaction of modifier support and age group in the
omnibus analysis above. In particular, the random effect of participants
and the fixed factor modifier support shared explained variance in the
analysis of the child responses. Therefore, we fitted another model, which
did not include participants as random factor. For this model, both head
support (F(1, 657)=9.1, p<0.001) and modifier support (F(1, 657)=11.9,
p<0.001) predicted children's responses. The influence of the modifier
family is also reflected in the correlations between number of responses
with the dominant interpretation and modifier support (r=0.12, p=0.003).
The magnitude of this correlation increases when items with no modifier
support (and, hence, with no basis for analogy) are removed (r=0.19,
p=0.001). Likewise, there is a positive correlation between the number of
responses with the dominant interpretation and head support (r=0.19,
p<0.001), and without items for which there is no head support (r=0.20,
p=0.002).
The analysis using the adult data alone showed a different pattern ;
modifier support (F(1, 1077)=8.0, p<0.001) but not head support was a
successful predictor of the responses (F(1, 1077)=1.9, p=0.17). This
finding is consistent with previous adult studies, which report that the
speed of interpretation was primarily affected by their experience with
modifiers in other noun-noun combinations (Gagne, 2001).
In sum, our analysis reveals that children and adults draw on similar but
different knowledge when interpreting novel noun-noun compounds. Both
groups use familiar compounds as an analogical base when interpreting
novel compounds. However, while adults base their interpretations
primarily on knowledge of modifiers in familiar combinations, children
base their interpretations primarily on knowledge of heads in familiar
combinations.
Overall relation frequency
After having shown the importance of the supportive head family on
children's interpretations, our second question was whether children's
interpretations were also affected by the overall frequency of relations in the
children's compound vocabulary. Did children have a higher success rate
with a relation that they were more familiar with ? Table 4 shows the
distribution of the most frequent thematic relations of compounds that
occur in the CHILDES database (summed frequencies in child-speech and
99

K R O T T E T A L.
T A B L E 4. Frequency of modifier-head relations in CHILDES compounds and
experimental stimuli, as well as success rate with dominant relation and usage if
non-dominant relation for children and adults

Success rate
with dominant
relation (%)

Stimuli
Relation
FOR
LOCATED
MADE OF
PART
HAS
BE
USE
LIKE
DURING
OTHERS

CHILDES
(%)
40.6
7.6
6.6
5.0
4.4
3.8
1.9
1.1
0.9
28.0

Usage if
non-dominant
relation (%)

#

%

Children

Adults

Children

Adults

16
1
6
1
4
1
0
0
1
0

53.3
3.3
20.0
3.3
13.3
3.3
0.0
0.0
3.3
0.0

40.9
59.1
18.9
45.5
59.1
31.8
n/a
n/a
63.6
n/a

70.1
100.0
65.7
77.8
54.9
94.3
n/a
n/a
94.4
n/a

4.2
14.6
2.7
0.0
17.1
5.9
0.9
1.2
0.2
0.5

8.3
0.7
5.7
0.1
7.7
0.5
1.0
4.2
0
8.0

child-directed speech)vii and of the experimental stimuli.viii Among the
compounds in CHILDES, the FOR relation strongly dominates (e.g.
earring=ring for an ear). If children understand relations better that occur
more often in their vocabulary, then they should perform better when
explaining a FOR relation than when explaining other relations. For each
relation we therefore calculated a success rate, averaging the success rates
over children. For example, for sixteen compounds the FOR relation was
the dominant and therefore the expected relation. We calculated for each
child how many responses out of the sixteen were actually FOR responses
and averaged this number over all children. The column labeled `success
rate with dominant relation - children ' in Table 4 lists success rates for all
relations occurring in our experimental stimuli. As shown in the table,
children's success rate was highest for DURING, HAS and LOCATED,
followed by PART, FOR and BE, which does not reflect the frequency
distribution in the CHILDES compounds. To test this difference, we
added the relation frequency in CHILDES as an additional fixed factor to

[vii] Taking only compounds that occur in children's utterances in CHILDES leads to a
very similar distribution.
[viii] Note that the group OTHERS slightly differs for children's responses and CHILDES.
In the case of children, these are responses that either could not be classified or
relations that occurred very seldom. In the case of CHILDES, these are either
compounds that are opaque, compounds with relations that do not fall into the main
categories, i.e. that rarely occur (in less than 2% of all compounds), or compounds that
did not receive a majority code from our coders.

100

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

our mixed effect model ; we conducted an analysis with response (dominant
interpretation versus other interpretation) as a dependent variable,
participants and items as crossed random effects, and head support,
modifier support, age group (children vs. adults), and CHILDES
Frequency as fixed factors. There was no effect of CHILDES Frequency
(F<1). Thus, we can conclude that children's success in responding with
the dominant relation is not affected by their familiarity with the relation
as reflected by the overall frequency of the relation in the CHILDES
database.
Relation preference for children and adults
Success rates in Table 4 suggest that children were not equally successful
with different relations, and their success rates were different from those of
adults. Out of the relations that appear more than once in our experimental
material, they seem to be quite successful with the relations HAS (59.1%)
and FOR (40.9%), while less successful with MADE OF (18.9 %). Adults
appear to have success rates that are much more equal (HAS 54.9%, FOR
70.1 %, MADE OF 65.7%). We tested whether the relation of a compound
has an additional effect on children's and adults' responses (apart from
family support effects) by adding relation (FOR, LOCATED, MADE OF,
PART, HAS, BE, DURING) as an additional fixed factor into our mixed
effect analysis. Results confirmed again main effects of modifier support
(F(1, 1722)=34.6, p<0.001), head support (F(1, 1722)=14.3, p<0.001) and
age group (F(1, 1722)=14.4, p<0.001), as well as an interaction between
age group and head support (F(1, 1722)=6.6, p=0.01). In addition, there
was an interaction between age group and relation (F(6, 1722)=8.3,
p<0.001), indicating that adults and children were not equally successful
with different relations.
Due to the interaction, we conducted separate generalized mixed model
analyses for children and adults. The analysis of the children's responses
showed main effects of head support (F(1, 651)=7.8, p=0.01) and relation
(F(1, 651)=4.3, p<0.001). Comparing children's responses to compounds
with the comparison relation FOR against compounds with other relations,
and restricting comparisons to the two relations that occur more often than
once in our stimuli (HAS and MADE OF) revealed that children responded
more often with the dominant relation HAS than with FOR ( b=0.11,
z=2.5, p=0.01) and more often with the dominant relation FOR than with
MADE OF ( b=1.1, z=3.1, p=0.002). Adults, on the other hand,
performed equally successful across the various relation-types ; the adult
analysis showed only a marginal effect of relation (F(1, 1071)=2.1, p=0.05),
with less successful responses with relation HAS than with FOR
(z=-2.2,=0.03).
101

K R O T T E T A L.

Does this finding mean that children have fewer problems explaining
compounds with a HAS relation than compounds with a FOR or MADE
OF relation because they have a good command of the HAS relation, while
they have a weaker command of FOR or MADE OF? Or does their success
with HAS result from an overuse of HAS? To answer this question, we
examined which relations children (and adults) use when they respond with
a non-dominant relation. We calculated the average percentage of responses
with a particular relation out of the total number of possible responses with
this relation when it was NOT the dominant relation. For example, for
fourteen compounds the FOR relation was not the dominant response. We
calculated for each child how many responses out of these fourteen were
actually FOR responses and therefore non-expected responses. The column
` usage if non-dominant relation - children ' in Table 4 lists the mean
percentage for each relation when used unexpectedly, i.e. when it is not the
dominant relation. Children tended to use the relations HAS and
LOCATED more often than adults when producing an unexpected
response, while they tended to use FOR and MADE OF less often than
adults. To test these differences, we conducted generalized linear mixed
effect analyses for the four relations FOR, MADE OF, LOCATED and
HAS. For each relation, we based the analysis on the subset of compounds
for which the relation would be non-dominant. For example, for the FOR
relation we only considered compounds for which FOR would be the nondominant response. We conducted a mixed effect model with response (e.g.
FOR vs. NOT FOR) as dependent variable, participants and items as
crossed random effects and age group as fixed factor. There were significant
effects of age group for all four relations, confirming that children used
FOR (F(1, 810)=5.0, p=0.03) and MADE OF (F(1, 1390)=16.0,
p<0.001) less often unexpectedly (i.e. when the dominant relation was a
different relation) than adults and that they used LOCATED
(F(1, 1680)=53.1, p<0.001) and HAS (F(1, 1506)=15.4, p<0.001) more
often than adults.
Taking success rates and non-dominant responses together, the following
pattern emerges. While adults have a similar success rate for relations HAS,
MADE OF and FOR, children have a higher success rate for the HAS
relation than for the FOR and MADE OF relations. Children also use the
HAS relation more often than adults when responding with a non-dominant
relation. Together, these results suggest that the children overused HAS
(cf. Clark & Berman, 1987). The same seems to be the case for the
LOCATED relation (see also Mellenius, 1997), although children's high
success rate for LOCATED (59.1 %) is based on a single compound (side
ache) and therefore needs to be treated with caution. Furthermore, the
children used the FOR and MADE OF relations less often than did the
adults, which suggests that children underused these relations.
102

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S
GENERAL DISCUSSION

The purpose of this study was to investigate various ways in which
frequency might affect children's selection of thematic relations for novel
noun-noun compounds. We addressed the following questions : Do children
use their knowledge of modifier and head families and the support for
thematic relations in these families when interpreting compounds ? If yes,
do they do this in the same way adults do ? In addition, we investigated
whether children's success rates and responses with non-dominant relations
are affected by frequency of modifier-head relations in their vocabulary and
whether there are relational preferences for children that are different from
those for adults.
In our discussion, we highlight four findings, in turn : (1) both children
and adults responded with highly frequent relations within compound
families when interpreting novel compounds ; (2) children and adults relied
on families related to different constituents ; (3) children's interpretation of
novel compounds was not related to the overall frequency of thematic
relations in compound words ; and (4) in addition to using the most frequent
thematic relation of a family, children had a strong tendency to use HAS or
LOCATED.
The main finding of our study was that both children's and adults'
interpretations of novel compounds was related to high-frequency relations
in the compound families. This finding is consistent with other studies
showing item-based effects in compounding for children (Krott &
Nicoladis, 2005 ; Neijt, Krebbers & Fikkert, 2002 ; Nicoladis & Krott,
2007) and adults (Krott et al., 2001). Taken together, these studies support
the following account of compound acquisition. We assume that children
start to learn compound words initially as individual words, with no
knowledge of their internal structure (cf. Berko, 1958 ; Berman, 1987). As
they learn clusters of similar words, children start to understand that
compounds have an underlying structure. Initially, this structure is a
combination of a specific constituent (e.g. a specific head such as muffin) and
a specific modifier-head relation (e.g. HAS), which results in a structure
such as modifier+muffin (HAS). Because specific constituents can be
combined with various relations (see breakfast muffin=muffin to be eaten
for breakfast), closely related structures develop (modifier+muffin (HAS),
modifier+muffin (FOR)), which need to be combined into a single structure
(modifier+muffin (RELATION)). We have referred to the latter as
constituent families. Eventually children learn an abstract pattern (e.g.
modifier+head (RELATION)).
Our results concerning adults' compound interpretations suggest that
knowledge about the head noun's constituent families gives way to
knowledge about the modifier's constituent families and this knowledge is
used alongside an abstract compound pattern. This is not an isolated
103

K R O T T E T A L.

phenomenon. Other researchers have noted that adults can have some
more-or-less frozen expressions in their vocabularies, even when they can
use the components of those expressions separately in other contexts
(Barlow & Kemmer, 2000 ; Bybee & Hopper, 2001; see also Di Sciullo &
Williams, 1987 ; Langacker, 1987). For example, some expresssions like
` would you' and ` didn't you' might be stored as single units in the lexicon
but elements of these constructions (i.e. ` would ', `did', `not' and `you ') are
also stored as units (Bybee & Hopper, 2001).
This account of compound acquisition predicts that children who are still
treating compounds as chunks (at least for a majority of compounds) should
not be influenced by modifier or head families when inferring thematic
relations of novel compounds. Future research will need to confirm this. It
is also unclear at what age children have fully developed an abstract
compound pattern. Earlier studies on compound production and
comprehension suggest that this knowledge is already present for twoyear-olds (e.g. Clark et al., 1985). It is important to note, though, that in
these studies young children still make a considerable number of errors. For
example, Clark et al. (1985) asked children to choose the referent for a novel
compound (e.g. mouse-hat) among the pictures of a mouse, a hat, a hat on a
mouse and a hat on a fish. Although significantly above chance level, only
50 % of two-year-olds correctly chose the hat on a mouse. Such a
performance level can be explained by an approach that assumes that
responses do not reflect an abstract knowledge about subcategorization, but
that each response depends on the individual knowledge of the child about
compounds that have the same modifier (mouse) or head (hat) as the novel
target compound. Furthermore, our study revealed that five-year-olds still
make reversal mistakes when identifying modifiers and heads in novel
compounds (see Nicoladis, 2002, for similar reversals in production in
three- and four-year-olds). This finding challenges the assumption that
two- and three-year-olds have a complete and robust knowledge of the roles
of modifiers and heads, i.e. that they have developed an abstract noun-noun
pattern. The finding rather adds to the evidence that this general knowledge
develops very slowly and possibly item by item (Krott & Nicoladis, 2005 ;
Nicoladis, 2003 ; Nicoladis & Krott, 2007). Nevertheless, it is difficult to
assess whether children's mistakes in such tasks are due to the lack of a
general abstract compound pattern or whether they stem from a different
source.
Our account of compound acquisition is very similar to that of Usagebased accounts of syntactic acquisition (e.g. Goldberg, Casenhiser &
Sethuraman, 2004 ; Tomasello, 2000). Usage-based accounts suggest that
children initially learn words in specific strings (e.g. `I love you '), gradually
construct underlying schemas with slots that still contain specific words
(e.g. ` I ____ you '), and finally generalize to an abstract pattern
104

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

(e.g. Subject-Verb-Object or Agent-Action-Patient). Although several
researchers using a Usage-based framework have focused on children's
acquisition of syntactic constructions (e.g. Goldberg et al., 2004 ; Lieven,
Behrens, Speares & Tomasello, 2003), Usage-based theories do not restrict
constructions to the level of syntax. A construction can be any highfrequency string (Bybee & Hopper, 2001) or any pairing of form and
meaning that is not predictable from its constituents or other constructions
(Croft, 2001 ; Goldberg, 2006). Given these definitions, the term
construction also refers to complex words (e.g. Bybee, 1985), including
compounds (see also Di Sciullo & Williams, 1987 ; Plag, 2006).
One should note, however, a difference between typical Usage-based
studies and the present study on compound relations. While typical Usagebased explanations are seen as an alternative to a generative approach that
assumes abstract syntactic knowledge from early on, this would not make
sense for thematic relations in compounds because there is no abstract
` default ' relation that children need to learn. In this sense, our results do
not present strong evidence against early abstract knowledge of thematic
relations. At the same time, our findings are consistent with the idea that
item-based knowledge is stored and used by children (and adults) when
linking linguistic units to form unified representations.
A second finding from the present study was that children and adults
relied on different constituents and their families in interpreting the
meaning of novel compounds. Children's interpretations are affected
primarily by the relational bias in head families. Although there is some
evidence that they are also affected by the bias within modifier families,
this evidence is inconclusive. In contrast to the children's data, the data
from the adults indicate that adults draw on their experience with
modifier families. Why do children and adults rely on different constituent
families? The ability to interpret a noun-noun combination involves
creating or identifying the concept denoted by the combination. We
propose that there are at least two aspects to this process. First, one
must understand that the combination is a member of the head noun
category, which is the subcategorization function of compounds (cf. Clark,
Gelman & Lane, 1985). For instance, a chocolate bowl is a kind of bowl.
Second, one must understand how the combined concept differs from other
members of the category. To illustrate, a chocolate bowl is a bowl for
chocolate, whereas a fruit bowl is a bowl for fruit. In these two examples,
the modifier provides information about the purpose or function of the
bowl and, in doing so, forms two subcategories of bowls. This second
ability involves understanding of how the head noun is modified by the
modifier concept. The first aspect of conceptual combination draws more
heavily on knowledge about the head noun because it involves
understanding the compound's category membership (it is a bowl). The
105

K R O T T E T A L.

second aspect draws more heavily on the modifier and how it can modify a
category.
The finding that children tend to use their knowledge about heads
therefore suggests that they use their knowledge about categories and
categorization. The effect of the supportive head family on children's
compound interpretations suggests that a child is more likely to pick a
relation for the novel compound if the child knows a lot of other
subcategories of the head with the same relation. For example, he/she
knows a lot of other bowls and they all have the function of storing
something. The finding that children appear to use knowledge about
modifier families to a lesser degree might mean that they do not know very
much yet about the possible modifications that a specific modifier (e.g.
chocolate) can create within a compound. Due to their limited vocabulary,
children might not have discovered the predictive power of modifiers and
their families, or children's small modifier families might not have a critical
mass yet to affect their interpretations.
Another possibility is that preschool children are still developing their
understanding of the roles of heads and modifiers and therefore focus their
attention on the category to which the compound belongs (i.e. the head
noun) because identifying the category is the first step of understanding an
unfamiliar compound. In other words, overall our research suggests that
preschool children do understand that modifier and head nouns play
different roles, which is consistent with past research. However, when they
determine how a modifier and head should be linked, they show only weak
signs of using knowledge about compounds with the same modifier. It is
unclear whether they do not have this knowledge or whether the complex
task leads them to focus on head categories.
A third finding to highlight from this study is that the children's
interpretations were not sensitive to overall relation frequency in
compounds that they are exposed to or that they use themselves. The lack
of a general frequency effect of relations in the vocabulary for five-year-olds
is unexpected within a Usage-based framework. It might appear surprising
that five-year-olds (and even adults) rely on abstract patterns in syntax (see
Tomasello, 2000, 2003) and still rely on item-based knowledge when it
comes to compounds (the present study). This difference might be due to
the fact that the syntactic constructions they learn early are more frequent
than compounds. An alternative explanation might be a larger variety of
relations for compounds (FOR, HAS, LOCATED, MADE OF etc.), which
makes the roles of compound modifiers and heads, especially the abstract
roles of being a modifier or the superordinate category, more difficult to
understand than those of constituents in syntactic phrases. Note that
syntactic phrases most similar to noun-noun compounds, namely
adjective-noun phrases, have a much stronger preference for a particular
106

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

relation, i.e. the IS relation (a red ball is a ball that IS red and a happy girl is
a girl that IS happy), than noun-noun constructs. Even very young children
can generalize the meaning of a novel adjective (e.g. Klibanoff & Waxman,
2000).
Another finding of our study was that children, but not adults, tended
to overuse HAS (and LOCATED) and to underuse FOR when interpreting
compounds. Thus, high frequency alone might not predict children's
productive use of some thematic relations (e.g. FOR). We consider briefly
three possible explanations for this finding. First, one might argue that
children's performance in our task is affected by their metalinguistic
awareness, i.e. their competence to express their understanding of
modifier-head relations. Children indeed sometimes seemed to struggle
to find the right words when explaining a relation and, in general, it
might be easier to explain a HAS or LOCATED relation than a FOR
relation. However, twenty out of the twenty-two children explained
at least once a FOR relation (mean 7.9 times), showing that they had
the means of expressing FOR relations. Therefore, metalinguistic
considerations alone cannot explain our finding. The second explanation
concerns the context of acquisition ; children might learn compounds in the
context of both objects represented by the compound constituents being
perceptually available. This is the case for HAS and LOCATED relations,
but not necessarily for FOR relations. For example, while a stepladder is
a ladder that always HAS steps and a doormat is located at a door, a lipstick
is not always near lips. If the context of compound acquisition leads
children to assume that compounds refer to two objects that are both
perceptual available, they should be more likely to assume that novel
compounds have HAS or LOCATED relations. A third possibility is that
children prefer HAS and LOCATED relations because they are
conceptually easier. HAS and LOCATED relations are concerned with
the physical proximity of objects. FOR relations on the other hand refer to
actions in which a head object acts on a modifier object. Because actions
are concepts of a higher complexity, it might be more demanding for
children to understand a FOR relation than a HAS or LOCATED relation.
Children might either overuse HAS and LOCATED relations to avoid
complex concepts or because they have not fully understood the FOR
relations.
The preference for the perceivable relations HAS and LOCATED
over the function FOR is in line with findings for children's development
in classifying objects and extending names to objects. There is evidence
that in these tasks children are initially strongly driven by perceptual
properties (especially the shape) of an object, while the function of the
object is used only later in development and depending on the
form-function relation (e.g. Gentner, 1982 ; Landau, Smith & Jones,
107

K R O T T E T A L.

1988).ix For example, in the classic study by Gentner (1982), children were
introduced to two novel objects with two novel names. When they were
asked to name a hybrid object that looked like one of the novel objects but
had the same function as the other object, they preferred the name of the
object that looked like the hybrid object. Our results suggest that children
have the same preference for visually perceivable features (HAS and
LOCATED versus FOR) when it comes to interpreting novel concept
combinations. Therefore, children seem to be not only affected by their
knowledge of head (and modifier) families when interpreting novel
compounds, but also by relation perceivability.
We chose to present our stimuli without any linguistic or non-linguistic
context that might make one or the other interpretation more likely to
achieve a clearer picture of the effect of children's experience with
compounds on their compound interpretations. Our results show that, at
least four- to five-year-olds are not relying on context for their
understanding of unknown compounds. They are able to use their
knowledge of other compounds to infer an appropriate interpretation,
similar to adults. Further studies will need to investigate how children
integrate knowledge of constituent families and contextual information.
To conclude, our findings add to the accumulating evidence that the
input frequency of linguistic constructions affects children's acquisition of
these constructions. Our study investigated the role of thematic relations
and distinguished two different types of frequency : local, i.e. item-based
frequencies, as reflected by constituent families, and global frequencies
across children's compound vocabulary. Our results suggest the effect of
only the former, supporting the importance of item-based knowledge in
language acquisition and language processing. We have also raised a
number of possible variables that might apply to children's learning of any
word strings, including syntax. One is the perceptual bias in interpreting
relations, which echoes the perceptual bias in early name extension and
object categorization.

REFERENCES
Allen, S. E. M. & Crago, M. B. (1996). Early passive acquisition in Inuktitut. Journal of
Child Language 23, 129-55.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R. & Gullikers, L. (1995). The CELEX Lexical Database (CDROM). University of Pennsylvania : Philadelphia, PA : Linguistics Data Consortium.
Barlow, M. & Kemmer, S. (2000). Usage Based Models of Language. Stanford, CA : Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
[ix] But see Nelson and her colleagues (e.g. Nelson, Russell, Duke & Jones, 2000), who
argue that function can be used by younger children when extending names to novel
objects. However, the plausibility of the function and the causal link between function
and structure of an object influences the effect of function on name extension.

108

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

Berko, S. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word 14, 150-77.
Berman, R. A. (1987). A developmental route : learning about the form and use of complex
nominals in Hebrew. Linguistics 25, 1057-85.
Bybee, J. L. (1985). Morphology : A study of the relation between meaning and form.
Philadelphia : John Benjamins.
Bybee, J. L. & Hopper, P. (2001). Introduction to frequency and the emergence of linguistic
structure. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (eds), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic structure, 1-24. Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
Clark, E. V. (1981). Lexical innovations : How children learn to create new words.
In W. Deutsch (eds), The child's construction of language, 299-328. London : Academic
Press.
Clark, E. V. (1983). Meaning and concepts. In P. H. Mussen, L. H. Flavell & E. M.
Markman (eds), Handbook of child psychology : Vol. 3 Cognitive development, 787-840.
New York : Wiley.
Clark, E. V. (1998). Lexical creativity in French-speaking children. Cahiers de Psychologie
Cognitive 17, 513-30.
Clark, E. V. & Berman, R. A. (1987). Types of linguistic knowledge : Interpreting and producing compound nouns. Journal of Child Language 14, 547-67.
Clark, E. V., Gelman, S. A. & Lane, N. M. (1985). Compound nouns and category structure
in young children. Child Development 56, 84-94.
Clark, H. H. (1983). Making sense of nonce sense. In G. B. Flores d'Arcais & R. J. Jarvella
(eds), The process of language understanding, 297-331. New York : Wiley.
Croft, W. (2001). Radical construction grammar : Syntactic theory in typological perspective.
Oxford : Oxford University Press.
De Jong, N. H., Feldman, L. B., Schreuder, R., Pastizzo, M. & Baayen, R. H. (2002). The
processing and representation of Dutch and English compounds : Peripheral morphological and central orthographic effects. Brain and Language 81, 555-67.
Di Sciullo, A. M. & Williams, E. (1987). On the definition of word. Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press.
Downing, P. (1977). On the creation and use of English compound nouns. Language 53(4),
810-42.
Gagne, C. L. (2001). Relation and lexical priming during the interpretation of noun-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning, Memory and Cognition 27(1),
236-54.
Gagne, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic relations on the comprehension
of modifier-noun combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning, Memory
and Cognition 23(1), 71-87.
Gagne, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (2002). Priming relations in ambiguous noun-noun combinations. Memory and Cognition 30(4), 637-46.
Gagne, C. L. & Spalding, T. L. (2004a). Effect of discourse context and modifier
relation frequency on conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and Language 50(4),
444-55.
Gagne, C. L. & Spalding, T. L. (2004b). Effect of relation availability on the interpretation
and access of familiar noun-noun compounds. Brain and Language 90, 478-86.
Gentner, D. (1982). A study of early word meaning using artificial objects : What looks like a
jiggy but acts like a zimbo? In J. Gardner (ed.), Readings in developmental psychology,
137-42. Boston : Little Brown.
Gerrig, R. J. & Murphy, G. L. (1992). Contextual influences on the comprehension of
complex concepts. Language and Cognitive Processes 7(3-4), 205-230.
Gleitman, L. & Gleitman, H. (1970). Phrase and paraphrase : Some innovative uses of language. New York : Norton.
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at work : The nature of generalization in language.
Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, A. E., Casenhiser, D. M. & Sethuraman, N. (2004). Learning argument structure
generalizations. Cognitive Linguistics 15(3), 289-316.

109

K R O T T E T A L.

Harris, M., Barrett, M., Jones, D. & Brookes, S. (1988). Linguistic input and early word
meaning. Journal of Child Language 15(1), 77-94.
Kay, P. & Zimmer, K. (1976). On the semantics of compounds and genitives in English. In
Sixth California Linguistics Association Proceedings, 29-35. San Diego, CA : Campile Press.
Klibanoff, R. S. & Waxman, S. R. (2000). Basic level object categories support the acquisition of novel adjectives : Evidence from preschool-aged children. Child Development 71
(3), 649-59.
Krott, A., Baayen, R. H. & Schreuder, R. (2001). Analogy in morphology : Modeling the
choice of linking morphemes in Dutch. Linguistics 39(1), 51-93.
Krott, A. & Nicoladis, E. (2005). Large constituent families help children parse compounds.
Journal of Child Language 32(1), 139-58.
Kuczaj, S. A. (1977). The acquisition of regular and irregular past tense forms. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 16, 589-600.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B. & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of shape in early lexical
learning. Cognitive Development 3(3), 299-321.
Langacker, R. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar, Vol. 1 : Theoretical prerequisites.
Stanford, CA : Stanford University Press.
Lees, R. B. (1960). The grammar of English nominalizations. Bloomington, IN : Indiana
University.
Levi, J. (1978). The syntax and semantics of complex nominals. New York : Academic Press.
Lieber, R. (1983). Argument linking and compounds in English. Linguistic Inquiry 14(2),
251-86.
Lieven, E., Behrens, H., Speares, J. & Tomasello, M. (2003). Early syntactic creativity : A
usage-based approach. Journal of Child Language 30(2), 333-70.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : Tools for analyzing talk, 3rd ed. Mahwah,
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Marchman, V. (1997). Children's productivity in the English past tense : The role of frequency, phonology, and neighbourhood structure. Cognitive Science 21, 283-304.
Mellenius, I. (1997). The acquisition of nominal compounding in Swedish. Lund : Lund
University Press.
Neijt, A., Krebbers, L. & Fikkert, P. (2002). Rythm and semantics in the selection of linking
elements. In H. Broekhuis & P. Fikkert (eds), Linguistics in the Netherlands 2002, Vol. 19,
117-27. Amsterdam/Philadelphia : AVT Publications.
Nelson, D. G. K., Russell, R., Duke, N. & Jones, K. (2000). Two-year-olds will name
artifacts by their functions. Child Development 71(5), 1271-88.
Nicoladis, E. (2002). What's the difference between ` toilet paper' and ` paper toilet' ?
French-English bilingual children's crosslinguistic transfer in compound nouns. Journal
of Child Language 29, 843-63.
Nicoladis, E. (2003). What compound nouns mean to preschool children. Brain and
Language 84, 38-49.
Nicoladis, E. & Krott, A. (2007). Family size and French-speaking children's segmentation
of existing compounds. Language Learning 57(2), 201-28.
Parault, S. J., Schwanenflugel, P. J. & Haverback, H. R. (2005). The development of interpretations for novel noun-noun conceptual combinations during the early school years.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 91(1), 67-87.
Pinheiro, J. C. & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models in S and S-PLUS. New York :
Springer.
Plag, I. (2006). The variability of compound stress in English : Structural, semantic, and
analogical factors. English Language and Linguistics 10, 143-72.
Roeper, T. & Siegel, M. E. A. (1978). A lexical transformation for verbal compounds.
Linguistic Inquiry 9(2), 199-260.
Stekauer, P. (2005). Meaning predictability in word formation. Amsterdam/Philadelphia : John
Benjamins.
Tomasello, M. (2000). First steps toward a usage-based theory of language acquisition.
Cognitive Linguistics 11(1-2), 61-82.

110

C H I L D R E N'S U N D E R S T A N D I N G O F N O V E L C O M P O U N D S

Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language : A Usage-based theory of language acquisition.
Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press.
Warren, B. (1978). Semantic patterns of noun-noun compounds. Goteborg : Acta Universitatis
Gothoburgensis.

APPENDIX A : STIMULI
# Responses with
dominant relation

Compound

Dominant Relation Relation
bias of
Family
relation of bias of
bias
compound modifier head

birthday room
book basket
chocolate bread
corn sauce
dish table
dog shoes
paper salad
side ache
sports rack
sun suit
apple ring
baby soup
car milk
cheese fish
coffee water
day lesson
fire foil
hockey powder
snow seat
toy muffin
animal helmet
banana shop
candy cake
carrot board
cookie sandwich
egg bag
horse skin
lemon box
pepper bread
rain juice

for
for
has
made of
for
for
made of
located
for
for
made of
for
for
has
for
during
for
for
made of
be
for
for
made of
for
has
for
part
for
has
made of

for
for
has
made of
for
for
made of
located
for
for
made of
for
for
has
for
during
for
for
made of
be
of
has
for
has
for
part
for
part
for
-

for
for
has
made of
for
for
made of
located
for
for
for
has
made of
like
-
about
made of
made of
located
has
for
for
made of
for
has
for
part
for
has
made of

111

High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-High
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
High-Low
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High
Low-High

Children Adults
(max. 22) (max. 36)
17
9
9
1
14
9
7
13
7
13
3
13
7
6
7
14
4
5
3
7
9
6
5
6
17
9
10
9
17
6

33
28
18
26
21
31
28
36
35
30
31
31
27
12
11
34
29
31
19
34
26
31
23
28
20
22
28
22
31
16

K R O T T E T A L.

APPENDIX B
RELATIONS AND EXAMPLES FROM CHILDREN'S DATABASE BASED ON
MAJORITY CODES PROVIDED BY FIVE BRITISH CODERS

Modifier-Head relation

examples

ABOUT (B is about A)

fairy story, alphabet song, science
museum
Barbie doll, baby bear, toy car
sunburn, heartbeat, motion sickness
light bulb
daylight, winter sports, April fool

BE (B is an A)
CAUSE1 (A causes B)
CAUSE2 (B causes A)
DURING (B happens
during A)
FOR (B is for A)
FROM (B comes from/is
derived from A)
HAS (B has A)
LIKE (B is like A)
LOCATED (B is located at A)
MADE OF (B is made of A)
MAKES1 (A makes B)
MAKES2 (B makes A)
OBJECTIVE
NOMINALIZATION
(A is object of verb B)
OPAQUE (A, B and/or whole
is opaque)
PART (B is part of A)
SUBJECTIVE
NOMINALIZATION
(A is subject of verb B)
USE (B uses A)
OTHER

postbox, picnic table, baby blanket
seafood, olive oil, lemon juice
cheese burger, apple tree, fruitcake
jellyfish, banana boat, goldfish
back door, farm animal, seabird
cardboard box, chocolate bar, snowball
honeybee, bubble gum
rabbit-hole, birdnest, chicken egg
haircut, shopkeeper, lawn mover

butterfly, bonfire, ferris wheel
apple peel, chicken leg, eyelash
snakebite, bee sting

pillow-fight, windmill, water pistol
weekend, boatman, beauty-spot

112

