SSLA, 31, 371-402. Printed in the United States of America.
doi:10.1017/S0272263109090342

TRANSFER AND TRANSITION
IN THE SLA OF ASPECT
A Bidirectional Study of Learners
of English and Japanese

Alison Gabriele
University of Kansas

Previous studies have shown that it is particularly difficult for second
language (L2) learners to overcome the effects of transfer when
they need to unlearn specific aspects of the native language in the
absence of explicit input that indicates which properties of the first
language (L1) are ruled out by the L2 grammar (Inagaki, 2001;
Westergaard, 2003; White, 1991a, 1991b). The present study focuses
on the effects of transfer in the domain of aspectual semantics through
an investigation of the interpretation of the present progressive in L2
English and the imperfective marker te-iru in L2 Japanese and examines whether L2 learners can rule out interpretations available in the

The research reported here is part of my dissertation work completed at the City University of New York Graduate Center in 2005. I am grateful to Gita Martohardjono and William
McClure for their guidance at both early and later stages of this project as well as for
many helpful discussions of the issues presented here. I thank Noriaki Yusa for hosting me
at Miyagi Gakuin Women's University in the fall of 2004 and for providing invaluable assistance and support in recruiting participants for this study. I also thank Chie Helinksi,
Yukiko Katagiri, Naomi Nakada Larson, William McClure, Kyoko Selden, Robert Sukle, and
John Whitman for their help in recruiting the L2 learners of Japanese. The Japanese experiment was developed in cooperation with Mamori Sugita. I thank Leigh Garrison for
her help in data collection and analysis as well as Hia Datta for her artistic expertise.
Various people have provided feedback at different stages of this work. I am grateful to Jose
Aleman-Banon, Marcel den Dikken, Erika Troseth, Virginia Valian, Maria Luisa Zubizaretta,
and the six anonymous SSLA reviewers for their helpful suggestions, which greatly
improved the article. All remaining errors are my own. This research was supported by a
dissertation improvement grant from the National Science Foundation (BCS-0345697).
Address correspondence to: Alison Gabriele, Department of Linguistics, University of
Kansas, 1541 Lilac Lane, Blake Hall 427, Lawrence, KS 66044-3177; e-mail: gabriele@ku.edu.
(c) 2009 Cambridge University Press 0272-2631/09 $15.00

371

372

Alison Gabriele
L1 but not in the L2. Japanese learners of English (n = 101), English
native-speaker controls (n = 23), English learners of Japanese (n = 31),
and Japanese native-speaker controls (n = 33) completed an interpretation task in English or Japanese. The results show that the L2
Japanese learners were more successful than the L2 English learners
in both acquiring the semantics of the imperfective in the L2 and ruling out interpretations available only in the L1. It is proposed that
successful unlearning depends on both the grammatical complexity
of the semantic target in the L2 and the transparency of the input
cues available to the learner.

Although the role of the native language has been controversial in the
history of SLA, every theory of SLA must include an explanatory account of transfer. Current generative theories of SLA are explicit with
respect to the role of the first language (L1) at the initial state (Epstein,
Flynn, & Martohardjono, 1996; Hawkins, 2001; Schwartz & Sprouse,
1996), but there is still little understanding of how transfer influences
subsequent development and ultimate attainment (Carroll, 2001; Gregg,
1996; Hawkins; Klein & Martohardjono, 1999; Whong-Barr, 2006). For
example, many second language (L2) studies have argued in support of
the full transfer/full access theory (Schwartz & Sprouse; see also White,
2003), which proposes that the entire L1 grammar defines the initial
state of SLA. According to this model, the learner's hypotheses are constrained by Universal Grammar, and acquisition is conceptualized as a
process of grammar restructuring, driven by input or positive evidence.
Restructuring is failure driven: The grammar is only restructured if the
input cannot be processed given the learner's current grammar (Klein
& Martohardjono; White). However, as White pointed out, it is difficult
to reconcile why some effects of transfer are easily overcome, whereas
others remain evident even at advanced levels of proficiency. A better
understanding of the circumstances in which restructuring will and will
not occur is thus needed. The present study considers this question in
the domain of aspectual semantics, an area in which the effects of restructuring have not yet been investigated.
There is evidence that restructuring is particularly difficult when
learners need to unlearn certain aspects of their L1 in the absence of
explicit input that indicates which properties of the L1 are ruled out by
the L2. Several studies have shown that learners can show evidence of
a L2 parameter setting while continuing to allow the L1 option, in some
cases even at advanced proficiency levels (Robertson & Sorace, 1999;
Westergaard, 2003; see also Truscott, 2006). This will be referred to as
a problem with the preemption of a L1 option (Trahey & White, 1993).
In a series of studies on the verb-raising parameter (i.e., a parameter

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

373

that distinguishes between languages with a strong inflection feature
[e.g., French] and languages with a weak inflection feature [e.g., English]
and that has consequences for verb placement), White (1991a, 1991b)
demonstrated that French learners of English successfully identified
strings such as John always kisses Mary as grammatical although this
word order is not permissible in French. Nevertheless, these learners
also allowed ungrammatical strings such as *John kisses always Mary,
which are permissible only in the L1. These findings, in addition to the
results of several subsequent studies in the domains of L2 argument
structure and syntax (e.g., Inagaki, 2001; Juffs, 1996; Mazurkewich,
1984; Sorace, 1993; Trahey & White; White, 1987), suggest that it cannot
be assumed that positive evidence for a target form in the L2 is also to
be understood as implicit negative evidence for the options available
in the L1.
Despite this evidence, which suggests that the preemption of L1 options is problematic, successful cases of unlearning have, nevertheless,
been observed (Slabakova, 2002a, 2006; Yuan, 2001, 2004). Yuan examined both French- and English-speaking learners of Chinese with respect
to the verb-raising parameter. Chinese is similar to English--and unlike
French--in prohibiting verb-raising in that the word order subject-verbadverb-object (e.g., *John kisses always Mary) is ruled out. In contrast
to the learners in White's studies (Trahey & White, 1993; White, 1991a,
1991b), the French learners of Chinese showed targetlike performance
after only 6 months of Chinese instruction.
Slabakova (2006) investigated English native speakers' (NSs') acquisition of the bare noun-proper name parameter in L2 Italian and also provided evidence of successful preemption. This parameter, proposed by
Longobardi (2001), provides a unified account for a syntactic word order contrast relevant to proper names and a semantic contrast relevant
to bare nouns. The syntactic component of this parameter determines
the word order of adjectives that modify proper names--for example, in
English, the adjective precedes the proper name (e.g., Ancient Rome),
whereas in Italian, the adjective follows the proper name (e.g., Roma
antica "ancient Rome"). The semantic component of this parameter accounts for the interpretation of bare plural noun phrases (NPs) in subject position--for example, in English, bare plural NPs such as white
elephants allow both a generic (i.e., the species of white elephants) and
an existential (i.e., some white elephants) reading, whereas in Italian,
only the existential reading is allowed.1 The task of the English-speaking
learner of Italian is to rule out the generic interpretation. Results indicate that learners are successful with both the syntactic and semantic
components of this parameter. Slabakova argued that learners are able
to acquire this semantic contrast and to rule out the L1 interpretation
on the basis of positive evidence for the syntactic component of the
parameter.

374

Alison Gabriele

The question that remains is what separates the cases of successful
acquisition and preemption from the cases of persistent L1 influence.
The study by Slabakova (2006) was the first to address this issue in the
domain of semantics but argued ultimately that the learners' success
was tied to a syntactic property. The present study continues this line
of investigation through the examination of the acquisition of a semantic property in the domain of aspect. Specifically, the acquisition of the
present progressive in L2 English and of the imperfective marker te-iru
in L2 Japanese is examined. The task of the learners of both L2 English
and L2 Japanese is similar: Learners must acquire the semantic representation for the target form in the L2 and preempt the L1 semantic
representation. Nevertheless, the results show that the L2 Japanese
learners are generally more successful than the L2 English learners, particularly with respect to preemption. It is proposed that two factors
play a significant role in determining whether preemption remains a
problem: (a) the complexity of the semantic computation and (b) the
transparency of the input cues available to the learner.
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN LEXICAL AND
GRAMMATICAL ASPECT
Tense places an event on a time line, relevant to the time of speech (Reichenbach, 1947). Aspect, on the other hand, expresses how an event
unfolds in time, focusing on the internal properties of an event, such as
whether an event is ongoing or whether an event has already been completed (Comrie, 1976; Smith, 1991/1997). Aspectual interpretation is
compositional and is determined by various grammatical sources in a
sentence, including lexical aspect, grammatical aspect, and temporal
adverbials. Lexical aspect usually refers to the four-way classification
system proposed by Vendler (1967) and Dowty (1979), which distinguishes statives (e.g., know), activities (e.g., run), accomplishments
(e.g., run a mile), and achievements (e.g., die). Lexical aspect is not a
property of verbs per se but rather is determined compositionally by
properties of the verb in conjunction with the verb's arguments and
adjuncts (Smith; Verkuyl, 1972). Grammatical aspect, in many languages,
is encoded by inflectional morphology, such as the progressive be -ing
in English. Here, the focus is on the interaction between accomplishments and achievements and the grammatical morphemes that encode
the progressive in English and Japanese.
Central to how Vendler (1967) and Dowty (1979) distinguished the
lexical aspectual classes is the compatibility of a verb phrase (VP) with
the progressive. As illustrated in (1), activities and accomplishments
occur naturally in the progressive, whereas statives and achievements
generally do not.

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese
(1)

375

a. Stative
*Sophia is knowing French.
b. Activity
Sophia is running.
c. Accomplishment
Sophia is running a mile.
d. Achievement
*Sophia is recognizing her friend.

According to Dowty, this pattern is the result of the lexical semantic
representation of these verb classes. Traditional accounts of the progressive in English require that the VP, under the scope of the progressive, entails a process (Dowty; Landman, 1992). The lexical semantics of
activities and accomplishments meets this requirement; therefore,
these VPs are compatible with the progressive. In contrast, statives and
achievements do not entail processes: Statives are not dynamic and
therefore do not progress, whereas achievements consist only of a
change of state and are said to happen instantaneously.
Many exceptions to this pattern have, nonetheless, been documented
(Dowty, 1979; Rothstein, 2004; Smith, 1991/1997; Verkuyl, 1989). Achievements such as arrive are quite natural in the progressive. Although the
details vary, several proposals (Michaelis, 2006; Moens & Steedman,
1988; Rothstein) have argued that achievements need to undergo a typeshifting or coercion operation in order to be compatible with the semantics of the progressive. According to Rothstein, for an achievement
to be acceptable in the progressive, it must first be converted to an
(abstract) accomplishment; that is, the type-shifting operation adds a
process component to the achievement, which allows the progressive
to focus on the point in the event just before culmination. Similarly,
certain statives may also be used in the progressive (e.g., John is being
a jerk). De Swart (1998) proposed that stative progressives are also the
result of coercion: The state is converted into an activity or process in
order to resolve the mismatch with the progressive. For both de Swart
and Rothstein, constraints on coercion rely on pragmatics; that is, not
all achievements can be coerced to combine with the progressive. For
de Swart, whether a verb can be coerced depends on both the context
and world knowledge--for example, arrive is compatible with the progressive because there are preparatory stages of arrival that can easily
be identified as events leading up to the point of culmination. For a verb
such as notice, however, it is much more difficult to identify what those
preparatory stages could involve (Rothstein).
On the other hand, in Japanese, the interpretation of the grammatical
form that denotes the progressive, te-iru, differs depending on the lexical aspect of the VP.2 With activities and accomplishments, as illustrated
in (2) and (3), the preferred reading is progressive (Jacobsen, 1992;

376

Alison Gabriele

Kindaichi, 1950; Ogihara, 1998),3 but with achievements, the imperfective marker te-iru always denotes a resultative interpretation. A progressive reading is thus ruled out, as shown in (4), and coercion is not
possible. The sentence in (4) literally means The plane has arrived and
crucially cannot mean The plane is arriving at the airport.4
(2)

Activity
Taroo-ga hashitte-iru.
Taroo-NOM run te-iru PRESENT
"Taroo is running."

(3)

Accomplishment
Taroo-ga hon-o
yonde-iru
Taroo-NOM book-ACC read te-iru PRESENT
"Taroo is reading a book."

(4)

Achievement
Hikoki-ga kuko-ni tuite-iru.
plane-NOM airport at arrive te-iru PRESENT
"The plane (arrived and) is at the airport."

(Hirakawa, 2001, p. 226)

The present study focuses on the differences in the interaction between
achievements and the aspectual morphemes in English and Japanese:
With the imperfective marker te-iru, achievements encode a resultative
reading, which indicates that the event has already been completed,
whereas with the progressive be -ing, achievements encode a progressive reading, which indicates that the event is about to happen.
Although details vary, in almost all formal semantic accounts (Dowty,
1979; Landman, 1992; Verkuyl, 1993), the progressive is treated as an
aspectual operator (PROG). Researchers have proposed truth conditions for the PROG operator that can account for its interaction with
specific VPs (e.g., de Swart, 1998; Dowty; Landman; Parsons, 1990;
Verkuyl). Expanding on previous work in English (e.g., Dowty; Landman;
Verkuyl), McClure (1995) proposed a crosslinguistic account in which
the difference in the behavior of the progressive be -ing in English and
the imperfective marker te-iru in Japanese was argued to lie in the semantics of the aspectual operator PROG.5 McClure proposed one set of
truth conditions for the progressive be -ing and a separate, but related,
set for the imperfective marker te-iru. The differences between the truth
conditions for the two forms are responsible for the differing interactions with the aspectual classes--achievements in particular.
McClure adopted, with some modification, Dowty's analysis of the
aspectual classes: Accomplishments entail both a process and a change
of state, whereas achievements entail only a change of state. Informally,
the truth conditions for the progressive be -ing in English specify that a
VP in the progressive is true during an interval when the event under
the scope of the progressive has begun but has not yet been completed

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

377

during that same interval. In English, both accomplishments and
achievements plus the progressive be -ing will thus be interpreted as
events in progress. It is important to note that McClure did not discuss
achievements in the progressive as instances of coercion, as does, for
example, Rothstein (2004).
In contrast, the semantics for the imperfective marker te-iru require
that at least one event entailed by the VP has been realized before the
specified interval of time, which, for the present tense, is the time at
which the sentence is uttered. Accomplishments entail both a process
and a change of state. The truth conditions for the imperfective marker
te-iru are satisfied even if only the process has been realized; thus, the
resulting reading is progressive.6 In contrast, achievements entail only
a change of state. Therefore, the truth conditions for the imperfective
marker te-iru can only be satisfied when the change of state has been
realized before the sentence has been uttered. Thus, achievements with
the imperfective marker te-iru in Japanese will always be interpreted as
resultative.
GOALS OF THE L2 LEARNER AND HYPOTHESES
Under McClure's (1995) analysis, the task of the learner is to acquire the
truth conditions for the aspectual operators that underlie the progressive be -ing and the imperfective marker te-iru. In accordance with full
transfer/full access (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1996), it is assumed that the
learner's initial hypothesis is that the truth conditions for the aspectual
operator in the L2 will match those of the L1. Difficulty with accomplishments was not predicted for either the L2 English or the L2 Japanese
learners because these learners should be able to rely on the truth conditions of their L1 to successfully interpret the L2 form.
With respect to achievements, the learner has two different goals.
First, the learner must acquire the truth conditions for the aspectual
operator in the L2. The truth conditions for the progressive be -ing are
only satisfied in contexts in which the end point of the event has not
been reached. The opposite is true for Japanese. If the learner maps the
truth conditions for the L1 aspectual operator onto the L2 operator,
achievements will be interpreted incorrectly: Japanese learners of English will interpret an achievement with the progressive be -ing as resultative, and English-speaking learners of Japanese will interpret an
achievement with the imperfective marker te-iru as progressive. This
will be referred to as the addition task because the learner must acquire
a new semantic representation; it is predicted that its acquisition can be
facilitated by positive evidence. Second, both groups of learners also
need to preempt the L1 semantic representation and rule out the readings available in the L1; that is, Japanese learners of English need to rule

378

Alison Gabriele

out a resultative interpretation for achievements with the progressive
be -ing, whereas the English-speaking learners of Japanese need to rule
out a progressive interpretation for achievements with the imperfective
marker te-iru.
The present study was designed to examine the acquisition of the
truth conditions for the aspectual operator in the L2 as well as the preemption of the semantic representation in the L1 in order to evaluate
whether the ability to overcome L1 influence depends on the type of
evidence available to the learner. Based on the results of earlier studies
in the domain of syntax (e.g., Trahey & White, 1993), it is predicted that
the acquisition of a new semantic representation is easier than the preemption of the existing L1 representation. The addition task can be facilitated by positive evidence, whereas the preemption task should be
more difficult, given that there is usually no input that addresses what
interpretations are not possible in the L2. These issues are investigated
with respect to both development and ultimate attainment through an
examination of learners at a range of proficiency levels, including a
group of highly advanced learners of L2 English. Given its bidirectional
design, this study examines whether the ability to overcome L1 influence is affected by the nature of the target form in the L2 or whether the
learning task is similar from English to Japanese and from Japanese to
English.
SLA OF ASPECT
A large body of research has investigated the aspect hypothesis (AH),
which proposes that learners follow a universal path of development in
the acquisition of aspectual morphology (see Bardovi-Harlig, 2000, Li &
Shirai, 2000, and Slabakova, 2001, for reviews). Specifically, proponents
of the AH argue that lexical aspectual classes guide early language learners in their acquisition of tense-aspect markers. For example, in English,
learners first use progressive morphology with activities and use past
morphology with telic VPs such as accomplishments and achievements.
Several studies have reported the predicted association between progressive marking and activities in oral production data (Robison, 1995),
in cloze passages (Bardovi-Harlig & Reynolds, 1995), and in oral and
written narratives (Bardovi-Harlig, 1998). Bardovi-Harlig's (1998) results
show very little use of the progressive with either accomplishments or
achievements. However, several issues still remain. First, due in part to
a reliance on production data, L2 research has not extended beyond the
initial association between activities and the progressive: It is unclear
how learners would perform with accomplishments or achievements in
the progressive if tested on comprehension or interpretation tasks. Second, as discussed by Salaberry and Shirai (2002) and Slabakova (2002b),

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

379

the properties of the L1 and L2 have not been systematically compared,
although it is likely that transfer plays an important role. For example,
Rocca (2002) showed that Italian learners of English overextended the
use of the progressive to stative verbs, a finding that Rocca attributed
to the fact that the imperfective marker in Italian is compatible with
statives (see also Collins, 2004).
In Japanese much of the research has focused on the imperfective
marker te-iru. Although this form allows both progressive and resultative interpretations, the AH predicts that learners will acquire the progressive interpretation first and associate the imperfective marker te-iru
strongly with activities--a pattern that has been observed among learners of various L1 backgrounds (Shirai & Kurono, 1998). The resultative
interpretation has generally been shown to be more difficult for learners (cf. Ishida, 2004). Despite these results, which suggest a universal
pattern of development, recent studies (e.g., Nishi & Shirai, 2007; Sugaya &
Shirai, 2007) have shown that the properties of the native language
may play a role as well. Sugaya and Shirai investigated the acquisition of
the imperfective marker te-iru by NSs of English, German, and Slavic
languages. Unlike English, German and the Slavic languages do not
have overt progressive morphology. Specifically, Sugaya and Shirai
questioned whether the predicted association between the imperfective marker te-iru and the progressive interpretation would emerge even
for learners whose L1 does not have a progressive form. The results of
an acceptability judgment task showed the predicted association for
low-proficiency learners in both L1 groups, thus supporting the AH.
However, on an oral picture description task, these low-proficiency
learners performed equally well with both the progressive and resultative uses of the imperfective marker te-iru. These results suggest that
the relative difficulty with the resultative interpretation may be influenced by both properties of the native language and task type.
Nishi and Shirai's (2007) study suggests that crosslinguistic differences at the level of lexical aspect might contribute to the difficulty with
the resultative interpretation. Their study compared performance on
verbs that differ at the level of lexical aspect in English and Japanese,
such as know--which is a stative verb in English, but its translational
equivalent in Japanese siru is an achievement--with performance on
verbs that are achievements in both languages. Beginning learners had
considerably more difficulty with verbs such as know, which suggests
that L1-L2 differences also play a significant role at the level of lexical
aspect.
Although the results of Sugaya and Shirai (2007) and Nishi and Shirai
(2007) suggest a role for L1 transfer, they do not explicitly address
preemption. However, other studies (e.g., Hirakawa, 2001; Shibata, 1999)
that examined the acquisition of the imperfective marker te-iru have
implicitly shown that the preemption of L1 options presents a challenge.

380

Alison Gabriele

Shibata (1999) found that English-speaking learners of Japanese actually used the imperfective marker te-iru more with achievements on a
picture description task. Some of these achievements were used incorrectly to encode a progressive interpretation. Similarly, in a study that
used the imperfective marker te-iru as a diagnostic of unaccusativity,
Hirakawa found that several learners had difficulty assigning a resultative interpretation to achievements with the imperfective marker te-iru,
particularly with the Japanese equivalents of burn, fall, and arrive. In
other words, these learners incorrectly assigned these verbs a progressive interpretation, likely due to transfer from English. The present
study aims to target this type of error in more detail.
Transfer has also been directly investigated in a body of recent work
that has specifically examined learners' interpretations of aspectual
forms (Gabriele, Martohardjono, & McClure, 2003; Montrul & Slabakova,
2002, 2003; Slabakova, 2003). In a series of studies, Montrul and Slabakova
(2002, 2003) investigated the acquisition of the preterite-imperfect
contrast in English-speaking learners of Spanish. In spite of the general
success of these learners, one context remained difficult even for advanced learners, despite aspectual similarities in the L1 and the L2:
Learners had difficulty with achievements such as sell in the Spanish
imperfect. According to de Swart (1998), achievements in the imperfect
induce coercion because there is a clash between the semantics of the
achievements and the unbounded imperfect. The coercion operator
shifts the achievement from a telic event to an atelic process to repair
the aspectual mismatch. Montrul and Slabakova (2002, 2003) argued
that coercion may be difficult, even if the process is available in the L1,
because coercion requires recourse to pragmatics and, thus, lies outside the realm of Universal Grammar.
In sum, previous studies (Bardovi-Harlig, 1998; Robison, 1995; Shirai &
Kurono, 1998; Sugaya & Shirai, 2007) have shown that the forms focused
on here are difficult to acquire. In L2 English, learners rarely use the progressive with accomplishments and achievements. However, the source
of this difficulty has not been fully investigated, taking properties of the
L1 into account and probing learners' interpretations of these forms.
In L2 Japanese, several studies (e.g., Shirai & Kurono; Sugaya & Shirai)
have shown that the resultative interpretation of the imperfective marker
te-iru is more difficult than the progressive interpretation. Nevertheless,
these studies have not addressed whether L2 learners transfer the semantic representation of the progressive from the L1. The present study
considers not only whether the semantics of the progressive be -ing and
the imperfective marker te-iru can eventually be acquired (i.e., addition)
but also whether L1 interpretations can also be ruled out (i.e., preemption), thus contributing to our understanding of the transfer of aspectual
semantics through the evaluation of whether the ability to overcome L1
influence depends on the type of evidence available to the learner.

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

381

LEARNERS OF L2 ENGLISH
Participants
The main participant group consisted of 101 Japanese NSs (mean
age = 20, SD = 1.5) who were initially exposed to English at the ages of
12-13 years and who, at the time of testing, were studying at universities in Japan. The University of Michigan English Language Institute Listening Comprehension Test was used as a proficiency measure. Raw
scores on this 45-question test ranged from 19 to 42 (M = 29, SD = 5.47).
Test scores were used to divide learners into three levels: low proficiency (score of 19-28, n = 46), intermediate proficiency (score of 29-35,
n = 39), and high proficiency (score of 36-45, n = 16). All students were
studying English in classes taught by English NSs who generally did not
use Japanese in the classroom.
A second group consisted of nine Japanese NSs who were living
in New York City. Their average length of residence in New York was
7 years. To be included in the analyses, participants had to score at
least 40 (of 45) on the University of Michigan English Language Institute
Listening Comprehension Test and also be evaluated as near native in an
interview. Near-native candidates were asked to answer three interview
questions and their answers were tape-recorded. Both the interview
questions and the scoring guidelines were based on the University of
Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English exam. Two English NS
judges individually scored each interview on a scale of 1 to 5 in four
areas: grammatical resource, lexical resource, discourse management,
and global achievement. The judges' scores were then averaged to produce one composite score for each participant. The 9 participants
(of 13) who were selected received composite scores of 4 or above.
Finally, 23 English NSs made up the control group.

Story Compatibility Task
An interpretation task was designed to tap learners' interpretations of
aspectual morphology in English. The story compatibility task presented learners with stories that depicted events that were either complete or incomplete (i.e., ongoing). These short stories, narrated in
English, were illustrated with two pictures presented in a PowerPoint
presentation. The narration of the story (one or two sentences per picture) was digitally recorded and incorporated into the presentation. Following each story, a test sentence appeared on the projection screen for
10 s; this sentence was also played over a speaker. Participants were
asked to judge the test sentence on a scale of 1 to 5 and to evaluate

382

Alison Gabriele

whether the sentence was compatible with the story. All of the numbers
on the scale were defined qualitatively; for example, 1 corresponded to
the statement I definitely cannot say this sentence in the context of the
story, 3 corresponded to I might be able to say this sentence in the context
of the story, and 5 corresponded to I definitely can say this sentence in the
context of the story. Learners were told to leave blank any questions for
which they were not sure of the answer.
The story compatibility task targeted the interpretation of accomplishments and achievements with simple past, present progressive,
and past progressive morphology. Sentences that targeted the simple
past were included as a control. The forms that mark the past, -ed in
English and -ta in Japanese, encode basically equivalent semantics regardless of the VP (Ogihara, 1998). Results for the past progressive will
not be discussed here (see Gabriele, 2005). The story narrations were
presented in the simple present so that the narrations did not use any
of the aspectual forms targeted in the test sentences.
Eight accomplishments and eight achievements were tested. The VPs
that were selected have the same lexical aspectual classification in both
languages. For the accomplishments, it was necessary that the verbs
encode an ongoing, action-in-progress interpretation with the English
progressive be -ing and that the Japanese equivalent of those verbs also
encode a progressive interpretation with the Japanese imperfective
marker te-iru.7 For the achievements, it was necessary that the verbs
selected denote a progressive interpretation with the progressive be
-ing but that the Japanese equivalents of those verbs unambiguously
denote a resultative interpretation with the imperfective marker te-iru.8
The English verbs are listed in (5).
(5)

Accomplishments: make a cake, build a sandcastle, drink a glass of coke,
eat a bowl of ramen, write a book, paint a portrait, read a pile of books, wash
a pile of dishes
Achievements: arrive, die, come, return, openINTRANSITIVE, closeINTRANSITIVE, leave,
go (to the store)

For each verb, a complete story context as well as an incomplete (i.e.,
ongoing) story context were developed. The goal was to elicit learners'
judgments as to the compatibility of sentences in the simple past and
present progressive with stories in each context. Filler sentences were
also included to test whether the learners understood the aspectual
theme of the stories (i.e., event in progress or event completed). Each
participant heard 32 test stories (16 verbs each in a complete and an
incomplete context) only once and provided a judgment on only one
test sentence per story.9 For example, if a participant judged a simple
past sentence such as The plane arrived at the airport with the complete story context, then that same participant would judge a different

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

383

sentence type (e.g., present progressive, past progressive, or filler) with
the incomplete version of the story. Thus, each participant responded
to only half of the target test categories. Roughly equal numbers of participants from each proficiency level were randomly assigned to one of
two groups.10 Items were counterbalanced across four lists, which were
randomized and controlled for ordering effects.
The stories and test sentences for the accomplishment VP paint a
portrait are presented in (6).11 In (6a), with the complete context, English NSs were predicted to accept the simple past sentence (with a score
of 4 or 5) but to reject the present progressive sentence (with a score of
1 or 2). Predicted ratings of the NSs and learners are provided following
each test sentence. No difficulty was predicted for the L2 learners with
accomplishments in the progressive or with the simple past in general.
The reverse judgments are predicted for the incomplete context in (6b),
in which the simple past should be rejected and the present progressive
should be accepted.
(6)

Paint a portrait (accomplishment)
Picture 1: Ken is an artist. At 12:00 he begins to paint a portrait of his family.
a. Complete story context
Picture 2a: At 8:00 he gives the portrait to his mother for her birthday.
i. Past: Ken painted a portrait of his family.
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 English learners: 5)
ii. Present progressive: Ken is painting a portrait of his family.
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 English learners: 1)
b. Incomplete story context
Picture 2b: At 12:30 he paints his mother and father.
i. Past: Ken painted a portrait of his family.
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 English learners: 1)
ii. Present progressive: Ken is painting a portrait of his family.
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 English learners: 5)

The paradigm for the achievement verb arrive is presented in (7). The
predicted judgments for the English NSs with achievements are the
same as the judgments predicted for the accomplishments: The simple
past should be accepted with the complete story context and rejected
with the incomplete story context. The progressive, in contrast, should
be accepted with the incomplete story context and rejected with the
complete story context. The predictions for the progressive differ for
the learners. If the learners map the truth conditions for the imperfective marker te-iru onto the progressive be -ing, they are expected to interpret the present progressive sentence The plane is arriving at the
airport incorrectly to mean The plane has arrived at the airport. This
is the preemption context, and it is predicted that even learners at
advanced levels of proficiency may have difficulty with this condition.

384

Alison Gabriele

Furthermore, if learners incorrectly interpret The plane is arriving at the
airport to mean The plane has arrived at the airport, they will incorrectly
reject the present progressive with the incomplete context, as is illustrated in (7b). This is the addition context, and it is predicted that learners will have less difficulty overcoming transfer here due to the
availability of positive evidence.
(7)

Arrive (achievement)
Picture 1: This is the plane to Tokyo. At 4:00 the plane is near the airport.
a. Complete story context (preemption)
Picture 2a: At 5:00 the passengers are at the airport.
i. Past: The plane arrived at the airport.
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 English learners: 5)
ii. Present progressive: The plane is arriving at the airport.
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 English learners: 5)
b. Incomplete story context (addition)
Picture 2b: There is a lot of wind. At 4:30 the plane is still in the air.
i. Past: The plane arrived at the airport.
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 English learners: 1)
ii. Present progressive: The plane is arriving at the airport.
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 English learners: 1)

Finally, 16 distracter stories were included to balance the number of
items expected to be acceptable and unacceptable.
A week before testing, participants were provided with a comprehensive
Japanese-English word list that defined the words and phrases that would
be included in the stories. On the day of testing, a brief vocabulary quiz
was given to review any potentially difficult items. Participants were tested
in small groups. The proficiency test and interpretation task took about 1
h total to complete. All participants were compensated for their time.

Results
Analyses. The main goal of the analyses was to determine if the responses to a given sentence type (e.g., simple past accomplishment)
differed depending on the context provided (i.e., complete or incomplete). Because each participant did not respond to all sentence types
in both the complete and incomplete contexts, factorial univariate
ANOVAs were performed separately for each sentence type with context
(i.e., complete vs. incomplete) and proficiency level (i.e., low, intermediate, high, near-native, and NS) as between-subjects factors.
Present Progressive. Results for the present progressive are presented
in Figure 1.12 Recall that for achievements (e.g., The plane is arriving at

385

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese
5
4

Incomplete

Mean
3
response

Complete

2
1

Low

Int.

High

Nearnatives

Achievements

NSs

Low

Int.

High

Nearnatives

NSs

Accomplishments

Figure 1. L2 English present progressive: Mean responses to achievements and accomplishments. Int. = intermediate.

the airport), the incomplete story represents the addition context and
the complete story represents the preemption context.
The results of the ANOVA for the achievements revealed a significant
effect for context, F(1, 123) = 28.606, p < .001, a significant effect for proficiency level, F(1, 123) = 3.816, p < .01, and a significant interaction between
context and proficiency level, F(4, 123) = 26.098, p < .001. NSs behaved as
predicted, assigning high scores on the incomplete context (i.e., plane still
in the air) and low scores on the complete context (i.e., plane has landed).
The results for the low- and intermediate-proficiency groups generally followed the pattern predicted by transfer: These learners assigned
higher scores to the present progressive with the complete context as
opposed to the incomplete context--the opposite of the NSs. The interaction was further examined with a series of t tests for each proficiency
level. The t tests confirmed that both the low- and intermediateproficiency groups assigned significantly higher scores to the present
progressive with complete contexts (low: t(44) = 2.723, p < .01; intermediate: t(37) = 2.212, p < .05). The results for the advanced groups are
somewhat more complicated. Similar to the NSs, the learners in the
high-proficiency group distinguished between the incomplete and complete contexts; they correctly assigned higher scores to the present
progressive with the incomplete contexts (high: t(14) = -3.859, p < .01;
NS: t(21) = -12.203, p < .001). However, the near-native speakers did not
make this distinction. Although their scores were numerically higher on
the incomplete context, the t test revealed that the difference between
the near-native speakers' responses in the two contexts was not
significant. However, it is possible that the low number of near-native
speakers is responsible for this result.
The acceptance and rejection rates for achievement verbs are presented in Table 1. Participants are categorized according to whether they
accepted at least 75% of the items (i.e., three of the four items) with a
score of 4 or 5, rejected at least 75% of the items with a score of 1 or 2, or
performed at chance. Recall that each participant responded to a given
sentence type with only one context: complete or incomplete.

386

Table 1.

Alison Gabriele

Achievements in the present progressive by group
Incomplete (addition)

Group

Accept

Complete (preemption)

Reject Chance Total Accept

Low
4 (18%) 3 (14%)
(n = 46)
Intermediate 4 (20%) 6 (30%)
(n = 39)
High
6 (86%) 0 (0%)
(n = 16)
Near-natives 4 (100%) 0 (0%)
(n = 9)
English NSs 11 (92%) 0 (0%)
(n = 23)

Reject

Chance Total

15 (68%) 22

13 (54%) 2 (8%)

9 (38%)

24

10 (50%) 20

11 (58%) 4 (21%) 4 (21%)

19

1 (14%)

7

2 (22%) 5 (56%) 2 (22%)

9

0 (0%)

4

2 (40%) 1 (20%) 2 (40%)

5

1 (8%)

12

0 (0%) 11 (100%) 0 (0%)

11

For the incomplete (i.e., addition) context, it was predicted--on the
basis of transfer--that the learners at lower levels of proficiency would
assign low scores to the present progressive. This is generally the pattern observed. However, the results are also consistent with the prediction that transfer can be overcome at higher proficiency levels, because
nearly all of the participants at the advanced proficiency levels correctly accepted 75% of the present progressive sentences with the incomplete context, similar to the NSs.
Although there is evidence of difficulty in the low- and intermediateproficiency groups, it is not clear whether this difficulty was caused by
transfer. Many learners performed at chance, and performance on this
context appeared to depend on the particular verb. Thus the overall
mean response for each verb was calculated: Learners performed most
accurately with the verbs go (M = 4.8), leave (M = 4.4), die (M = 3.7), and
close (M = 3.3) but demonstrated difficulty with the verbs return (M = 2.8),
come (M = 2.5), arrive (M = 2.1), and open (M = 1.8).13 No simple explanation can be found for the reason why some verbs are less problematic
than others. These results suggest that deciphering the interaction
between the progressive operator and the VP seems to proceed at a different pace for different verbs.
With respect to the preemption task, it was predicted--on the basis
of transfer--that learners would incorrectly give high scores in the complete context; that is, they would incorrectly allow the progressive to
refer to a complete event. The results in Table 1 show this general pattern: In the low- and intermediate-proficiency groups, about half of the
participants accepted 75% of the items. Many of the other learners in
the low- and intermediate-proficiency groups performed at chance:
They assigned half of the items scores of 4 or 5 and the other half of
the items scores of 1 or 2. At the higher levels of proficiency, several of

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

387

the participants also clearly accepted the progressive with a complete
context. With respect to individual verbs, go was the only verb that the
L2 learners clearly rejected with the complete context, with an overall
mean of 1.5. The results show that the learners had more difficulty with
the other verbs: return (M = 3.1), come (M = 3.2), arrive (M = 3.4), leave
(M = 3.6), close (M = 3.6), die (M = 3.7), and open (M = 4.5). In sum, preemption remained a problem.
As predicted, there were differences in the results of the incomplete
and complete contexts for achievements in the present progressive:
Although the lower level learners demonstrated difficulty in correctly
accepting the present progressive with an incomplete context, a more
targetlike interpretation emerges in the higher proficiency levels. These
results suggest that, as predicted, advanced learners perform more
accurately when the acquisition task involves the addition of a new
representation. The same pattern of development was not found with
the preemption context: Individual analyses showed that even some
advanced learners allowed the present progressive to refer to complete events.
The results for the present progressive sentences with accomplishments (e.g., Ken is painting a portrait of his family) are also summarized in Figure 1. The ANOVA indicated a significant effect for context,
F(1, 123) = 157.670, p < .001, but not for proficiency level, F(4, 123) = 0.843,
p = .501. However, a significant interaction was found between context
and proficiency level, F(4, 123) = 2.971, p < .05. Independent samples
t tests revealed that the distinction was in fact significant for all groups
(low: t(44) = 8.439, p < .0001; intermediate: t(37) = 4.871, p < .001; high:
t(14) = 6.70, p < .001; near native: t(7) = 5.676, p < .001; NS: t(21) = 7.348,
p < .001). As predicted, with accomplishments, all groups successfully
accepted the progressive with the incomplete context (i.e., portrait in
progress) and rejected the form with the complete context (i.e., portrait completed), which indicates that the nontargetlike responses to
the achievements were not due to difficulty with the semantics of the
present progressive in general.
Simple Past. Figure 2 summarizes the results for the simple past. The
results for the achievements yielded a significant effect for context, F(1,
123) = 537.913, p < .001, but not for proficiency level, F(4, 123) = 1.584,
p = .183, nor was there an interaction between these two factors,
F(4, 123) = 1.079, p = .37. Similarly, the ANOVA for the accomplishments in
the simple past revealed a significant effect for context, F(1, 123) = 113.952,
p < .001, but not for proficiency level, F(4, 123) = 0.810, p = .521, nor
was there an interaction between context and proficiency level,
F(4, 123) = 2.228, p = .07. In sum, these results for the simple past demonstrate a clear distinction between the incomplete and complete contexts and indicate that the learners follow the same pattern as the NSs.14

388

Alison Gabriele
5
4
Incomplete

Mean
3
response

Complete

2
1

Low

Int.

High

Near- NSs
natives

Achievements

Low

Int.

High

Near- NSs
natives

Accomplishments

Figure 2. L2 English simple past: Mean responses to achievements
and accomplishments. Int. = intermediate.
Furthermore, the targetlike results for the achievements in the simple
past indicate that learners do not have difficulty with the lexical aspectual class of achievements per se but rather with the interaction between the achievements and the progressive operator.
LEARNERS OF L2 JAPANESE
Participants
The main participant group consisted of 33 English NSs who were studying Japanese at high schools or universities (mean age = 21, SD = 6.9).
The control group was composed of 31 Japanese NSs, who were undergraduates tested in Japan. All L2 participants were initially exposed to
Japanese after the age of 15. The participants had been studying Japanese for an average of 3 years (range: 6 months to 6 years). The listening
comprehension section of the Japanese Language Proficiency Test,
which is administered by the Japan educational exchanges and services, was used as a proficiency measure.15 Raw scores on this 16-item
test ranged from 1 to 14 (M = 6.8). Learners who scored below the mean
were classified as low-proficiency learners (n = 16), and learners who
scored above the mean were classified as high-proficiency learners
(n = 17).

Story Compatibility Task
The Japanese version of the task was designed in parallel to the English
version. The Japanese verbs are listed in (8).
(8)

Accomplishments: keeki-o tsukuru "make a cake," suna-no shiro-o tateru
"build a sandcastle," koppu ippai-no koora-o nomu "drink a glass of coke,"

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

389

ippai-no raamen-o taberu "eat a bowl of ramen," hon-o kaku "write a book,"
e-o kaku "paint a portrait," yamazumi no hon-o yomu "read a pile of books,"
yamazumi-no shokki-o arau "wash a pile of dishes"
Achievements: tsuku "arrive," shinu "die," kuru "come," kaeru "return," aku
"openINTRANSITIVE," shimaru "closeINTRANSITIVE," deru "leave," iku "go"

Here, only the results for the accomplishments and achievements
with the simple past marker -ta and the progressive marker te-iru will
be discussed. The stories and test sentences for the accomplishment
e-o kaku "paint a portrait" are provided in (9). The stories were narrated in Japanese, whereas the test sentences were both narrated and
presented in written form, using Japanese script. All Chinese characters (kanji) were also phonetically transcribed (in hiragana). In the
stimuli, the polite form of the verb was used because learners are
more familiar with this form: For example, in (9), the polite form of the
imperfective marker, te-imasu, was used instead of te-iru.
In the complete context, as illustrated in (9a) for the accomplishment e-o kaku "paint a portrait," Japanese NSs were predicted to
accept the simple past sentence but to reject the sentence with the
imperfective marker te-iru. In the incomplete context in (9b), on
the other hand, the simple past was predicted to be rejected, and
the sentence with the imperfective marker te-iru was predicted to be
accepted. No difficulty was predicted for the L2 learners with accomplishments with the imperfective marker te-iru or with the simple
past in general.
(9)

E-o kaku "paint a portrait" (accomplishment)
Picture 1: Ken-wa gaka desu.
Ken-TOPIC artist be-PRESENT
12ji-ni
Ken-wa kazoku-no e-o
kaki-hajimemasu.
12 o'clock at Ken-TOPIC family-GEN picture-ACC draw-begin-PRESENT
"Ken is an artist. At 12:00 Ken begins to paint a picture of
his family."
a. Complete story context
Picture 2a: 8ji-ni
Ken-wa tanjoobi puresento toshite
8 o'clock at Ken-TOPIC birthday present as
okaasan-ni e-o
watashimasu.
mother-at picture-ACC give-PRESENT
"At 8:00 Ken gives the picture to his mother for her birthday."
i. Past: Ken-wa kazoku-no e-o
kakimashita.
Ken-TOPIC family-GEN picture-ACC draw-PAST
"Ken painted a picture of his family."
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 Japanese learners: 5)
ii. Te-iru: Ken-wa kazoku-no e-o
kaite-imasu.
Ken-TOPIC family-GEN picture-ACC draw-te-iru-PRESENT
"Ken is painting a picture of his family."
(Expect rating of NSs: 1; L2 Japanese learners: 1)

390

Alison Gabriele
b. Incomplete story context
Picture 2b: 12ji 30pun-ni Ken-wa okaasan-to otoosan-no e-o
12:30 at
Ken-TOPIC mother and father-GEN picture-ACC
kaki-hajimemasu.
draw-begin-PRESENT
"At 12:30 Ken begins to paint a picture of his mother and
father."
i. Past: Ken-wa kazoku-no e-o
kakimashita.
Ken-TOPIC family-GEN picture-ACC draw-PAST
"Ken painted a picture of his family."
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 Japanese learners: 1)
ii. Te-iru: Ken-wa kazoku-no e-o
kaite-imasu.
Ken-TOPIC family-GEN picture-ACC draw-te-iru-PRESENT
"Ken is painting a picture of his family."
(Expected rating of NSs: 5; L2 Japanese learners: 5)

Stories and test sentences for the achievement tsuku "arrive" are
provided in (10). It was predicted that the Japanese NSs would accept the simple past with the complete context in (10a) and reject it
with the incomplete context in (10b). For achievements, the predicted NS judgments are the same for the simple past and the sentences with the imperfective marker te-iru. In contrast, if the English
NSs map the truth conditions for the English progressive be -ing onto
the imperfective marker te-iru, they will interpret the sentence in
(10) to mean The plane is arriving at the airport. Thus, in (10a), the
learners will incorrectly reject the imperfective marker te-iru with
the complete (i.e., addition) context; it was predicted that learners
will have less difficulty overcoming transfer in this context. Furthermore, if the English NSs interpret the imperfective sentence in (10)
as The plane is arriving at the airport, they should incorrectly accept
the sentence with the incomplete (i.e., preemption) context in (10b).
It was predicted that even learners at advanced proficiency levels
may have difficulty with this context.

(10)

Tsuku "arrive" (achievement)
Picture 1: Kore-wa Tookyoo yuki-no
hikooki desu.
Ima 4ji
This-TOPIC Tokyo bound-GEN plane be-PRESENT now 4 o'clock
desu.
Hikooki-wa kuukoo-no chikaku desu.
be-PRESENT Plane-TOPIC airport-GEN close be-PRESENT
"This is the plane bound for Tokyo. It's 4:00 now. The plane is
near the airport."
a. Complete story context (addition)
Picture 2a: 5ji
desu.
Jyookyaku-wa kuukoo-ni imasu.
5 o'clock be-PRESENT passenger-TOPIC airport-at exist-PRESENT
"It's 5:00. The passengers are at the airport."

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

391

i. Past: Hikooki-wa kuukoo-ni tsukimashita.
Plane-TOPIC airport-at arrive-PAST
"The plane arrived at the airport."
(Expected rating for NSs: 5; L2 Japanese learners: 5)
ii. Te-iru: Hikooki-wa kuukoo-ni tsuite-imasu.
Plane-TOPIC airport-at arrive-te-iru-PRESENT
"The plane is at the airport."
(Expected rating for NSs: 5; L2 Japanese learners: 1)
b. Incomplete story context (preemption)
Picture 2b: Kaze-ga tsuyoi desu.
4ji 30 pun-ni hikooki-wa
wind-NOM strong be-PRESENT 4:30 at
plane-TOPIC
mada sora-o hikoo-chyuu
desu.
still sky-ACC fly-in the middle of be-PRESENT
"The wind is strong. At 4:30 the plane is still in the sky."
i. Past: Hikooki-wa kuukoo-ni tsukimashita.
Plane-TOPIC airport-at arrive-PAST
"The plane arrived at the airport."
(Expected rating for NSs: 1; L2 Japanese learners: 1)
ii. Te-iru: Hikooki-wa kuukoo-ni tsuite-imasu.
Plane-TOPIC airport-at arrive-te-iru-PRESENT
"The plane is at the airport."
(Expected rating of NSs: 1; L2 Japanese learners: 5)

Filler sentences were included to test whether the learners understood the aspectual theme of the stories (i.e., event in progress or event
completed). Additionally, 16 distracter stories were included to balance
the number of items expected to be acceptable and unacceptable. The
L2 Japanese participants were provided with a comprehensive word list
that was reviewed on the day of testing. Participants were tested in
small groups. The proficiency test and interpretation task took about 1 h
total to complete. All participants were compensated for their time.
Results
The Imperfective Marker te-iru. The results of the achievement verbs
(e.g., tsuite-imasu "has arrived") used with the imperfective marker te-iru
are presented in Figure 3. Recall that, in the Japanese study, the complete context represented the addition task and the incomplete context
represented the preemption task.
Japanese NSs responded as predicted, assigning high scores in the
complete context (i.e., the plane has landed) and low scores in the incomplete context (i.e., the plane still in the air). The ANOVA indicated a
significant effect for context, F(1, 58) = 148.015, p < .001, and proficiency
level, F(2, 58) = 8.031, p < .01, as well as a significant interaction between
these two factors, F(2, 58) = 18.354, p < .001. Learners' responses were
found to generally follow the same pattern as the NSs; they correctly

392

Alison Gabriele
5
4
Incomplete

Mean
3
response

Complete

2
1
Low

High

NSs

Achievements

Low

High

NSs

Accomplishments

Figure 3. L2 Japanese imperfective marker te-iru: Mean responses to
achievements and accomplishments.
assigned higher scores to achievements with the complete context than
with the incomplete context. Independent samples t tests confirmed
that this distinction was significant for all groups (low: t(14) = 3.093, p <
.01; high: t(15) = 3.942, p < .01; Japanese NSs: t(29) = 22.802, p < .001).
Thus, the learners performed more accurately than predicted.
The acceptance and rejection rates for achievement verbs are presented in Table 2. Participants are categorized according to whether
they accepted at least 75% of the items (i.e., three of the four items)
with a score of 4 or 5, rejected at least 75% of the items with a score of
1 or 2, or performed at chance. Recall that each participant responded
to a given sentence type in only one context: complete or incomplete.
For the complete (i.e., addition) context, it was predicted--on the
basis of transfer--that learners at lower levels of proficiency would assign low scores to the imperfective marker te-iru. The results do not
provide evidence of transfer in either group. The majority of the learners performed similarly to the NSs; that is, they correctly accepted at
least 75% of the test items. In the high-proficiency group, five learners
accepted all of the items. With respect to individual verbs, both groups
of learners performed well and provided mean responses above 4.0 on
six of the eight verbs: The only two verbs that presented difficulty were
tsuku "arrive" (M = 3.3) and iku "go" (M = 3.1). These results demonstrate
that very few learners had difficulty with the addition task.
Table 2. Achievements with the imperfective marker te-iru by group
Complete (addition)
Group

Accept

Incomplete (preemption)

Reject Chance Total Accept

Low (n = 46) 6 (86%) 0 (0%) 1 (14%)
High (n = 16) 7 (70%) 0 (0%) 3 (30%)
Japanese
16 (100%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
NSs (n = 31)

Reject

Chance Total

7 3 (33%) 0 (0%) 6 (67%) 9
10 0 (0%)
4 (57%) 3 (43%) 7
16 0 (0%) 14 (93%) 1 (7%) 15

393

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

For the incomplete (i.e., preemption) context, it was predicted--on
the basis of transfer--that the learners would incorrectly accept these
sentences. In the low-proficiency group, the results of three learners
provide strong evidence of transfer because they incorrectly accepted
75% of these test items; for these learners, preemption was clearly a
problem. Most learners performed at chance, however. Mean responses
were calculated for each verb: The verbs that presented the most difficulty in the preemption context were iku "go" (M = 4.6), deru "leave"
(M = 4.0), kaeru "return" (M = 3.8), and tsuku "arrive" (M = 3.0). The highproficiency group performed more accurately, with the majority of the
learners correctly rejecting 75% of the test items. These results differ
from the results of the L2 learners of English, in which even some nearnative speakers had difficulty with preemption.
Figure 3 summarizes the results for the imperfective marker te-iru
used with accomplishments (e.g., e-o kaite-imasu "painting a portrait").
There was a significant effect for context, F(1, 58) = 67.470, p < .001, but
not for proficiency level, F(2, 58) = 2.704, p = .075, nor was there an interaction between context and proficiency level, F(2, 58) = 1.555, p = .220.
Participants clearly distinguished between the incomplete (i.e., portrait
in progress) and complete (i.e., portrait complete) contexts.
Simple Past. Figure 4 summarizes the results for the simple past. The
results for the achievements indicate a significant effect for context,
F(1, 58) = 288.764, p < .001, and a significant interaction between context
and proficiency level, F(2, 58) = 10.850, p < .001, but no effect for proficiency level, F(2, 58) = 0.271, p = .764. The results for the accomplishments indicate a significant effect for context, F(1, 58) = 74.929, p < .01,
and for proficiency level, F(2, 58) = 3.493, p < .05. However, post hoc comparisons did not reveal significant differences between any of the
groups. No interaction was found between context and proficiency level,
F(2, 58) = 2.036, p = .140. These results indicate that the participants

5
4
Incomplete

Mean
3
response

Complete

2
1

Low

High

Achievements

NSs

Low

High

NSs

Accomplishments

Figure 4. L2 Japanese simple past: Mean responses to achievements
and accomplishments.

394

Alison Gabriele

generally performed as expected. Just as in the L2 learners of English,
the simple past did not present difficulty for the learners.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The goal of this study was to examine the nature of transfer in the domain of aspectual semantics through the investigation of differences in
the interaction between lexical and grammatical aspect in English and
Japanese. It was predicted that learners' performance on accomplishments would be better than their performance on achievements, and
that performance on the addition context would be more accurate than
performance on the preemption context. Finally, the bidirectional nature of this study allowed for the examination of whether L2 learners'
ability to overcome these crosslinguistic differences is influenced by
the semantics of the target in the L2.
The hypothesis that learners of both L2 English and L2 Japanese would
perform accurately on accomplishments was confirmed, which demonstrates that learners do not have global difficulty with either the semantics
of the progressive in English or the imperfective marker te-iru in Japanese.
Additionally, the learners' targetlike results on achievements in the simple past demonstrate that learners do not have global difficulty with
achievements. Thus, it becomes clear that it is the interaction between
achievements and the progressive be -ing and the imperfective marker
te-iru that presents the greatest challenge.
Although these results are consistent with those of previous studies
for L2 English and L2 Japanese (e.g., Bardovi-Harlig, 1998; Shirai &
Kurono, 1998), the novel contribution of this study was the consideration of not only acquisition but also preemption. The results confirmed
that the preemption contexts presented the greater problem for the
learners of both L2 English and L2 Japanese. The learners of L2 English,
at all proficiency levels, performed poorly on the preemption context,
allowing the present progressive to refer to complete events. This contrasts with the addition context, in which the task presented difficulty
only for learners at lower proficiency levels. For the learners of L2 Japanese, preemption was less of a problem, but there was still evidence of
difficulty, particularly among learners in the low-proficiency group who
allowed the imperfective marker te-iru to refer to ongoing events. These
results for the preemption context contrast with the addition context
in which the majority of the L2 Japanese learners were successful,
irrespective of proficiency level. In general, this suggests that the task
was more difficult for the L2 English learners, with preemption presenting the greatest challenge.
To reconcile the findings of the two groups of L2 learners, their comparability must be addressed: It is necessary to ascertain whether the

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

395

L2 Japanese learners simply had an advantage because of higher L2
proficiency. The learners in the lower proficiency levels differed with
respect to years of L2 study: The low-proficiency L2 English learners
averaged 8 years of study (i.e., junior high school through university),
whereas the low-proficiency L2 Japanese learners averaged only 2 years
(i.e., high school or university). In this respect, the L2 Japanese learners
do not have an advantage. The advanced learners demonstrate a greater
disparity: The most advanced L2 Japanese learners were still essentially
classroom learners. Only 6 of the 17 L2 Japanese learners in the highproficiency group reported spending time in Japan (M = 4 months
abroad). On average, these learners reported using Japanese outside of
the classroom for 1 h per week; only five learners reported contact with
NSs. In contrast, the high-proficiency L2 English learners (tested in Japan) all reported frequent contact with English NSs either through their
jobs or through friendships with foreigners who live in Japan. The nearnatives tested in New York City used English on a daily basis. Therefore,
it is unlikely that the superior performance of the L2 Japanese participants is due only to an advantage of proficiency, exposure, or use.
In fact, the L2 English learners seem to have the advantage. Nevertheless, the results suggest that the learning task was more difficult for the
L2 learners of English. I will argue that the explanation for this difficulty
lies in both the complexity of the grammatical form in English and the
transparency of the input cues available to the learners.
For the L2 English learners, the learning task is likely to be more difficult because it requires that they master the semantics of progressive
achievements. Under McClure's (1995) account, difficulty was predicted
with progressive achievements because of the differences between
English and Japanese; this proposal does not treat accomplishments
and achievements in the scope of the progressive differently. However,
several recent accounts have proposed that achievements need to undergo a type-shifting or coercion operation to be compatible with the
semantics of the progressive (Michaelis, 2006; Moens & Steedman, 1988;
Rothstein, 2004). Rothstein proposed that achievements (but not accomplishments) require a semantic type-shifting operation to repair the
aspectual mismatch between the VP and the progressive operator.
Therefore, there is an extra step in the semantic computation: Achievements must first be converted to abstract accomplishments.
de Swart's (1998) account of coercion provides an idea of what this
extra processing step would entail. In her account, VPs can only be
reinterpreted or coerced if an appropriate context is available. For example, the achievement verb die can be coerced to match the requirements of the progressive only if one can identify preparatory stages that
can be defined as events leading up to the point of culmination (i.e.,
death). This extra step in the computation would potentially entail
that interpreting progressive achievements would incur an additional

396

Alison Gabriele

processing cost; if the input is more difficult to process, then acquisition may be delayed (Slabakova, 2002b). Although progressive achievements have not yet been examined in the sentence processing literature,
a growing body of evidence suggests that the processing of other instances of aspectual coercion in fact incurs additional processing costs
(Brennan & Pylkkanen, 2008; Pinango, Zuriff, & Jackendoff, 1999).
If the coercion account is correct, then it is possible that even NSs
with L1s that, similar to English, also allow progressive achievements
will experience difficulty in their interpretation and processing. This
notion would be compatible with the predictions of the AH, which predicts a similar path of development for the progressive regardless of
the L1. In the coercion account, the underlying cause of the difficulty
with progressive achievements is due to the semantic and pragmatic
complexity of the computation. Thus, learners of a different L1 background, such as Korean--which is similar to English in allowing progressive achievements--should be tested. A comparison of Korean and
Japanese learners of English would allow us to determine whether the
difficulty observed here was a consequence of transfer from Japanese,
as argued, or whether the complexity of progressive achievements
presents a challenge regardless of the properties of the L1. Preliminary
work by Gabriele, Maekawa, and Aleman-Banon (2009) suggests an advantage for L1-L2 similarity, although even Korean learners are not able
to perform at the level of NSs. Moreover, Montrul and Slabakova (2002)
showed that similarity between the L1 and the L2 does not necessarily
facilitate acquisition when learners confront sentence types that entail
coercion (see also Gass & Ard, 1984).
In contrast to the L2 English learners, the L2 Japanese learners do not
have to master the same type of semantic complexity. The combination
of achievements with the imperfective marker te-iru does not require a
shift in verb type or coercion. Therefore, the interpretation of achievements as resultative is potentially a much easier task. In fact, a large
body of research that addresses the AH has shown that learners tend to
associate accomplishments and achievements with tense-aspect markers that encode completion (Li & Shirai, 2000). Furthermore, it seems
that this kind of type-shifting, as proposed by Rothstein (2004) for English, is unreported in the aspectual domain in Japanese. If this is the
case, then Japanese learners of English face an even greater challenge
because they need to learn that aspectual mismatches can in fact be
repaired via the type-shifting operation.
Finally, the input cues that might serve as the impetus for grammatical restructuring must be considered. There has been little discussion
of how learning proceeds in the domain of semantics and what role the
input might play. It is important to point out that there are differences
that distinguish semantic from syntactic learning. A successful semantic analysis requires that the components of a sentence be successfully

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

397

integrated (compositionality), and that the sentence be successfully
evaluated as true or false with respect to a particular context in the
world. The need for this external evaluation presents a clear difference
from the type of computation that syntactic learning requires, in which
grammatical form is all that matters.
In some cases, the context may transparently guide a learner to restructure his or her grammar. Imagine a particular context in which a L2
learner of English (L1 Japanese) is watching a movie with a friend. In the
movie, an old man is on his deathbed, terminally ill but still speaking.
A second friend enters the room and asks about the movie. The first friend
replies "The old man is dying." If the L2 learner's grammar is constrained
by the semantic properties of the L1 Japanese, the sentence will be interpreted as The old man is dead. However, the output of the semantic
analysis will be transparently incompatible with the real-world context:
If the old man is talking, he cannot be dead. This type of incompatibility
should drive the restructuring of the grammar and facilitate the acquisition of a new representation in the L2. It is not hard to imagine that this
kind of input might be readily available. However, this is not to say that
all input will be so transparent. Imagine a different context in which the
same L2 learner is now waiting at the train station with a friend. The L2
learner is chatting on her cell phone in the stairwell while the friend
waits on the platform. Suddenly, the friend calls down to the L2 learner
and says "The train is arriving." If the L2 learner analyzes this sentence
through the L1, the sentence will be interpreted as The train is here.
As the L2 learner bounds the stairs to the platform, the train may already
be pulling in to the platform. In other words, the learner's incorrect interpretation will now appear correct. Achievements present only a short
window of time before the event is actually realized, and it may often be
difficult to distinguish the preparatory stages (e.g., the train approaching) from the point of culmination (e.g., the train at the platform). It is
important to note that, in these cases, there will be no impetus for the
learner to restructure his or her grammar, and the L1 option will be
maintained. In contrast, the L2 Japanese learner is unlikely to face the
same type of uncertainty. If an achievement such as tsuku "arrive" is
used with the imperfective marker te-iru, it is unambiguously the case
that the arrival has already taken place. If the English NS learning Japanese were to incorrectly interpret the form as is arriving, the learner
would immediately realize that the output of his or her semantic computation was incorrect.
These examples show that a careful consideration of the input will
allow for a better understanding of the circumstances in which learners
are able to successfully converge on the target--and thus preempt L1
options--and those circumstances in which convergence is not possible.
The input is likely to be particularly important in the domain of semantics
in which the cues are often fairly subtle and learners must be able to

398

Alison Gabriele

integrate extralinguistic information into their evaluation of a given form.
These results suggest that if the input cues are not salient, a learner may
vacillate between the available options until the evidence is strong
enough to favor only the target, similar to the model proposed by Valian
(1990) for L1 acquisition. Valian argued that L1 learners consider the dual
options of a parameter simultaneously, weighing the evidence in favor of
one or the other option, before finally converging on the target.
In sum, two factors have been proposed that arguably play a role in
determining whether learners will successfully preempt L1 options.
First, the grammatical complexity of the semantic target in the L2 is
significant. It was argued that the Japanese learners of English faced a
more difficult learning task in that the interpretation of progressive
achievements in English requires type-shifting or coercion, an additional semantic computation that the English-speaking learners of Japanese do not need to confront. Additional research on both the acquisition
and processing of forms that entail coercion is necessary to better understand whether these forms are ultimately acquirable in SLA and to
what extent the properties of the native language play a role.
Second, it has been argued that a consideration of the input cues can
provide a better understanding of the cases in which grammatical restructuring is not successful. In the domain of semantics, learners must
evaluate a given sentence with respect to a particular context. It was
proposed that the L2 learners of English again faced a more challenging
task.16 Achievements in the progressive often allow for a very short window of time before the change of state is actually realized, and the distinction between the event unfolding and the completion of that same
event may sometimes be quite subtle. In general, it is proposed that
unlearning is certainly possible in the semantic domain but that learners' success depends on several factors, which include the complexity
of the semantic computation of the target and the transparency in which
the L1 interpretation can be ruled out by the extralinguistic context.
(Received 20 January 2009)

NOTES
1. The bare noun-proper name parameter also addresses an additional semantic contrast related to anaphoric binding (see Longobardi, 2001).
2. Shirai (2000) argued that some statives such as tigau "be different" are compatible
with the imperfective marker te-iru. However, statives will not be addressed here, as they
are not tested in the present study.
3. In certain contexts, activities and accomplishments with the imperfective marker
te-iru can encode a perfect or experiential reading (e.g., Taroo has had the experience of
reading a book). The present study does not address this additional interpretation. The
results of the experimental task in Japanese suggest that the experiential reading for the
accomplishments was not accessed by either the NSs or the learners.

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

399

4. An anonymous SSLA reviewer asked about verbs such as keru "kick" and kushami
suru "punch," which look like achievements but would be interpreted progressively with
the imperfective marker te-iru. In Shirai's (2000) classification, these verbs fall into a fifth
category of semelfactives; that is, they are punctual but also atelic and, therefore, are not
relevant for this study.
5. See Gabriele (2005) for details of the formal semantics of the aspectual operator
PROG.
6. In contrast, if the change of state is manifested, the resulting interpretation is perfect or experiential (e.g., Taroo has had the experience of reading a book). In this way,
McClure's (1995) proposal accounts for the two readings available for accomplishments
with the imperfective marker te-iru.
7. The interpretation of the imperfective marker te-iru with each VP was verified by
the Japanese NS control group that participated in the study of the L2 learners of Japanese.
8. Here, the VP go (to the store) is classified as an achievement because its Japanese
equivalent iku "go" encodes a resultative interpretation with the imperfective marker
te-iru.
9. Although a test design in which the participants do not respond to all test
conditions has limitations, particularly with respect to individual analyses, it was
used because of the concern that a participant's response to one item might be influenced by other items on the same test. Additionally, for each participant to respond
to each sentence type (e.g., simple past, present progressive, past progressive, or
filler) for each story, they would have to listen to each of the 32 stories four separate
times.
10. A series of independent samples t tests showed that, within each proficiency
level, the two participants groups did not differ in terms of performance on the proficiency test. The same method was followed for both the learners of L2 English and
Japanese.
11. For complete stimuli, see Gabriele (2005).
12. Results of the English NSs as well as the L2 English intermediate- and highproficiency learners for the accomplishments in the present progressive and the simple
past were also reported in Gabriele and Maekawa (2008).
13. It is interesting to note that all learners correctly accepted Vicky is going to the
store with the incomplete context. After further investigation, it was found that the Japanese NSs accepted iku "go" with the imperfective marker te-iru in the incomplete context
more than with any other achievement verb. The mean rating for all achievements with
the exception of iku "go" fell in the range of 1-2, which demonstrates clear rejection, but
the mean rating for iku "go" was 2.9. Therefore, it may be that iku "go," for some NSs, allows a progressive interpretation with the imperfective marker te-iru, unlike the other
achievements tested. If this is true, the L1 could have assisted the learners in this
context.
14. The only surprising result is that mean responses to sentences in the incomplete
context are not quite as low as predicted for both learners and NSs. It is possible that
because the accomplishments tested involve creation or consumption VPs, speakers are
more likely to accept the simple past sentences even when just part of the object has been
created or consumed.
15. To ensure that the exam results would distinguish between learners at different
proficiency levels, questions designed for intermediate learners (Level 3) and questions
designed for quite advanced learners (Level 2) were used from the Japanese Language
Proficiency Test.
16. An alternative explanation is that the L2 learners of Japanese had access to negative evidence, whereas the L2 learners of English did not. Although it may be the case that
this type of negative evidence is available, it is nevertheless an empirical question whether
negative evidence is in fact beneficial (e.g., White, 1991a, 1991b). Nishi (2003) conducted
a classroom study to investigate the effectiveness of form-focused instruction in teaching
the various interpretations of the imperfective marker te-iru. Learners who received instruction demonstrated improvement; however, the difference between those learners
and the control group, who did not receive instruction, was not large enough to be
conclusive.

400

Alison Gabriele

REFERENCES
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1998). Narrative structure and lexical aspect: Conspiring factors in second language acquisition of tense-aspect morphology. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 20, 471-508.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2000). Tense and aspect in second language acquisition: Form, meaning
and use. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Reynolds, D. W. (1995). The role of lexical aspect in the acquisition of
tense and aspect. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 107-131.
Brennan, J., & Pylkkanen, L. (2008). Processing events: Behavioral and neuromagnetic correlates of aspectual coercion. Brain and Language, 106, 132-143.
Carroll, S. (2001). Input and evidence: The raw material of second language acquisition.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Collins, L. (2004). The particulars on universals: A comparison of the acquisition of tenseaspect morphology among Japanese- and French-speaking learners of English. Canadian Modern Language Review, 61, 251-274.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect. New York: Cambridge University Press.
de Swart, H. (1998). Aspect shift and coercion. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 16,
347-385.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Epstein, S., Flynn, S., & Martohardjono, G. (1996). Second language acquisition: Theoretical and experimental issues in contemporary research. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
19, 677-714.
Gabriele, A. (2005). The acquisition of aspect in a second language: A bidirectional study of
learners of English and Japanese. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, City University
of New York Graduate Center.
Gabriele, A., & Maekawa, J. (2008). Interpreting tense in a second language. EUROSLA
Yearbook, 8, 79-106.
Gabriele, A., Maekawa, J., & Aleman-Banon, J. (2009). Can we predict when dying will
be difficult: Progressive achievements in L2 English. In J. Chandlee, M. Franchini,
S. Lord, & G. M. Rheiner (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development (pp. 175-186). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Gabriele, A., Martohardjono, G., & McClure, W. (2003). Why swimming is just as difficult as
dying for Japanese learners of English. ZAS Papers in Linguistics, 29, 85-103.
Gass, S. M., & Ard, J. (1984). Second language acquisition and the ontology of language
universals. In W. E. Rutherford (Ed.), Language universals and second language acquisition (pp. 33-67). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Gregg, K. (1996). The logical and developmental problems of second language acquisition.
In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 49-81).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Hawkins, R. (2001). The theoretical significance of Universal Grammar in SLA. Second Language Research, 17, 345-367.
Hirakawa, M. (2001). L2 acquisition of Japanese unaccusative verbs. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 23, 221-245.
Inagaki, S. (2001). Motion verbs with goal PPs in the L2 acquisition of English and Japanese. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 23, 153-170.
Ishida, M. (2004). Effects of recasts on the acquisition of the aspectual form -te i-(ru) by
learners of Japanese as a foreign language. Language Learning, 54, 311-394.
Jacobsen, W. (1992). The transitive structure of events in Japanese. Tokyo: Kurosio.
Juffs, A. (1996). Learnability and the lexicon: Theories and second language acquisition research. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kindaichi, H. (1950). Kokugo dooshi no ichibunrui [Classification of Japanese verbs].
Gengo Kenkyuu, 15, 48-63.
Klein, E., & Martohardjono, G. (1999). Investigating second language grammars: Some
conceptual and methodological issues in generative SLA research. In E. Klein &
G. Martohardjono (Eds.), The development of second language grammars: A generative
approach (pp. 3-34). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Landman, F. (1992). The progressive. Natural Language Semantics, 1, 1-32.

Aspect in L2 English and L2 Japanese

401

Li, P., & Shirai, Y. (2000). The acquisition of lexical and grammatical aspect. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Longobardi, G. (2001). How comparative is semantics? A unified parametric theory of bare
nouns and proper names. Natural Language Semantics, 9, 335-369.
Mazurkewich, I. (1984). Dative questions and markedness. In F. R. Eckman, D. Nelson, & L. H.
Bell (Eds.), Universals of second language acquisition (pp. 119-131). Rowley, MA:
Newbury House.
McClure, W. (1995). Syntactic projections of the semantics of aspect. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Michaelis, L. (2006). Tense and time. In B. Aarts & A. MacMahon (Eds.), The handbook of
English linguistics (pp. 220-243). Oxford: Blackwell.
Moens, M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational Linguistics, 14, 15-28.
Montrul, S., & Slabakova, R. (2002). Acquiring morphosyntactic and semantic properties
of aspectual tenses in L2 Spanish. In A. T. Perez-Lerouz & J. Liceras (Eds.), The acquisition of Spanish morphosyntax: The L1-L2 connection (pp. 113-149). Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Montrul, S., & Slabakova, R. (2003). Competence similarities between native and nearnative speakers: An investigation of the preterite-imperfect contrast in Spanish.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 25, 351-398.
Nishi, Y. (2003). Verb learning and the acquisition of aspect: The influence of crosslinguistic
variation in inherent lexical aspect. Unpublished manuscript, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY.
Nishi, Y., & Shirai, Y. (2007). Where L1 semantic transfer occurs: The significance of crosslinguistic variation in lexical aspect in the L2 acquisition of aspect. In Y. Matsumoto,
D. Y. Oshima, O. Robinson, & P. Sells (Eds.), Diversity in language: Perspectives and
implications (pp. 219-241). Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Ogihara, T. (1998). The ambiguity of the -te iru form in Japanese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics, 7, 87-120.
Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the semantics of English: A study in subatomic semantics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinango, M., Zurif, E. B., & Jackendoff, R. (1999). Real-time processing implications of enriched composition and the syntax-semantics interface. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 28, 395-414.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of symbolic logic. New York: Free Press.
Robertson, D., & Sorace, A. (1999). Losing the V2 constraint. In E. Klein & G. Martohardjono (Eds.), The development of second language grammars: A generative approach
(pp. 317-361). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Robison, R. (1995). The aspect hypothesis revisited: A cross-sectional study of tense and
aspect marking in interlanguage. Applied Linguistics, 16, 344-370.
Rocca, S. (2002). Lexical aspect in child second language acquisition of temporal morphology: A bidirectional study. In R. Salaberry & Y. Shirai (Eds.), The L2 acquisition of tenseaspect morphology (pp. 249-284). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Rothstein, S. (2004). Structuring events: A study in the semantics of aspect. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Salaberry, R., & Shirai, Y. (2002). L2 acquisition of tense-aspect morphology. In R. Salaberry & Y. Shirai (Eds.), The L2 acquisition of tense-aspect morphology (pp. 1-20). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access
model. Second Language Research, 12, 40-72.
Shibata, M. (1999). The use of Japanese tense-aspect morphology in L2 discourse narratives. Acquisition of Japanese as a Second Language, 2, 68-102.
Shirai, Y. (2000). The semantics of the Japanese imperfective -teiru: An integrative
approach. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 327-361.
Shirai, Y. (2002). The aspect hypothesis in SLA and the acquisition of Japanese. Acquisition
of Japanese as a Second Language, 5, 42-61.
Shirai, Y., & Kurono, A. (1998). The acquisition of tense/aspect marking in Japanese as a
second language. Language Learning, 48, 245-279.
Slabakova, R. (2001). Telicity in the second language. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Slabakova, R. (2002a). The compounding parameter in second language acquisition.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 507-540.

402

Alison Gabriele

Slabakova, R. (2002b). Recent research on the acquisition of aspect: An embarrassment
of riches? Second Language Research 18, 172-188.
Slabakova, R. (2003). Semantic evidence for functional categories in interlanguage
grammars. Second Language Research, 19, 42-75.
Slabakova, R. (2006). Learnability in the second language acquisition of semantics: A bidirectional study of a semantic parameter. Second Language Research, 22, 498-523.
Smith, C. (1991/1997). The parameter of aspect. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sorace, A. (1993). Incomplete and divergent representations of unaccusativity in nonnative grammars of Italian. Second Language Research, 9, 22-48.
Sugaya, N., & Shirai, Y. (2007). The acquisition of progressive and resultative meanings of
the imperfective aspect marker by L2 learners of Japanese. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 29, 1-38.
Trahey, M., & White, L. (1993). Positive evidence and preemption in the second language
classroom. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 181-204.
Truscott, J. (2006). Optionality in second language acquisition: A generative, processing
oriented account. International Review of Applied Linguistics, 44, 311-330.
Valian, V. (1990). Null subjects: A problem for parameter-setting models of language acquisition. Cognition, 35, 105-122.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Verbs and times. In Z. Vendler (Ed.), Linguistics in philosophy (pp. 97-121).
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. (1972). On the compositional nature of the aspects. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Verkuyl, H. (1989). Aspectual classes and aspectual composition. Linguistics and Philosophy,
12, 39-94.
Verkuyl, H. (1993). A theory of aspectuality: The interaction between temporal and atemporal
structure. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Westergaard, M. (2003). Unlearning V2: Transfer, markedness and the importance of input
cues in the acquisition of word order in English by Norwegian children. EUROSLA
Yearbook, 3, 73-101.
White, L. (1987). Markedness and second language acquisition: The question of transfer.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 9, 261-286.
White, L. (1991a). Adverb placement in second language acquisition: Some effects
of positive and negative evidence in the classroom. Second Language Research, 7,
133-161.
White, L. (1991b). The verb-movement parameter in second language acquisition.
Language Acquisition, 1, 337-360.
White, L. (2003). Second language acquisition and Universal Grammar. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Whong-Barr, M. (2006). What transfers? In S. Unsworth, T. Parodi, A. Sorace, & M. YoungScholten (Eds.), Paths of development in L1 and L2 acquisition (pp. 187-200). Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Yuan, B. (2001). The status of thematic verbs in second language acquisition of Chinese:
Against the inevitability of thematic verb-raising in L2 acquisition. Second Language
Research, 17, 248-272.
Yuan, B. (2004). Negation in French-Chinese, German-Chinese and English-Chinese interlanguages. Transactions of the Philological Society, 102, 169-197.

