C 2009 Cambridge University Press doi:10.1017/S1366728909004027
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 12 (2), 2009, 239-257 

Bilingual children's sensitivity
to specificity and genericity:
Evidence from metalinguistic
awareness

239

L U D OV I C A S E R R AT R I C E
The University of Manchester

A N TO N E L L A S O R AC E
FRANCESCA FILIAC I
University of Edinburgh

M I C H E L A BA L D O
The University of Manchester

A number of recent studies have argued that bilingual children's language comprehension and production may be affected by
cross-linguistic influence. The overall aim of this study was to investigate whether the ability to judge the grammaticality of a
construction in one language is affected by knowledge of the corresponding construction in the other language. We
investigated how English-Italian and Spanish-Italian bilingual children and monolingual peers judged the grammaticality of
plural NPs in specific and generic contexts in English and in Italian. We also explored whether language of the community,
age, and the typological relatedness of the bilinguals' two languages significantly affected their performance. While
performance in English was overall poor, no significant differences existed between the English-Italian bilinguals and the
monolinguals. In contrast, we found that knowledge of English affected the bilinguals' ability to discriminate between
grammatical and ungrammatical sentences in Italian. The English-Italian bilinguals were significantly less accurate than
both the monolinguals and the Spanish-Italian bilinguals in a task where they simply had to rely on the local definite article
cue to reject ungrammatical bare plurals in generic contexts. Language of the community and age also played a significant
role in children's accuracy.

Introduction
In this study we explored bilingual and monolingual
children's ability to give metalinguistic judgements on
the grammaticality of specific and generic plural Noun
Phrases (NPs) in English and in Italian. So far none of
the research on bilinguals' acquisition of nominals has
investigated how children deal with the semantics of plural
NPs (Muller, 1994; Granfeldt, 2000; Serratrice, 2000;
Kupisch; 2004, 2007). Specific and generic plural NPs are
an interesting case to consider in the context of English-
Italian bilingual acquisition as the two languages differ in
the distribution of the definite article to mark specificity
and genericity. Plural NPs in subject position in Italian, as
in other Romance languages like Spanish, always require a
definite article regardless of their semantic interpretation.
By contrast, in English plural NPs in subject position
can appear with or without a definite article, depending

* This research was supported by the UK Economic and Social Research
Council (grant number R000230782 to the first two authors). We are
extremely grateful to all the participants for their time. Special thanks
are due to the children's parents and to the staff at the International
School of Milan, the American School of Milan, the Bilingual School
in Monza, the Italian School in Barcelona, Bruntsfield Primary in
Edinburgh, "Giovanni Pascoli" and "Pilastro" primary schools in Este.
Their enthusiastic cooperation has been invaluable for the completion
of this project.

on whether they are interpreted as specific or as generic
(Longobardi, 1994, 2001).
The aims of this study were the following: to examine
whether primary school bilingual and monolingual
children can discriminate between specific and generic
readings of plural NPs in English as a function of
the semantic context, whether they correctly reject bare
plural NPs in Italian, regardless of context, and whether
bilingual children's linguistic judgements in one language
are affected by knowledge of the other language. We
also explored how the language of the community and
the typological relatedness between a bilingual's two
languages affect linguistic performance. In essence we
wanted to find out whether bilinguals' grammaticality
judgements are affected by cross-linguistic influence, and
whether the effect can be predicted by cross-linguistic
differences in the distribution of the definite article, by
the amount of input they receive in each language, and
by the typological relation between the two languages.
In other research (Sorace, Serratrice, Filiaci and Baldo,
2009) we found significant differences between 6-7-yearolds and 8-10-year-olds in a forced-choice task testing
the acceptability of overt and null pronouns. In this study
we therefore tracked children's performance between six
and at ten years of age to determine whether performance
changes over time as a function of increased exposure to
the language.

Address for correspondence:
Ludovica Serratrice, The University of Manchester, School of Psychological Sciences, HCD, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
Serratrice@manchester.ac.uk

240

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

Cross-linguistic influence as a function of properties of
the target language and frequency of exposure
The issue of cross-linguistic influence and the nature
of syntactic representations in simultaneous bilingual
children have been the object of a debate ever since
systematic investigation of bilingual first language
acquisition started in the late 1970s (Volterra and
Taeschner, 1978; Taeschner, 1983; Genesee, 1989). The
current prevailing understanding is that bilingual children
who are regularly exposed to two languages from birth
or thereafter have separate syntactic representations for
each of their two languages. The bulk of the evidence for
this claim comes from studies focusing on cross-linguistic
differences in word order where young bilinguals have
been shown to use language-specific word order in each of
their languages (Meisel, 1989, 1994; Paradis and Genesee,
1996). If language A has the word order X1-X2 and
language B has the word order X2-X1 and a bilingual
child acquiring languages A and B uses the appropriate
word order in each of her languages, then we can conclude
that this child has separate syntactic representations for
the two languages and that there is no evidence for crosslinguistic influence. More interestingly, however, recent
work has started to shed light on the nature of syntactic
representations and on the mechanisms of language
comprehension and production in cases where there is
no such clear-cut opposition between the two languages,
but where there is a degree of cross-linguistic overlap
(Bernardini, 2003; Nicoladis, 2006; van der Linden and
Blok-Boas, 2005). For example, if language A has both
word order X1-X2 and word order X2-X1, and language
B only has X1-X2 the prediction is that the word order
attested in both languages (X1-X2) will be preferred in the
language that has both and it will be extended to contexts
in which it is not grammatical or pragmatically acceptable.
This does not mean that bilingual children are expected to
use the overlapping X1-X2 word order in inappropriate
contexts in a systematic fashion. In fact, most of the time
bilinguals use language-specific appropriate word orders
in both of their languages. Structural overlap is simply
"predictive of morphosyntactic transfer, although crosslinguistic transfer is not limited to cases of structural
overlap" (Nicoladis, 2006: 26). Dopke (1998), for
instance, found that German-English bilingual children
overgeneralized the VO order in German, where both
VO and OV are possible, under the influence of English
where VO is the only possible order. Van der Linden
and Blok-Boas (2005) reported that three French-Dutch
bilingual children and one Italian-Dutch bilingual child
growing up in the Netherlands had a tendency to use
the Romance word order (possessee-possessor) in Dutch
nominal possessive constructions more often than Dutch
monolingual children. Both possessee-possessor and
possessor-possessee constructions exist in Dutch while

Italian only has the possessee-possessor order. Along
similar lines, Bernardini (2003) showed that Swedishdominant Swedish-Italian bilingual children overused the
Swedish Adj-N word order in Italian where the preferred
word order is N-Adj but the Adj-N order also exists.
In a study of adjective placement in English-French
bilingual children, Nicoladis (2006) likewise reported
the overgeneralization of the English Adj-N word order
in French where both Adj-N and N-Adj exist.1 At the
clause level, Argyri (2006) and Argyri and Sorace (2007)
observed a preference for SV word order in wh-embedded
clauses in the Greek of English-dominant English-Greek
bilinguals. Both SV and VS are possible word orders in
Greek while only SV is attested in English. Once again, the
preference for SV is attributed to cross-linguistic influence
from English.
In sum, there seems to be an emerging body of evidence
suggesting that a degree of cross-linguistic influence
is indeed attested in simultaneous bilingual children.
Additional support for this hypothesis comes from studies
investigating this issue in terms of the interface between
syntax and discourse pragmatics (Hulk and Muller, 2000;
Paradis and Navarro, 2003; Serratrice, Sorace and Paoli,
2004). More specifically, the argument has been made
that constructions whose distribution is constrained by
discourse pragmatics are particularly vulnerable to crosslinguistic influence when they partially overlap across
languages.
Besides properties of the target languages, variables
such as language dominance as measured by children's
Mean Length of Utterance (MLU), amount of talk, and
vocabulary composition have also been investigated as
possible contributing factors to cross-linguistic influence
(Yip and Matthews, 2000; Kupisch, 2007). The role of
dominance intended as the amount of input children
receive in each language has been systematically
investigated by Argyri and Sorace (2007) in a study
of bilingual children acquiring Greek and English
simultaneously in the UK or in Greece. The results of
this study showed that input played a significant role
in the magnitude of cross-linguistic influence. Only the
Greek of bilinguals in the UK was affected by their
knowledge of English, the Greek-dominant bilinguals in
Greece behaved like their Greek monolingual peers.
Although not specifically concerned with the issue of
cross-linguistic influence but with the issue of children's
linguistic awareness more in general, the work of
Gathercole also provides substantial evidence for the role
1

More puzzlingly, the bilingual children in van der Linden and BlokBoas (2005) also used the Dutch word order in their Romance
language, an error that is unattested in their monolingual peers, and
Nicoladis (2006) also found that the bilingual children used the N-
Adj in English, although this word order is unattested in the adult
language and was used only marginally by monolingual peers.

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
of input in bilinguals' metalinguistic judgements. In three
large-scale studies Gathercole (2002a, b, 2007) explored
the role of the amount of input as a predictor of linguistic
performance in school-age Spanish-English bilingual
children in Miami, and of Welsh-English bilingual
children in Wales. The findings of the Miami studies
were that, overall, the bilinguals performed less accurately
than the monolinguals on two grammaticality tasks in
Spanish. The bilinguals' performance was correlated with
the amount of Spanish they received at home. Children
in homes where only Spanish was spoken performed
significantly better than children in whose homes only
English was spoken. Similar results on the role of input
are reported by Gathercole (2007) for the comprehension
and production of gender, and the identification of subjects
and objects in Welsh-English bilingual children. In both
the Miami and the Welsh studies the differences between
monolinguals and bilinguals and across the bilingual
groups diminished over time as children acquired a critical
mass of items necessary to abstract a pattern for the
structures in questions.
In view of the role played by language exposure in
the child's environment, both on a daily basis and over
time, the present study includes the variables of language
of the community (Italian, English), and age (6-7-yearolds, 8-10-year-olds), alongside typological relatedness
(English-Italian, Spanish-Italian), to address the issue
of cross-linguistic influence. Before formulating specific
predictions on the directionality of influence, we introduce
the theoretical linguistic background on the differences
between English and Italian in the distribution of the
definite article in plural NPs.
The Nominal Mapping Parameter
In a seminal paper Chierchia (1998) framed the
empirical observation of cross-linguistic differences in
the distribution of definite articles with singular and
plural count and mass nouns within the variation of a
semantic parameter. According to Chierchia's hypothesis,
formalized in the Nominal Mapping Parameter (NMP),
natural languages can be divided into three types
according to the different ways in which they refer to
kinds. Nouns appear to play a double role inasmuch as
they can be predicates (e.g. the predicate "a doctor" in
"John is a doctor") or arguments when they refer to
kinds (e.g. the argument "a doctor" in "A doctor rang this
morning"). The mapping of the syntactic category Noun
onto its semantic interpretation as predicate or argument is
constrained cross-linguistically by the language-specific
setting of the NMP as [ argument] and [ predicate].
Although in principle four combinations of these two
features are possible [+arg, +pred], [+arg, -pred] [-arg,
+pred] [-arg, -pred], the setting in which nouns cannot
be mapped onto either predicates or arguments is clearly

241

an impossibility. From the three settings that are actually
attested, Chierchia derives cross-linguistic variation in the
availability of bare arguments, the extension of all nouns to
mass, and the existence of plurals. Languages like Chinese
and Japanese, where the setting is [+arg, -pred], are
languages where nouns refer to kinds, therefore bare count
nouns occur freely as arguments (e.g. "Girl hugs boy").
In these languages all nouns are also mass and therefore
plural marking does not exist. The two remaining settings
[-arg, +pred] and [+arg, +pred] are the ones that are more
closely relevant to the present study as the former is the
setting in Italian, Spanish and the rest of the Romance
languages, while the latter is the setting in English and
in most of the Germanic languages. In a [-arg, +pred]
language all nouns are, by default, predicates and therefore
they require a Determiner to be turned into arguments (e.g.

"Ragazza abbraccia ragazzo"/"Girl hugs boy"). There is,
however, cross-linguistic variation within the Romance
family itself as to the availability of a phonological null
Determiner. Languages like Italian and Spanish allow bare
NPs in a lexically governed position, while French (3) does
not. This is illustrated in (1)-(3).
(Italian)
(1) a.  Donne sono arrivate ieri sera.
"Women arrived last night."
b. Ho comprato patate e pane al mercato.
"(I) bought potatoes and bread at the market."
(Spanish)
(2) a.  Mujeres llegaron ayer por la noche.
"Women arrived last night."
b. Compre pan y leche al mercado.
"(I) bought potatoes and bread at the market."

(French)
(3) a. Femmes sont arrivees hier soir.
"Women arrived last night."
b.  J'ai achete pommes de terre et pain au marche.
"I bought potatoes and bread at the market."
None of the Romance languages allow bare NPs with
a generic interpretation in a non-governed position, but
require the projection of a Determiner in the shape of a
definite article.
(4) I dinosauri sono vissuti milioni di anni prima
dell'arrivo dell'uomo.
"(The) dinosaurs lived millions of years before the
arrival of man."
(5) Los dinosaurios vivieron millones de anos antes de la
aparicion del hombre.
"(The) dinosaurs lived millions of years before the
arrival of man."
(6) Les dinosaures ont vecu des millions d'annees avant
l'arrivee de l'homme.
"(The) dinosaurs lived millions of years before the
arrival of man."
The definite article is interpreted as i, an operator that
selects the greatest element from the extension of a
predicate but which can be intensionalized, and thus

242

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

becomes equivalent to the type shifting operator  in
generic sentences and with individual level predicates.
With respect to the availability of count and mass
nouns, [-arg, +pred] languages are predicted to have both
since the mass/count distinction relates to the extension of
predicates. It also follows that those nouns that are count
can appear with an overt plural marking.
As regards the last class of languages that are identified
by the NMP, i.e. [+arg, +pred] languages like English,
Chierchia's proposal is that nouns can either denote kinds
(arguments) or predicates. Nouns that denote kinds [+arg]
will have mass denotation, as a consequence they will be
able to appear as bare NPs in any syntactic position and
they will not be marked for plural.
(7) Advice is available online.
(8) I need advice on this issue.
(9)  Advices are always welcome.
Nouns that denote predicates will have count
denotation. As such they will not be able to appear as
bare arguments in the singular, and they will take plural
marking.
(10)  Chair is next to the table.
(11) I moved the chairs into the room next door.
Bare plural arguments do however exist in English,
they appear in generic sentences, with individual level
predicates, and they are allowed in any syntactic position,
unlike in Italian and Spanish where they are restricted to
lexically-governed argumental positions.
(12) Dogs are friendly animals.
(13) I like dogs.
The presence of bare plural nouns in English rests on
the availability of the type shifter  which can freely apply
to plural nouns to yield a kind as in (12) and (13). Because
a kind is the totality of its instances it follows that the
type shifting operation can apply only to plural nouns and
not to singular nouns. Singular count nouns only identify
a part and not the totality of the plurality they belong
to. Note, however, that English also has definite articles;
therefore in principle an intensionalization of the definite
article in appropriate semantic contexts should be possible
in the same way as it is possible in Romance languages.
Contrary to this prediction the sentence in (14) is indeed
ungrammatical.
(14)  The dinosaurs became extinct 65 million years ago.
Chierchia's solution to this conundrum is to appeal
to the economy-based constraint of "Avoid Structure".
Unlike Romance languages, which have no option but
to resort to the intensionalization of the definite article,
English does have a type shifting operation that applies
to bare nouns to turn them into arguments in generic
sentences and with individual level predicates. Because
this type shifter can apply as early as the NP level,

and it can generate the required semantic interpretation
without the extra projection of a Determiner, this solution
is preferable in terms of economy considerations and it
therefore blocks the use of the definite article.
Monolingual acquisition of specificity and genericity
The NMP offers a theoretical account of the observed
cross-linguistic differences between Germanic and
Romance languages in the distribution of bare NPs
and their interpretation. The presence of a definite
article with plural NPs is the crucial difference between
English and Romance languages on which we will
focus in the present study; there are however other cues
that children can exploit to discover the existence of
generic and non-generic interpretations of plural NPs.
Gelman and Raman (2003) identified three main sets
of cues that English-speaking children can rely upon
to distinguish the generic from the non-generic reading
of plural NPs: morphosyntactic cues, pragmatic cues
and world-knowledge cues. Morphosyntactic cues include
determiners, tense and aspect. As shown above, the
presence of a definite article with a plural noun is a very
direct and reliable cue ("The dogs bark" vs. "Dogs bark"),
so are tense ("A cow says `moo'" vs. "A cow said `moo'")
and aspect ("Cats meow" vs. "Cats are meowing"). In
Romance languages only tense and aspect are potentially
useful cues given that definite articles are obligatory in
both the generic and the non-generic reading, at least in
subject position.
Pragmatic cues include the interpretation of pronouns
as co-referential with a specific antecedent ("These are my
gerbils. They like to eat sunflower seeds.") or not ("This
is a gerbil. They like to eat sunflower seeds."). We would
add that other pragmatic cues that might point children in
the right direction are the understanding of adjuncts like
"in general", "as a whole", as opposed to "in this story",
"here in this picture", etc. Both in English and in Romance
languages children will have this type of pragmatic cues
at their disposal.
There is experimental evidence that English-speaking
children as young as three can appreciate the
morphosyntactic determiner cue and the pragmatic
anaphoric cue to distinguish between a generic and
a specific reading (Gelman and Raman, 2003). In a
cross-linguistic study, Perez-Leroux, Munn, Schmitt and
DeIrish (2004), assessed pre-school children's sensitivity
to the determiner and the tense morphosyntactic cues in
the generic/non-generic interpretation of plural NPs in
English and in Spanish. The results of two experiments
with monolingual English-speaking and monolingual
Spanish-speaking pre-school and school-age children
showed a high rate of generic responses with definite
plural NPs (between 40% and 80%), while in the Gelman
and Raman's (2003) study the authors reported rates of

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
generic responses to definite plural NPs between 8% and
15%. This obvious discrepancy in the rate of generic
readings with non-generic wording is probably due to
important methodological differences between the two
studies. In both the Gelman and Raman (2003) study
and the Perez-Leroux et al. (2004) study, the Englishspeaking participants were presented with drawings of
atypical entities (e.g. spotted zebras), and were asked
either a generic question (e.g. "Do zebras have spots?"), or
a non-generic question (e.g. "Do the zebras have spots?").
However, while in the Gelman and Raman's experiments
the questions were only preceded by a brief statement (e.g.
"Here are two birds. Can birds fly?/Can the birds fly?"),
in the Perez-Leroux et al. (2004) experiment the target
question was preceded by a story in which the two entities
were identified by a proper name (e.g. "Zippy the zebra
and Suzy the zebra are spotted"). Because the animals
in the stories were introduced by name, using a definite
NP to make subsequent reference to them may have been
perceived by the children as discourse-pragmatically odd.
A more natural way to identify the animals would have
been to use their proper name; the use of an NP might have
led the children to rule out the option that the experimenter
was talking about the recently named animals, hence the
high number of generic interpretations.
The performance of the Spanish-speaking children in
Perez-Leroux et al.'s second set of experiments showed
that in the presence of a definite plural NP which can
have both a generic and a non-generic interpretation
in the language, three-to-five-year-olds and six-yearolds opted for the generic interpretation in the vast
majority of cases. Interestingly, although this tendency
remained high, it diminished significantly when the
question containing the plural definite NP was in the
past tense ("Los tigres comian carne?"/"Were the tigers
eating meat?"). Unlike the English-speaking children,
the Spanish-speaking children in this study were able to
interpret an imperfective past tense form of a natural kind
in current existence as a cue to the non-generic reading.
Although Romance languages like Spanish do not have
a dichotomy between plural definite NPs with a specific
reading and bare plural NPs with a generic reading in
subject position, these two options are indeed available in
object position. Gavarro, Perez-Leroux and Roeper (2006)
conducted an experiment with monolingual Catalanspeaking three-, four- and five-year-olds to assess to what
extent children differentiate between the specific and the
generic reading of an NP in object position on the basis
of the presence/absence of the definite article. The results
showed that three-year-olds could not reliably exploit the
presence/absence of the definite article to give either the
intended specific or generic interpretation. The four-yearolds were somewhat more successful, although they still
gave incorrect generic answers to a specific question,
the five-year-olds never interpreted a specific question

243

as a generic but they gave a specific answer to a generic
question approximately 40% of the time, while the adults'
performance was at ceiling in both specific and generic
contexts.
The picture that emerges from the studies reviewed
here is somewhat inconclusive with respect to young
children's ability to discriminate between specific and
generic readings of plural NPs. On the one hand, Gelman
and Raman (2003) provide data in support for systematic
differentiation as early as 2;8 in monolingual English
speakers. On the other hand, Perez-Leroux et al. (2004)
and Gavarro et al. (2006) present data showing that
Catalan-speaking children as old as 4 and monolingual
English-speaking children as old as 5 provide incorrect
generic responses with non-generic wording up to 40%
of the time. Gavarro et al. also found that Catalanspeaking five-year-olds interpreted a generic wording as
specific almost 60% of the time. These discrepancies are
however likely to be due to methodological differences in
the experimental paradigms adopted. While Gelman and
Raman (2003) used the prototypical/atypical paradigm,
Gavarro et al. (2006) used a task in which the non-specific
reading included the specific referent, hence the reason for
the lack of sensitivity to the bare noun distinction in the
children they tested.
We are not aware of any data on older bilingual
children's linguistic awareness of generic and specific
readings of plural NPs in English. The main aim of
the present study was to use grammaticality judgement
tasks to assess whether English-Italian bilingual schoolage children and monolingual peers rely on the presence
of the definite article in English in conjunction with
pragmatic information provided by adverbial adjuncts like
"here" or "in general" to discriminate between generic
and specific readings of plural NPs. At the same time we
wanted to find out whether, because of their knowledge
of Italian, the bilinguals would be more inclined to reject
bare NPs. For Italian we investigated whether English-
Italian bilinguals, Spanish-Italian bilinguals and Italian
monolinguals would reject bare NPs as ungrammatical,
regardless of specific or generic context, and whether
English-Italian bilinguals would be more likely to accept
bare NPs, especially in generic contexts, as a result of the
availability of bare NPs in their other language.
Predictions
In a number of recent studies cross-linguistic influence has
been reported in situations where the two languages are
in a subset-superset relationship with respect to a given
construction. If a language has two options (e.g. null and
overt pronominal subjects in Italian) and one language
only has one option (e.g. overt pronominal subjects in
English), the option that is common to both languages (e.g.
overt pronominal subjects) has been observed to extend

244

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

to inappropriate contexts in the language that has both
(e.g. overt pronominal subjects are used in Italian where
null subjects would be more pragmatically felicitous)
(Montrul, 2004; Tsimpli, Sorace, Heycock and Filiaci,
2005; Sorace and Filiaci, 2006; Serratrice, 2007). By
this rationale, we should predict that the directionality of
cross-linguistic influence for the distribution of definite
articles with plural NPs should go from Italian (only
definite articles with plural NPs) to English (both definite
plural DPs and bare plural NPs) where definite plural
NPs should become acceptable with a generic reading.
This is in line with Hulk and Muller's (2000) and Muller
and Hulk's (2001) original cross-linguistic influence
hypothesis based on structural overlap.2
There is however another alternative: it is possible
that cross-linguistic influence is driven by more abstract
economy considerations. If this hypothesis is correct
we would expect the opposite pattern: cross-linguistic
influence from English to Italian. English has the
opportunity to give bare plural NPs kind reference
through type shifting, a more economical operation
than the projection of an extra Determiner. If economy
considerations underlie cross-linguistic influence, then
the more economical option to achieve a generic reading
should, at least occasionally, be preferred in Italian over
the more costly projection of a DP.
Regardless of which of the two alternative proposals - the subset-superset hypothesis or the economy
hypothesis - proves to be a better fit to the data, the input
variable is likely to be playing a role in the magnitude
of the cross-linguistic influence. If the subset-superset
hypothesis is along the right lines we would expect a
larger effect in the English of English-Italian bilinguals
raised in Italy who will inevitably get more input in
Italian and therefore would receive more evidence for
the availability of a generic reading with plural definite
NPs. Conversely, if cross-linguistic influence is driven

2

An anonymous reviewer has pointed out that Muller and Hulk (2001)
also stated that when confronted with the input of two partially
overlapping languages, bilingual children may tend to persist longer
at the "universal stage", and use the default grammatical option rather
than the overlapping construction. In the case of generic NPs the
reviewer suggests that bare NPs might be viewed as the default
grammatical option. The prediction should therefore be that the
direction of cross-linguistic influence, if and when it does take place,
should be from English (bare NPs) to Italian (definite NPs). We are
unwilling to committing ourselves to bare NPs as the default option;
our argument is simply that they are a more economical option. It is
not clear what a default grammatical option actually is, or whether it
might be a useful theoretical construct. Prior attempts to account for
developmental stages in terms of default parameter settings have not
been particularly successful (e.g. Hyams, 1986). Our interpretation of
Muller and Hulk's (2001) hypothesis in terms of structural overlap,
rather than in terms of default grammar, is also in line with the work
of other researchers working on cross-linguistic influence in bilingual
acquisition.

by economy consideration, we expect that English-
Italian bilingual children raised in the UK would show
a significantly larger acceptance rate of bare plural NPs
with a generic reading in Italian than their counterparts
living in Italy.
In this study we also wanted to explore to what
extent the performance of bilingual children is indeed
an effect of the typological differences between the
two languages that they are acquiring, rather than the
effect of having to learn two languages instead of one.
Should we observe a significant difference between the
English-Italian bilinguals and their monolingual Italian
peers, we would still need to establish to what extent
the bilinguals' behaviour is the result of cross-linguistic
influence from English, or rather the more general effect
of learning two languages simultaneously. This latter
possibility has in fact received some preliminary support
from studies of the acquisition of Italian by L1 Spanish
speakers (Bini 1993), which found similar error patterns
for the use of subject pronouns as those observed in
L1 English speakers of Italian, despite the equivalence
of the pronoun systems in Spanish and Italian (see
Sorace and Filiaci, 2006 for discussion). The additional
entailment of this hypothesis is that certain forms have
the status of unmarked options that are used by bilingual
speakers to overcome temporary processing difficulties or
knowledge gaps (Sorace 2005, 2006).3 To ascertain the
role of typology vs. bilingualism we therefore included
an additional group of age-matched Spanish-Italian
bilinguals who are acquiring two languages that behave in
the same way with respect to the distribution of definite
plural NPs and their specific and generic interpretation. If
the typological difference between Italian and English is
the cause of cross-linguistic influence, we would expect
the English-Italian bilinguals to behave significantly
differently both from the monolingual Italian peers and the
Spanish-Italian bilinguals, and no significant differences
should be observed between the latter two groups. If,
conversely, learning any two languages simultaneously is
going to significantly affect the performance of bilingual
children compared to their monolingual peers, we would
not expect significant differences between the bilingual
groups, regardless of language combination. At the same
time we would expect them to be significantly different
from their monolingual Italian peers.
Lastly, we considered the effect of age. If a significant
gap between bilingual and monolingual children exists at
a given point in time we wanted to find out whether it is
3

A further corollary of this hypothesis is that the use of unmarked forms
should also be observable in monolingual speakers in a situation of
processing pressure or, alternatively, when speakers can afford a "good
enough" production or interpretation. See Carminati (2002, 2005) for
a study of these tendencies in the processing of pronominal subjects
by native Italian speakers.

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
likely to narrow over time, so that older bilingual children
behave more like their monolingual peers than do younger
bilinguals, as we have observed in other research (Sorace
et al., 2009).
Methods
Participants
A total of 167 children between the ages of 6;2 and 10;10
participated in the study, together with 30 monolingual
English-speaking adults, and 30 monolingual Italianspeaking adults. There were two groups of English-Italian
bilingual children, one group living in the UK (N = 20)
and one group living in Italy (N = 39). The bilinguals in
Italy were recruited among the pupils of international or
American primary schools in Milan, where English is the
medium of instruction. Those in the UK were recruited by
word of mouth and through an online forum for Italian nationals (http://www.corriere.it/solferino/severgnini). The
Spanish-Italian bilingual children living in Spain (N = 31)
were recruited among Italian or mixed origin families in
Spain and Italy, and among pupils at the Italian School of
Barcelona.4 The criteria for the selection of the bilingual
children were the following: between six and ten years
of age, no history of language impairment or hearing
loss; regular exposure to both English and Italian from
birth; regular use of both languages on a daily basis;
similar perceived fluency in both languages. The parents
of suitable children completed a questionnaire on the
pattern of language use in their family, and on their
perception of the children's ability to use both of their
languages in everyday situations effectively.
A group of monolingual English-speaking children in
the UK (N = 39) and a group of monolingual Italianspeaking children in Italy (N = 38) were also included
for control purposes. The criteria for the selection of the
monolingual participants were the following: no history
of language impairment or hearing loss; no exposure to a
language other than Italian or English. The children were
recruited to match in age the bilinguals and were therefore
between six and ten years of age. The monolingual
children were recruited from primary schools in northern
Italy and in Scotland. The children were divided into
a younger (6;2-7;11) and an older group (8;0-10;10).
No statistical age differences existed between the groups
either for the younger (F < 1) or the older group (F < 1).

4

Because of the bilingual status of Catalonia, the children recruited in
Barcelona have been exposed to different extents to Catalan as well
as Italian and Spanish. Although we are aware of this situation of
trilingualism, Catalan is also a Romance language like Spanish and
Italian. The setting of the NMP and its related syntactic and semantics
properties are the same in the three languages (Chierchia, 1998), we
therefore rule out a possible confounding effect of Catalan in our data.

245

Table 1. Mean age, SD and age range of child
participants.
Group

Number Mean SD Range

English-Italian (Italy)
Younger
Older

16
23

6;8
8;8

0;5 6;2-7;9
0;6 8;0-10;2

English-Italian (UK)
Younger
Older

10
10

6;9
8;8

0;5 6;3-7;6
0;6 8;4-10;6

Spanish-Italian
Younger
Older

14
17

6.7
9;0

0;4 6;4-7;10
0;5 8;3-10;10

Italian-speaking monolinguals
Younger
15
Older
23

6;8
8;9

0;4 6;2-7;11
0;7 8;0-10;8

English-speaking monolinguals
Younger
15
Older
24

6;7
8;9

0;5 6;2-7;11
0;7 8;0-10;6

The monolingual adults were recruited among university
students in Italy and in England. Details for the child
participants are provided in Table 1.
Materials
The English and the Italian versions of the task each
included six pairs of test sentences and three pairs of filler
sentences. Each pair of sentences was presented together
with a picture of prototypical objects or animals. The test
sentences included six generic contexts and six specific
contexts. In the specific contexts the sentences were
introduced by "Here"/"Qui" and in the generic contexts
they were prefaced by "In general"/"In genere". For each
picture the participants heard a sentence containing a
subject plural NP in a specific context and a sentence
with a subject plural NP in a generic context. The
presence of the definite article was manipulated to
obtain four different conditions so that participants heard
three grammatical and three ungrammatical sentences
in the specific condition and three grammatical and
three ungrammatical sentences in the generic condition.
Examples of grammatical and ungrammatical sentences
are provided in (15)-(18) below; a full list of test and filler
items in English and in Italian is provided in the appendix.
(15) a. Here the strawberries are red.
(specific grammatical)
b. Qui le fragole sono rosse. (specific grammatical)
"Here the strawberries are red."
(16) a.  Here strawberries are red.
(specific ungrammatical)

246

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

b.  Qui fragole sono rosse.
(specific ungrammatical)
"Here strawberries are red."
(17) a. In general sharks are dangerous.
(generic grammatical)
b. In genere gli squali sono pericolosi.
(generic grammatical)
"In general the sharks are dangerous."
(18) a.  In general the sharks are dangerous.
(generic ungrammatical)
b.  In genere squali sono pericolosi.
(generic ungrammatical)
"In general sharks are dangerous."
The participants' task was to judge whether the
sentence they had just heard was okay in English/Italian
or not. Instead of using a task where participants were
presented only with grammatical options as in the Gelman
and Raman (2003) studies, we opted for an acceptability
judgment task because the aim of this study was precisely
to investigate to what extent bilingual children were
prepared to accept an option that is ungrammatical in
one language but acceptable in the other language. The
nature of the task was clearly different in two languages. In
Italian children simply had to rely on the presence/absence
of the article to accept or reject the sentence as articles are
always required in Italian regardless of context. In English,
by contrast, children had to use the initial adjunct to decide
whether the sentence was acceptable with or without
the article. Evidence from comparable metalinguistic
tasks administered to Spanish-English bilinguals and
monolinguals by Galambos and Goldin-Meadow (1990)
shows that, both in English and in Spanish, children
between the ages of 4 and 7 found it difficult to reject
an ungrammatical sentence like "Yesterday I am cleaning
the boat" where they had to integrate the temporality of
the adverbial adjunct ("yesterday") and of the auxiliary
verb ("am"). Spanish-speaking children rejected these
sentences a mere 34% of the time, while the English
speakers fared somewhat better at 63%. The same children
found it easier to judge ungrammatical sentences with a
missing article as in "Boy jumped over the high wall". The
missing article was noticed 55% of the time in Spanish
and 69% of the time in English.
The sentences in the English task in this study also
called for the integration of the semantics of the adjunct
with the semantics of the plural NP, a somewhat more
difficult undertaking that noticing the presence or absence
of an article in the Italian sentences. The expectation is
therefore that performance in the English task should be
overall worse than in Italian. We nevertheless predicted
that if cross-linguistic difference affects the English-
Italian bilingual children they should still perform
significantly worse in English according to the subset-
superset hypothesis by accepting plural NPs with a definite

article in generic contexts, or significantly worse in Italian
according to the economy hypothesis by accepting bare
NPs in generic contexts.
Procedure
The participants were seen individually in a quiet room
at home, at school or on university premises by a
female researcher. The English-Italian bilinguals took
part in both the English and in the Italian version of the
experiment on separate days at least a week apart. Half
of the children participated in the English study first and
half in the Italian study first. The experiment was preceded
by a series of instructions and by two practice items. The
participants were told that they would be looking at a series
of pictures of objects and animals and that at the same
time they would hear some statements about the specific
objects and animals in the pictures, and some statements
about those objects and animals in general. Their task was
to say whether the sentences they heard in those contexts
were okay in English/Italian or not. During the practice
items participants were asked to pay particular attention to
the form of the sentences they were presented with. If they
found the sentences unacceptable they were encouraged
to provide an acceptable alternative. If the participants
did not detect the source of the ungrammaticality the
experimenter provided the grammatical alternative herself
drawing the participants' attention to the anomaly in
the stimulus sentence. All the children and the adults
understood what was required of them during the
practice session and no participant failed to complete the
task.
English results
Figure 1 and Figure 2 report the mean number of acceptances of grammatical sentences and the mean number
of rejections of ungrammatical sentences in specific and
generic contexts for the younger children (6;2-7;11), the
older children (8;0-10;10), and the adults.5
Overall all groups at all ages performed more
accurately in specific than in generic contexts, and they
were more likely to accept grammatical sentences than
to reject ungrammatical ones. To analyse the effects
of language background and age on the participants'
responses we performed a mixed-design ANOVA with
context (specific, generic) and grammaticality (grammatical, ungrammatical) as within-subjects variables,

5

Participant's responses were analaysed separately for grammatical and
ungrammatical sentences. This allowed us to tease apart the correct
acceptance of grammatical sentences from the correct rejection
of ungrammatical sentences, thus providing a clearer picture of
participants' metalinguistic abilities.

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity

247

Figure 1. Mean accuracy scores for the younger children in English.

and age (younger children, older children, adults), and
language background (monolingual English-speaking
adults, monolingual English-speaking children, English-
Italian bilinguals in Italy, English-Italian bilinguals in the
UK) as between-subjects variables. The analysis revealed
a significant effect of context (F(1,114) = 8.62, p < .01,
partial 2 = .07) confirming that items in the specific
condition were responded to more accurately than items in
the generic condition. There was also a highly significant
effect of grammaticality (F(1,114) = 250.22, p < .001,
partial 2 = .68), evidence that participants were more
likely to accept a grammatical sentence than to reject
an ungrammatical one. There was no significant effect
of the age variable. Tukey HSD post-hoc tests revealed
that this was due to the lack of a significant difference
between the younger and the older children (p > .05).
The adults however performed significantly better than
both groups of children (p > .001). There were also
a significant effect of group (F(2,114) = 7.98, p <
.01, partial 2 = .12), a significant interaction between
grammaticality and age (F(1,114) = 11.27, p < .01, partial
2 = .09), and a significant interaction between context
and grammaticality (F(2,114) = 6.97, p < .01, partial
2 = .05).

To further explore the group differences and these
interactions we conducted additional one-way ANOVAs
for the younger and the older children separately
(Tukey HSD post-hoc tests were used in the pairwise
comparisons). In the younger group, the only significant
difference in the mean number of correct acceptances of
grammatical sentences in the specific context (F(3,60) =
3.88, p < .01, partial 2 = .16) was between the
adults and the monolingual children (p < .05). The
younger monolinguals also accepted significantly fewer
grammatical sentences than the adults (p < .01), the
bilinguals in the UK (p < .05) and the bilinguals in Italy
(p < .01) in the generic context (F(3,60) = 6.75, p < .01,
partial 2 = .25). No other differences were significant in
this condition.
With respect to the mean number of rejections of
ungrammatical sentences in the specific context, the only
significant differences were between the adults and the
monolingual children (p < .05), and the adults and the
bilingual children in Italy (p < .05) (F(3,60) = 5.08, p <
.01, partial 2 = .20). Finally, the adults also correctly
rejected a significantly higher number of ungrammatical
sentences in the generic context than all the child groups
(all ps < .01) (F(3,60) = 5.08, p < .01, partial 2 = .39).

248

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

Figure 2. Mean accuracy scores for the older children in English.

In the older group there were no significant differences
as a function of language background in the acceptance
of grammatical sentences, either in the specific or the
generic context (specific context F(3,80) = 2.25, p >
.05); generic context F(3,80) = .82, p > .05). There
were significant differences in the rejection of specific
and generic ungrammatical sentences (specific context
F(3,80) = 8.48, p < .001, partial 2 = .24; generic context
F(3,80) = 53.18, p > .001, partial 2 = .66), but in both
contexts the only significant differences were between the
adults and the three groups of children (all ps < .05), while
the children did not different significantly as a function of
language background.
Response patterns within the groups
In addition to the analyses of mean group data we provide
information on within-group response patterns. Table 2
(adults and younger children) and Table 3 (adults and older
children) report the percentage of participants in each
group as a function of the number of correct responses in
the specific and in the generic conditions. The maximum
number of correct responses in each condition was six
(three correct acceptances of grammatical sentences, and
three correct rejections of ungrammatical sentences). A
score of 6 indicates ceiling performance, a score of

Table 2. Within-group response patterns in English for
the adults and the younger children.
Accuracy level

Group

Context

Chance
or below

Above
chance

Ceiling

Monolingual adults

specific
generic

0
0

48
40

52
60

Monolingual children

specific
generic

50
71

42
29

8
0

E-I bilinguals Italy

specific
generic

64
84

28
8

8
8

E-I bilinguals UK

specific
generic

67
77

22
23

11
0

3 or below corresponds to chance or below chance
performance, and a score between 4 and 5 is indicative
of above chance performance.
The profile for the younger children is fairly consistent
for both conditions and for all groups, with half to two
thirds of children performing at chance or below chance
level. In the older group the monolingual children did

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
Table 3. Within-group response patterns in English for
the adults and the older children.

249

with a definite article in generic contexts as predicted by
the subset-superset hypothesis.

Accuracy level

Italian results
Group

Chance
Context or below

Above
chance

Ceiling

Monolingual adults

specific
generic

0
0

48
40

52
60

Monolingual children

specific
generic

50
92

37
8

13
0

E-I bilinguals Italy

specific
generic

30
65

56
21

14
14

E-I bilinguals UK

specific
generic

40
50

50
50

10
0

not perform any better than their younger counterparts; if
anything, fewer children were above chance level in the
generic condition. Both groups of older bilingual children
were more accurate than the younger bilinguals, especially
in the specific condition. In the generic condition more
bilingual children performed at above chance level only
in the UK group.
Interestingly, although the adults performed consistently better as a group, only half of them performed at
ceiling in either condition. Possible reasons for this pattern
of behaviour will be offered in the general discussion.
Discussion
The results of the acceptability judgement task in English
show an overall poor level of performance both for
the two groups of bilinguals and for the monolingual
children. The children in this study correctly accepted
plural NPs with a definite article in specific contexts
and bare plurals in generic contexts. However, they also
accepted ungrammatical bare plurals in specific contexts
and definite articles with plural NPs in generic contexts.
Both bare plurals and plural NPs with a definite article
are grammatical in English, but their grammaticality
crucially depends on the semantic context. Contrary to
our expectations, the adverbial adjuncts used in this
task failed to set up unambiguously specific or generic
contexts. Similarly to the children in the Galambos and
Goldin-Meadow's (1990) study the children in this study
had obvious difficulties integrating the semantics of the
adjunct with the semantics of the presence/absence of the
article. This difficulty was also compounded by the fact
that the adjuncts we used were not 100% successfully
recognized even by the adults. Nevertheless, aside from
the overall poor performance, there was no evidence that
the bilingual children tended to accept more sentences

Figure 3 and Figure 4 report the mean number of
acceptances of grammatical sentences and the mean
number of rejections of ungrammatical sentences in
specific and generic contexts for the younger children
(6;2-7;11), the older children (8;0-10;10), and the
adults. Unlike in English, where the performance of the
monolinguals was far from perfect, in Italian the adult
monolinguals scored 100% correct in both contexts, the
younger and older monolinguals, and the older Spanish-
Italian bilinguals were equally accurate. The younger
Spanish-Italian bilinguals did not perform at ceiling, but
their performance was well above chance in all contexts.
In contrast, the English-Italian bilinguals, and especially
those in the UK, accepted more ungrammatical sentences,
particularly in the generic contexts, than all other groups.
To analyse the effects of language background and age
on the participants' responses we performed a mixeddesign ANOVA with context (specific, generic) and
grammaticality (grammatical, ungrammatical) as withinsubjects variables, and age (younger children, older
children, adults), and language background (monolingual
Italian-speaking adults, monolingual Italian-speaking
children, Spanish-Italian bilinguals, English-Italian
bilinguals in Italy, English-Italian bilinguals in the
UK) as between-subjects variables. Tukey HSD posthoc tests were used for all the pairwise comparisons.
The analysis revealed a significant effect of context
(F(1,135) = 31.58, p < .001, partial 2 = .19) showing
that items in the specific condition were responded to more
accurately than items in the generic condition. The effect
of grammaticality was highly significant (F(1,135) =
108.13, p < .001, partial 2 = .68), confirming that
participants were more likely to accept grammatical
sentences than to reject ungrammatical ones. There was
a significant effect of age (F(1,135) = 9.18, p < .01,
partial 2 = .06), with the expected differences between
younger children, older children and adults (all ps < .01).
There were also a significant effect of group (F(3,135) =
47.82, p < .001, partial 2 = .51), with significant
differences between the two bilingual groups and the
other three groups of monolingual children, monolingual
adults and Spanish-Italian bilinguals (all ps < .001); a
significant interaction between context, group and age
(F(3,135) = 5.86, p < .01, partial 2 = .11) showing that
response accuracy varied as a function of the generic or
specific context, as a function of age and as a function
of language background, with English-Italian bilingual
children giving significantly fewer correct responses
than monolingual and Spanish-Italian bilingual children.
Finally, we also found a significant interaction between

250

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

Figure 3. Mean accuracy scores for the younger children in Italian.

context, grammaticality and group (F(1,135) = 3.43, p <
.01, partial 2 = .07), showing that response accuracy
varied as a function of context (specific vs. generic), and
of grammaticality (acceptance of grammatical sentences,
rejection of ungrammatical sentences) with the English-
Italian bilingual children performing less accurately than
the monolinguals and the Spanish-Italian bilinguals.
To further explore the meaning of these interactions we
conducted additional one-way ANOVAs for the younger
and the older children separately (Tukey HSD post-hoc
tests were used for all the pairwise comparisons). In the
younger group, there was no significant difference in
the mean number of correct acceptances of grammatical
sentences in the specific context (F(4,69) = .99, p > .05).
The difference in the mean number of correct acceptances
of grammatical sentences in the generic context was barely
significant (F(4,69) = 2.66, p = .04, partial 2 = .13), with
the only significant group differences being between the
bilinguals in the UK and the monolingual adults (p < .01),
and between the bilinguals in the UK and the monolingual
children (p < .05). The pattern for the mean number of
correct rejection of ungrammatical sentences was similar
in the specific (F(4,69) = 13.51, p < .001, partial 2 = .43)
and in the generic contexts (F(4,69) = 38.08, p < .001,
partial 2 = .68), with the only non-significant differences

between the monolingual groups and the Spanish-Italian
bilinguals, all other pairwise comparisons were significant
(all ps < .01). In both the specific and in the generic
contexts the worst performers were the English-Italian
bilinguals in the UK who accepted significantly more bare
plural NPs than all the other groups.
In the older group there was a significant difference
in the mean number of acceptances of grammatical
sentences in the specific condition between the five groups
(F(4,94) = 3.13, p < .05, partial 2 = .11). The English-
Italian bilinguals in Italy accepted fewer sentences than all
the other groups (all ps < .01), except than the bilinguals
in the UK. In the generic condition there was a significant
effect of language background (F(4,94) = 4.35, p < .01,
partial 2 = .15); this time it was the English-Italian
bilinguals in the UK who rejected the highest number of
grammatical sentences than any other group (all ps <
.01). There were significant group differences also in
the ungrammatical specific context (F(4,94) = 9.27, p <
.001, partial 2 = .28) and in the ungrammatical generic
context (F(4,94) = 42.04, p < .001, partial 2 = .64).
In both conditions the only non-significant differences
were between the monolingual children, the adults and
the Spanish-Italian bilinguals, all other group differences
were significant (all ps < .01).

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity

251

Figure 4. Mean accuracy scores for the older children in Italian.

Response patterns within the groups
Table 4 (adults and younger children) and Table 5 (adults
and older children) report the percentage of participants
in each group as a function of the number of correct
responses in the specific and in the generic conditions.
Unlike in English, where only half of the adults
performed at ceiling, in Italian all the adults achieved
100% accuracy scores in both conditions. In the younger
group of children more than 94% of the Spanish-Italian
bilinguals and of the monolingual children scored at
ceiling in both conditions. By contrast, the same level of
accuracy in the specific condition was obtained by 59% of
the English-Italian bilinguals in Italy and by a mere 26%
of the bilinguals in the UK. Performance in the generic
condition was even worse for the two groups of English-
Italian bilinguals with only 38% of those in Italy and 7%
of those in the UK scoring at ceiling. In the older group
the monolingual children's performance was the same as
for the younger monolinguals, while all of the Spanish
bilinguals scored 100% correct in both conditions. The
percentage of English-Italian bilinguals in Italy at the
highest end of the performance scale also increased to
reach 65% of the group in the specific condition and 51%
in the generic condition. In contrast the percentage of
the bilinguals in the UK at ceiling increased only in the

Table 4. Within-group response patterns in Italian for
the adults and the younger children.
Accuracy level

Group

Chance
Context or below

Above
chance

Ceiling

Monolingual adults

specific
generic

0
0

0
0

100
100

Monolingual children

specific
generic

0
0

5
3

95
97

S-I bilinguals

specific
generic

3
3

3
3

94
94

E-I bilinguals Italy

specific
generic

18
31

23
31

59
38

E-I bilinguals UK

specific
generic

56
86

18
7

26
7

specific condition (from 26% to 37%), while no children
achieved perfect accuracy in the generic condition in the
older age group.

252

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

Table 5. Within-group response patterns in Italian for
the adults and the older children.
Accuracy level

Group

Chance
Context or below

Above
chance

Ceiling

Monolingual adults

specific
generic

0
0

0
0

100
100

Monolingual children

specific
generic

0
0

4
4

96
96

S-I bilinguals

specific
generic

0
0

0
0

100
100

E-I bilinguals Italy

specific
generic

13
18

22
31

65
51

E-I bilinguals UK

specific
generic

37
87

26
13

37
0

Discussion
The results of the Italian task show a strikingly different
pattern of performance from the results of the English
task. In Italian bare plural NPs in subject position are
always ungrammatical. We did not anticipate that the
use of adverbial adjuncts would make any difference
for the monolingual participants and the Spanish-
Italian bilinguals, but our rationale for using them was
to find out whether they would make a difference
for the English-Italian bilinguals. The Italian-speaking
monolingual children in both age groups, and in both
conditions, performed virtually at ceiling, like the adults.
They correctly accepted plural NPs with a definite
article in both specific and generic contexts and at the
same time they rejected ungrammatical bare plurals in
both conditions. The Spanish-Italian bilingual children
were also at ceiling in both conditions but only in the
older age group; in the younger group three out of
14 children accepted some ungrammatical bare plurals
in either the specific and in the generic condition
(two children) or in the generic condition alone (one
child); differences with their monolingual peers were
however not statistically significant. The evidence from
the monolingual children and from the Spanish-Italian
bilinguals indicates that their ability to discriminate
between ungrammatical and grammatical plural NPs in
this type of metalinguistic task is well established at age 6.
They had no problems in consistently rejecting sentences
without a definite article; these sentences are always
ungrammatical in Italian, regardless of context. Children
never hear bare plurals in subject position in Italian;
rejecting an unattested construction is undoubtedly easier
than deciding between two constructions that are both

in use, but in different contexts, as in English. Despite
the relative ease of this task, the English-Italian bilingual
children were significantly less accurate than the Spanish-
Italian bilinguals and than the monolinguals in both
conditions and in both age groups. Overall they accepted
grammatical plural NPs with a definite article but they
were unable to consistently reject ungrammatical bare
plurals. Crucially, their performance was worse in generic
contexts where bare NPs are indeed acceptable in English,
but performance in the specific contexts was also generally
poorer than for the monolinguals. The acceptance of bare
NPs in generic contexts suggests that these children are
treating these NPs as [+arg] with no need to project a
Determiner, an option that is grammatical in English
because of the different setting of the NMP. If these
children treat Italian, at least occasionally as a [+arg,
+pred] language like English, the acceptance of bare NPs
in specific contexts is likely to be a more indirect effect of
the difficulty to integrate the semantics of the adjunct with
the absence of the article, similarly to what was observed
for the English task.
As far as the role of input is concerned there is
clear evidence that the bilinguals in Italy consistently
outperform their counterparts in the UK in both
conditions, although as they grow older both groups
of children become better at rejecting specific plural
NPs without a definite article. Crucially, with respect to
the generic condition only the bilinguals in Italy show
significant progress, while the bilinguals in the UK remain
at chance level.
General discussion
The main aim of the present study was to establish whether
English-Italian bilingual children would be significantly
different from English- and Italian-speaking monolingual
peers in rejecting bare NPs in Italian, especially in generic
contexts, and in accepting plural NPs with a definite
article, especially in generic contexts in English. We
initially formulated two contrasting hypotheses on the
directionality of cross-linguistic influence. According to
the subset-superset hypothesis we predicted that Italian
(the language with only definite plural NPs) would
influence English (the language that has both definite
plural NPs and bare plurals). As a consequence, English-
Italian bilingual children should be willing to accept
plural NPs with a definite article in a generic context
in English significantly more often than monolingual
children. The result of cross-linguistic influence from
Italian to English would thus result in a higher acceptance
rate of ungrammatical definite NPs. Conversely, if crosslinguistic influence exists but is driven by more abstract
economy considerations, rather than by the surface overlap
of definite articles, we would expect, following Chierchia's
(1998) Nominal Mapping Parameter, that English should

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
influence Italian. The more economical type shifting
operation would be preferred over the more costly
projection of a Determiner to turn a plural NP into an
argument. The assumption here is that bilingual English-
Italian children would treat, at least occasionally, Italian
as a [+arg, +pred] language like English. When nouns
denote kinds [+arg], and type shifting applies at the level
of the plural NP to turn bare nouns into arguments,
as it does in [+arg, +pred] languages, there is no need
to project a Determiner for the same purpose, and it
is therefore undesirable to do so on economy grounds
("Avoid Structure").
Our results did not show a significant difference
between the English-Italian bilinguals and the Englishspeaking monolinguals in the accuracy scores in
the generic condition, but we did find significant
differences between the English-Italian bilinguals and
their monolingual Italian peers in the generic condition. In
English the bilinguals performed at chance level in both
the generic and the specific condition and were equally
as likely as the monolinguals to accept a plural NP with
a definite article in a generic context or a bare NP in a
specific context. Crucially the English-Italian bilinguals
were no more likely than the monolinguals to accept
definite NPs in generic contexts.
In contrast, in Italian the English-Italian bilinguals
were significantly more likely than the monolinguals to
accept a bare plural in a generic context, an option that the
Italian children rejected 100% of the time. These findings
suggest that cross-linguistic influence from English to
Italian did take place as a result of the adoption of the more
economical English setting of the NMP [+arg, +pred]
in Italian, for a substantial number of English-Italian
bilinguals, especially those with English as the language
of the community.
The nature of the grammaticality tasks
Although the results are clear-cut in the asymmetry
between English and Italian, it is worth commenting
further on the performance pattern of all groups in both
conditions in the English task, and in the specific condition
in the Italian task. Aside from the bilingual children, the
monolingual English-speaking children also performed
at chance level in both conditions and even the adults
did not perform at ceiling. We believe that it is precisely
the different nature of the two grammaticality tasks that
is the cause for the strikingly different behaviour in the
two languages. In Italian the occurrence of bare plurals is
narrowly confined to lexically governed positions, and a
bare plural in subject position is obviously ungrammatical,
as shown by the categorical rejection even by the youngest
Italian speakers. In English, both definite plural NPs
and bare plurals are found in subject position, albeit in
different contexts. The sheer availability of these two

253

types of NPs in the input makes it more difficult for the
English speakers to reject either outright. The participants
failed to match the semantics of the adjuncts "Here"/"In
general" introducing the sentences in the specific and in
the generic condition respectively. In a sense it is always
possible for the English-speaking participants to conjure
up a context in which the sentence is grammatical, while
this possibility is not available to the Italian-speaking
participants because of the overall ban on bare plural
subjects. Paying attention to the pragmatics of the initial
adjuncts calling for either a specific ("Here") or a generic
context ("In general") was crucial to the task. The results
of the English task show that children, and even adults
to some extent, found this difficult and were inclined
to override the pragmatics of the adjunct and consider a
context in which the sentence would indeed be acceptable.
This is probably also due to the fact that, although the
adjunct created a bias, it was not as strong as we had
anticipated. These results are very similar to the findings
reported by Galambos and Goldin-Meadow (1990) for
sentences in which there was a mismatch between a
temporal adverbial adjunct (e.g. "yesterday" = past)
and the tense of the auxiliary verb ("am" = present).
In a comprehension task of specific and generic plural
NPs in Catalan, Gavarro et al. (2006) report a similar
overinterpretation of the context in which children, and
even some adults, treated plural NPs with and without
a definite article as having both a specific and a generic
reading. In a recent study of the effect of specificity on
clitic omission in Spanish, Borgonovo, Bruhn de Garavito,
Guijarro-Fuentes, Prevost and Valenzuela (2006) reported
another instance in which participants behaved in an
unexpected way. When choosing between two answers
to a question containing a non-specific bare noun (e.g.
"Compraste leche?"/"Did (you) buy milk?") the native
speakers and the L2 learners selected the answer with a
clitic ("Si, la compre"/"Yes (I) bought it") 15.7% and 40%
of the time respectively, when in fact they should have
chosen the sentence without a clitic ("Si, compre"/"Yes
(I) bought") 100% of the time because the NP in the
question ("leche"/"milk") was non-specific. Clearly, the
participants treated the bare noun in the question as if it
was in fact preceded by a definite article ("Compraste la
leche?"/"Did (you) buy the milk?"), a specific context in
which indeed the sentence with the clitic would have been
appropriate.
This tendency of comprehenders to disregard
crucial semantic, syntactic or pragmatic information
in the interpretation of written language has been
recently explored in the language processing literature
(Christianson, Hollingworth, Halliwell and Ferreira,
2001; Ferreira, Bailey and Ferraro, 2002; Ferreira, 2003).
In a series of experiments, Ferreira and associates have
shown that comprehenders do not always compute the
full syntactic structure of a sentence. Instead, it appears

254

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

that they rely on shallow processing guided by a simple
NVN strategy (e.g. the subject of a sentence is also the
agent, and the object is the patient) rather than on the
full computation of semantic and syntactic structure. For
example, in a passive sentence the subject is not the
agent but the patient, abiding by the NVN strategy in
the processing of a non-canonical sentence will therefore
lead to the wrong thematic role assignment.
In sum, there is evidence that comprehenders of all
ages and linguistic backgrounds are willing to ignore
the context provided by the experimenter and accept
a sentence as grammatical if the option is somehow
available in their language. What is important for the
present study, however, is the fact that the English-
Italian bilingual children did not accept definite NPs in
generic contexts in English significantly more often than
the monolingual children. This would be expected if the
obligatoriness of definite articles in Italian were affecting
their judgments in English. In addition we argue that
the difficulty that the bilingual children experienced in
integrating the semantics of the adjunct and the semantics
of the NP in English, and the availability of both bare and
definite plural NPs also spilled over into Italian. While the
Italian monolinguals and the Spanish-Italian bilinguals
simply relied on the morphosyntactic cue provided by
the presence/absence of the article, the English-Italian
bilinguals brought to the task their knowledge of the
availability of both bare and definite plural NPs in their
other language, and their inefficient matching of the
semantics of adjuncts and NP form. What is crucial in
terms of the cross-linguistic influence hypothesis is that
performance in generic contexts was significantly worse
than performance in specific context. Over and beyond
the issues outlined above, in the generic contexts there
was the added contribution made by the fact that children
in English are indeed exposed to grammatical bare plural
NPs in these contexts.
With respect to the issue of unidirectionality of crosslinguistic influence, we acknowledge that the use of
an initial adverbial adjunct did not create as strong
a bias as expected in English. As a consequence, the
results from this task cannot categorically rule out the
possibility that we might have also found influence from
Italian to English, as predicted by the structural overlap
hypothesis, if the adjuncts had elicited clearer specific
and generic readings. Only between 10% and 50% of
monolingual children performed at ceiling on this task, in
contrast to the virtual 100% correct performance of their
Italian counterparts. To completely exclude the possibility
that the English-Italian bilinguals are accepting more
ungrammatical definite NPs in generic contexts in English
one would ideally have a situation in which the semantic
context is unambiguously associated with either a specific
or a generic reading of the plural NP. The expectation
would therefore be that the monolingual children would

behave at ceiling (as the Italian children did), and any
differences with the bilinguals could be considered more
clearly an effect of cross-linguistic influence due to
structural overlap. Although we cannot completely rule
out the possibility that influence from Italian to English
might be possible, we do have a clear-cut set of results in
Italian showing cross-linguistic influence from English.
It may indeed be possible that both structural overlap
and economy considerations might play different roles
in conjunction with language dominance, as suggested by
Foroodi-Nejad and Paradis (2007). As discussed below,
we did find that the likelihood that an English-Italian
bilingual child would accept a bare plural NP in a generic
context was significantly greater if they lived in the UK,
suggesting that the amount of input accounted for a
significant proportion of the variance.

The role of input
The second prediction formulated in connection with the
directionality of cross-linguistic influence concerns the
role of input. We have observed a unidirectional effect
from English to Italian, therefore, if the language of the
community plays an important part in the magnitude
of the differences between bilingual children and their
monolingual peers, we predicted that the bilingual
children in the UK would perform significantly less
accurately than the bilinguals in Italy. Although both
groups of English-Italian bilinguals scored significantly
lower in the generic condition than the monolinguals in
both the younger and the older group, we did find that
the bilinguals in Italy consistently outperformed their
bilingual counterparts in the UK. This suggests that the
frequency with which Italian is heard and spoken by the
children must have an effect on the likelihood of accepting
a bare plural as an acceptable generic phrase. In a number
of large-scale studies on the metalinguistic awareness of
bilingual and monolingual children Gathercole (2002a, b,
2007) consistently reported that frequency of input in each
of a bilingual's two languages is a significant predictor of
the child's performance in each of her languages. The
higher the input, the more accurate the performance.
Similar findings are reported by Argyri and Sorace (2007)
in their study on language dominance and cross-linguistic
influence. These results and those of the present study
indicate that the role of input is non-trivial and should
therefore be considered as an explanatory variable in
future research.

The role of typological relatedness
To our knowledge this is also the first relatively largescale study to compare groups of bilingual children

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
who are acquiring two different language combinations.6
Our rationale for doing so was to explore whether
any differences we might find between the English-
Italian bilinguals and the Italian monolinguals are indeed
the effect of the different parametric setting between
English and Italian or more generally the consequence
of the simultaneous acquisition of two languages.
Italian and English have different settings of the NMP
(Nominal Mapping Parameter), English is [+arg, +pred]
while Italian is [-arg, +pred]. Although it is very
likely that significant differences between bilinguals and
monolinguals in Italian are due to the fact that the
English-Italian bilinguals get interference from speaking
and hearing English in addition to Italian, we cannot
a priori rule out the eventuality that the effect is due
to learning two languages rather than one. If we take
this second possibility seriously we can formulate two
sets of predictions. Because Spanish and Italian have
the same [-arg, +pred] setting of the NMP, we would
expect Spanish-Italian bilingual children to behave like
monolinguals and significantly better than English-Italian
bilinguals, if what drives the likelihood of accepting a
bare plural in a generic context is indeed the availability
of the [+arg] setting in English. If, alternatively, accuracy
in this discrimination task is affected by the number of
languages spoken we would expect Spanish-Italian and
English-Italian bilingual children to behave alike and
significantly worse than monolingual Italian children. Our
results show that the Spanish-Italian bilinguals behaved
significantly more like the Italian monolinguals than like
the English-Italian bilinguals, suggesting that learning
two languages with the same NMP setting did not affect
their performance on the task.
The role of age
Finally, our results also address the issue of development
over time and convergence on the performance of
monolinguals. In English the older bilingual children were
no more accurate than the younger ones, but neither were
the monolinguals. In Italian the monolingual children
were already at ceiling in the younger group, the younger
Spanish-Italian bilinguals were not quite at ceiling but
their performance was already very accurate. They had
a margin for improvement which they took advantage
of to reach 100% correct responses in the older group.
As for the English-Italian bilinguals, improvement was
observed for both groups in the specific condition, but
6

See Cornips and Hulk (2006) for a comparative study of the use of
gender-marked definite articles in Dutch in bilingual and bidialectal
communities in The Netherlands. Conips and Hulk elicited data from
bilingual speakers of Dutch (N = 14) with Moroccan Arabic, Berber,
Turkish, Akan, Ewe, Sranan and French, and from bidialectal speakers
of Dutch (N = 13) and the dialect of Herleen.

255

in the generic condition, of greater interest here, only the
bilinguals in Italy showed a significant improvement. This
interaction between age and language of the community
suggests that convergence on the monolingual target might
depend crucially on frequency of use and exposure to
the language. As a consequence, significant differences
between bilingual and monolingual performance might
persist over time, and perhaps never disappear, in the
language with reduced native input.
Conclusion
The results of this study showed unidirectional crosslinguistic influence from the language with the most
economical setting of the NMP which indicates that
structural overlap is not always necessary for crosslinguistic influence to take place. Bare plural NPs in Italian
with a generic reading are not found in subject position in
Italian, in contrast to English, but English-Italian children
did accept them as a grammatical option, especially if their
community language was English. Whether bidirectional
cross-linguistic influence is also possible, and whether
structural overlap and economy considerations are both
viable are open questions that await further research.
References
Argyri, E. (2006). The later stages of bilingual acquisition:
Cross-linguistic influence in older English-Greek bilingual
children. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Edinburgh.
Argyri, E. & Sorace, A. (2007). Cross-linguistic influence
and language dominance in older bilingual children.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 10, 79-99.
Bernardini, P. (2003). Child and adult acquisition of word
order in the Italian DP. In N. Muller (ed.), (In)vulnerable
domains in multilingualism, pp. 41-81. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Bini, M. (1993). La adquisicion del italiano: mas alla de
las propiedades sintacticas del parametro pro-drop. In J.
Liceras (ed.), La linguistica y el analisis de los sistemas no
nativos, pp. 126-139. Ottawa: Doverhouse.
Borgonovo, C., Bruhn de Garavito, J., Guijarro-Fuentes, P.,
Prevost, P. & Valenzuela, E. (2006). Specificity in Spanish:
The syntax/semantics interface in SLA. In S. H. FosterCohen, M. Medved Krajnovic & J. Mihaljevic Djigunovic
(eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook 6, pp. 57-78. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Carminati, M. N. (2002). The processing of Italian subject
pronouns. Ph.D., University of Massachusetts.
Carminati, M. N. (2005). Processing reflexes of feature hierarchy
(person > number > gender) and implications for linguistic
theory. Lingua, 115, 259-285.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Reference to kinds across languages.
Natural Language Semantics, 6, 339-405.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J. & Ferreira,
F. (2001). Thematic roles assigned along the garden path
linger. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 368-407.

256

L. Serratrice, A. Sorace, F. Filiaci and M. Baldo

Cornips, L. & Hulk, A. (2006). Bilingual and bi-dialectal
language development: grammatical gender in Dutch. In
C. Lefebvre, L. White & C. Jourdan (eds.), The Montreal
Dialogues, pp. 355-379. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dopke, S. (1998). Competing language structures: The
acquisition of verb placement by bilingual German-English
children. Journal of Child Language, 25, 555-584.
Ferreira, F. (2003). The misinterpretation of noncanonical
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 164-203.
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K. G. D. & Ferraro, V. (2002). Good-enough
representations in language comprehension. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 11-15.
Foroodi-Nejad, F. & Paradis, J. (2007). Cross-linguistic transfer
in the acquisition of Farsi compound words in Farsi-English
bilinguals. Presented at 6th International Symposium on
Bilingualism, University of Hamburg.
Galambos, S. J. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1990). The effects
of learning two languages on levels of metalinguistic
awareness. Cognition, 34, 1-56.
Gathercole, V. (2002a). Monolingual and bilingual acquisition.
In Oller & Eilers (eds.), pp. 220-254.
Gathercole, V. (2002b). Grammatical gender in bilingual
and monolingual children: A Spanish morphosyntactic
distinction. In Oller & Eilers (eds.), pp. 207-219.
Gathercole, V. (2007). Miami and North Wales, so far
and yet so near: Constructivist account of morphosyntactic development in bilingual children. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 10, 224-
247.
Gavarro, A., Perez-Leroux, A. T. & Roeper, T. (2006). Definite
and bare noun contrasts in child Catalan. In V. Torrens &
L. Escobar (eds.), The acquisition of syntax in Romance
languages, pp. 51-68. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gelman, S. & Raman, L. (2003). Preschool children use
linguistic form class and pragmatic cues to interpret
generics. Child Development, 74, 308-325.
Genesee, F. (1989). Early bilingual development: One language
or two? Journal of Child Language, 16, 161-179.
Granfeldt, J. (2000). The acquisition of the determiner phrase
in bilingual and second language French. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 3, 263-280.
Hulk, A. & Muller, N. (2000). Bilingual first language
acquisition at the interface between syntax and pragmatics.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3, 227-244.
Hyams, N. (1986). Language acquisition and the theory of
parameters. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Kupisch, T. (2004). The acquisition of determiners in
bilingual German-Italian and German-French children.
Ph.D. dissertation, Universitat Hamburg.
Kupisch, T. (2007). Determiners in bilingual German-Italian
children: What they tell us about the relation between
language influence and language dominance. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 10, 57-78.
Longobardi, G. (1994). Reference and proper names. Linguistic
Inquiry, 25, 609-665.
Longobardi, G. (2001). How comparative is semantics? A
unified parametric theory of bare nouns and proper
names. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 9, 335-
368.

Meisel, J. M. (1989). Early differentiation of languages in
bilingual children. In K. Hyltenstam & L. Obler (eds.),
Bilingualism across the lifespan: Aspects of acquisition,
maturity and loss, pp. 13-40. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Meisel, J. M. (ed.) (1994). Bilingual first language acquisition:
French and German grammatical development. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Montrul, S. (2004). Subject and object expression in Spanish
heritage speakers: A case of morphosyntactic convergence.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7, 125-142.
Muller, N. (1994). Gender and number agreement within DP. In
Meisel (ed.), pp. 53-89.
Muller, N. & Hulk, A. (2001). Cross-linguistic influence
in bilingual language acquisition: Italian and French
as recipient languages. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 4, 1-21.
Nicoladis, E. (2006). Cross-linguistic transfer in adjectivenoun strings by preschool bilingual children. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 9, 15-32.
Oller, K. D. & Eilers, R. E. (eds.) (2002). Language and literacy
in bilingual children. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Paradis, J. & Genesee, F. (1996). Syntactic acquisition in
bilingual children: Autonomous or interdependent. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 1-25.
Paradis, J. & Navarro, S. (2003). Subject realization and
cross-linguistic interference in the bilingual acquisition of
Spanish and English: What is the role of the input? Journal
of Child Language, 30, 1-23.
Perez-Leroux, A. T., Munn, A., Schmitt, C. & DeIrish,
M. (2004). Learning definite determiners: Genericity
and definiteness in English and Spanish. Proceedings
Supplement BUCLD 28.
Serratrice, L. (2000). The emergence of functional categories
in bilingual first language acquisition. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Edinburgh.
Serratrice, L. (2007). Cross-linguistic influence in the
interpretation of anaphoric and cataphoric pronouns in
English-Italian bilingual children. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 10, 225-238.
Serratrice, L., Sorace, A. & Paoli, S. (2004). Cross-linguistic
influence at the syntax-pragmatics interface: Subjects
and objects in English-Italian bilingual and monolingual
acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7,
183-205.
Sorace, A. (2005). Syntactic optionality at interfaces. In L.
Cornips & K. Corrigan (eds.), Syntax and variation:
Reconciling the biological and the social, pp. 46-111.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sorace, A. (2006). Gradience and optionality in mature and
developing grammars. In G. Fanselow, C. Fery, M.
Schlesewsky & R. Vogel (eds.), Gradience in grammars:
Generative perspectives, pp. 106-123. Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Sorace, A. & Filiaci, F. (2006). Anaphora resolution in nearnative speakers of Italian. Second Language Research, 3,
339-368.
Sorace, A., Serratrice, L., Filiaci, F. & Baldo, M. (2009).
Discourse conditions on subject pronoun realization:

Sensitivity to specificity and genericity
Testing the linguistic intuitions of older bilingual children.
Lingua, 119, 460-477.
Taeschner, T. (1983). The sun is feminine: A study in bilingual
acquisition in bilingual children. Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
Tsimpli, I.-M., Sorace, A., Heycock, C. & Filiaci, F. (2005). First
language attrition and syntactic subjects: A study of Greek
and Italian near-native speakers of English. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 8, 257-277.
van der Linden, E. & Blok-Boas, A. (2005). Exploring
possession in simultaneous bilingualism: Dutch/French and
Dutch/Italian. In S. Foster-Cohen, M. d. P. Garcia-Mayo

257

& J. Cenoz (eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook 5, pp. 103-135.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Volterra, V. & Taeschner, T. (1978). The acquisition and
development of language by bilingual children. Journal
of Child Language, 5, 311-326.
Yip, V. & Matthews, S. (2000). Syntactic transfer in a Cantonese-
English bilingual child. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 3, 193-208.
Received: August 23, 2007
Final revision received: February 6, 2008
Accepted: March 12, 2008

