J. Child Lang. 37 (2010), 1123-1132. f Cambridge University Press 2009
doi:10.1017/S0305000909990286

BRIEF RESEARCH REPORT

Early childhood language memory in the speech
perception of international adoptees*
J A N E T S. O H
California State University, Northridge
TERRY KIT-FONG AU
The University of Hong Kong
AND

SUN-AH JUN
University of California, Los Angeles
(Received 6 March 2009 - Revised 1 July 2009 - First published online 2 December 2009)

ABSTRACT

It is as yet unclear whether the benefits of early linguistic experiences
can be maintained without at least some minimal continued exposure to
the language. This study compared 12 adults adopted from Korea to the
US as young children (all but one prior to age one year) to 13 participants
who had no prior exposure to Korean to examine whether relearning can
aid in accessing early childhood language memory. All 25 participants
were recruited and tested during the second week of first-semester
college Korean language classes. They completed a language background
questionnaire and interview, a childhood slang task and a Korean
phoneme identification task. Results revealed an advantage for adoptee
participants in identifying some Korean phonemes, suggesting that
some components of early childhood language memory can remain
intact despite many years of disuse, and that relearning a language can
help in accessing such a memory.
[*] This work was supported by a grant from the University of Hong Kong (Au). The
preparation of this paper was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation
(Oh). We would like to thank Rich Lee, Hangtae Cho, Kim Park Gregg, Marissa Weyer,
Sahyang Kim, Timothy Arbisi-Kelm and Kate Bell for their help with this study. These
data were presented at the Boston University Conference on Language Development,
November 2008. Address for correspondence : Janet Oh, Department of Psychology,
California State University, Northridge, 18111 Nordhoff Street, Northridge, CA 913308255. e-mail: janetoh@alum.pomona.edu

1123

O H E T A L.

Without early linguistic experience, it is difficult to acquire native-like
phonological abilities (e.g. first language : Fromkin, Krashen, Curtiss, Rigler
& Rigler, 1974 ; Koluchova, 1972 ; 1976; second language : Johnson &
Newport, 1989; Oyama, 1976). There appear to be long-lasting benefits of
such early linguistic experience even when regular experience with a language
is limited to just the early years, as long as there is at least some minimal
continued exposure to the language. For example, English-monolingual
adults learning Hindi who had regular exposure to Hindi just during their
first two years of life were much better at distinguishing among Hindi speech
sounds than their peers who had no such prior experience with the language
(Tees & Werker, 1984). Because these adults grew up in Hindi-Canadian
communities, they probably continued to hear Hindi phonemes if family or
community members spoke Hindi around them and/or if first-generation
immigrants in the community spoke in Hindi-accented English.
Similarly, Korean-American adults who had been childhood speakers of
Korean (spoke Korean regularly until about age five years) outperformed
novice adult learners of Korean in distinguishing among Korean stop
consonants (Oh, Jun, Knightly & Au, 2003). Childhood speakers were also
more native-like in their production of those speech sounds. Furthermore,
Latino childhood overhearers and childhood speakers of Spanish who were
relearning the language as adults spoke Spanish with more native-like accents
than their classmates who had no regular exposure to Spanish until learning
the language in adolescence (Au, Knightly, Jun & Oh, 2002 ; Au, Oh,
Knightly, Jun & Romo, 2008 ; Knightly, Jun, Oh & Au, 2003). As with the
Hindi-Canadian language learners, these Korean-American and Latino
heritage language learners probably continued to hear the phonemes of their
heritage language in the speech of their family and heritage community, and
this continued exposure to the language, albeit minimal, may have served to
maintain the benefits of their early experiences with the language.
Without at least minimal continued exposure to the target language,
linguistic experiences limited to the early years appear to be inaccessible
in adulthood. Monolingual French adults who were completely cut off
from their childhood language after being adopted from Korea to France
between ages three and eight or nine years seemed to show no memory for
their childhood language. They were no better than their non-adoptee
monolingual French peers on a variety of tasks assessing Korean linguistic
ability, including a sentence identification task, a word recognition task, a
speech segment detection task and a phoneme discrimination task (Pallier
et al., 2003; Ventureyra, Pallier & Yoo, 2004). Furthermore, adoptees'
event-related fMRI activation patterns while listening to Korean and French
did not differ from other French monolinguals, nor did the adoptees' patterns
differ while listening to an unfamiliar language (Polish) vs. Korean (Pallier
et al., 2003).
1124

CHILDHOOD LANGUAGE MEMORY

In this study, we examine whether the benefits of early linguistic
experiences that are limited just to the early years can be maintained without
continued exposure to the language. Although it makes intuitive sense that
one would have to have some continued experience to maintain early
childhood language memory, it is also possible that one could access such
early language memory through the process of relearning. In fact, relearning
has been found to be an effective way to build up retrieval strength to access
a long-ago memory (Bjork & Bjork, 1996 ; Bjork & Bjork, 2006). Perhaps
early childhood language memory becomes inaccessible without continued
exposure, but remains intact. The process of relearning could then help build
up retrieval strength to access that memory. Note that while the Korean
adoptees were not relearning their childhood language (with the exception of
two adoptee participants ; see Ventureyra et al., 2004), the adult heritage
language learners in the other studies were. The heritage language learners
may have been able to access their childhood language memory by relearning
the language, whereas the adoptees' childhood language memory may have
been harder to access as a result of years of disuse. If the Korean adoptees in
France were to relearn Korean as adults, they might show an advantage over
novice learners of the language.
To better understand the accessibility of early linguistic memory, this
study compared Korean international adoptees relearning Korean as adults
with novice adult learners of Korean. If early childhood language memory
can be re-activated and accessed upon relearning, then adoptees - who had
no experience with Korean after adoption - should nonetheless, upon
relearning Korean, show an advantage over novice learners in their perception
of Korean phonemes. Moreover, because adoptees in our study were adopted
during their first year of life, with one exception, likely before they were
speaking, this study also addresses possible lasting benefits of perceptual
learning from mere exposure to a language during infancy. This study
therefore examined the nature of very early childhood language memory.
Specifically, we predicted that childhood language memory will remain intact
despite many years of disuse. We also predicted that relearning a childhood
language will help in accessing a seemingly lost language memory.
METHOD

Participants
Twenty-five participants were recruited from a large university in Minnesota,
USA. All participants were enrolled in a first-semester Korean language class
that met five days a week for 50 minutes. Twelve participants had been
adopted as young children from Korea to Minnesota (mean age=21;0 ;
range : 18 to 33 years ; 9 female), and 13 were novice learners of Korean (mean
age=20 ; 2; range : 18 to 25 years ; 6 female). Eleven adoptee participants had
1125

O H E T A L.

been adopted by age one year (between 3 months and 1 year ; mean age at
adoption : 5 months); one was adopted at age three years.
Materials and procedure
Data were collected during the second week of the Korean language course.
Each participant completed a language background questionnaire, then
a Korean language abilities test, and then a follow-up interview. The
computerized language abilities test was programmed in e-Prime (Schneider,
Eschmann & Zuccolotto, 2002) and included a childhood slang task and a
phoneme identification task.
Language background assessment. The language background questionnaire
asked about the participant's general language background (e.g. participant's
first language, languages spoken by parents) and specific questions about the
participant's experiences with Korean since birth. The latter set of questions
included both the quantity (how much they heard, were spoken to and spoke
Korean) and quality (words/short phrases/sentences ; extent of mixing with
English) of their linguistic experiences during various periods of their lives.
A follow-up interview was conducted to clarify questionnaire responses. In
our prior research, we have found that independent reports from informants
who knew the participants as young children largely confirmed participants'
responses on the language background questionnaire (Au et al., 2002).
To corroborate participants' self-reports of childhood experiences with
Korean, we assessed their knowledge of Korean childhood slang. The target
slang terms are commonly used around young children at home or on the
playground, but are not typically taught in the language classroom (e.g.
` cry-baby ', ` spoiled '), and should therefore be a good measure of early
childhood experience with Korean. The task is designed to distinguish
between those who have had early childhood experience with Korean and
those who have not had any such early experience and should be difficult for
all participants in this study. Because nearly all adoptee participants were
adopted as infants, any knowledge of such childhood slang would likely
reflect post-adoption experiences, if any, with Korean. We assessed all
participants' slang production and comprehension. To assess slang
production, 14 terms were presented on a computer screen in English, and
participants translated them aloud into Korean. For slang comprehension,
they heard 14 slang terms in Korean over headphones and translated them
aloud into English. Responses were audiotaped and compared against a list
of acceptable responses compiled by Korean-English bilingual research
assistants. In previous research, this task reliably corroborated self-reports of
language background (Oh et al., 2003).
Phoneme perception. Target phonemes in the phoneme identification task
were the three denti-alveolar (lenis : /t/, tense: /t*/, aspirated /th/) and the
1126

CHILDHOOD LANGUAGE MEMORY

three velar (lenis : /k/, tense : /k*/, aspirated : /kh/) Korean stop consonants.
Korean utilizes a three-way distinction in stop consonants (lenis, tense,
aspirated), while English utilizes a two-way distinction (voiced, voiceless).
The Korean three-way distinction is therefore usually very challenging for
first-time adult learners of Korean. We identified 6 minimal triplets
of Korean words that varied only on the target consonant : 3 started with
the denti-alveolar consonants (e.g. /tal/, /t*al/, /thal/) and 3 with the velar
consonants (e.g. /kong/, /k*ong/, /khong/).
In the phoneme identification task, participants heard one speaker saying
two different words (A and B), and then a second speaker saying one of the
first two words (X). They were then asked to identify whether X matched A
or B (ABX technique ; Harris, 1952 ; Liberman, Harris, Hoffman & Griffith,
1957). A and B always came from one triplet, and therefore varied only in the
target consonant. Each participant completed the phoneme identification
task once with the target phoneme in phrase-initial position (target word
only) and once in phrase-medial position (target word preceded by /i/, which
means ` this '). They indicated their answer by pushing the appropriate
button on a button box connected to the computer. Note that this is a very
easy task for native Korean speakers; in a previous study, native Korean
speakers correctly identified 98.6 % of phonemes in a similar task (target
phonemes were the Korean denti-alveolar stop consonants ; Oh et al., 2003).

RESULTS

Language background assessment. All of the adoptee participants were
monolingual English speakers. Of the 12 adoptee participants, one was
adopted at age three years and could speak Korean then. The only postadoption experience this participant had until the college Korean language
class was a summer program focused mostly on Korean culture with some
Korean language instruction around age seven or eight years. The remaining
11 adoptees were all adopted by age one year (eight were adopted by
6 months). Five of them had no post-adoption experience with Korean until
their college Korean language class. Six had minimal exposure (2 during
adolescence and 4 during childhood), usually in culture camps for Korean
adoptees. These culture camps take place in Minnesota and primarily provide
a place for Korean adoptees to socialize and meet other adoptees and their
families. They are conducted in English, and some provide minimal Korean
language instruction as part of their curriculum ; for example, teaching some
basic Korean vocabulary words (e.g. counting).
Most of the novice learners were monolingual English speakers. Four
novice learners reported that their first language was a non-English language
(Chinese, Vietnamese and Cambodian), but none of these languages are in the
same language family as Korean, and therefore do not utilize the three-way
1127

O H E T A L.
TABLE

1. Mean accuracy (with standard errors) on phoneme perception task
by group

Aspirated
Lenis
Tense

Adoptee full sample
(n=12)

Adoptee subsamplea
(n=7)

Novice learners
(n=13)

0.85 (0.03)
0.85 (0.01)
0.75 (0.03)

0.83 (0.04)
0.85 (0.02)
0.74 (0.05)

0.74 (0.05)
0.70 (0.06)
0.77 (0.04)

a : Adoptee subsample : adoptees who did not have post-adoption experience with Korean
during early childhood.

stop consonant distinction of interest (i.e. lenis, tense, aspirated). Nine of the
13 novice learners reported some minimal prior experience with Korean
(5 during adolescence and 4 in adulthood) : either watching Korean television
or occasionally hearing a few words from a Korean friend.
Performance on the childhood slang task corroborated participants'
self-reports of prior experience with Korean. As expected, most participants
did not correctly translate any of the slang items. On average, adoptees
correctly translated 1.8% of slang production items and 1.6% of slang
comprehension items. Novice learners did not correctly translate any item.
Phoneme perception. The phoneme identification task revealed no advantage
for adoptees over novice learners in overall accuracy (t(23)=1.67, n.s.,
Cohen's d=0.67) (in all cases, we report one-tailed, planned t-tests ;
see Table 1, column 1 for means). However, adoptees do seem to have an
advantage over novice learners on some phonemes, namely, lenis (t(23)=
2.55, p=0.009, d=1.02), and aspirated consonants (t(23)=1.83, p=0.04,
d=0.74), but not tense consonants (t(23)=0.39, n.s., d=0.16). In order to
examine whether there were gender differences in phoneme perception, we
also conducted 2r2 ANOVAs with group (adoptee vs. novice learner) and
gender as independent variables. In all cases, for overall phoneme perception
and for perception in each phoneme category, there were no reliable main
effects of gender (Fs(1, 21)=0.11 to 1.80, n.s.), nor were there any reliable
grouprgender interactions (Fs(1, 21)=0.20 to 1.26, n.s.).
We also re-ran all of the analyses with only those adoptees who were
adopted before age one year and had no post-adoption experience with
Korean during early childhood. In all cases, the pattern of results was the
same (see Table 1, column 2). Additionally, in order to examine whether
performance on the task was related to age at adoption, we ran bivariate
Pearson correlations between age at adoption and accuracy in identifying
each of the three types of phonemes. These analyses revealed that age at
adoption was not reliably correlated to accuracy in phoneme identification in
any category (rs=x0.18 to 0.03, n.s.) (see Figure 1).
1128

CHILDHOOD LANGUAGE MEMORY

Fig. 1. Adoptee participants' overall accuracy on phoneme identification task by age
at adoption.
N O T E : Squares represent those adoptee participants who had some post-adoption exposure
to Korean in early childhood.

DISCUSSION

Adoptee participants in this study reliably outperformed novice learners
of Korean in identifying some Korean phonemes, even though the adoptees
did not have any regular exposure to Korean since being adopted from
Korea. Importantly, 11 of the 12 adoptees were adopted during their first
year of life. Some components of very early childhood language memory,
then, can remain intact even without continued exposure to the language.
Although both our adoptee participants and those in Pallier and colleagues'
studies were cut off from their childhood language after adoption, the
adoptee participants in this study were able to access their early childhood
language memory to show an advantage over novice learners in Korean
phoneme perception. These findings are noteworthy, given that the Korean
adoptees in Pallier et al.'s (2003) study had been adopted at much older
ages (between ages three and eight years) than the adoptees in the current
study. A potentially important difference between these two samples, namely
two weeks of relearning of the Korean language in our sample and no
relearning in Pallier and colleagues' sample, calls for further exploration
of relearning as a mechanism for re-activating early childhood language
memory.
Although there may be other potentially important differences between the
samples, the difference in relearning experience has emerged as a particularly
1129

O H E T A L.

interesting one. Although speculative at this point, relearning a language
may help in accessing a long-ago language memory - especially for the
overlearned aspects of language such as phoneme perception. Researchers
have proposed a distinction between storage and retrieval strength in
memory (Bjork & Bjork, 1996 ; Bjork & Bjork, 2006). While storage strength
depends on how well something was originally learned, retrieval strength
depends on current usage. For a long-ago memory such as adoptees'
childhood language memory, storage strength would have been maintained
from the original linguistic input, but retrieval strength would be very low
due to lack of use. As a result, childhood language memory may seem
inaccessible (as in Pallier and colleagues' studies of Korean adoptees). In
these cases, relearning can aid in building up retrieval strength for the
memory, making the memory accessible as a result. Our findings appear to
support this theory.
We recognize that it is also possible that adoptees were able to access their
childhood language memory before relearning occurred. That is, adoptee
participants may have outperformed novice learners on Korean phoneme
perception even before the start of the Korean class, and so the adoptees'
advantage may not have been a result of relearning per se. Because we did not
collect data before the Korean language class started, we cannot rule out this
possibility. However, given the difference between our findings and Pallier
and colleagues' findings (Pallier et al., 2003 ; Ventureyra et al., 2004), we
believe that there is a good possibility that adoptees' advantage in this study
was due to relearning.
The results of our study also underscore the importance of early linguistic
experiences. As much previous research has demonstrated, such early
experience is critical for achieving native-like abilities in a language (e.g.
Fromkin et al., 1974 ; Koluchova, 1972; 1976). In fact, infants go from
being interested in contrasts between both non-native and native phonemes
to only being interested in contrasts between native phonemes during the
course of the first year (Werker, 1989). Our study demonstrates the
long-lasting benefits of such early perceptual learning of language-specific
phoneme categories, even when such experience is discontinued for many
years thereafter.
Our findings also speak to adults' access to memory from infancy in
the domain of perceptual learning. Note that for 11 of the 12 adoptees
in our study, early exposure to Korean was limited to their first year
of life, most likely before they learned to speak. As infants, they began
to learn to categorize Korean phonemes from hearing the ambient
language, retained the memory for about two decades and successfully
accessed it after less than two weeks of relearning. These findings can
have important implications for the long-term retention of perceptual
learning.
1130

CHILDHOOD LANGUAGE MEMORY

We are mindful that adoptee participants did not show an across-the-board
advantage. They outperformed novice learners on lenis and aspirated
consonants but not on tense consonants. The reason for this is not entirely
clear, but it could be due to the two-way vs. three-way laryngeal contrast
between English and Korean and how these contrasts correspond to each
other. In English, voiceless consonants are aspirated while voiced consonants
are not. In Korean, however, both lenis and aspirated consonants are aspirated
while tense consonants are not (Korean three-way contrasts also vary in other
laryngeal features such as pitch and voice quality at vowel onset ; Cho, Jun &
Ladefoged, 2002). That is, lenis and aspirated consonants in Korean belong
to the same category as English voiceless consonants in terms of voice onset
time. Thus, distinguishing lenis from aspirated consonants in Korean would
require attending to other features, making it difficult for native speakers of
English.
We focused on phoneme perception because most adoptees in
our study had been adopted before learning to speak Korean. In previous
studies, we have found that with mere exposure to a language in
childhood, childhood overhearers of Spanish spoke Spanish with more
native-like phonology than novice learners (Au et al., 2002 ; Knightly et
al., 2003). It remains to be seen whether international adoptees, even
if adopted before they were speaking and without continued exposure to
their childhood language, could have an advantage in phoneme production
as well.
Future studies should also investigate the influence of other factors on the
adoptees' advantage. Although we did not find any association between age
at adoption and accuracy in phoneme identification, perhaps a sample with a
wider adoption age range would uncover a reliable adoption-age effect. More
generally, a better understanding of the accessibility of early childhood
language memory could not only inform us about a basic mechanism of
language acquisition, namely the retention of long-ago childhood memory,
it could also help adoptees and adoptive parents to make more informed
decisions about heritage language learning.
Previous research had indicated that continued exposure to a language was
necessary to maintain the benefits of early linguistic experience. Earlier
studies of international adoptees who had made a clean break from their
childhood language uncovered no benefits of such early linguistic experience.
In contrast, the studies of heritage-language (re)learners who had some
minimal exposure to the target language beyond childhood documented
reliable and measurable benefits. The present study of international adoptees
who were relearning the language as adults suggests that some components of
childhood language memory - acquired in early infancy - can remain intact
despite many years without exposure to the language, and that relearning the
language may help re-activate and access that memory.
1131

O H E T A L.

REFERENCES
Au, T. K., Knightly, L. M., Jun, S.-A. & Oh, J. S. (2002). Overhearing a language during
childhood. Psychological Science 13, 238-43.
Au, T. K., Oh, J. S., Knightly, L. M., Jun, S.-A. & Romo, L. F. (2008). Salvaging a
childhood language. Journal of Memory and Language 58, 998-1011.
Bjork, E. L. & Bjork, R. A. (1996). Continuing influences of to-be-forgotten information.
Consciousness and Cognition 5, 176-96.
Bjork, R. A. & Bjork, E. L. (2006). Optimizing treatment and instruction: Implications of a
new theory of disuse. In L.-G. Nilsson & N. Ohta (eds), Memory and society: Psychological
perspectives, 109-133. New York, NY : Psychology Press.
Cho, T., Jun, S.-A. & Ladefoged, P. (2002). Acoustic and aerodynamic correlates of Korean
stops and fricatives. Journal of Phonetics 30, 193-228.
Fromkin, V., Krashen, S., Curtiss, S., Rigler, D. & Rigler, M. (1974). The development of
language in Genie: A case of language acquisition beyond the ` critical period'. Brain and
Language 1, 81-107.
Harris, J. D. (1952). Remarks on the determination of a differential threshold by the so-called
ABX technique. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 24, 417.
Johnson, J. S. & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning:
The influence of maturational state on the acquisition of English as a second language.
Cognitive Psychology 21, 60-99.
Knightly, L. M., Jun, S.-A., Oh, J. S. & Au, T. K. (2003). Production benefits of childhood
overhearing. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 114, 465-74.
Koluchova, J. (1972). Severe deprivation in twins: A case study. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry 13, 107-114.
Koluchova, J. (1976). The further development of twins after severe and prolonged
deprivation: A second report. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17, 181-88.
Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S. & Griffith, B. C. (1957). The discrimination
of speech sounds within and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 54, 358-68.
Oh, J. S., Jun, S.-A., Knightly, L. M. & Au, T. K. (2003). Holding on to childhood language
memory. Cognition 86, B53-B64.
Oyama, S. (1976). A sensitive period for the acquisition of a nonnative phonological system.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 5, 261-83.
Pallier, C., Dehaene, S., Poline, J.-B., LeBihan, D., Argenti, A.-M., Dupoux, E. & Mehler, J.
(2003). Brain imaging of language plasticity in adopted adults: Can a second language
replace the first? Cerebral Cortex 13, 155-61.
Schneider, W., Eschmann, A. & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime user's guide. Pittsburgh, PA:
Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Tees, R. C. & Werker, J. F. (1984). Perceptual flexibility: Maintenance or recovery of the
ability to discriminate non-native speech sounds. Canadian Journal of Psychology 38,
579-90.
Ventureyra, V. A. G., Pallier, C. & Yoo, H.-Y. (2004). The loss of first language phonetic
perception in adopted Koreans. Journal of Neurolinguistics 17, 79-91.
Werker, J. F. (1989). Becoming a native listener: A developmental perspective on human
speech perception. American Scientist 77, 54-59.

1132

