Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

On the incrementality of pragmatic processing: An ERP investigation
of informativeness and pragmatic abilities
Mante S. Nieuwland a,b,c,*, Tali Ditman b,c, Gina R. Kuperberg b,c,d
a

Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Paseo Mikeletegi 69, 2nd Floor, 20009 Donostia, Spain
Department of Psychology, Tufts University, 490 Boston Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA
c
MGH/MIT/HMS Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Bldg 149, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
d
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Bldg 149, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 19 August 2009
revision received 22 June 2010
Available online 15 July 2010
Keywords:
Language comprehension
Pragmatics
Scalar quantifiers
Electrophysiology
N400 ERP
Individual differences
Pragmatic abilities
Autism Quotient Communication subscale
Informativeness

a b s t r a c t
In two event-related potential (ERP) experiments, we determined to what extent Grice's
maxim of informativeness as well as pragmatic ability contributes to the incremental
build-up of sentence meaning, by examining the impact of underinformative versus
informative scalar statements (e.g. ``Some people have lungs/pets, and. . .") on the N400
event-related potential (ERP), an electrophysiological index of semantic processing. In
Experiment 1, only pragmatically skilled participants (as indexed by the Autism Quotient
Communication subscale) showed a larger N400 to underinformative statements. In Experiment 2, this effect disappeared when the critical words were unfocused so that the local
underinformativeness went unnoticed (e.g., ``Some people have lungs that. . ."). Our results
suggest that, while pragmatic scalar meaning can incrementally contribute to sentence
comprehension, this contribution is dependent on contextual factors, whether these are
derived from individual pragmatic abilities or the overall experimental context.
O 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
According one of the key principles of pragmatics,
addressees by default presume that speakers communicate
efficiently by uttering messages that are informative (Grice,
1975; Sperber & Wilson, 1986). This so-called conversational
maxim of quantity is based on the idea that communication
has evolved as a cooperative effort, and it often implicitly
shapes our communicative interactions (e.g., Engelhardt,
Bailey, & Ferreira, 2006; see also Clark, 1996). Of course, that
does not mean that everything that we say or write is genuinely informative. We easily adjust our expectations to who
we are talking to (e.g., children, people who know more or

* Corresponding author at: Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and
Language, Paseo Mikeletegi 69, 2nd Floor, 20009 Donostia, Spain. Fax: +34
943 309 052.
E-mail addresses: m.nieuwland@bcbl.eu, mante@nmr.mgh.harvard.
edu (M.S. Nieuwland).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2010.06.005

less than we do), reflecting the fact that what is informative
or relevant to one individual might be trivial or irrelevant to
another. Moreover, there is abundant literature to suggest
that individuals can vary greatly in their abilities to produce
and comprehend pragmatic language, which could mean
that some people are simply more focused on the logic of
utterances than others (e.g., Baron-Cohen, 2008).
Although Grice's account of pragmatic principles was
not intended to serve as a psychological model of cognitive
processing (see Bach, 2006; Bezuidenhout & Cutting, 2002),
it may be that the addressee's default presumptions have
important ramifications for how language is processed online (e.g., Wilson & Sperber, 2004). One way in which
Grice's maxim of quantity may play out in on-line sentence
processing is by influencing the addressee's expectations of
what kind of words will come next (e.g., Federmeier, 2007;
Van Berkum, 2009). For example, following the sentence
fragment ``Some people have. . .", the addressee might expect the upcoming word to denote something that not all

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

people have (e.g., `pets', `tattoos'), instead of something that
all people possess (e.g., `lungs', `bodies'). As a result, one can
hypothesize that trivially true, underinformative statements (e.g., ``Some people have lungs") incur semantic processing costs because they deviate from the addressee's
expectations. In the two experiments reported below, we
determined to what extent Grice's maxim of informativeness contributes to the incremental build-up of sentence
meaning. Specifically, we explored differences in individual's reliance on this maxim for interpretation, and also
investigated the role of general contextual factors on the
processing of underinformative utterances. We addressed
these issues by examining the impact of underinformative
versus informative scalar sentences (e.g. ``Some people
have lungs/pets. . .") on the N400 event-related potential
(ERP), an electrophysiological index of semantic processing
(Kutas & Hillyard, 1980, 1984).
Ever since Aristotle's science of logic, quantifiers and logical operators have been important windows into human
reasoning, and have maintained a crucial role in logic and
linguistics because of their association with truth-value
(e.g., see Gamut, 1991). The scalar quantifier `some' has received much attention because it allows for two disparate
readings: a pragmatic interpretation and a logical interpretation. The pragmatic interpretation approximates to `some
but not all' or `only some'. This interpretation constitutes a
conversational inference, by which language comprehenders
attribute an implicit meaning beyond the logical or literal
meaning. This inference is termed a scalar inference or scalar
implicature because it is thought that comprehenders base
this pragmatic interpretation on the assumption that the
communicator had a reason for not using a more informative
or stronger term on the same quantity scale (some < many < all; see Horn, 1972). In other words, comprehenders assume that the communicator would have said `all' if he/she
thought `all' was true, and assume that the communicator
says `some' because he/she thinks that stronger expressions
like `many' and `all' are false.
The logical interpretation approximates to `at least some'
or `some and possibly all'. This interpretation makes sense
when communicators use the expression `some' when they
lack all the relevant information (for example, ``Some guests
are coming to my party, but not everybody has RSVPed yet",
in which case it is possible that many or all invitees will
come to the party), or when they are not referring to a specific subset (e.g., ``Some people were crossing the street").
Importantly, the pragmatic and logical interpretation
may yield different truth-values. For a simple, informative
statement like ``Some people have pets", each interpretation yields an outcome that is true with respect to world
knowledge; it is true that `some but not all people have
pets', consistent with the pragmatic interpretation, and it
is also true that there exist people with pets, consistent
with the logical interpretation. However, for an underinformative statement like ``Some people have lungs",
whereas the logical interpretation yields a true outcome
(because people with lungs do exist), the pragmatic interpretation yields a false outcome (because all people have
lungs, not just some). The fact that `some' may yield disparate truth-values can be used to examine how language
comprehenders apply their pragmatic knowledge during

325

sentence comprehension and establish sentence truth-value (for reviews see Noveck and Reboul (2008), Noveck
and Sperber (2007) and Sedivy (2007)).
Theoretical accounts of how people deal with scalar
quantifiers predominantly differ in whether they assume
that scalar inferences are generated by default or whether
scalar inferences are context-dependent (see also Geurts,
2009; Horn, 2006; Recanati, 2003). In what has been
dubbed the Levinsonian account, scalar inferences are
generated automatically upon encountering `some'. The
idea behind this is that, because the pragmatic meaning
of scalars is so dominant in our language use, it has become `lexicalized' (see Levinson, 2000; for related accounts see Chierchia, 2004; Gazdar, 1979) such that the
intended message can be efficiently communicated. The
pragmatic meaning, however, can be cancelled when the
subsequent context requires so. For example, upon
encountering the sentence ``John wanted some of the
cookies", addressees automatically generate the pragmatic interpretation and interpret the sentences as meaning John wanted some, but not all, of the cookies.
However, at a later point, upon encountering the sentence
``In fact, he wanted all of them", they revise their initial
interpretation to be consistent with the logical interpretation. According to this account, it is this undoing of the
scalar inference that is costly.
In contrast, proponents of Relevance Theory have posited that the generation of scalar inferences is chiefly a
function of whether the inference is required to meet the
addressee's standard of relevance (e.g., Carston, 1998; Sperber & Wilson, 1986). The logical interpretation of `some'
(i.e., ``some and possibly all") could very well lead to a satisfying interpretation of the utterance, but the discourse
context may require the addressee to derive a scalar inference to arrive at the pragmatic interpretation. Since this
pragmatic interpretation involves `narrowing' (negation of
the stronger expressions `many' and `all'), it constitutes a
fully fledged inferential process which requires processing
time and effort beyond the `easier' logical interpretation.
Neither the Levinsonian framework nor Relevance Theory constitutes a psychological model of scalar inferences
with explicit implications for processing. Yet, experimental
psychologists have tried to infer testable predictions about
the time course of scalar inferences. It has been argued that
if scalar inferences are generated automatically, as advocated in the Levinsonian account, they are also generated
relatively rapidly and their cancellation would incur additional processing costs (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004). In contrast, if scalar inferences are truly context-dependent, then
they would incur processing costs in situations where they
are not licensed by the context. According to Breheny,
Katsos, and Williams (2006), Relevance Theory predicts
that in a neutral context (i.e., without a discourse context
that biases towards either a logical or a pragmatic interpretation), no scalar inference will initially be computed, and
only when the logical interpretation is deemed insufficient
will addressees invest additional cognitive effort to generate a scalar inference.
To examine the time course for the generation of scalar
inferences, behavioral research on scalar inferences has
often used the sentence-verification paradigm (e.g., Bott &

326

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Noveck, 2004; De Neys & Schaeken, 2007; Feeney, Scrafton,
Duckworth, & Handley, 2004; Noveck, 2001; Noveck &
Posada, 2003; Pijnacker, Hagoort, Buitelaar, Teunisse, &
Geurts, 2009; for reviews, see Bezuidenhout and Morris
(2004), Huang and Snedeker (2009), Noveck and Reboul
(2008), Noveck and Sperber (2004,2007) and Sedivy
(2007)). In sentence-verification tasks participants are
asked to judge the truth of a statement, and in speeded sentence-verification tasks participants are asked to do this as
fast as possible. Because the logical and pragmatic interpretation of informative sentences yield identical truth-values,
the dependent measure of whether a scalar inference has
been made is whether participants respond `false' to an
underinformative scalar statement (e.g., ``Some people have
lungs"). An often reported finding is that participants who
respond `false' to underinformative sentences are slower
than those who respond `true' (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004;
Noveck & Posada, 2003; Rips, 1975). This is the case regardless of whether participants are explicitly instructed to respond `false' or whether they spontaneously decide to do
so (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004). These results have been interpreted as suggesting that scalar inferences are associated
with additional processing costs and result from a delayed
decision process (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck &
Posada, 2003; Noveck & Reboul, 2008).
Although using a sentence-verification task makes intuitive sense when dealing with truth-value, its interpretation is subject to a number of important caveats, as has
already been noted by several researchers (Feeney et al.,
2004; Grodner, Klein, Carbary, & Tanenhaus, 2010; Huang
& Snedeker, 2009). For example, evaluating the logical
meaning of an underinformative sentence may be inherently easier than evaluating its pragmatic meaning because one needs only one or two examples to verify the
logical meaning (one or two people that have lungs)
whereas one may need to do a more extended analysis to
falsify the pragmatic meaning (e.g., search of, and failing
to find counterexamples in memory; see also Grodner
et al., 2010; Huang & Snedeker, 2009). Thus, it may not
necessarily be the case that generating the pragmatic
meaning requires additional processing effort and time,
but rather refuting it. Another important concern is that
speeded sentence verification is a relatively unnatural task
that may encourage participants to ignore their pragmatic
knowledge (Feeney et al., 2004), and it is hardly representative of how people process language in everyday life.
Importantly, people who do generate scalar inferences
are also slower in other conditions (e.g., Noveck & Posada,
2003), suggestive of a more general difference in task-related strategic processing. Finally, reaction times in verification tasks are generally quite slow, over 600 ms when
statements are presented word-by-word (e.g., Bott &
Noveck, 2004; Noveck & Posada, 2003) or even in the order
of seconds when sentences are presented as a whole (e.g.,
De Neys & Schaeken, 2007; Pijnacker et al., 2009). In this
regard, the results from verification tasks should be taken
to reflect early stages of language processing as well as
the output of downstream decision processes that follow
them (e.g. Kounios & Holcomb, 1992).
Recently, researchers have overcome these problems by
using a more indirect, high temporal resolution measure of

scalar processing - the visual-world paradigm. Using this
paradigm, Huang and Snedeker (2009) recorded eye-movements while participants received auditory instructions
such as ``Click on the girl that has some of the socks" or
``Click on the girl that has all of the soccer balls" in the
presence of a display in which one girl had two socks from
the four socks that were present in the display, and another
girl had all three soccer balls that were present in the display. The temporary referential ambiguity in the instruction at the point of `some' could, in principle, be resolved
immediately if participants made a scalar inference that
would restrict `some' to a proper subset. Participants, however, were substantially delayed, to `some', but not when
the instruction contained the word `all'. Based on this
observation, Huang and Snedeker argued that `pragmatic'
scalar inferences are delayed relative to the `semantic' logical interpretation (see also Bott & Noveck, 2004; Breheny
et al., 2006; De Neys & Schaeken, 2007; Noveck & Posada,
2003).
However, Grodner and colleagues (Grodner et al., 2010)
note that `some' is not unambiguously associated with a
scalar inference (e.g., ``Click on the girl with some socks"
does not imply other socks are in the discourse), and that
it was the partitive construction `of the' that allowed for
identification of the target in the Huang and Snedeker
study. In contrast, for all, the quantifier itself was sufficient
to identify the target. In a related study by Grodner et al.
(2010) that circumvented these and some additional issues, scalar inference associated with pragmatic-some
was not delayed relative to expressions that did not require a scalar inference. Thus, in contrast to the Huang
and Snedeker (2009) results, the Grodner et al. results suggest that the pragmatic meaning of scalar expressions is
rapidly available.
In the present study on scalar processing, we employed
another indirect, high temporal resolution measure of language comprehension, namely Event-Related Potentials
(ERPs). An important advantage of ERPs is that they provide both quantitative and qualitative information about
language processing well in advance of (and without the
principled need for) an explicit behavioral response (e.g.,
Van Berkum, 2004). In particular, we focus on the N400
ERP component (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980, 1984; see Kutas,
Van Petten, and Kluender (2006), for review), a negative
deflection in the ERP that emerges somewhere between
150 and 300 ms after the onset of a word and that peaks
at about 400 ms, with a maximum over the back of the
head (i.e., electrodes at parietal locations). The N400 is, in
principle, elicited by every content word, and its amplitude
decreases in size and in a gradual manner when the word
fits the context better (e.g., Kutas et al., 2006; Van Berkum,
Brown, Zwitserlood, Kooijman, & Hagoort, 2005). A differential effect of two conditions on the N400 amplitude is referred to as an N400 effect. The functional significance of
the N400 is still under debate (e.g., Kutas et al., 2006;
Lau, Phillips, & Poeppel, 2008; Van Berkum, 2009), but
there is a general consensus that its amplitude reflects
the fit between the lexical-semantic meaning of an incoming word and the interaction between linguistic context (at
the level of single words, sentences and discourse) with
information stored in memory (e.g., semantic memory,

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

real-world knowledge and pragmatic knowledge of what a
speaker is likely to say), henceforth referred to as `semantic
fit'.1 The results from recent ERP studies have shown that
the interaction between context and real-world knowledge
can lead people to generate expectations about the semantic
properties of specific upcoming words (e.g., Delong, Urbach,
& Kutas, 2005; Federmeier, 2007; Van Berkum, 2009; Van
Berkum et al., 2005), although it may be that, under other
circumstances, the three-way mapping process is initiated
only once the word is encountered. Importantly, in a recent
study on negation processing, we showed that the N400 ERP
is also sensitive to the informativeness of an utterance
(Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008). In this study, participants
read sentences that were true but underinformative due to
pragmatically unlicensed negation (e.g., ``Bulletproof vests
aren't very dangerous. . .", in which case negation is used to
deny something that makes no sense to begin with, namely
that bulletproof vests are dangerous). Critical words
(`dangerous') in these sentences elicited an increased N400
responses in the same way that false sentences did. In contrast, true sentences that contained pragmatically licensed
negation (e.g., ``With proper equipment, scuba-diving isn't
very dangerous. . .") elicited N400 responses that were
indistinguishable from those elicited by true affirmative sentences (e.g., ``With proper equipment, scuba-diving is very
safe. . ."). These results suggest that pragmatic knowledge
of what is an informative thing to say influences an early
stage of semantic processing, and may even contribute to
building up broad pragmatic expectancies about what
upcoming words are likely to be encountered.
There has been one previous study investigating
whether the N400 is modulated by scalar inferences. Noveck and Posada (2003) recorded readers' electrophysiological
responses
to
sentence-final
words
in
underinformative sentences (e.g., ``Some elephants have
trunks"), patently false sentences (e.g., ``Some crows have
radios") and patently true sentences (e.g., ``Some houses
have bricks"). Similar to previous behavioral studies, participants were asked to make a sentence verification response
following each sentence. The results indicated that patently true and patently false sentences elicited a larger
N400 ERP than underinformative sentences, and that the
N400 responses to underinformative sentences were not
modulated by whether participants responded true or false
to these sentences. Consistent with previous behavioral
findings, the reaction time data indicated that those participants who made scalar inferences (i.e. responded `false' to
underinformative sentences) were much slower to respond
than those who followed a literal interpretation (i.e., responded `true' to underinformative sentences). Critically,
however, participants who made scalar inferences were
much slower in all conditions, suggesting that these participants were using a more cautious strategy overall (see
Feeney et al., 2004, for a related discussion). Noveck and
Posada interpreted the smaller N400 for underinformative
sentences, in combination with the slow time course of
1
This view can be distinguished from one in which the N400 reflects the
combinatorial process of integrating a critical word with the preceding
context or of assessing the plausibility of the resulting proposition (see
Kuperberg, 2007; Lau et al., 2008; Van Berkum, 2009, for discussion).

327

scalar implicatures, as being inconsistent with a Levinsonian account. They also suggested that scalar implicatures
may likely be the product of a post-semantic decision process, that, once the critical word has been encountered,
computes the truth-value of the complete proposition,
whereas the initial stage of semantic processing after the
critical word is determined only by simple lexical-semantic relationships (e.g., see also Fischler, Bloom, Childers,
Roucos, & Perry, 1983; Kounios & Holcomb, 1992). Later
accounts by Noveck and colleagues suggest that, under certain conditions, the pragmatic scalar meaning may be generated without having to traverse through a logical
interpretation first (Noveck & Sperber, 2007). However,
the general idea that pragmatic processing costs are incurred after lexico-semantic processing is complete has
persisted in some models of language processing (e.g.
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2008; Cutler &
Clifton, 1999; Fodor, 1983; Forster, 1979; Regel, Gunter,
& Friederici, 2010).
Several problems with interpreting the initial ERP study
by Noveck and Poseda. First, the materials in the different
conditions were not matched or counterbalanced, and the
words were presented in at a very fast pace (a presentation
duration of 200 ms per word and an inter-word interval of
40 ms, which is about half of what is customarily used in
ERP research using serial visual presentation).2 Second,
they employed a sentence-verification task that may have
evoked decision-related positive ERPs that overlap in time
and scalp distribution with the N400, and that may obscure
modulations of the N400 (e.g., Kuperberg, 2007). In light of
these concerns, it is important to note that patently false
sentences did not evoke larger N400 responses than patently
true sentences, whereas violations of real-world knowledge
have consistently been associated with larger N400 responses in other studies (e.g., Fischler, Childers, Achariyapaopan, & Perry, 1985; Fischler et al., 1983; Hagoort, Hald,
Bastiaansen, & Petersson, 2004; Hald, Steenbeek-Planting,
& Hagoort, 2007; Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008). This is
problematic because these violations were included to
establish a benchmark comparison for the main results.
In the current study, we addressed some of these concerns and used ERPs to examine how rapidly different individuals use their pragmatic knowledge of what is an
informative versus uninformative thing to say during the
processing of scalar sentences. We compared ERP responses elicited by critical words in underinformative scalar statements (e.g., ``Some people have lungs, . . .") to those
elicited by critical words in informative scalar statements
(e.g., ``Some people have pets, . . .", see Table 1 for more
examples). If the pragmatic meaning of weak scalar quantifiers can be used incrementally during sentence comprehension (i.e., scalar inferences are made online), this may
2
The short presentation duration that was used by Noveck and Posada
(and by Bott and Noveck (2004)), although constant, may mimic the speed
of the natural reading rate more closely. However, using these durations in
the RSVP procedure, which does not allow backtracking or slowing down,
can cause readers to experience difficulties with normal sentence comprehension (see Camblin, Ledoux, Boudewyn, Gordon, & Swaab, 2007), and
note that word-by-word self-paced reading times are generally over at least
350 ms even for very short words (see Koornneef & Van Berkum, 2006;
Ditman, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2007a).

328

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Table 1
Examples sentences from Experiment 1. Critical words are underlined for
expository purpose only.
Underinformative/informative
Some people have lungs/pets, which require good care
Some rock bands have musicians/groupies,
sometimes with drug problems
Some gangs have members/initiations, and
often strong hierarchy too
Relatively poor/good semantic fit
Literature classes sometimes read papers/poems as a class
Wine and spirits contain sugar/alcohol in different amounts
Fillers
Many people catch the flu, especially in the winter
Many vegetarians eat bean curd, which is rich in protein

guide expectations about upcoming words so that readers
and listeners will expect new input to be informative (e.g.,
Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Crain & Steedman, 1985;
Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995; see also MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). Given that the N400 is sensitive to how well a word fits the context based on both
semantic and pragmatic constraints (Coulson, 2004; Kutas
et al., 2006; Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008; Van Berkum,
2009; Van Berkum, Van den Brink, Tesink, Kos, & Hagoort,
2008), this incremental account predicts that critical words
in an underinformative statement would yield a larger
N400 than in an informative statement.
In contrast, if the pragmatic meaning of weak scalar
quantifiers is not readily available when readers encounter
the critical word, then the N400 ERP would not be sensitive
to whether the statement is informative or underinformative. Rather, sentence processing and modulation of the
N400 may be driven purely by lexico-semantic relationships (e.g., Otten & Van Berkum, 2007; Van Petten, 1993;
Van Petten, Weckerly, McIsaac, & Kutas, 1997; for review,
see Kutas et al. (2006)). Because critical words in the
underinformative condition (e.g., `lungs') had a stronger
lexical-semantic relationship to the main noun phrase in
the preceding phrase (e.g., `people') than in the informative
condition (supported by their higher values on a Latent
Semantic Analysis, LSA Landauer & Dumais, 1997), see
``Methods"), this would predict a smaller N400 to informative than non-informative sentences (as shown by Noveck
& Posada, 2003). This prediction also follows from Grice's
original account (for discussion see Geurts, 2009), and is
generally consistent with models of language comprehension that assume that pragmatic factors come into play
after an initial stage of `context-free', linguistic-semantic
processing (e.g. Fodor, 1983; Forster, 1979).
Previous studies have reported that individuals can vary
significantly in whether and how they apply their pragmatic
knowledge (e.g., Joliffe & Baron-Cohen, 1999; Musolino &
Lidz, 2006; Noveck, 2001; Schindele, Ludtke, & Kaup, 2008;
Stanovich, & West, 2000; Tager-Flusberg, 1981). Moreover,
there have been several reports of individual differences in
scalar inference generation (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004; Feeney et al., 2004; Noveck & Posada, 2003), suggesting that different people may preferentially and consistently adopt
either a literal or a pragmatic interpretation when asked to
evaluate underinformative sentences. Our hypothesis,

which we will describe in more detail below, is that individuals with good real-world pragmatic skills are, at least initially, relatively more sensitive to the pragmatic `violation'
of underinformativeness and therefore more likely to show
a pragmatic N400 effect, whereas processing in people with
poorer real-world pragmatic skills is more likely to be driven
by pure lexico-semantic association.
As a caveat, inferences regarding the full extent of
incremental scalar processing based on our paradigm are
limited. As opposed to studies that have used the visualworld paradigm, our study was not designed to examine
whether scalar inferences are generated immediately upon
encountering the scalar quantifiers. A modulation of the
N400 by informativeness in our study could be taken either
as evidence that the processing consequences of the scalar
quantifier either are rapidly computed upon encountering
the critical word, or were perhaps computed before
encountering the critical word. As argued by Van Berkum
(2009), there are good reasons to assume that a pragmatic
modulation of the N400 does not directly reflect a fully
compositional enrichment process, but more likely indicates that the semantic and pragmatic consequences of
the preceding discourse have been computed to serve as
an interpretive background to retrieve word meaning
(see also Kuperberg, Paczynski, & Ditman, 2010b).
Although our study was not specifically designed to examine ERP responses to scalar quantifiers, we will report
exploratory analyses that address these issues.
Experiment 1
In the first of our two experiments, we examined electrophysiological responses to critical words in underinformative statements versus informative scalar statements,
and used this measure to investigate individual differences
in pragmatic processing. If scalar pragmatic inferences are
generated incrementally during on-line sentence processing, critical words that render a statement trivial or underinformative should lead to additional semantic processing
costs, and should elicit a larger N400 than critical words in
informative statements - a pragmatic N400 effect (see also
Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008). If, on the other hand, pragmatic scalar information is not used incrementally during
online processing, the N400 should not be larger to critical
words in underinformative statements. In fact, given the
closer lexico-semantic associations in underinformative
than in informative sentences (people-lungs versus people-pets), the N400 may even be relatively attenuated in
underinformative sentences.
We also hypothesized that there may be individual variation in these patterns of N400 modulation, that may be
predicted by variation in participants' abilities to produce
and comprehend pragmatic aspects of language in the real
world (e.g., Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, & Cohen, 2000;
Happe, 1993; Schindele et al., 2008; Tager-Flusberg,
1981, 1985). We therefore obtained an independent measure of pragmatic language abilities of our participants in
everyday life through the Communication subscale of the
Autism-Spectrum Quotient questionnaire (the AQ; BaronCohen, Wheelwright, Skinner, Martin, & Clubley, 2001)
that quantifies an individual's pragmatic skills on a

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

continuum from autism to typicality. Of the five AQ subscales, the Communication subscale taps into pragmatic
abilities most directly. Some examples of items from this
subscale are ``Other people frequently tell me that what I've
said is impolite, even though I think it is polite", ``I find it hard
to `read between the lines' when someone is talking to me",
and ``I am often the last to understand the point of a joke".
We predicted that individuals with good pragmatic abilities (as indexed by a low score on the AQ-Communication
subscale), would be relatively more sensitive to the pragmatic `violation' of underinformativeness and more likely
to show a pragmatic N400 effect, as compared to less pragmatically skilled individuals (see Pijnacker et al., 2009;
Schindele et al., 2008, for related hypotheses in participants
with high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome). This
sensitivity may play out in several different ways. For example, individuals with good pragmatic abilities might generate pragmatic inferences more consistently, generate more
robust inferences, they might be better at evaluating incoming words for informativeness, or perhaps even have a different task set than people with poor pragmatic skills. In the
current study we cannot distinguish between these or other
possibilities. Nevertheless, modulation of a pragmatic N400
effect by pragmatic abilities could provide evidence that
such everyday communication problems may be, in part,
driven by an impaired incremental use of pragmatic knowledge during language processing.
In order to examine the specificity of these potential
individual differences, we also included sentences that
did not contain scalars, but that contained a word that
had a relatively good semantic fit versus relatively poor
semantic fit to the preceding sentence context based on
real-world knowledge; see Table 1 for examples). We
predicted that words that were incongruous with realworld knowledge3 would produce a robust N400 effect
compared to words that were congruous with real-world
knowledge (e.g., Kutas & Hillyard, 1984) in all individuals,
regardless of their AQ-Communication scores. This allowed
us to dissociate individual differences in incrementally
recruiting pragmatic knowledge from the more general
recruitment of real-world knowledge during online
processing.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-one right-handed Tufts students (17 males;
mean age = 20.2 years) gave written informed consent.
All were native English speakers, without neurological or
psychiatric disorders.
Materials
We constructed 70 sentence pairs such that the underinformative and informative versions of each sentence pair
3
We use the term `incongruous with real-world knowledge', but these
sentences did not describe events that are impossible in the real-world, and
this term only refers to the relative poor fit with real-world knowledge
compared to the congruous sentences.

329

were identical except for the critical word. Each sentence
consisted of two clauses, and the first clause (the quantifier
clause) always started with the quantifier `some' and always ended with a comma after the critical word. We selected critical words so that replacing `some' by the
quantifier `all' would yield a true statement in the underinformative condition (e.g., ``All people have lungs"), but a
false statement in the informative condition (e.g., ``All people have pets"). The second clause always contained at
least three words and provided additional information
about the critical word, the main NP in the scalar clause
(e.g., `people') or the scalar clause as a whole, and was created so that the complete sentence constituted a logically
true statement in each condition. Critical words in the
two conditions were approximately matched for average
length in number of letters (underinformative, informative,
M = 6.7/7.0, SD = 1.8/2.0) and log frequency (Kucera & Francis, 1967; underinformative, informative, M = 1.73/1.91,
SD = 2.29/2.03). Semantic similarity values were calculated
for the critical words within the underinformative and
informative sentences using Latent Semantic Analysis
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Landauer, Foltz, & Dumais,
1998; available on the Internet at http://lsa.colorado.edu).
As expected, underinformative words yielded a higher LSA
value than informative words (underinformative, informative; M = .33/.17, SD = .23/.18; t(138) = 4.58, p < .001). As
noted in the Introduction, higher LSA values are generally
associated with smaller N400 amplitudes compared to
lower LSA values, because the LSA values reflect in part
the amount of lexico-semantic priming a word receives
from the preceding context.
For the semantic fit manipulation, we constructed another 70 sentence pairs that were identical except for the
critical word. Critical words were selected that were relatively congruous or incongruous to the sentence with regard to world knowledge (see Table 1 for examples).
Critical words in the two conditions were matched for average length in letters (congruous, incongruous, M = 6.4/6.3,
SD = 2.1/1.7) and log frequency (Francis & Kucera, 1982;
congruous, incongruous, M = 1.46/1.50, SD = 1.74/1.88).
Semantic similarity values were calculated for the congruous, incongruouswords using Latent Semantic Analysis.
Good semantic fit words yielded a higher LSA value than
poor semantic fit words (congruous, incongruous, M = .22/
.14, SD = .11/.08; t(138) = 5.31, p < .001). At least two words
followed the critical words before the sentence ended.
We also created 35 filler sentences that each had a similar sentence structure as the scalar sentences but that always started with the quantifier `many', and involved a
simple and true statement (e.g., ``Many vegetarians eat bean
curd, which is rich in protein.").
We created two counterbalanced lists so that each
sentence appeared in only one condition per list, but in
all conditions equally often across lists. Within each list,
items were pseudorandomly mixed with the 70 sentences
containing a semantic fit manipulation (35 containing a
relatively good fitting critical word, 35 containing a
relatively poor fitting critical word) and the 35 filler
sentences to limit the succession of identical sentence
types, while matching trial-types on average list
position.

330

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

The Autism-Spectrum Quotient
The AQ (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001) is a self-administered
questionnaire that is designed to measure the extent to
which adults with normal intelligence possess traits associated with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Although this
scale is not a diagnostic measure, its discriminative validity
as a screening tool has been clinically tested (WoodburySmith, Robinson, Wheelwright, & Baron-Cohen, 2005).
The test consists of 50 items, made up of 10 questions
assessing five subscales: Social Skill (e.g., ``I would rather
go to a library than a party"), Communication (e.g., ``I frequently find that I don't know how to keep a conversation
going"), Imagination (e.g., ``When I'm reading a story, I find
it difficult to work out the characters' intentions"), Attention To Detail (e.g., ``I usually notice car number plates or
similar strings of information"), and Attention-Switching
(e.g., ``I frequently get so absorbed in one thing that I lose
sight of other things"). Half the questions are worded to
elicit an `agree' response and the other half a `disagree' response, addressing demonstrated areas of cognitive characteristics in ASD (American Psychiatric Association,
1994; Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). Higher scores on the AQ
indicate stronger presence of traits associated with ASD.
A score of 32+ appears to be a useful cutoff for distinguishing individuals who have clinically significant levels of
autistic traits (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001; the maximum
score of the participants in our study was 30). Such a high
score on the AQ however does not mean that an individual
has autism, because a diagnosis is only merited, based on
diagnostic measures such as the American Psychiatric
Association (1994), ADI-R (Lord, Rutter, & Le Couteur,
1994) or ADOS-G (Lord, Risi, Lambrecht, et al., 2000), if
the individual is suffering a clinical level of distress as a result of their autistic traits. In the current study, the AQ was
administered in a quiet room subsequently to the ERP
experiment, and took each participant about 10 min.
Procedure
Participants silently read sentences, presented word-byword and centered on a computer monitor, while minimizing eye-movements and blinks. There was no task other
than reading for comprehension. To parallel natural reading
times (Legge, Ahn, Klitz, & Luebker, 1997), all words were
presented using a variable presentation procedure (Otten
& Van Berkum, 2008; see also Nieuwland & Kuperberg,
2008). Word duration in ms was computed as ((number
of letters  27) + 187), with a 10 letter maximum. Also, to
mimic natural reading times at clause boundaries (e.g.,
Hirotani, Frazier, & Rayner, 2006; Legge et al., 1997; Rayner,
Kambe, & Duffy, 2000), critical words (which were followed
by a comma) were presented for an additional 227 ms, and
sentence-final words for an additional 500 ms. All interword-intervals were 121 ms. Following sentence-final
words, a blank screen was presented for 500 ms, followed
by a fixation mark at which subjects could blink and selfpace onto the next sentence by a right-hand button press.
Participants were given six short breaks. Total time-on-task
was approximately 40 min. After the ERP experiment, each
subject was allowed a short break to wash up and was then

administered a brief exit-interview, followed by the Autism-Spectrum Quotient questionnaire.
In the exit-interview, participants received a booklet
that contained 6 pages and were instructed to answer
the question from the booklet page-by-page without looking at the subsequent pages. On page 1, subjects were
asked to report whether they noticed anything about the
sentences they read and what research question(s) they
thought the experiment was about. On page 2, an example
of an informative scalar sentence was given, and participants reported whether they thought that sentences starting with `Some' stood out, what they thought the purpose
of these sentences was, and what research question these
sentences involved. On page 3, subjects reported whether
they thought that some of the sentences in the experiment
sounded odd and provided a brief explanation why they
thought this. On pages 4 and 5, subjects were presented
with 10 different scalar statements, including informative
and underinformative scalar sentences truncated after
the CW as well as longer sentences that contained locally
informative or underinformative phrases. Subjects were
asked to rate whether each sentence was true (1 = false,
5 = true) and how normal they would find it if somebody
said this (1 = odd, 5 = normal). On page 6, subjects were informed that a sentences like ``Some people have lungs"
could be rated as false (because the sentence implies that
most people do not have lungs) or true (because there
are at least some people in the world that do have lungs).
The subjects were asked to report whether they thought
during the experiment about whether these sentences were
true or false, whether they during the experiment `treated'
these sentences as true or false, and how consistently they
did this (1 = very inconsistently, 5 = very consistently).
EEG recording
The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 29
tin electrodes held in place on the scalp by an elastic cap
(Electro-Cap International, Inc., Eaton, OH, USA). Electrode
locations included Fz, Cz, Pz, Oz, Fp1/2, F3/4, F7/8, FC1/2,
FC5/6, C3/4, T3/4, T5/6, CP1/2, CP5/6, P3/4, P7/8, O1/2,
and 2 additional EOG electrodes; all were referenced to
the left mastoid). The EEG recordings were amplified
(band-pass filtered at 0.01-40 Hz) and digitized at
200 Hz. Impedance was kept below 5 kX for EEG electrodes. Prior to off-line averaging, single-trial waveforms
were automatically screened for amplifier blocking and
muscle/blink/eye-movement artifacts over 850 ms epochs
(starting 100 ms before CW onset). Two participants were
excluded due to excessive artifacts (mean trial loss >50%).
For the remaining 29 participants, average ERPs (normalized by subtraction to a 100 ms pre-stimulus baseline)
were computed over artifact-free trials for CWs in all conditions (mean trial loss across conditions 11%, range 0-
42%, without substantial differences in mean trial loss
across conditions).
Statistical analysis
For all analyses reported below, the Greenhouse/Geisser
correction was applied to F tests with more than one

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

degree of freedom in the numerator. Note that due to the
large number of trials needed for averaging in ERPs (which
reduces the probability that the results hinge on just a few
odd items), statistics are only reported for by subjects analyses, and analyses by items are not included.
Results
Main effect of informativeness
Critical words elicited very similar N400 responses in
the underinformative and the informative statements
(see Fig. 1, left panel). Because modulation of the N400
ERP is generally maximal at posterior electrodes (e.g.,
Kutas et al., 2006), we divided all electrodes into anterior
electrodes (F3/4, F7/8, F9/10, FC1/2, FC5/6, FP1/2, FPz, Fz)
and posterior electrodes (Pz, Oz, CP1/2, CP5/6, P3/4, P7/8,
O1/2) for subsequent analyses. Using mean amplitude in
the 350-450 ms time window, a 2 (informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (AP distribution: anterior,
posterior) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
revealed that there was no statistically significant difference between the ERP responses to informative and underinformative statements, and no interaction effect between
informativeness and AP distribution.
AQ-Comm score and ERP responses to informativeness
AQ scores ranged from 9 to 30 (M = 21, SD = 7.04). To
explore the role of pragmatic abilities, we first grouped
the participants into low AQ-Comm (N = 15) and high

331

AQ-Comm (N = 14) groups based on the median split of
scores on the Communication subscale. AQ-Comm score
for the low AQ-Comm group ranged from 0 to 5
(M = 2.33, SD = .51; seven males and eight females, mean
age 20.9 years, mean total AQ score 15.8), and from 6 to
9 for the high AQ-Comm group (M = 7.2, SD = .28; eight
males and six females, mean age 19.3 years, mean total
AQ score 26.5). The two AQ-Comm groups showed statistically significant differences in AQ-Comm score
(t(27) = 8.34, p < .001) and in total AQ score (t(27) = 6.24,
p < .001), as well as in age (t(27) = 2.49, p < .05; when entered into the subsequent analyses as a covariate, the factor age, however, did not change the patterns of results.
Grand average ERPs for the two groups are displayed in
Fig. 1 (middle panel). Using mean amplitude in the
350-450 ms time window, the overall ANOVA revealed a
significant 2 (informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (AQ-Comm Group: low AQ-Comm, high
AQ-Comm) interaction effect when using all electrodes
(F(1, 27) = 9.45, p = .005). There was no significant 3-way
interaction with AP distribution (F(1, 27) = 2.19, p = .15),
but the Informativeness by AQ-Comm group interaction effect was statistically significant when using only posterior
electrodes (F(1, 27) = 11.54, p = .002), but only marginally
significant when using anterior electrodes (F(1, 27) = 3.3,
p = .07). This predominantly posterior distribution of N400
modulation is consistent with the N400 literature (e.g., Kutas et al., 2006).
Simple main-effect analysis for the groups separately,
using posterior electrodes only, showed that underinformative statements elicited larger N400 responses than

Experiment 1: Underinformative versus informative
mid-sentence critical words

Fig. 1. Left panel: Grand-average event-related potential (ERP) waveforms elicited by critical words in underinformative (dotted lines) and informative
(solid lines) statements from Experiment 1, shown at electrode locations Cz, Pz, and Oz. In this and all following figures, negativity is plotted upwards.
Middle panel: Grand average ERPs elicited by critical words in underinformative and informative statements per AQ-Communication group in Experiment 1,
and corresponding scalp distributions of the mean difference effect (underinformative minus informative sentences) in the 350-450 ms analysis window.
Right panel: Correlation between N400 effect and AQ-Communication score.

332

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

informative statements in the low AQ-Comm group
(F(1, 14) = 5.57, p = .033, CI .82  .75), whereas informative statements elicited larger N400 responses than underinformative statements in the high AQ-Comm group
(F(1, 13) = 6.12, p = .028, CI 1.38  1.2). There was no statistically significant effect of informativeness in the two
AQ-Comm groups separately when taking into account
anterior electrodes only (Fs < 1, n.s.).
As can be seen from Fig. 1, there appeared to be differential effects of informativeness for the two groups before
the 350-450 ms time window. We therefore performed
additional 2 (informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (AQ-Comm Group: low AQ-Comm, high AQComm) ANOVAs for the 50-150, 150-250 and 250-350
time windows. These revealed some significant effects
within early time windows (50-150 ms in the low AQComm group, 150-250 ms in the high AQ-Comm group;
see Appendix A for full report, which can be found at
http://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/materials.
htm). We were concerned that these early effects of informativeness reflected an artefactual side effect of dividing
subjects on the basis of their AQ-Comm score. It is wellknown that with limited numbers of EEG trials going into
the average of a single subject, single-subject ERPs constitute unknown mixtures of critical ERP effects and residual
EEG background noise which could, in principle, explain
the early onset ERP differences. We therefore repeated
analyses using a longer, 500 ms pre-CW baseline thus
reducing noise in the baseline time window (and consequently, in the post-baseline ERP signal). ERP difference effects that truly are the result of the experimental
manipulation should survive this longer baseline analysis.
The corresponding figures for these analyses can be found
at the website as referenced above. After rebaselining, the
early effects in the 50-150 and 150-250 ms windows disappeared but left the main pattern of results in the 250-
350 and 350-450 ms windows unchanged (see Appendix
A). Additional analyses for the post-450 ms time windows
using the original baseline as well as the new baseline can
also be found on our website.

Correlation analysis for AQ-Comm scores and ERP responses
to informativeness
We also performed a correlation analysis that took into
account the full range in individual AQ-Comm scores, and
revealed a negative correlation between AQ-Comm score
and the mean ERP difference score calculated as underinformative minus informative in the 350-450 ms time window at posterior electrodes (Pearson's r = .53, p = .003;
see Fig. 1, right panel). This correlation effect was also
present for total AQ score (r = .55, p = .002), the Social
Skill subscale score (r = .45, p = .014) and AttentionSwitching subscale score (r = .55, p = .002), but was not
significant for scores on the subscales Imagination
(r = .21, p = .29) and Attention To Detail (r = .17,
p = .39).We should note that the Attention-Switching subscale and the Communication subscale were also the strongest interrelated subscales, so the effects of these subscales
are hard to tease apart.

ERP responses to informativeness and the role of LSA
As mentioned in the Introduction, the content words in
underinformative statements co-occur in language relatively more frequently than those in the informative statements, as reflected by their differences in LSA values.
However, not each underinformative statement from each
sentence pair had a larger LSA value than its informative
counterpart. This allowed us to separate our items into one
set that had a relatively small LSA difference between informative and underinformative sentences (LSA(underinformative-informative), M = 0.02, SD = 0.12), and one set
that had a relatively large LSA difference across conditions
(M = 0.34, SD = 0.18). By computing ERPs separately for
these two sets for each group, we investigated the effect of
informativeness while controlling for lexical-semantic
factors.
The corresponding figures for these analyses can be
found at (http://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/materials.htm). These plots reveal clear differences
between the low and high AQ-Comm groups in N400
modulation by LSA and informativeness. Analyses focusing on N400 peak amplitude modulations across posterior electrodes in the 350-450 ms time window showed
that the informativeness by LSA difference interaction effect was significant in the high AQ-Comm group
(F(1, 13) = 5.38, p = .037), but not in the low AQ-Comm
group (F(1, 14) = .02, p = .90). Follow-ups showed that,
in the low AQ-Comm group, critical words in underinformative statements elicited a larger N400 than those in
informative statements, both when there was a relatively
small and a relatively large LSA difference between conditions (small difference, F(1, 14) = 2.37, p = .043, CI
.84  .76; large difference, F(1, 14) = 2.19, p = .052, CI
.80  .77). In the high AQ-Comm group, however,
underinformative statements elicited a lower N400 than
informative statements only when there was a relatively large LSA difference (F(1, 13) = 4.01, p = 0.001, CI
2.25  1.21), but not when there was a relatively
small LSA difference (F(1, 13) = .21, p = 0.834, CI
.17  1.76).
In sum, whereas we found a typical modulation of LSA
in the high AQ-Comm group, the pragmatic N400 effect
in the low AQ-Comm group was insensitive to LSA.
Group differences in ERP responses to sentence-final words
We also examined the ERP responses to sentence-final
words in underinformative and informative statements
between the two AQ-Comm groups (see Fig. 2). Statistical analyses were carried out using mean amplitude in
the 300-500 ms. The sentence-final words involved different word categories, and there may have been differences in naturalness of the second clauses following
informative versus underinformative statement. Our
main interest in this comparison was therefore not the
main effects of informativeness (positive ERPs to sentence-final words of underinformative than informative
sentences across both groups, F(1, 27) = 20.28, p < .001,
CI .96  .46), but rather the differences between the
two AQ-Comm groups to the same set of stimuli. As

333

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Experiment 1: Underinformative versus informative
sentence-final words
High AQ-Comm

Low AQ-Comm
FPz

FPz

Cz

Cz

Oz

Oz

FPz

+

+

-2uV

+

Cz

+
Oz
300-500 ms

500-700 ms

300-500 ms

500-700 ms

+2uV

Underinformative - Informative

-2uV
Underinformative, Sentence-final words
Some people have lungs, which require good care.

0

200

400

600 ms

Word onset

Informative, Sentence-final words
Some people have pets, which require good care.

Fig. 2. Grand average ERPs elicited by sentence-final words in underinformative (dotted lines) and informative (solid lines) statements per AQCommunication group in Experiment 1, shown at electrode locations FPz, Cz, and Oz, and corresponding scalp distributions of the mean difference effect
(underinformative minus informative sentences) in the 300-500 ms and the 500-700 ms analysis window.

shown in Fig. 2, there was a clear differential ERP effect
on the sentence-final words in underinformative and
informative statements in the low AQ-Comm group, but
less so in the high AQ-Comm group. This differential
ERP effect appeared to have a slightly frontal distribution
(i.e., inconsistent with an N400 effect scalp distribution),
and may reflect additional sentence wrap-up processing.
Across all electrodes, the overall ANOVA revealed a marginally significant informativeness by AQ-Comm group
interaction effect (F(1, 27) = 3.88, p = .059) and followups showed that the modulation by informativeness
was
significant
in
the
low
AQ-Comm
group
(F(1, 27) = 17.56, p = .001, CI 1.36  .70), but only marginally significant in the high AQ-Comm group
(F(1, 27) = 3.64, p = .079, CI .54  .60). A 2 (informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (AP distribution: anterior, posterior) ANOVA revealed no interaction
effect of informativeness with anterior-posterior distribution (F < 1), and there was no significant interaction
between informativeness, AQ-Comm group and distribution (F < 1). Because the effect was prolonged, we
repeated the above analyses in the 500-700 ms window
and this yielded the same pattern of results.

Group differences in ERP responses to real-world congruous
versus incongruous sentences
To determine the specificity of the group differences in
ERP responses to underinformativeness, we also examined
whether the groups differed in their N400 modulation to
words that were congruous versus incongruous with realworld knowledge. We compared the modulation of the
N400 by words with a relatively poor versus good fit based
on real-world knowledge across the two groups. As can be
seen from Fig. 3, the modulation of the N400 was quite
similar across the two groups. Using mean amplitude at posterior electrodes in the 350-450 ms time window, the overall 2 (Real-world congruity: congruous, incongruous)  2
(AQ-Comm Group: low AQ-Comm, high AQ-Comm) ANOVA
revealed that the incongruous words evoked a larger amplitude N400 than congruous words (F(1, 27) = 19.28, p < .001,
CI 1.35  .64) However, no Real-world congruity by AQComm Group interaction was observed (F(1, 27) = 1.77,
p = .19). There was also no significant Real-world congruity
by AQ-Comm Group interaction in the adjoining 250-350
and 450-550 time windows (all Fs < 2, ns.). Consistent with
the absence of this interaction, there was also no significant

334

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Experiment 1: Poor semantic fit versus good semantic fit

Fig. 3. Left panel: Grand average ERPs elicited by words that had a relatively poor (dotted lines) and relatively good (solid lines) semantic fit per AQCommunication group in Experiment 1, and corresponding scalp distributions. Right panel: Correlation between N400 effect and AQ-Communication score.

correlation between the N400 difference effect in the 350-
450 ms time window and AQ-Comm score (Pearson's
r = .29, p = .13).
Exploratory analyses of ERP responses to the scalar quantifiers
Although our experiment was not specifically designed
to examine ERP responses to the scalar quantifiers, we performed an exploratory analysis to investigate whether
there were differences between the two AQ-Comm groups
in ERP responses to the sentence-initial scalar quantifiers
`Some' (the sentence-initial word of the experimental sentences) and `Many' (the sentence-initial word in 35 filler
sentences). The reasoning behind this analysis was that if
the quantifiers themselves evoke differential pragmatic
processing, then the differences in pragmatic abilities between the groups may already become apparent at the
quantifier. We note that the quantifier `many' can elicit a
``not all" implicature as can `some', so this comparison is
not optimal for examining differences in pragmatic processing. However, because these quantifiers can be arranged on a scale of informativeness where `many' is
stronger than `some', the `some' implicature would include
``not many" as well as ``not all". In this sense, and particularly in an experimental context in which both are repeatedly presented, one could argue that these scalar
quantifiers are associated with implicatures that are of different strength.
The figures corresponding to this analysis can be accessed at http://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/materials.htm. In the high AQ-Comm group, `Many',
relative to `Some' appeared to evoke a slightly more nega-

tive right-lateralized waveform at about 300-350 ms and a
more positive frontally-distributed waveform at about
650-700 ms. There appeared to be no such effect in the
low AQ group. We performed a series of repeated measures
ANOVAs to test for the 2 (quantifier: some, many) by 2
(AQ-Comm group: low AQ-Comm, high AQ-Comm) interaction, in adjoining 50 ms time windows between 100
and 800 ms after quantifier onset, using all electrodes or
only anterior or posterior electrodes. The only (marginally)
significant interaction effect was found in the 650-700 ms
window using anterior electrodes (F(1, 27) = 3.77,
p = .063). Follow-up analyses confirmed that `many' elicited more positive ERPs than `some' in the high AQ-Comm
group (F(1, 13) = 14.70, p = .002, CI 2.04  1.15), but there
was no difference between the two quantifiers in the low
AQ-Comm group (F(1, 14) = .07, p = .80, CI .21  1.68). In
addition, this frontal positivity effect showed a marginally
significant correlation with AQ-Comm score (Pearson's
r = .34, p = .073). There was also a marginally significant
correlation between the frontal positivity effect and the
differential ERP effect at the critical words, suggesting that
participants who showed a larger frontal positive effect
were less likely to show a pragmatic N400 effect later in
the sentence (r = .35, p = .06). The frontal positivity, however, did not predict the N400 modulation by real-world
congruity (Pearson's r = .15, p = .46).
Exit-interview
We examined whether the AQ-Comm groups differed
in their exit-interview ratings for truth-value and
naturalness. A 2 (AQ-Comm group: low AQ-Comm, high

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

AQ-Comm) by 2 (informativeness: informative, underinformative) ANOVA revealed no group differences in the
truth-value ratings and the naturalness ratings (all
Fs < 2). In addition, underinformative and informative
statements received similar truth-value ratings (t < 1) but
different naturalness ratings (t(1, 28) = 15.98, p < .001).

Discussion
Across all participants, underinformative statements
elicited N400 responses that were similar to those elicited
by informative statements. However, there was marked
heterogeneity across individuals in N400 modulation, with
some individuals showing a larger N400 to critical words
in underinformative than in informative statements, and
others showing the opposite pattern of modulation (i.e., a
larger N400 to critical words in informative than underinformative statements). Most importantly, these individual
differences could be explained by taking into account individual variability in real-world pragmatic language ability.
Individuals with few pragmatic language difficulties (as indexed by a low score on the AQ-Communication subscale)
were more sensitive to the pragmatic `violation' of underinformativeness. This opposite pattern of activity was clear
both in a median split analysis that dichotomized the two
groups and in a correlation analysis that took into account
the full range in individual AQ-Comm scores. Importantly,
this N400 modulation by AQ-Comm score did not extend
to the N400 responses to words with a relatively poor fit
with respect to world knowledge, suggesting that AQComm score was fairly specific in explaining the pattern
of N400 modulation to the pragmatic violations. In addition, the two groups were differentially sensitive to lexical-semantic co-occurrence: whereas the low AQ-Comm
group showed a pragmatic N400 effect independently of
whether the underinformative and informative sentences
were matched for LSA, the high AQ-Comm group's ERP responses were modulated by LSA. Finally, we also explored
ERP responses to the scalar quantifier `some' versus' many'.
Although these quantifiers could be argued to evoke related (although not identical) pragmatic processes, rendering this comparison suboptimal for examining potential
differences in pragmatic processing, we did find some preliminary evidence that pragmatic abilities influenced processing at the scalars themselves.
If one considers only the pragmatically skilled participants, our results show that pragmatically underinformative statements are associated with early semantic
processing costs (see also Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008).
This result suggests that the pragmatic meaning of a scalar
quantifier can, in principle, be rapidly and incrementally
incorporated during sentence comprehension, a finding
that is consistent with models of language processing that
incorporate an incremental contribution of pragmatic factors (Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Crain & Steedman,
1985; Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995) and with the results
of studies from the visual-world paradigm (Grodner
et al., 2010).
In contrast to the more pragmatically skilled participants, however, the less pragmatically skilled participants

335

showed no pragmatic N400 effect. Their processing was
rather driven primarily by the relatively closer lexical-
semantic relationships between individual words in these
statements which overrode pragmatic factors. One possible
interpretation of these results is that these individuals,
who report difficulties with pragmatic abilities in everyday
life, were simply incapable of generating scalar inferences.
One could argue that this conclusion is in line with the notion from Relevance Theory that scalar inferences are not
obligatory (see also Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck & Posada,
2003) but depend on constraints from the context and possibly from neuropsychological factors (see also Happe,
1993).
However, if one takes into account the ERP patterns
elicited by sentence-initial scalars, a more complicated
picture emerges. The exploratory analyses of ERP responses elicited by the sentence-initial scalar quantifiers
suggest that pragmatic abilities influenced scalar statement processing already at the scalar quantifier. Perhaps
counter-intuitively, differential processing of the two different scalar quantifiers was most pronounced in the
pragmatically less skilled participants. We will provide
more in-depth discussion of these issues in the general
discussion, but what these results suggest is that pragmatically less skilled participants may have been able to
temporarily ignore or inhibit their pragmatic knowledge
during the processing of the critical words (see Feeney
et al., 2004; Handley & Feeney, 2004), instead of being
insensitive to pragmatic constraints (e.g., Schindele
et al., 2008).
In sum, our results suggest that pragmatic constraints
can have rapid effects during on-line sentence comprehension. When pragmatic constraints are taken into account,
as in low AQ-Comm people, they may guide expectations
about upcoming words through the pragmatic presumption of informativeness. But when these constraints cannot
be used or they are ignored, as in the high AQ-Comm
group, the effects of other constraints may surface, such
as the effect of lexical-semantic relationships. In our second experiment, we examined the incremental processing
of weak scalar quantifiers further by modulating the effect
of pragmatic constraints through linguistic focus.

Experiment 2
Introduction
Whereas blatantly underinformative statements that
violate pragmatic principles are relatively uncommon in
everyday language (perhaps with the notable exception
of utterances where underinformativeness is used as a
humoristic device), temporarily underinformative statements are quite common. For example, whereas a phrase
such as ``Some people have eyes," is unlikely to appear, a
sentence such as ``Some people have eyes that are different
colors" is much more natural.
In the sentence ``Some people have eyes," the comma
signals clausal wrap-up and the end of the quantifier
scope. This puts the clause-final words `eyes' clearly into
focus (e.g., Birch & Rayner, 1997; Hirotani et al., 2006). In

336

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

contrast, in ``Some people have eyes that are different colors", the scope of the quantifier encompasses the whole
relative clause construction (`eyes that are different colors') and the focus of the utterance - the part of the statement that the communicator wants to emphasize and is
most relevant to the addressee for evaluating sentence
meaning - is not `eyes' but `different colors'.
Research on the role of focus in language comprehension suggests that the processing of unfocused materials
is dominated by `low-level' lexical-semantic relationships
rather than by `full-fledged' compositional processing that
is needed to establish sentence truth-value or real-world
plausibility (e.g., Ferreira, Bailey, & Ferraro, 2002; Sanford
& Sturt, 2002). This is because readers and listeners generally devote less attention and processing time to unfocused
material than to focused material (e.g., Cutler, Dahan, &
van Donselaar, 1997; Frazier, Carlson, & Clifton, 2006), so
that unfocused materials receive an incomplete semantic
and pragmatic analysis (so-called shallow processing;
e.g., Sanford & Garrod, 1998).
In Experiment 2, a second set of participants read sentences like ``Some people have eyes that are different colors". The first clauses of these sentences were identical to
those used in Experiment 1, but the comma was excluded
and the clause was always followed by a relative clause
(see Table 2, for examples). Thus the sentences were
informative overall but the first clause could be considered `locally' underinformative. Given the absence of the
comma and the fact that all scalar sentences in Experiment 2 had this same structure, we expected the critical
words to be out of focus and we hypothesized that they
would therefore be processed more shallowly (e.g., Sanford & Sturt, 2002), and the ERP response would be dominated by simple lexical-semantic relationships rather
than by the pragmatic presumption of informativeness.
In other words, we predicted that locally underinformative statements would fail to evoke a pragmatic N400 effect. Rather, we predicted that the N400 would be
reduced, relative to the informative statements, because
of their closer lexical-semantic relationships. In addition,
we predicted that this effect would not be modulated by
the real-world pragmatic abilities (AQ-Comm score) of
the participants because the relevant pragmatic constraints were now the same in the informative and underinformative statements.

Table 2
Examples sentences from Experiment 2. Critical words are underlined for
expository purpose only.
Underinformative/informative
Some people have lungs/pets that are diseased by viruses
Some rock bands have musicians/groupies with real drug problems
Some gangs have members/initiations that are really violent
Relatively poor/good semantic fit
Literature classes sometimes read papers/poems as a class
Wine and spirits contain sugar/alcohol in different amounts
Fillers
Many people catch the flu in the winter
Many vegetarians eat bean curd as a source of protein

Methods
Participants
Thirty-one right-handed Tufts students (13 males;
mean age = 19.7 years) gave written informed consent.
All were native English speakers, without neurological or
psychiatric disorders, and had not participated in Experiment 1.

Materials
We constructed 70 sentence pairs that were identical to
the 70 critical sentence pairs from Experiment 1 up until
and including the critical words (see Table 2). The 70
new sentences did not contain commas, and the critical
words were always followed by a relative clause (e.g.,
``Some people have lungs that are diseased by viruses.").
In addition, we created 35 new filler sentences that, as in
Experiment 1, started with the quantifier `many' and involved a simple and true statement, and that, like the
new `some' sentences, did not contain a comma (e.g.,
``Many people catch the flu in the winter."). To examine
ERP responses to semantic fit, participants in Experiment
2 were also presented the exact same 70 sentences containing the semantic fit manipulation as used in Experiment 1.

Procedure and EEG recording
The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to that of
Experiment 1 except for the presentation duration of the
critical words (which was 227 ms longer in Experiment 1
due to the presence of commas).
EEG recording and pre-processing in Experiment 2 was
identical to that in Experiment 1. Two participants were
excluded due to excessive artifacts (mean trial loss >50%).
For the remaining 29 participants, average ERPs (normalized by subtraction to a 100 ms pre-stimulus baseline)
were computed over artifact-free trials for CWs in all conditions (mean trial loss across conditions 12%, range 0-
35%, without substantial differences in mean trial loss
across conditions).
The exit-interview in Experiment 2 was identical to that
from Experiment 1 except for the last page. In Experiment
2, the last page gave subjects an example of a locally
underinformative sentence and a locally informative
sentence, and an explanation for why the first part of the
sentence could be considered informative or underinformative. Subjects subsequently reported whether they had
noticed during the ERP experiment that the first part of
some sentences was odd for the above mentioned reason?
If they answered `yes' they were asked to report how consistently (on a 5-point scale) they noticed that some of
these sentences sounded odd, whether they treated such
underinformative sentences as true or false, and how consistently (on a 5-point scale) they treated these sentences
as true or false.

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Results
Main effect of informativeness
Critical words elicited larger N400 responses in the
informative statements compared to the underinformative
statements (see Fig. 4, left panel). Using mean amplitude
across all electrodes in the 350-450 ms time window, a 2
(informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (distribution: anterior, posterior) ANOVA revealed that informative statements elicited a larger N400 ERP than
underinformative statements (F(1, 28) = 7.52, p = 0.011, CI
.56  .42), whereas this effect did not differ across anterior and posterior electrodes (F(1, 28) = .162, p = 0.690).
Separate ANOVAs for anterior and posterior electrodes,
however, revealed that the main effect of condition was
only marginally significant at anterior electrodes
(F(1, 28) = 3.69, p = 0.065, CI .53  .56) but fully statistically significant at posterior electrodes (F(1, 28) = 6.87,
p = 0.014, CI .65  .51).
AQ-Comm score and ERP responses to informativeness
AQ scores ranged from 5 to 36 (M = 21.17, SD = 7.88).
The participants were again grouped into low AQ-Comm
(N = 14) and high AQ-Comm (N = 15) groups based on the
median split of scores on the Communication subscale.
AQ-Comm score for the low AQ-Comm group ranged from
0 to 5 (M = 1.43, SD = .43; five males and nine females,
mean age 20.4 years, mean total AQ score 15.9), and from
6 to 9 for the high AQ-Comm group (M = 7.4, SD = .25; 7

337

males and 8 females, mean age 19.2 years, mean total AQ
score 26.1). The two AQ-Comm groups showed statistically
significant differences in AQ-Comm score (t(27) = 12.18,
p < .001) and in total AQ score (t(27) = 4.49, p < .001), as
well as in age (t(27) = 2.43, p < .05). As in Experiment 1,
the factor age, when entered into the subsequent analyses
as a covariate, did not change the patterns of results.
Grand average ERPs for the two groups are displayed in
Fig. 4 (right panel). Using mean amplitude at posterior
electrodes in the 350-450 ms time window, the overall 2
(informativeness:
informative,
underinformative)  2
(AQ-Comm Group: low AQ-Comm, high AQ-Comm)
ANOVA revealed no significant interaction effect
(F(1, 27) = .712, p = .41), suggesting that the groups similarly showed larger N400 responses to informative compared to underinformative statements. Consistent with
this result, and in contrast to Experiment 1, pragmatic abilities now did not predict the size of the underinformativeness N400 effect, as there was no significant correlation
between AQ-Comm score and the mean ERP difference
score for underinformative and informative statements
(Pearson's r = .034, p = .86), nor between the ERP difference
score and scores on the total AQ score (r = .11, p = .57) or
any of the AQ subscales (Social Skill, r = .09, p = .63;
Attention-Switching, r = .13, p = .516; Imagination,
r = 0.78, p = .69; Attention To Detail, r = .282, p = .139).
To directly test for differential effects of AQ-Comm
group across the two experiments, we performed a 2
(informativeness: informative, underinformative)  2 (AQ
Group: low AQ, high AQ)  2 (Experiment: Experiment 1,
Experiment 2) ANOVA. This analysis revealed a statistically

Experiment 2: Underinformative versus informative
mid-sentence critical words

Fig. 4. Left panel: Grand average ERPs elicited by critical words in underinformative (dotted lines) and informative (solid lines) statements from Experiment
2. Right panel: Grand average ERPs elicited by critical words in underinformative and informative statements per AQ-Communication group in Experiment
2.

338

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

LSA differences between conditions (F(1, 28) = .31, p = .58).
These results did not differ between the two groups
(F(1, 27) = .88, p = .36).

significant 3-way interaction effect (F(1, 54) = 8.29,
p = .006), supporting the observation that AQ-Comm modulated the effect of informativeness in Experiment 1 but
not in Experiment 2.

Group differences in ERP responses to sentence-final words
ERP responses to informativeness and the role of LSA
We also examined the ERP responses to sentence-final
words in underinformative and informative statements between the two AQ-Comm groups. As shown in Fig. 5, there
was no modulation of ERPs evoked by sentence-final words
in the underinformative relative to the informative statements in either the low or the high AQ-Comm group. Using
mean amplitude in the 300-500 ms time window across
all electrodes, the overall ANOVA revealed no significant
main effect of informativeness (F(1, 28) = .13, p = .72) and
no significant interaction effect of informativeness with
AQ-Comm group (F(1, 27) = .92, p = .35). Repeating the
above analyses for sentence-final words across the 500-
700 ms window yielded the same pattern of results.

We repeated the same analyses as in Experiment 1 to
investigate the role of lexical-semantic factors, and computed ERP responses for one item set that had a relatively
small LSA difference between informative and underinformative sentences, and one set that had a relatively
large LSA difference between conditions (see http://
www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/materials.htm).
The results indicated that across both groups, LSA modulated the effect of informativeness (F(1, 28) = 5.31,
p = .029) such there was an effect of informativeness in
the item set with large LSA differences between conditions
(F(1, 28) = 9.35, p = .005) but not in the item set with small

Experiment 2: Underinformative versus informative
sentence-final words
Low AQ-Comm

High AQ-Comm

FPz

FPz

Cz

Cz

Oz

Oz

-2 uV

FPz
Cz

+2 uV

Oz
300-500 ms

500-700 ms

300-500 ms

500-700 ms

Underinformative - Informative

-2uV
Underinformative, Sentence-final words
Some people have lungs that are diseased by viruses.

0
Word onset

200

400

600 ms

Informative, Sentence-final words
Some people have pets that are diseased by viruses.

Fig. 5. Grand average ERPs elicited by sentence-final words in underinformative (dotted lines) and informative (solid lines) statements per AQCommunication group in Experiment 2, shown at electrode locations FPz, Cz, and Oz.

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Group differences in ERP responses to real-world congruity
As in Experiment 1, the two AQ-Comm groups produced
similar real-world congruity N400 effects (see Fig. 6). Using
mean amplitude at posterior electrodes in the 350-450 ms
time window, the overall 2 (Real-world congruity: congruous, incongruous)  2 (AQ-Comm Group: low AQ-Comm,
high AQ-Comm) ANOVA revealed a significant main N400
effect of real-world congruity (F(1, 28) = 23.05, p < .001, CI
1.66  .73) but no significant congruity by group interaction effect (F(1, 27) = 2.26, p = .15). Also, as in Experiment
1, there was no significant correlation between AQ-Comm
score and the size of the real-world congruity N400 effect
(r = .15, p = .44).
In a direct test for differential effects of AQ-Comm
group across the two experiments, a 2 (Real-world congruity: congruous, incongruous)  2 (AQ Group: low AQ, high
AQ)  2 (Experiment: Experiment 1, Experiment 2) ANOVA
did not reveal a significant 3-way interaction effect
(F(1, 54) = 1.41, p = .24), i.e. the two AQ-Comm subgroups
showed the same effects of real-world congruity in the
two experiments.
Exploratory analyses for ERP responses to the scalar
quantifiers
As in Experiment 1, we examined whether the two
groups differed in their ERP responses to the sentence-initial quantifiers (the results are available at http://
www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/materials.htm).

339

The quantifier `Some' elicited a relatively broadly distributed negativity compared to `Many' in both groups. We
performed a series of repeated measures ANOVAs to test
for a 2 (quantifier: some, many) by 2 (AQ-Comm group:
low AQ-Comm, high AQ-Comm) interaction, in adjoining
50 ms time windows between 100 and 800 ms after quantifier onset, using all electrodes or only anterior or posterior electrodes. Only in the 450-500 ms window was there
a marginally significant interaction effect when using all
electrodes (F(1, 27) = 4.2, p = .053), or only anterior electrodes (F(1, 27) = 2.99, p = .095). Follow-ups showed that
the quantifier `some' elicited a more negative ERP compared to `many' in the low AQ-Comm group (all electrodes,
F(1, 13) = 4.314, p = .058, CI .85  .87; anterior electrodes,
F(1, 13) = 5.353, p = .038, CI 1.07  1.00), but not in the
high AQ-Comm group (all electrodes, F(1, 14) = .564,
p = .465, CI .29  .27; anterior electrodes, F(1, 14) = .017,
p = .90, CI .05  .81). Additional analyses showed that
there was a marginally significant correlation between
AQ-Comm and the differential quantifier effect when using
all electrodes (r = .366, p = .051). The differential ERP effect at the quantifier further predicted the differential
ERP effect at the critical word when using posterior electrodes (r = .435, p = .018), but also the differential ERP effect of real-world congruity (r = .51, p = .005).
Exit-interview
We examined whether the AQ-Comm groups differed in
their exit-interview ratings for truth-value and natural-

Experiment 2: Poor semantic fit versus good semantic fit

Fig. 6. Left panel: Grand average ERPs elicited by words that had a relatively poor (dotted lines) and relatively good (solid lines) semantic fit per AQCommunication group in Experiment 2 and corresponding scalp distributions. Right panel: Correlation between N400 effect and AQ-Communication score.

340

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

ness. As in Experiment 1, the 2 (AQ-Comm group: low
AQ-Comm, high AQ-Comm) by 2 (informativeness:
informative, underinformative) ANOVA revealed no group
differences in the truth-value ratings and the naturalness
ratings (all Fs < 2). In addition, underinformative and informative statements received similar truth-value ratings
(t < 1) but different naturalness ratings (t(1, 28) = 9.3,
p < .001).

Discussion
In Experiment 2, critical words in statements that were
temporarily underinformative but out of discourse focus
elicited a smaller N400 than critical words in informative
statements. This effect was not modulated by the pragmatic language abilities of the participants, but was modulated by the lexical-semantic differences between
conditions. We take these results to suggest that, when
statements were out of focus (in this case due to the sentence structure and scalar quantifier scope), initial semantic processing costs were driven primarily by the lexical-
semantic relationships between each critical word and
the previous words in the sentence, rather than pragmatic
constraints of informativeness. Interestingly, whereas all
participants in Experiment 1 had indicated in the exitinterview to have noticed underinformativeness, none of
the participants in Experiment 2 indicated to have noticed
any `local' underinformativeness and there were no differential processing costs on sentence-final words.
As mentioned in the introduction to Experiment 2, we
think that the fact that all scalar sentences in Experiment
2 had the same relative clause construction may have contributed to the relatively shallow processing of critical
words, as compared to Experiment 1. We designed the
experiment in this way so that participants would expect
all scalar sentences to have a particular structure with
the most important information near the end of the sentence, directing their focus away from the critical words.
These experiment-based expectations may be related to
structural priming in comprehension whereby the syntactic structure of a sentence can influence the analysis of
subsequent sentences (e.g., Branigan (2007), for review).
As in Experiment 1, we found an interaction effect between pragmatic abilities and the ERP response to the sentence-initial quantifiers in Experiment 2, suggesting that
the groups differed in their pragmatic response to the
quantifiers. However, this was not a clear-cut replication.
Whereas the high AQ-Com group showed a larger differential effect of quantifier type in Experiment 1, it was the low
AQ-Comm group that showed a larger differential effect of
quantifier type in Experiment 2. In addition, although the
differential effects of quantifier type were most pronounced at anterior electrodes in both experiments, the
statistically significant interaction effects occurred in different time windows across the two experiments. Of
course, the experiments differed in an important way,
namely that in Experiment 1 the quantifier `some' was
associated with potential underinformativeness downstream, but not in Experiment 2. It is therefore possible
that the different patterns of results across the experi-

ments reflect that certain task-strategies that were relevant in Experiment 1 (e.g., pragmatic processing related
to the differences in informativeness between `Some' and
`Many') were not applicable in Experiment 2.
Taken together, the results from our first and second
experiment suggest that contextual factors, whether these
are derived from individual pragmatic abilities or the overall experimental context (see also Breheny et al., 2006),
and lexical-semantic factors modulate the processing of
scalar statements. Moreover, when contextual factors
attenuate the impact of pragmatic underinformativeness,
either because certain participants are less likely to process
`pragmatically' or because the experimental context makes
local underinformativeness go unnoticed, lexical-semantic
factors are more likely to surface.

General discussion
In Experiment 1, we tested the hypothesis that pragmatically underinformative statements incur a semantic
processing cost as indexed by the N400 ERP component,
and, moreover, that this is more likely to happen in healthy
individuals who are relatively pragmatically skilled than in
healthy individuals who report everyday-life pragmatic
communication difficulties. Across all participants, underinformative and informative statements (e.g., ``Some people have lungs/pets, . . .") elicited similar N400 ERPs, but
this absence of an overall effect was due to opposite effects
in participants depending on their pragmatic abilities.
Pragmatically more skilled participants (the low AQ-Comm
group) showed a larger N400 to underinformative versus
informative statements - a pragmatic N400 effect that
was independent of the lexical-semantic differences between the underinformative and informative conditions.
In contrast, pragmatically less skilled participants (the high
AQ-Comm group) showed a larger N400 for informative
versus underinformative statements, and this effect was
driven by lexical-semantic factors because it disappeared
when we controlled for lexical-semantic differences between conditions. Interestingly, in Experiment 1, processing differences between these two groups were already
observable at the scalar quantifiers (differential effects on
`some' versus `many' in the high AQ-Comm but not the
low AQ-Comm group), and were also evident at the end
of the sentences (a reduced effect on the sentence-final
word in the high AQ-Comm relative to the low AQ-Comm
group). In contrast, the two groups showed no differences
in their N400 response to statements with a relatively poor
versus good semantic fit in relation to real-world knowledge (e.g., ``Wine and spirits contain sugar/alcohol . . .").
In Experiment 2, we examined the role of linguistic
focus in pragmatic processing by comparing ERP responses
to the same underinformative statements followed by a
relative clause construction (e.g., ``Some people have
lungs/pets that. . .'). Because of the larger quantifier scope
in these sentences, the local underinformativeness of the
embedded statement was irrelevant to ongoing processing
and, according to our exit-interview, went unnoticed by all
participants. As expected, the informative statements now
elicited larger N400 ERPs than (locally) underinformative

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

statements, and this N400 modulation was strongly dependent on lexical-semantic factors in pragmatically more
and less skilled participants alike.

341

als and groups. Each of these points is discussed in further
detail below.
Effects of experimental context

Implications for theory
The fact that underinformative statements elicited an
N400 effect compared to informative statements, albeit
only in a subgroup of participants, suggests that the pragmatic meaning of scalar quantifiers (`some but not all') can
rapidly and incrementally contribute to sentence comprehension (see also Grodner et al., 2010), at least to the extent that the pragmatic meaning was available when the
critical was encountered. This pragmatic N400 effect is
inconsistent with an early claim in the experimental pragmatic literature that pragmatic scalar meaning results
from a post-semantic decision process (e.g., Noveck & Posada, 2003), and with theoretical accounts of language processing that assume an initial, purely linguistic-semantic
analysis that is followed by a later pragmatic stage of processing (e.g. Fodor, 1983; Forster, 1979).
The implications of our results for Relevance Theory or
for the Levinsonian account, however, are less clear as neither theory makes explicit predictions about the time
course of inferential processes. In a Levinsonian account,
the pragmatic scalar meaning is thought to be automatically generated without having to traverse through a logical interpretation first (e.g., Levinson, 2000), whereas
Relevance Theory assumes that scalar inferences are made
only when they are sufficiently supported by the discourse
context (e.g., Sperber & Wilson, 1986). It has been argued
by some researchers that because single sentences like
``Some people have lungs" are without a discourse context
(i.e., `neutral'), and because the logical interpretation is the
default because of its simplicity. Thus, one interpretation
of Relevance Theory might predict an initial logical interpretation and a delay in pragmatic interpretation (e.g.,
Breheny et al., 2006). The fact that we observed a pragmatic N400 effect on `lungs' in the low AQ-Comm Group
in Experiment 1 suggests that there was no such initial logical interpretation at the point of the critical word. It suggests that, at least in these participants, the pragmatic
meaning of `some' was immediately available at the point
of the critical word in the absence of a discourse context.
On the other hand, there were several aspects of the
data that are consistent with an interpretation of Relevance Theory that emphasizes the roles context, standard
of relevance and that allows for certain anticipatory processes. First, the experiments themselves may be considered as `global context' which, in principle, could have
biased some participants towards making scalar inferences
more frequently and rapidly than usual in Experiment 1
and discouraged these participants to generate such inferences in Experiment 2. Second, advocates of Relevance
Theory have argued that the presumption of relevance
may guide certain anticipatory processes (e.g., Wilson &
Sperber, 2004), and that pragmatic scalar meaning can be
generated without having to traverse through a logical
interpretation first (see also Noveck & Sperber, 2007).
Third, what is relevant or not will depend on the specific
reader or listener and can therefore differ across individu-

In both Experiments 1 and 2, many scalar sentences
were presented in close succession. In Experiment 1, one
might argue that the presentation of so many underinformative sentences biased the low-AQ participants towards
generating more scalar inferences than they would during
normal language comprehension. This, however, seems
unlikely: there is little support from the experimental literature that participants in experimental settings are biased
towards generating scalar inferences. In fact, in studies
using sentence-verification tasks, at least 40-50% of participants do not generate scalar inferences (e.g., Bott &
Noveck, 2004; Noveck & Posada, 2003), perhaps because
the true/false verification encourages a strategic use of formal logic (cf. Feeney et al., 2004). Also, our exit-interview
in Experiment 1 indicated that all participants mentioned
that they had treated the underinformative scalar statements as being true. This, if anything, suggests that the
experimental context may have biased against the generation of scalar inferences.
In Experiment 2, however, the experimental context
biased against the generation of scalar inferences limited
to the critical word only, but not against the generation
of scalar inferences per se. The experimental context in this
experiment consisted of the repeated presentation of
scalar statements with a quantifier scope that extended
beyond the critical word, and therefore establishing
truth-value of the complete proposition was only possible
at a later moment in time. The result of this attenuation of
the impact of local pragmatic underinformativeness by
contextual factors was that the local underinformativeness
went unnoticed, and that lexical-semantic factors
dominated semantic processing of the critical words.
Incremental processing and pragmatic expectancy
The observed relationship between pragmatic abilities
and the N400 ERP was specific to pragmatic underinformativeness, because we found no relationship between pragmatic abilities and the N400 modulation by real-world
semantic fit or modulation of the N400 in Experiment 2.
These results suggest that the reported N400 modulation
of informativeness is due of the `genuinely pragmatic' violation of Gricean maxims (Grice, 1975) instead of a violation of or deviation from real-world semantic knowledge.
Thus, in addition to other factors, the N400 indexes the lexico-semantic processing consequences of using pragmatic
constraints during on-line sentence comprehension.
In line with recent work, we have suggested that the
pragmatic presumption of informativeness guides the
participant's expectations about upcoming words (e.g.,
Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008; Van Berkum, 2009; Van
Berkum et al., 2005), which facilitates subsequent semantic processing. Such expectations may be generated before
the onset of the critical word, i.e. they may constitute active predictions that facilitate lexical access of the critical
word (see Delong et al., 2005; Van Berkum et al., 2005),

342

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

or the relevant information may be retrieved only once the
critical word is presented (e.g., Brown, Hagoort, & Kutas,
2000; for discussion on these two different interpretations
of the N400, see Federmeier & Kutas, 1999; Kutas &
Federmeier, 2000; Kutas et al., 2006; Lau et al., 2008;
Van Berkum, 2009). Although much of the prediction literature deals with lexically specific predictions during language comprehension (e.g., Delong et al., 2005; Van
Berkum et al., 2005), we take our results as potential evidence for relatively coarse-grained anticipation, a background of expectations of relevance that can be revised
or elaborated as sentences unfold (e.g., Wilson & Sperber,
2004).
We propose that, in the low-AQ-Comm participants, the
availability of pragmatic scalar meaning allowed participants to derive expectations about upcoming words based
on the pragmatic presumption of informativeness, so that
they expected the upcoming word to denote something
that only some, hence not all people have. In this respect,
we take our N400 results in these subjects in Experiment
1 not to directly reflect full-fledged, online pragmatic inferencing, but rather to reflect the semantic processing consequences of earlier and relatively implicit pragmatic
inferencing (see also Kuperberg, Choi, Cohn, Paczynski, &
Jackendoff, 2010a; Kuperberg, Paczynski, et al., 2010b;
Van Berkum, 2009).
In addition to the effects at the critical word, there were
also additional downstream processing consequences of
violating pragmatic expectations, with effects on the sentence-final words in both low AQ-Comm and high AQComm groups (although, as discussed below, this effect
was somewhat smaller in the high AQ-Comm group). No
such effect was seen in Experiment 2. Our design did not
allow us to test specific hypotheses with regard to these
sentence-final effects and the nature of this differential
ERP effect remains unclear. We think it is unlikely to be
an N400 effect, because of its more frontal distribution
and prolonged morphology. Instead, it could reflect a larger
positivity to sentence-final words in the underinformative
statements. This would be consistent with other reports of
positive ERP effects elicited by sentence-final words in sentences requiring inferencing as compared simpler sentences (e.g., Filik, Sanford, & Leuthold, 2008; Kuperberg,
Choi, et al., 2010a; Kuperberg, Paczynski, et al., 2010b),
possibly reflecting additional sentence wrap-up processing
(e.g., Steinhauer & Friederici, 2001).

Individual differences in scalar processing
One of the most striking findings of Experiment 1 was
the heterogeneity between the individuals in their ERP
profiles that was predicted by their real-life pragmatic
abilities. One possible interpretation of these results is that
scalar inferences are not obligatory (see also Bott & Noveck, 2004; Breheny et al., 2006): many of the participants
in Experiment 1 - the less pragmatically skilled participants - did not show a pragmatic N400 effect. This result
seems to mirror the observation from the behavioral literature that some people tend to make scalar inferences and
some do not (e.g., Noveck & Posada, 2003), as defined by a

`false' or a `true' response to underinformative scalar
statements.
The underlying cause of these individual differences is
as yet unknown and such variability in the healthy adult
population has often been ignored by researchers (but
see Banga, Heutinck, Berends, & Hendriks, 2009; Feeney
et al., 2004). One relatively trivial explanation for these
individual differences is that the groups differed in the extent that they were actually paying attention to sentence
meaning rather than to the superficial coherence or lexical-semantic relatedness of the words in the sentences.
This seems unlikely, however, for several reasons. First,
such a `non-specific attention' account would predict similar patterns for Experiments 1 and 2. In Experiment 2,
however, we saw no between-group differences even
though the same lexical items were presented. Second,
such an account would predict group differences in the
ERP responses to the real-world congruity manipulation.
Even though the real-world congruous-incongruous sentences differed in several respects from the scalar sentences, one might expect some differential N400 effects
between the two groups for these items, given that the
N400 is sensitive to attentional factors (see Chwilla, Brown,
& Hagoort, 1995). Third, as discussed below, the high AQComm participants showed differential effects at the point
of the quantifier itself in Experiment 1, suggesting that
they were attending to its meaning.
We therefore suggest that a more specific impairment
mediated the absence of a pragmatic N400 effect in the
high AQ-Comm participants of Experiment 1. One possibility is that these participants were unable to generate scalar
inferences, e.g., Noveck, 2001). This draws analogies from
research on the differential ability of children and adults
to generate scalar inferences. Young children (age 7-
9 years) seem less likely than older children or adults to
generate scalar inferences (e.g., Guasti et al., 2005; Noveck,
2001; Pouscoulous, Noveck, Politzer, & Bastide, 2007;
Smith, 1980), although it appears that this ability is largely
constrained by task-specific features and that it can be improved by training (e.g., Feeney et al., 2004; Guasti et al.,
2005; Pouscoulous et al., 2007). Such results are often ascribed to children having a relatively under-developed
ability for pragmatic inferencing or a relative insensitivity
to pragmatic constraints (e.g., Smith, 1980). If the high
AQ-Comm participants in the current study show similar
impairments, these may, in turn, be related to the notion
of `standard of relevance' from Relevance Theory. This
holds that individuals generate scalar inferences only
when they are required to meet the individual's internal
standard of relevance, reflecting a trade-off between the
possible cognitive gains associated with generating the
inference and the amount of cognitive effort necessary to
derive it (e.g., Carston, 1998). Individuals with self-reported impaired pragmatic abilities may have a lower standard of relevance, to the extent that they are less likely to
compute the pragmatic consequences of linguistic input. It
could also be the case that generating scalar inferences is
more costly for those individuals, as has been suggested
for children (e.g., Noveck, 2001).
However, our ERP findings indicate that the high
AQ-Comm group was not completely insensitive to the

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

pragmatic manipulation. Both AQ-Comm groups showed a
sentence-final ERP modulation by informativeness
(although this effect was marginally larger in low AQComm participants). In addition, both low and high AQComm participants indicated in the exit-interview that
they had in fact registered the pragmatic anomaly. There
are at least two different explanations for these results.
First, it is possible that the high AQ-Comm participants
simply showed a delay in pragmatic processing. For example, they might not have generated a scalar inference by
the time the critical word was encountered (leading to a
pragmatic N400 effect) but such an inference may have
been computed at some later point such that, at the sentence-final word, the pragmatic anomaly was registered.
This account, however, is difficult to reconcile with the
observation that these high AQ-Comm participants did
show a differential ERP effect at the scalar quantifier itself.
An alternative explanation is that, the high AQ-Comm
participants did register the pragmatic meaning of the
word `some', but strategically ignored or inhibited the
resulting pragmatic meaning of the scalar statements at
the point of the critical word, and focused on the logical
meaning of the sentences instead, perhaps based on their
observation that standard conversational norms in Experiment 1 were repeatedly violated (see Guasti et al., for a
similar suggestion). This latter explanation is similar to
what has been proposed to explain individual differences
in logical reasoning tasks, namely that some people are
simply better in temporarily ignoring or inhibiting their
pragmatic knowledge in order to focus on the logical reasoning requirements of a task (see Feeney et al., 2004;
Handley & Feeney, 2004; Stanovich & West, 2000). The fact
that the high, but not low, AQ-Comm group showed a differential ERP response to the scalar quantifiers could be taken as consistent with such an account. These early ERP
effects may have reflected the active `undoing' of the automatic access to the pragmatic meaning of `some'.
These conclusions, however, are only speculative, and
dedicated follow-up experiments are needed to examine
the functional significance of the observed ERP differences
the scalar quantifiers. One possible prediction is that high
AQ-Comm people are also more likely to respond `true' to
underinformative statements in a sentence-verification paradigm (but see Pijnacker et al., 2009) and that this behavioral
outcome is heralded by ERP responses to the scalar
quantifiers.
Although our experiments were not optimized for investigating this issue and our conclusions are necessarily post
hoc, the ERP modulations at the scalar quantifiers might be
taken to reflect pragmatic processing that took place before
encountering the critical words. Although the nature of the
differential effect of quantifier differed between Experiments 1 and 2, in both experiments there was a near-significant correlation between the differential effect of quantifier
and the differential effect at the critical words. This correlation should be interpreted with caution, however, because it
could be the case that larger overall ERP amplitudes also
generate larger differential effects, which may confound
the examination of a relationship between two ERP difference scores. Nevertheless, one tentative conclusion could
be that scalar quantifiers can rapidly evoke scalar inferences

343

that guide expectations about upcoming words based on the
pragmatic presumption of informativeness, and, as a result,
influence downstream semantic processes.
A dynamic interplay between levels of processing, as indexed
by the N400
In addition to the pragmatic effect of (under)informativeness, this paper has also highlighted two other influences on semantic processes as indexed by the N400: the
effects of lexico-semantic co-occurrence, and the effect of
real-world knowledge. Previous studies have shown that
all these factors can independently influence the modulation of the N400, and that, when they all support the same
interpretation, they can act in parallel to facilitate processing (e.g., Ditman, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2007b; Federmeier & Kutas, 1999). A key question, however, is which of
these factors prevail when they are in conflict with one another. There are reports of lexical-semantic associations
overriding any effect of pragmatic constraints on the
N400 (e.g., Fischler et al., 1983; Kounios & Holcomb,
1992; Noveck & Posada, 2003), but this seems to be the
case only in pragmatically infelicitous sentences (see Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008, for discussion). Lexico-semantic associations can, under other circumstances, also
temporarily dominate processing of implausible sentences
and discourse, with delayed effects observable within a
late positivity/P600 time window (e.g., Kuperberg, Sitnikova, Caplan, & Holcomb, 2003; Nieuwland & Van Berkum,
2005; for review see Kuperberg (2007)). However, in a recent study, we showed that causal coherence across sentences can modulate the N400, even when semantic
relationships between individual words are matched
(Kuperberg, Choi, et al., 2010a; Kuperberg, Paczynski,
et al., 2010b). The evidence thus points towards a dynamic
interplay between different levels of processing, with each
level of processing being influenced by a range of relevant
factors. In the current study, we have shown that pragmatic licensing can override lexical-semantic co-occurrence in some individuals but not in others. Moreover,
we have shown that differences in linguistic focus can shift
the balance from `full-fledged', higher-order compositional
processing to processing driven by lexical-semantic relationships (e.g., Ferreira et al., 2002; Sanford & Garrod,
1998; Sanford & Sturt, 2002). Taken together, these observations provide further evidence for a dynamic interplay
between lexical-semantic, pragmatic and neuropsychological factors during on-line sentence comprehension.
Conclusion
A major feat of human cognition is our ability to use
language to efficiently communicate about the world.
Mapping an incoming message about the world onto our
world knowledge involves at least two aspects: the message can be true or false with respect to what we hold to
be true, and it can be relatively informative or trivial in
the light of what we already know. In the case of scalar
statements, this means that logical-structural meaning of
the scalar quantifier needs to be combined with our real-

344

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

world knowledge, our pragmatic knowledge of what constitutes a trivial or informative thing to say, and our individual tendencies to rely more on logic or pragmatic
aspects of language. In the current study, we provide ERP
evidence that all these factors exert their influence during
on-line language comprehension.
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Kana Okano, Liam Clegg and
Sarah Cleary for their help with stimulus preparation and
data collection, and to Ira Noveck, two anonymous reviewers and Andrea Eyleen Martin-Nieuwland for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. This research
was supported by an NWO Rubicon Grant to MSN and by
NIMH-R01-MH071635 to GRK.
References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with context during
human sentence processing. Cognition, 30, 191-238.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual
of mental disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Bach, K. (2006). The top 10 misconceptions about implicature. In B. J.
Birner & G. Ward (Eds.), A festschrift for Larry Horn. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Banga, A., Heutinck, I., Berends, S. M., & Hendriks, P. (2009). Some
implicatures reveal semantic differences. In B. Botma & J. van Kampen
(Eds.), Linguistics in the Netherlands (pp. 1-13). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2008). Autism, hypersystemizing, and truth. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 64-75.
Baron-Cohen, S., Tager-Flusberg, H., & Cohen, D. J. (2000). Understanding
other minds: Perspectives from autism and developmental cognitive
neuroscience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., & Clubley, E.
(2001). The autism spectrum quotient (AQ): Evidence from Asperger
syndrome/high functioning autism, males and females, scientists and
mathematicians. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31,
5-17.
Bezuidenhout, A., & Cutting, J. C. (2002). Literal meaning, minimal
propositions, and pragmatic processing. Journal of Pragmatics, 34,
433-456.
Bezuidenhout, A., & Morris, R. (2004). Implicature, relevance and default
inferences. In I. Noveck & D. Sperber (Eds.), Experimental pragmatics.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Birch, S., & Rayner, K. (1997). Linguistic focus affects eye movements
during reading. Memory & Cognition, 28, 653-660.
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2008). An alternative
perspective on ``semantic P600" effects in language comprehension.
Brain Research Reviews, 59, 55-73.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The
onset and time course of scalar inferences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 437-457.
Branigan, H. P. (2007). Syntactic priming. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 1, 1-16.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalized scalar
implicatures generated by default? An on-line investigation into the
role of context in generating pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100,
434-463.
Brown, C. M., Hagoort, P., & Kutas, M. (2000). Postlexical integration
processes in language comprehension: Evidence from brain-imaging
research. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (2nd ed.,
pp. 881-895). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Camblin, C. C., Ledoux, K., Boudewyn, M., Gordon, P. C., & Swaab, T. Y.
(2007). Processing new and repeated names: Effects of coreference on
repetition priming with speech and fast RSVP. Brain Research, 1146,
172-184.
Carston, R. (1998). Informativeness, relevance and scalar implicature. In R.
Carston & S. Uchida (Eds.), Relevance theory: Applications and
implications (pp. 179-236). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity phenomena, and the
syntax/pragmatics interface. In A. Belletti (Ed.), Structures and beyond.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chwilla, D. J., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1995). The N400 as a function of
the level of processing. Psychophysiology, 32, 274-285.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. New York, NY, US: Cambridge
University Press.
Coulson, S. (2004). Electrophysiology and pragmatic language
comprehension. In I. Noveck & D. Sperber (Eds.), Experimental
pragmatics (pp. 187-206). San Diego: Palgrave Macmillan.
Crain, S., & Steedman, M. (1985). On not being led up the garden path: The
use of context by the psychological parser. In D. R. Dowty, L.
Karttunen, & A. M. N. Zwicky (Eds.), Natural language parsing
(pp. 320-358). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Cutler, A., & Clifton, C. E. (1999). Comprehending spoken language: A
blueprint of the listener. In C. M. Brown & P. Hagoort (Eds.), The
neurocognition of language (pp. 123-166). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & van Donselaar, W. (1997). Prosody in the
comprehension of spoken language: A literature review. Language
and Speech, 40, 141-201.
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are more logical under
cognitive load: Dual task impact on scalar implicature. Experimental
Psychology, 54, 128-133.
Delong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005). Probabilistic word preactivation during language comprehension inferred from electrical
brain activity. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Ditman, T., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2007a). An investigation of
concurrent
ERP
and
self-paced
reading
methodologies.
Psychophysiology, 44, 927-935.
Ditman, T., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2007b). The contributions of
lexico-semantic and discourse information to the resolution of
ambiguous categorical anaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes,
22, 793-827.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do speakers and
listeners observe the Gricean maxim of quantity? Journal of Memory
and Language, 54, 554-573.
Federmeier, K. D. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and roots of prediction
in language comprehension. Psychophysiology, 44, 491-505.
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other name: Longterm memory structure and sentence processing. Journal of Memory
and Language, 41, 469-495.
Feeney, A., Scrafton, S., Duckworth, A., & Handley, S. J. (2004). The story of
some: Everyday pragmatic inference by children and adults. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 121-132.
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferraro, V. (2002). Good-enough
representations in language comprehension. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11, 11-15.
Filik, R., Sanford, A. J., & Leuthold, H. (2008). Processing pronouns without
antecedents: Evidence fromevent-related brain potentials. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 1315-1326.
Fischler, I., Bloom, P. A., Childers, D. G., Roucos, S. E., & Perry, N. W. (1983).
Brain potentials related to stages of sentence verification.
Psychophysiology, 20, 400-409.
Fischler, I., Childers, D. G., Achariyapaopan, T., & Perry, N. W. (1985). Brain
potentials during sentence verification: Automatic aspects of
comprehension. Psychophysiology, 20, 400-409.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forster, K. (1979). Levels of processing and the structure of the language
processor. In W. E. Cooper & E. C. T. Walker (Eds.), Sentence processing:
Psycholinguistic studies presented to Merrill Garrett. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Francis, W., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage. New
York: Houghton Mifflin.
Frazier, L., Carlson, K., & Clifton, C. (2006). Prosodic phrasing is central to
language comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 244-249.
Gamut, L. (1991). Logic, Language, and Meaning (Vol. 1). Chicago, Illinois:
University of Chicago Press.
Gazdar, G. (1979). Pragmatics: Implicature, presupposition, and logical form.
New York: Academic Press.
Geurts, B. (2009). Scalar implicature and local pragmatics. Mind and
language, 24, 51-79.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.),
Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic
Press.
Grodner, D., Klein, N. M., Carbary, K. M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2010).
``Some", and possibly all, scalar inferences are not delayed: Evidence
for immediate pragmatic enrichment. Cognition, 116, 42-55.
Guasti, M. T., Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Foppolo, F., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2005). Why children and adults sometimes (but not
always) compute implicatures. Language and Cognitive Processes,
20, 667-696.

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346
Hagoort, P., Hald, L. A., Bastiaansen, M., & Petersson, K. M. (2004).
Integration of word meaning and world knowledge in language
comprehension. Science, 304, 438-441.
Hald, L. A., Steenbeek-Planting, E. G., & Hagoort, P. (2007). The interaction
of discourse context and world knowledge in online sentence
comprehension. Evidence from the N400. Brain Research, 1146,
210-218.
Handley, S. J., & Feeney, A. (2004). Reasoning and pragmatics: The case of
even if. In I. Noveck & D. Sperber (Eds.), Experimental pragmatics.
London: Palgrave Press.
Happe, F. G. E. (1993). Communicative competence and theory of mind in
autism. A test of relevance theory. Cognition, 48, 101-109.
Hirotani, M., Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (2006). Punctuation and intonation
effects on clause and sentence wrap-up: Evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 425-443.
Horn, L. R. (1972). On the semantic properties of logical operators in English.
Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Los Angeles.
Horn, L. R. (2006). The border wars: A neo-Gricean perspective. In K. von
Heusinger & K. Turner (Eds.), Where semantics meets pragmatics
(pp. 21-48). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Huang, Y., & Snedeker, J. (2009). Online interpretation of scalar
quantifiers: Insight into the semantics-pragmatics interface.
Cognitive Psychology, 58, 376-415.
Joliffe, T., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1999). A test of central coherence theory:
Linguistic processing in high-functioning adults with autism or
Asperger syndrome: Is local coherence impaired? Cognition, 71,
149-185.
Koornneef, A. W., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2006). On the use of verb-based
implicit causality in sentence comprehension: Evidence from selfpaced reading and eye tracking. Journal of Memory and Language, 54,
445-465.
Kounios, J., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Structure and process in semantic
memory: Evidence from event-related brain potentials and reaction
times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 121, 459-479.
Kucera, J., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational analysis of present- day
American English. Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
Kuperberg, G. R. (2007). Neural mechanisms of language comprehension:
Challenges to syntax. Brain Research, 1146, 23-49.
Kuperberg, G. R., Choi, A., Cohn, N., Paczynski, M., & Jackendoff, R. (2010a).
Electrophysiological correlates of Complement Coercion. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21333.
Kuperberg, G. R., Paczynski, M., & Ditman, T. (2010b). Establishing causal
coherence across sentences: An ERP study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, doi:10.1162/jocn.2010.21452.
Kuperberg, G. R., Sitnikova, T., Caplan, D., & Holcomb, P. J. (2003).
Electrophysiological
distinctions
in
processing
conceptual
relationships within simple sentences. Cognitive Brain Research, 17,
117-129.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2000). Electrophysiology reveals semantic
memory use in language comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4, 463-470.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences: Brain
potentials reflect semantic incongruity. Science, 207, 203-205.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during reading reflect
word expectancy and semantic association. Nature, 307, 161-163.
Kutas, M., Van Petten, C., & Kluender, R. (2006). Psycholinguistics
electrified II: 1994-2005. In M. Traxler & M. A. Gernsbacher (Eds.),
Handbook of psycholinguistics (2nd ed., pp. 659-724). New York:
Elsevier.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's problem: The
latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Dumais, S. T. (1998). Introduction to latent
semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.
Lau, E. F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for
semantics: (De)constructing the n400. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9,
920-933.
Legge, G. E., Ahn, S. J., Klitz, T. S., & Luebker, A. (1997). Psychophysics of
reading-XVI. The visual span in normal and low vision. Vision
Research, 37, 1999-2010.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized
conversational implicature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., et al. (2000). The autism diagnostic
observation schedule - Generic: A standard measure of social and
communication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 205-223.
Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994). Autism diagnostic interview -
Revised: A revised version of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of

345

individuals with possible pervasive developmental disorders. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24, 659-685.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). Lexical
nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological Review, 101,
676-703.
Musolino, J., & Lidz, J. (2006). Why children are not universally successful
with quantification. Linguistics, 44, 817-852.
Nieuwland, M. S., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2008). When the truth is not too
hard to handle: An event-related potential study on the pragmatics of
negation. Psychological Science, 19, 1213-1218.
Nieuwland, M. S., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2005). Testing the limits of the
semantic illusion phenomenon: ERPs reveal temporary change
deafness in discourse comprehension. Cognitive Brain Research, 24,
691-701.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than adults:
Experimental investigations of scalar implicature. Cognition, 78,
165-188.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time course of an
implicature: An evoked potentials study. Brain and Language, 85,
203-210.
Noveck, I. A., & Reboul, A. (2008). Experimental pragmatics: A Gricean
turn in the study of language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12,
425-431.
Noveck, I. A., & Sperber, D. (2004). Experimental pragmatics. Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Noveck, I. A., & Sperber, D. (2007). The why and how of experimental
pragmatics: The case of `scalar inferences'. In N. Roberts (Ed.),
Advances in pragmatics. Palgrave.
Otten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2007). What makes a discourse
constraining? Comparing the effects of discourse message and
scenario fit on the discourse-dependent N400 effect. Brain Research,
1153, 166-177.
Otten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). Discourse-based lexical
anticipation: Prediction or priming? Discourse Processes, 45, 464-496.
Pijnacker, J., Hagoort, P., Buitelaar, J., Teunisse, J., & Geurts, B. (2009).
Pragmatic inferences in high-functioning adults with autism and
Asperger syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39,
607-618.
Pouscoulous, N., Noveck, I., Politzer, G., & Bastide, A. (2007). Processing
costs and implicature development. Language Acquisition, 14,
347-375.
Rayner, K., Kambe, G., & Duffy, S. A. (2000). The effect of clause wrap-up
on eye movements during reading. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 53A, 1061-1080.
Recanati, F. (2003). Embedded implicatures. Philosophical Perspectives, 17,
299-332.
Regel, S., Gunter, T. C., & Friederici, A. D. (2010). Isn't it ironic? An
electrophysiological
exploration
of
figurative
language
comprehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. doi: 10.1162/
jocn.2010.21411.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Quantification and semantic memory. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 307-340.
Sanford, A. J., & Garrod, S. C. (1998). The role of scenario mapping in text
comprehension. Discourse Processes, 26, 159-190.
Sanford, A. J., & Sturt, P. (2002). Depth of processing in language
comprehension: Not noticing the evidence. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 382-386.
Schindele, R., Ludtke, J., & Kaup, B. (2008). Comprehending
negation: A study with adults diagnosed with high functioning
autism or Asperger's syndrome. Intercultural Pragmatics, 5,
421-444.
Sedivy, J. (2007). Implicatures in real-time conversation: A view from
language processing research. Philosophy Compass, 2, 475-496. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-9991.2007.00082.x.
Smith, C. L. (1980). Quantifiers and question answering in young children.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 30, 191-205.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication and cognition.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning:
Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
127, 645-726.
Steinhauer, K., & Friederici, A. D. (2001). Prosodic boundaries, comma
rules, and brain responses: The closure positive shift in ERPs as a
universal marker for prosodic phrasing in listeners and readers.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30, 267-295.
Tager-Flusberg, H. (1981). On the nature of linguistic functioning in early
infantile autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 11,
45-56.

346

M.S. Nieuwland et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 324-346

Tager-Flusberg, H. (1985). Psycholinguistic approaches to language and
communication in autism. In E. Schopler & G. B. Mesibov (Eds.),
Current issues in autism (pp. 69-88). New York: Kluwer.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (1995). Sentence comprehension. In J.
L. Miller & P. D. Eimas (Eds.), Speech, language, and communication
(pp. 217-262). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press, Inc.
Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2004). Sentence comprehension in a wider
discourse: Can we use ERPs to keep track of things? In M.
Carreiras, Jr. & C. Clifton, Jr. (Eds.), The on-line study of sentence
comprehension: Eyetracking, ERPs and beyond (pp. 229-270). New
York: Psychology Press.
Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2009). The neuropragmatics of `simple' utterance
comprehension: An ERP review. In U. Sauerland & K. Yatsushiro (Eds.),
Semantics and pragmatics: From experiment to theory (pp. 276-316).
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., Zwitserlood, P., Kooijman, V., & Hagoort,
P. (2005). Anticipating upcoming words in discourse: Evidence from

ERPs and reading times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition, 31, 443-467.
Van Berkum, J. J. A., Van den Brink, D., Tesink, C. M. J. Y., Kos, M., &
Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integration of speaker and message.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 580-591.
Van Petten, C. (1993). A comparison of lexical and sentence-level context
effects in event-related potentials. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8,
485-531.
Van Petten, C., Weckerly, J., McIsaac, H. K., & Kutas, M. (1997). Working
memory capacity dissociates lexical and sentential context effects.
Psychological Science, 8, 238-242.
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (2004). Relevance theory. In G. Ward & L. Horn
(Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics (pp. 607-632). Oxford: Blackwell.
Woodbury-Smith, M. R., Robinson, J., Wheelwright, S., & Baron-Cohen, S.
(2005). Screening adults for Asperger syndrome using the AQ: A
preliminary study of its diagnostic validity in clinical practice. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 35, 331-335.

