Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Real-time processing of gender-marked articles by native and
non-native Spanish speakers
Casey Lew-Williams , Anne Fernald
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 31 March 2010
revision received 5 July 2010
Available online 1 September 2010
Keywords:
Language processing
Grammatical gender
Second language
Eye movements
Language development
Statistical learning

a b s t r a c t
Three experiments using online-processing measures explored whether native and nonnative Spanish-speaking adults use gender-marked articles to identify referents of target
nouns more rapidly, as shown previously with 3-year-old children learning Spanish as
L1 (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). In Experiment 1, participants viewed familiar objects
with names of either the same or different grammatical gender while listening to Spanish
sentences referring to one object. L1 adults, like L1 children, oriented to the target more
rapidly on different-gender trials, when the article was informative about noun identity;
however, L2 adults did not. Experiments 2 and 3 controlled for frequency of exposure to
article-noun pairs by using novel nouns. L2 adults could not exploit gender information
when different article-noun pairs were used in teaching and testing. Experience-related
factors may influence how L1 adults and children and L2 adults--who learned Spanish at
different ages and in different settings--use grammatical gender in real-time processing.
Published by Elsevier Inc.

Introduction
Adults learning a second language typically lack the fluency in understanding and speaking that is characteristic
of native speakers. One aspect of morphosyntax that can
be especially complicated for learners to master is grammatical gender--a system found in many of the world's
languages that assigns nouns to noun classes and marks
syntactically related words for agreement. Writer David
Sedaris, a native English speaker, describes his difficulty
learning the French gender-marked articles la and le
(`the'), and his increasing reliance on the gender-neutral,
plural article les: ``My confidence hit a new low when my
friend Adeline told me that French children often make
mistakes, but never with the [gender] of their nouns. `It's
just something we grow up with,' she said. `We just hear
the gender once and think of it as part of the word.' Tired
of embarrassing myself in front of two-year-olds, I've
 Corresponding author. Address: Waisman Center, Infant Learning Lab,
1500 Highland Ave., Room 501, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53705-2280, United States.
E-mail address: lewwilliams@wisc.edu (C. Lew-Williams).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2010.07.003

started referring to everything in the plural" (Sedaris,
2000, p. 190). Indeed young children learning a language
with grammatical gender not only make fewer gender
agreement errors than do older language learners (Karmiloff-Smith, 1979; Scherag, Demuth, Rosler, Neville, & Roder,
2004; Slobin, 1985), but also take advantage of gendermarked words in real time to interpret spoken sentences
more rapidly (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007).
Here we explore how adults learning Spanish as a second language (L2 adults) process gender-marked articles,
such as la and el (`the[fem/masc]'), as compared to adults
who learned Spanish as a first language (L1 adults). In
Experiment 1, we asked whether native English-speaking
adults learning Spanish as L2 were able to use potentially
informative gender-marked articles to interpret familiar
nouns more efficiently. These L2 adults were compared
with adult native speakers of Spanish, and also with the
3-year-old children learning Spanish as L1 observed in
our previous research (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). Because native speakers have been exposed to the names of
familiar objects and animals many more times than have
non-native speakers, Experiments 2 and 3 equated frequency of exposure to the target nouns used in testing.

448

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

L1 and L2 adults were trained and tested on newly learned
Spanish nouns preceded by gender-marked articles. Thus
we sought to determine whether adult L2 learners of Spanish differ from native Spanish speakers in the efficiency
with which they process both familiar and novel article-
noun sequences in real-time language comprehension.
Processing of grammatical gender by native speakers
While research on grammatical gender in linguistics has
documented the complex noun categorization systems
that exist in many languages throughout the world (Corbett, 1991), psycholinguistic researchers have focused on
the learning and processing of gender systems. Such studies explore how learners use phonological, semantic, and
morphological cues to assign nouns to gender classes (Karmiloff-Smith, 1979; Perez-Pereira, 1991) and to track gender agreement across words in both speech production
(e.g., Andersen, 1984) and sentence comprehension (e.g.,
Bates, Devescovi, Hernandez, & Pizzamiglio, 1996).
Experimental studies show that L1 speakers of languages
with grammatical gender use morphosyntactic cues to gender in real time to identify words and build sentence meaning. In one study, native speakers of French responded more
rapidly to nouns preceded by an article correctly marked for
gender than to nouns that were not (Grosjean, Dommergues, Cornu, Guillelmon, & Besson, 1994). In the first experiment, French-speaking adults participated in a gating task
in which they heard incrementally longer portions of noun
phrases beginning either with a gender-marked article (e.g.,
une jolie plage, `a[f] nice beach[f]') or without a gendermarked article (e.g., jolie plage, `nice beach[f]'). Because the
adjective joli(e) has the same pronunciation in both feminine and masculine forms, it served as an intervening word
that was uninformative about gender in all article-noun
pairs, allowing for more processing time. On trials with prenominal gender marking, participants needed to hear less of
the target noun to determine its identity than on trials with
no prenominal gender marking. In a second experiment,
French-speaking adults listened to the same stimuli in a lexical decision task, indicating via a button-press whether
nouns were real words or non-words. When prenominal
gender marking was present, participants responded faster,
showing that gender marking on articles affected speed of
lexical access by native French speakers.
Gender information also facilitates interpretation for native speakers of Italian (Bates et al., 1996). In a series of studies using auditory naming and grammaticality judgments,
adults were presented with adjective-noun pairs that were
gender-congruent (e.g., brutta casa, `ugly[f] house[f]'), gender-incongruent (e.g., brutto casa, `ugly[m] house[f]'), or gender-ambiguous (e.g., grande casa, `large[amb.] house[f]').
Participants' latencies to repeat the noun or make a grammaticality decision were faster for gender-congruent pairs
and slower for gender-incongruent pairs relative to the neutral baseline. Since processing was disrupted when Italian
speakers encountered violations of gender agreement, these
findings revealed inhibitory as well as facilitatory effects of
gender priming. Differences in processing speed were also
evident in research using event-related brain potentials, as
native Spanish-speaking adults read complex sentences

containing nouns that either agreed or disagreed in gender
with the preceding article (Wicha, Moreno, & Kutas, 2004).
These results revealed sensitivity at a neural level to violations of gender agreement, providing further evidence that
native speakers use gender information in real time to form
expectations about possible subsequent words.
One previous study has used eye tracking to investigate
whether prenominal gender marking affects how listeners
recognize spoken words (Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus, &
Magnuson, 2000). French-speaking adults viewed scenes
containing objects with names that shared phonological onsets but differed in grammatical gender (e.g., vase, `vase[m],'
vache, `cow[f]'). Eye-tracking studies investigating the cohort
effect show that when listeners hear the first few phonemes
of a noun, they are equally likely to look at a target picture or
a cohort competitor that share a phonological onset; only
with more speech information do listeners increasingly shift
to the target picture. Dahan et al. proposed that the presence
of a prenominal gender marker might guide listeners to the
target with fewer false alarms to competitor objects. Participants heard gender-informative commands (e.g., Cliquez
sur le[m/singular] vase) as well as gender-uninformative commands (e.g., Cliquez sur les[neutral/plural] vases, `Click on the
vases'). Listeners responded more rapidly to nouns preceded
by a gender-informative singular article (la[f], le[m]) than to
nouns preceded by a gender-ambiguous plural article
(les[neut.]). Moreover, the gender-marked article eliminated
interference from the phonological competitor. These
findings were interpreted as evidence that gender-marked
articles affect lexical access directly, by constraining the
set of candidates considered as possible referents. Using
diverse methodologies--including those that require metalinguistic judgments, like lexical decision, and those that
reflect more naturalistic processing, like eye tracking--these
studies show that gender information can enable adult
native speakers to recognize familiar words more rapidly.
Such impressive efficiency in processing is not restricted to adults. Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007) found
that 3-year-olds learning Spanish as L1 can also use gender-marked articles to more rapidly identify visual referents. Children looked at paired pictures of objects with
names of either the same (e.g., la pelota, `ball', la galleta,
`cookie') or different grammatical gender (la pelota, el zapato, `shoe'), as they heard a Spanish sentence referring to
one of the objects (Encuentra la pelota, `Find the ball').
Eye movements were used as an index of listeners' latency
to identify the target referent: children were faster to orient to the correct referent on different-gender trials, when
the article was potentially informative, than on same-gender trials, when the article revealed nothing about the following noun. When the monolingual Spanish-speaking
parents of these children were tested in the same procedure, they were faster than children overall on both trial
types, but showed the same advantage on different-gender
trials. This study provided the first evidence that young
Spanish-learning children with only 500 words in their
expressive vocabularies already demonstrated a processing
advantage characteristic of adult native speakers. Similar
findings have since emerged from studies with Frenchand Dutch-learning toddlers (van Heugten & Johnson, in
press; van Heugten & Shi, 2009).

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

Differences between native and non-native speakers in
processing grammatical gender
A substantial literature investigating differences in language processing between native and non-native speakers
shows that L2 adults are generally slower in lexical access
than L1 adults across a variety of tasks and language structures (Hahne, 2001; McDonald, 2000; Segalowitz, 2003). In
research using ERP measures, L1 and L2 adults also show different responses to sentences containing syntactic violations, such as incorrect phrase structure or incorrect
grammatical gender agreement (Hahne, 2001; Tokowicz &
MacWhinney, 2005; Weber-Fox & Neville, 2001). While native speakers show a positivity in the centroparietal cortex
after roughly 600 ms, L2 adults' responses are characterized
by ERP distributions with slower latencies. In contrast, when
listening to sentences with semantic rather than syntactic
violations, L1 and L2 adults are more similar in their responses: both groups show a negativity in the centroparietal
cortex after roughly 400 ms--a similarity that can appear
after only 14 h of L2 instruction (McLaughlin, Osterhout, &
Kim, 2004). However, L2 adults' ERP responses to semantic
violations may be slightly delayed relative to L1 adults (Neville et al., 1997).
The research reviewed here shows that native speakers
exploit gender information to interpret spoken language
more efficiently. Can non-native speakers of a language with
grammatical gender also take advantage of gender information to identify nouns more rapidly? Guillelmon and Grosjean (2001) studied monolingual French-speaking adults
as well as highly proficient English-French bilinguals who
had learned French either in childhood or in early adulthood. Bilingual participants were highly fluent speakers
with at least 20 years of immersion in a French community.
In an auditory naming task, participants repeated a noun
within a short phrase that was either preceded by gender
marking or not. Monolinguals and early bilinguals were significantly faster to repeat the noun when prenominal gender marking was present. However, the late bilinguals
were slower overall and showed no processing advantage
on gender-marked trials. Participants who had learned
French as adults were less able to make efficient use of morphosyntactic cues in online processing, as compared to native French speakers and early L2 learners--a surprising
finding given that they had been immersed in French for
an average of 24 years.
In a related study comparing native German-speaking
adults with L2 German speakers whose L1 was English,
the L2 speakers showed a similar insensitivity to gender
marking (Scherag et al., 2004). Both groups were highly
proficient, with no differences in vocabulary level, grammatical knowledge, or productive language competence,
based on language assessments for foreign students learning German. In a priming procedure, participants were presented with an adjective (e.g., faltiges, `wrinkled[neut.]') that
either agreed or disagreed in gender with the noun that
followed (Gesicht, `face[neut.]' vs. Haut, `skin[f]'). Some nouns
were real German words while others were non-words,
and participants were asked to distinguish between these
in a lexical decision task. When the adjective and noun
agreed in gender, L1 German speakers were faster to iden-

449

tify the targets as real German words. However, processing
speed was slower for L2 learners overall, and they responded with the same reaction time (RT) regardless of
whether or not the adjective and noun matched in grammatical gender. As in the Guillelmon and Grosjean (2001)
study with French speakers, highly proficient speakers
who learned their L2 after childhood were not able to use
gender agreement to facilitate lexical access. L2 learners
in both studies showed less efficient processing than L1
speakers, a disadvantage that may have resulted from several interconnected factors: less experience processing and
speaking the gender-marking language, less cumulative
frequency of hearing the phrases used in testing, and later
age of exposure to the gender-marking language.
Comparing incremental processing by children and adults
While many studies have explored how adults process
grammatical gender in L1 and L2, none have examined sentence processing by young children learning L1, adults
learning L2, and adult L1 speakers in a comparable task. In
the present study, one goal was to provide direct comparisons of performance by adult and child participants, to better understand how age- and experience-related differences
influence gender processing. Such a comparison requires a
procedure suitable for participants across a broad range of
ages. Eye-tracking measures have been used effectively
with children (Fernald, Pinto, Swingley, Weinberg, & McRoberts, 1998; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999) as well
as adults (Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy,
1995) to reveal how listeners interpret speech from moment
to moment in relation to referential information in the visual field. Fernald et al. (1998) explored the time course of
familiar word recognition in 15-, 18-, and 24-month-olds.
In the looking-while-listening (LWL) procedure (Fernald,
Zangl, Portillo, & Marchman, 2008), participants looked at
two pictures (e.g., ball, shoe) and heard a simple sentence
referring to the target picture (e.g., Where's the ball?). The
dependent measure was the speed with which children
moved their eyes from the distracter to the target picture.
English-learning children became faster with age at finding
the referent, with RTs decreasing more than 300 ms between 15 and 24 months, a pattern of findings also observed
in Spanish-learning infants (Hurtado, Marchman, & Fernald,
2007). A longitudinal study with English-learning infants
across the same age range showed that measures of processing efficiency in the LWL procedure at 24 months predicted
vocabulary growth over the second year (Fernald, Perfors, &
Marchman, 2006) as well as cognitive and language outcomes several years later (Marchman & Fernald, 2008).
Like adults, children process speech incrementally, making use of what they have heard so far to interpret words
and sentences that are not yet complete. They can use partial phonetic information to establish reference (Fernald,
Swingley, & Pinto, 2001; Swingley, Pinto, & Fernald, 1999),
and they use prenominal verbs (Fernald, 2004) and adjectives (Fernald, Thorpe, & Marchman, 2010) to identify target
nouns that follow later in the sentence. Moreover, 2-yearolds respond as if they expect an object name to follow an
article (Zangl & Fernald, 2007). When an unstressed adjective occurs instead, they `listen through' it and wait for the

450

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

following noun before responding; but if the adjective is
stressed and novel, children tend to misinterpret the word
as a potential object name (Thorpe & Fernald, 2006). This
tendency to `false alarm' in response to stressed novel
words preceded by the article the shows that these children
are integrating prosodic information with knowledge of the
distributional patterns of English determiners to predict
what kind of word is coming next. Further evidence for early
skill in incremental processing was found in the study
showing that young Spanish-learning children can also take
advantage of informative gender-marked articles to identify
the appropriate referent before it has been named (LewWilliams & Fernald, 2007).
Goals of the current experiments
The first goal of this research was to explore how adult
L2 Spanish learners process gender information in online
comprehension, comparing them with native Spanishspeaking adults and also with young children learning
Spanish as L1. Is the ability to make use of la and el as predictive cues in incremental processing more difficult for
adult L2 learners than for adults and children for whom
Spanish is the native language? In Expt. 1, we used the
same child-friendly experimental procedure and stimuli
used previously with Spanish-learning children (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007), comparing L1 adults, L2 adults, and
L1 children in the efficiency of their processing of gendermarked articles paired with familiar Spanish nouns.
The second goal of this research was to examine how
native and non-native Spanish-speaking adults make use
of gender-marked articles paired with newly-learned object names rather than well-known familiar words, thus
controlling for participants' previous exposure to the target
noun. Expts. 2 and 3 asked whether L1 and L2 adults show
a processing advantage when trained and tested on novel
nouns preceded by informative gender-marked articles.
When listeners first learn a novel object name paired with
a particular article, can they generalize to a different article
they have never before heard paired with that noun? Or is
experience with a specific article-noun sequence required
before the listener is able to use the article as a predictive
cue? In interpreting the results from these experiments,
we consider the nature of L1 and L2 learning environments, as well as different characteristics of child and adult
learners, as ways to understand how gaining proficiency in
real-time processing of determiner-noun phrases varies
for first and second language learners.
Experiment 1
Extending our earlier study with Spanish-learning children and their monolingual Spanish-speaking parents
(Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007), Expt. 1 explored how native and non-native Spanish-speaking adults use gendermarked articles in fluent speech to identify the appropriate
referent in the visual array. While the L1 adult participants
in the earlier study were primarily from low-income families and had roughly 9 years of education, the L1 and L2 participants in the present study were all university students

matched for age and education level. These participants
were tested in the same eye-tracking procedure used to
monitor the time course of children's sentence interpretation in the earlier study. On each trial, L1 and L2 adults
viewed pictures of two objects with names of either the
same or different grammatical gender, as they heard a Spanish sentence referring to one of the objects. RTs to the target
were calculated on those trials where participants were initially looking at the distracter at article onset and then
shifted to the target picture by the end of the noun. If they
could use information from the gender-marked article to
identify the referent, they should shift to the target object
more rapidly on different-gender than on same-gender trials. Comparable data from the 3-year-old participants in
our previous research were included in the statistical analyses in Expt. 1 to enable direct comparison of L1 Spanishlearning children and L2 Spanish-learning adults.
Method
Participants
L1 adults were 26 undergraduate students (M =
20.1 years) who were exposed to Spanish from birth. L2
adults were 26 native English-speaking undergraduate students (M = 18.8 years) who had been exposed to Spanish in
school. Participants completed a language questionnaire
that addressed: (1) age of first exposure to Spanish in a
home, school, or community setting, (2) years of classroom
exposure to Spanish during elementary school, middle
school, high school, and college, and (3) self-rated proficiency in understanding Spanish using a five-point scale:
1 (not proficient), 3 (moderately proficient), 5 (very proficient). Table 1 provides language background information
for L1 and L2 adults.
The child participants from Lew-Williams and Fernald
(2007), whose data are also included in the analyses in Expt.
1, were 26 monolingual Spanish-learning toddlers (M =
37.7 months, range = 34-42 months) from families recently immigrated from Mexico. All toddlers had more than
85% exposure to Spanish in their daily interactions at home.
Stimuli
A list of speech stimuli from all experiments is provided
in the Appendix. The stimuli in Expt. 1 were identical to
those used by Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007). In a soundproof booth, a female native Spanish speaker recorded sentences consisting of a simple frame (Encuentra, `Find' or
Donde esta, `Where is') followed by one of eight article-
noun pairs, half feminine and half masculine (la pelota, `ball,'
la galleta, `cookie,' la vaca, `cow,' la rana, `frog,' el zapato,
`shoe,' el carro, `car,' el pajaro, `bird,' or el caballo, `horse').
Articles were unstressed, as is typical in Spanish conversation. Since these stimuli were originally designed for use
with 3-year-olds, nouns were selected based on their high
familiarity to Spanish-learning children, according to the
Inventario del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas (the
Spanish-language version of the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory; Jackson-Maldonado et al.,
2003). Each sentence was followed by a short attention-getting phrase (e.g., Te gusta?, `Do you like it?). Three tokens of
each sentence were recorded using intonation characteristic

451

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

of child-directed speech. The best token was selected for the
final stimulus set based on a prosodic and temporal match to
other selected tokens. Minor editing of the waveform of each
sentence was conducted to control for the duration of the
sentence frame (M = 914 ms, range = 900-931 ms), gender-marked article (M = 280, range = 268-299), and noun
(M = 720, range = 670-770). Visual stimuli were colorful
digital pictures of the named objects on gray backgrounds.
Each picture served as target on four trials and as distracter
on four trials, with side of target picture presentation counterbalanced. Two tokens of each object/animal were used in
testing to enhance the variety of visual stimuli.
Procedure
Participants were briefly introduced to the object
names to be used as target words prior to the eye-tracking
procedure. A Spanish-speaking experimenter asked participants to indicate their familiarity with the eight target
nouns, using a five-point scale, to ensure that all participants were familiar with the appropriate label for a particular picture. For example, one of the pictures used in
testing depicted a frog, and we wanted participants to access the feminine noun rana, `frog,' (the label used during
the test session), as opposed to the masculine noun sapo,
`toad.' Thus the experimenter asked participants to indicate familiarity with the noun rana and never said the
word sapo. Similarly, we wanted to increase the likelihood
that participants would access the feminine noun vaca,
`cow,' during the test session, as opposed to the masculine
noun toro, `bull.' Consistent with the familiarization procedure used in our previous study with L1 toddlers, each object was named using only the indefinite article (una or un)
with the target noun, in order to avoid priming the particular article-noun sequences that would be used later in the
test session. Thus, during the test session participants
heard each target noun paired with an article that was different from the one heard during familiarization.
Following familiarization, L1 and L2 adults were tested
in the looking-while-listening (LWL) procedure, a childfriendly technique that yields online measurements of the
time course of spoken language processing (see Fernald
et al., 2008). Adult participants were told that the experiment was designed for young children, and they were asked
to look at a series of pictures as they listened to Spanish
sentences. Participants were seated 150 cm from a rearprojection screen on which they viewed two pictures

side-by-side on each trial. Pictures were ca. 36  50 cm,
with 60 cm between pictures. On each trial, one of the pictures was named in a pre-recorded sentence. The target
noun was always preceded by a definite article. Following
a protocol similar to that used with children (Lew-Williams
& Fernald, 2007), adults were presented with 16 same-gender trials, where pictures depicted objects with names of
the same grammatical gender, and 16 different-gender trials,
where pictures depicted objects with names of different
grammatical gender, interspersed in two counterbalanced,
quasi-random orders. Test trials were interspersed with
24 filler trials. Across Expts. 1, 2, and 3, filler trials consisted
of a variety of Spanish sentence structures with copulas,
articles, verbs, adjectives, and nouns.
On each trial, pictures were visible for 2 s prior to the
speech signal, for the duration of the 3-s speech signal,
and for 1 s following the speech signal. The participant's
face was recorded from a centrally located camera. Using
custom software, eye movements were coded offline,
frame-by-frame, with 33-ms resolution. A digital timecode was time-locked to the acoustic onset of the article
on each trial, and coders blind to trial type indicated at
each frame whether the participant was looking left, right,
between the pictures, or away from both.
To assess the reliability of eye-movement coding, two
independent observers coded 25% of the trials from 25%
of the participants in each group, yielding a total of 6.25%
of trials coded by two observers. Trials were selected for
reliability coding only if they contained two or more shifts
between the pictures. Because participants spend far more
time maintaining fixation on pictures than they do shifting
between pictures, including stationary fixations in reliability comparisons can result in overrepresentation of consistency between observers. Thus the calculation of interobserver agreement was based only on those 33-ms frames
surrounding shifts. Using this conservative, shift-specific
method of assessing reliability, the two observers agreed
within a single frame on 98.8% of the frames for L1 adults
and on 95.6% for L2 adults.
Measures of speech-processing efficiency
In eye-tracking studies with adults, it is possible to direct attention to a central fixation point prior to the onset
of speech, which permits an analysis of the direction and latency of a shift in gaze on every trial (e.g., Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998). Child participants, however,

Table 1
Measures of L1 and L2 adults' language backgrounds and proficiency.

Expt. 1
Expt. 2
Expt. 3

Age of exposure to
Spanisha

Age of exposure to
Englishb

Years of classroom exposure to
Spanishc

Self-rated proficiency in understanding
Spanishd

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

0
0
0

12.8 (7-19)
12.2 (7-18)
12.1 (6-19)

4.3 (0-13)
5.3 (0-15)
4.4 (0-13)

0
0
0

5.0 (0-11)
4.6 (0-8)
5.1 (0-10)

5.5 (1-10)
5.2 (1-9)
5.6 (2-10)

4.8 (4-5)
4.8 (4-5)
4.9 (4-5)

3.6 (2-5)
3.2 (2-5)
3.6 (2-5)

a
Mean age, in years, of participants' first exposure to Spanish in a home, school, or community setting. Ranges for these and other measures appear in
parentheses next to the means.
b
Mean age, in years, of participants' first exposure to English in a home, school, or community setting.
c
Mean number of years of classroom exposure to Spanish in elementary school, middle school, high school, and college. Participants were not given
specific directions about what constitutes a year of Spanish instruction.
d
Mean self-rated proficiency in understanding Spanish on a five-point scale ranging from 1 (not proficient) to 5 (very proficient).

452

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

will not comply with a request to maintain fixation on a
central point. Because the LWL procedure was designed to
accommodate child participants, and because a goal of
Expt. 1 was to replicate the Lew-Williams and Fernald
(2007) results with adult L2 learners, adult participants
were given no instructions about initial fixation. Since participants could not know in advance which picture would
be named, they were by chance equally likely to be looking
at the target or distracter picture at the onset of the article.
Thus there were two ways of responding correctly, contingent on which picture they happened to be fixating initially.
If they were already looking at the correct picture (targetinitial trials), they should maintain fixation; but if they
were looking at the distracter picture (distracter-initial trials), they should shift their eyes to the named picture as the
article-noun sequence unfolded. We expected that such
distracter-to-target shifts would begin more rapidly on different-gender trials, where the article provides a prenominal cue to the identity of the target referent.
Distracter-initial trials were used to calculate reaction
time (RT), the latency to initiate a shift toward the target
picture. RT was calculated from article onset--the first moment in the unfolding sentence where participants received
relevant acoustic information. For L1 adults, 52% (235) of
the same-gender trials and 54% (248) of the different-gender trials were distracter-initial. For L2 adults, 54% (251)
of the same-gender trials and 54% (244) of the differentgender trials were distracter-initial. Shifts initiated in the
first 300 ms were not included in the analyses, because
they were likely to represent random shifting initiated prior
to the possible influence of the article (Haith, Wentworth, &
Canfield, 1993). RTs were included in analyses if they occurred between 300 and 1300 ms from article onset. The
1300-ms cutoff, which corresponded to the total duration
of the article and noun, was selected because, across experiments and participant groups, roughly 90% of shifts from
distracter to target occurred within this window.
Results
The main question addressed in Expt. 1 was how adult
L2 Spanish learners would compare to adults and young
children who were native Spanish speakers in their ability
to take advantage of the articles la and el to identify the
correct referent on each trial. The plot in Fig. 1a depicts
the time course of speech processing on same-gender
and different-gender trials for L1 and L2 adults. Only those
trials where participants were looking at the distracter picture at article onset are included in this plot; thus the curve
begins at zero and rises over time as participants shift their
eyes to the target picture (see Fernald et al., 2008). Time
from article onset is shown on the x-axis. The y-axis shows
the proportion of trials on which participants were looking
at the correct picture at each 33-ms frame after shifting
from distracter to target, averaged across participants. Because the plot is not a direct reflection of RT data, Fig. 1b
shows mean RTs on each trial type for each group. Data
from the Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007) study with
Spanish-learning 3-year-olds are also included in these figures, as well as in the statistical analyses below, to enable
comparison with the two groups of adult participants.

The first analysis compared mean RTs for L1 adults, L2
adults, and L1 children on same- and different-gender trials,
showing that native Spanish speakers at both ages, but not
L2 adults, used informative gender-marked articles to facilitate word recognition. Mean RTs were analyzed in a 3  2
mixed ANOVA, with group (L1 adults, L2 adults, L1 children)
as a between-subjects factor and trial type (same-gender,
different-gender) as a within-subjects factor. The three
groups differed in overall processing speed, as shown by a
significant main effect of group, F(2, 74) = 26.2, p < .001,
g2p 1/4 :42. Bonferroni-corrected comparisons revealed that
L1 adults (M = 642, SD = 119) responded significantly faster
than L2 adults (M = 781, SD = 148), t(50) = 4.2, p < .001,
d = 1.16, and that L2 adults, in turn, were faster than L1 toddlers (M = 887 ms, SD = 141 ms), t(50) = 2.8, p < .01, d = .78.
The group  trial type interaction was also significant,
F(2, 74) = 4.2, p < .02, g2p 1/4 :10, indicating that RT differences between the two trial types were not consistent
across groups. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc comparisons
(p < .01) revealed that L1 adults were significantly faster
to initiate eye movements to the target picture on different-gender trials (M = 608, SD = 125) than on same-gender
trials (M = 674, SD = 103), t(25) = 3.0, p < .005, d = .59, as
were L1 toddlers (different-gender: M = 843, SD = 148;
same-gender: M = 935, SD = 130), t(24) = 2.9, p < .005,
d = .62. However, L2 adults did not respond differentially
to the two trial types (different-gender: M = 788, SD =
151; same-gender: M = 775, SD = 144), t(25) = .5, p = .30,
d = .09. Despite the fact that L2 adults reported high familiarity with the target nouns used in testing, they nevertheless were less efficient in using their knowledge of gender
information in real-time processing. Note that block was
initially included as a factor in the mixed ANOVA, to determine whether participants were faster to process article-
noun pairs in the second half of the test trials. In all three
experiments, participants showed no significant improvement in performance between the first 16 and second 16
test trials, and this was the case for both L1 and L2 adults
on both same- and different-gender trials.
Also of interest was whether those L2 adults who reported greater Spanish proficiency, more years of classroom
exposure to Spanish, or a younger age of exposure to Spanish would show faster absolute processing speed and/or
greater efficiency in exploiting gender-marked articles. As
a measure of overall processing speed, mean RT was calculated across both trial types combined for each participant.
Overall RT was significantly correlated with self-reported
Spanish proficiency, r(25) = .51, p < .01, and with years of
classroom exposure to Spanish, r(25) = .46, p < .025, but
not with age of exposure, r(25) = .20, p = .33. Self-reported
Spanish proficiency and years of classroom exposure to
Spanish were not significantly intercorrelated, r(25) = .17,
p = .3, and multiple regression analyses indicated that selfreported proficiency accounted for a marginally significant
proportion of unique variance in overall RT, F(1, 23) = 4.2,
p < .055. To quantify efficiency of processing, a difference
score was calculated between the mean RTs on same- and
different-gender trials for each participant. A positive
difference score indicated a faster response on differentgender than on same-gender trials, when the articles were
informative about the subsequent noun. Difference scores

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

453

Fig. 1. (a) Time course of L1 and L2 adults' looking to the target on same- and different-gender trials in Expt. 1. Data from child participants are adapted
from Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007). Vertical dashed lines indicate acoustic offsets of the article and noun. (b) Mean RTs in shifting from the distracter to
the target picture. Error bars indicate SEmean.

did not correlate significantly with self-reported proficiency, years of classroom exposure, or age of exposure to
Spanish. Thus L2 adults who were more proficient in Spanish were slightly faster overall in orienting to the named
target picture, although greater proficiency in Spanish was
not associated with greater efficiency in making use of the
gender-marked article in online processing.
Discussion
Three main findings emerged from Expt. 1. First, adult
native Spanish speakers took advantage of the gender-

marked articles la and el to rapidly identify the referent
of a familiar noun, when the two candidate referents had
names belonging to different noun classes, consistent with
our earlier results (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). Second,
adults learning Spanish as L2 were not able to use a gender-marked article to identify the referent more quickly,
although they had on average five years of L2 instruction
and reported high familiarity with the nouns used in testing. Third, the L1 and L2 adults in Expt. 1 were faster in
absolute processing speed than the Spanish-learning
3-year-olds tested in our previous study; however,
children were more similar to L1 adults in their ability to

454

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

use gender-marked articles to establish reference more
quickly in online comprehension. Thus, from an early age,
native Spanish speakers had an advantage in processing
determiners marked with gender information, an advantage that was not shared by late L2 learners.
The mean RT of L1 adults in this experiment was identical to that of adult participants in the study by Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007). Adult participants in the earlier
study were low-income, monolingual Spanish speakers,
while adult participants in the present experiment were
university students, highly proficient in English, with
greater knowledge of how research is conducted. Although
these groups of participants differed demographically in
several respects, they shared an important life experience:
they had all been immersed in Spanish from early in life.
Their comparable efficiency in online processing suggests
that the LWL procedure is resistant to strategizing by
test-savvy adults, and that the online-processing measures
used here are sensitive to small effects in participants at
different ages from diverse populations.
One factor that could account for the striking differences between L1 and L2 adults is that they differed substantially in their previous experience with the article-
noun combinations used in Expt. 1. L1 adults have typically
heard article-noun sequences such as la pelota and el zapato many thousands of times, and even Spanish-learning
toddlers have received extensive exposure to these particular article-noun sequences by the age of three years. By
comparison, it is safe to assume that L2 adults who have
learned Spanish in a classroom setting have typically had
much less exposure to the article-noun pairs used here. Given that the cumulative frequency of exposure to nouns is
known to affect speed of access (Dahan, Magnuson, &
Tanenhaus, 2001; Gollan, Montoya, Cera, & Sandoval,
2008; Oldfield & Wingfield, 1965; Zevin & Seidenberg,
2004), differences in amount of exposure to article-noun
pairs could account for the differential efficiency of native
speakers and L2 adults in using gender information in Expt.
1. If L1 and L2 adults experienced particular article-noun
sequences the same number of times, would these two
groups be more similar in how quickly and efficiently they
recognized spoken words? To address this question, Expt. 2
controlled for overall frequency of exposure to novel nouns
combined with gender-marked articles.

Experiment 2
In Expt. 2 we asked how L1 and L2 adults make use of
articles preceding newly-learned object names. During
the training phase, L1 and L2 adults were exposed the same
number of times to four unfamiliar objects, each named
with a novel noun preceded by a definite article. Two of
these novel words ended in the vowel -a, the most common
ending for feminine nouns in Spanish, and these target
words were preceded by the feminine singular article la.
The other two novel words ended in the vowel -o, the most
common ending for masculine nouns, and were preceded
by the masculine singular article el. During the testing
phase, participants heard sentences with the same definite
articles and saw pairs of novel objects on same- and differ-

ent-gender trials, as in Expt. 1. Given equal exposure to
these four novel article-noun pairs in a simplified wordlearning environment, we predicted that L2 adults as well
as L1 adults would be able to use gender-marked articles
to more rapidly interpret newly-learned object names.
Method
Participants
L1 adults were 12 Spanish-English bilinguals
(M = 20.1 years). L2 adults were 12 native English speakers
(M = 19.7 years). Table 1 provides information about age of
first exposure to Spanish, years of classroom exposure to
Spanish, and self-rated proficiency in understanding Spanish for participants in Expt. 2.
Stimuli
On teaching trials, the speech stimuli consisted of a
simple sentence frame (Mira, es, `Look, it's') followed by
one of the four novel Spanish nouns preceded by a definite
article, half feminine and half masculine (la catela[f], la
pifa[f], el durino[m], or el tebo[m]). On test trials, the four
nouns were paired with the same definite articles used in
teaching, preceded by a different frame (Donde esta,
`Where is'). Duration of sentence frames, articles, and
nouns used on test trials were edited to closely parallel
those of Expt. 1. The visual stimuli were digital pictures
of four novel objects, which were constructed of plastic
and differed from each other in color and shape. Pictures
of 12 familiar objects were also used on filler trials.
Procedure
L1 and L2 adults were exposed to the unfamiliar objects
labeled by four novel nouns, two masculine and two feminine. Participants were presented with 24 teaching trials,
32 test trials, and 24 filler trials in one of two counterbalanced orders. On teaching and testing trials, each novel object was labeled consistently with one of the four novel
words, with assignment of novel word to novel object
counterbalanced across participants. On each teaching
trial, a picture of one of the novel objects was presented
centrally on the screen, accompanied by a simple sentence
naming the object (Mira, es la catela!, `Look, it's the [novel
noun]!'). The four novel object/word pairings were presented six times each in alternating order. On test trials,
participants viewed pairs of the novel objects side-by-side
and heard sentences containing the same sequences of definite articles and newly learned nouns (e.g., Donde esta la
catela?, `Where's the catela?'). Each novel object served as
target and as distracter on eight test trials. As in Expt. 1,
half the test trials were same-gender trials, on which the
two pictures had names of the same grammatical gender
(e.g., catela, pifa), and half were different-gender trials, on
which the two pictures had names that differed in grammatical gender (e.g., catela, durino). Timing of stimulus presentation and coding were comparable to Expt. 1. For L1
adults, 51% (114) of the same-gender trials and 48% (104)
of the different-gender trials were distracter-initial. For
L2 adults, 57% (118) of the same-gender trials and 59%
(122) of the different-gender trials were distracter-initial.
Reliability coding was conducted on 6.25% of trials. Inter-

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

455

Fig. 2. (a) Time course of L1 and L2 adults' looking to the target picture on same- and different-gender trials in Expt. 2. (b) Mean RTs in shifting from
distracter to target.

coder agreement within a single frame was 99.8% for L1
adults and 99.1% for L2 adults.
Results
To succeed in Expt. 2, participants had to associate a
definite article and a novel noun, and then, on differentgender trials, to use the article as a prenominal cue to
the referent named by the subsequent target noun. Under
these conditions, both L1 and L2 adults took advantage of
gender-marked articles to identify the correct referent
more quickly on different-gender trials than on same-gender trials. Fig. 2a depicts the time course of language interpretation by L1 and L2 adults. Fig. 2b shows mean RTs on
each trial type for each group.
Mean RTs were analyzed in a 2 (group)  2 (trial type)
mixed ANOVA. As in Expt. 1, L1 adults (M = 670 ms,
SD = 91 ms) responded faster overall than L2 adults
(M = 776, SD = 147), as shown by a significant main effect

of group, F(1, 22) = 4.5, p < .05, g2p 1/4 :17. The main effect
of trial type was also reliable: Participants responded
faster on different-gender than on same-gender trials,
F(1, 22) = 10.9, p < .005, g2p 1/4 :33. However, unlike in Expt.
1, the group  trial type interaction was not significant,
F(1, 22) = .1, p = .72, g2p 1/4 :01, indicating that the difference
in speed across trial types was similar in L1 and L2 adults.
As shown in Fig. 2b, L1 adults responded faster on different-gender trials (M = 620, SD = 105) than on same-gender
trials (M = 719, SD = 121). The RT difference between trial
types was slightly smaller in L2 adults (different-gender:
M = 737, SD = 183; same-gender: M = 816, SD = 135). Bonferroni-corrected post hoc comparisons (p < .025) showed
that the main effect of trial type was significant for L1
adults, t(11) = 2.5, p < .015, d = .74. For L2 adults, the effect
was marginally significant, since it did not meet the more
conservative alpha criterion of .025, t(11) = 2.1, p < .03,
d = .49. These results show that when we controlled for
exposure to article-noun sequences in Expt. 2, L2 adults

456

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

were able to take advantage of gender-marked articles in
ways that resembled L1 adults. Among L2 adults, the
self-report measures of Spanish experience, proficiency,
and age of exposure were not significantly correlated with
overall RT or efficiency in processing.
Discussion
The main finding in Expt. 2 was that on different-gender
trials, when the article was potentfially informative, L2 as
well as L1 Spanish-speaking adults were able to use the
gender-marked article preceding a newly-learned nonce
word to identify the correct referent more quickly. When
exposed to the novel word/object pairings the same number of times, non-native as well as native speakers were
successful in this task, and the difference between these
groups observed in Expt. 1 was not as evident.
Both in training and in testing, participants in Expt. 2
heard the same nonce words paired consistently with
either la or el, which raises further questions: Does performance in Expt. 2 reflect the same processes underlying
interpretation of familiar article-noun pairs in Expt. 1?
What does Expt. 2 reveal about processing grammatical
gender? The verbal stimuli were in Spanish and listeners
clearly took advantage of information in the carrier phrase
preceding the newly learned noun to identify the referent
more quickly on different- than on same-gender-trials.
However, this study failed to capture an essential property
of grammatical gender in natural speech: that no noun is
uniquely associated with a single determiner. Parental
utterances recorded in the Child Language Data Exchange
System (MacWhinney, 2000) reveal that young Spanishlearning children hear the noun pelota preceded by a variety of determiners: the definite article la, the indefinite
article una, the demonstrative esta (`this'), the comparative
otra (`other'), the negative adjective ninguna (`no'), and the
plural forms of these, along with other determiners. However, in Expt. 2, catela and pifa were always preceded by la,
and durino and tebo by el. So the article might in effect be
perceived as the initial syllable of the novel word. If novel
objects had been paired with unfamiliar names such as
doohickey and doodad on same-gender trials, and doohickey
and gizmo on different-gender trials, the results would presumably have been comparable. On same-gender trials,
participants would have to wait for the second syllable to
identify the target, while on different-gender trials, they
would be able to use the first syllable to establish reference. In this case, Expt. 2 could be testing something comparable to a cohort effect in word recognition--as in
previous eye-tracking studies showing that adults take
longer to identify a target if its name shares a phonological
onset with a distracter, such as `candy' and `candle' (Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1996). The results of Expt. 2 could also be explained in terms of simple
paired-associate learning. Even a listener with no knowledge of Spanish could potentially have succeeded in this
experiment by simply linking adjacent syllables. In fact, if
the feminine and masculine articles used here had been replaced with tones differing in frequency, these tones might
also have served as predictive cues in some contexts (see
Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport, 1999).

The finding that L1 adults were faster than L2 adults to
respond to articles paired with novel nouns indicates that
Expt. 2 tested linguistic processing on some level. However, the use of la and el as predictive cues in this context
does not necessarily provide evidence for `nativelike' processing of gender agreement by L2 adults. To address these
concerns, the design of Expt. 2 was modified in Expt. 3.
Rather than pairing the same articles with particular novel
nouns during both training and testing, participants were
trained on novel nouns preceded by indefinite articles,
and were later tested on these nouns preceded by definite
articles. Thus in Expt. 3, successful performance required
generalization between different article forms.
Experiment 3
As language learners become familiar with new nouns,
they typically hear them in combination with several different determiners. Spanish determiners mark definiteness, gender, and number, with many possible forms. Can
listeners generalize between different articles, e.g., una
and la, for a feminine noun, to more rapidly identify a noun
as belonging to a particular noun class? Or must they actually hear a particular article in conjunction with a new
noun before the article can become useful as a prenominal
cue? The L1 and L2 adults in Expt. 3 were exposed to the
same four novel objects paired with the same nouns used
in Expt. 2, half feminine and half masculine. However,
while the participants in Expt. 2 had heard definite articles
on both training and test trials (e.g., Training: Mira, es la catela! Test: Donde esta la catela?), in Expt. 3 they heard
indefinite articles on training trials followed by the same
test trials as in Expt. 2 (e.g., Training: Mira, es una catela!
Test: Donde esta la catela?). Since these test trials contained only definite articles, the participants in Expt. 3
had not previously heard these particular article-noun
combinations during training. To succeed in this task, they
had to learn an association between a gender-marked article and novel noun, and then use a different article form as
a predictive cue when asked to identify the referent of the
newly-learned object name.
Method
Participants
L1 adults were 18 Spanish-English bilinguals (M =
19.9 years). L2 adults were 18 native English speakers
(M = 20.2 years). Table 1 provides information about age
of first exposure to Spanish, years of classroom exposure
to Spanish, and self-rated proficiency in understanding
Spanish. Note that we tested more participants in Expt. 1
in order to match the sample sizes used in Lew-Williams
and Fernald (2007). However, since previous eye-tracking
studies with adult bilinguals have found effects by testing
groups of 12 participants (e.g., Dahan et al., 2000), fewer
participants were tested in Expts. 2 and 3.
Stimuli and procedure
The procedures in Expt. 3 were identical to those in Expt.
2, except that the sentences used on teaching trials con-

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

457

Fig. 3. (a) Time course of L1 and L2 adults' looking to the target picture on same- and different-gender trials in Expt. 3. (b) Mean RTs in shifting from
distracter to target.

tained indefinite articles, while those used on test trials
contained definite articles. Waveforms were edited to control for the duration of sentence frames, definite articles,
and novel nouns. For L1 adults, 60% (187) of the same-gender trials and 58% (181) of the different-gender trials were
distracter-initial. For L2 adults, 57% (176) of the same-gender trials and 55% (172) of the different-gender trials were
distracter-initial. Reliability coding was conducted on
6.25% of trials: coders agreed within a single frame on
96.6% of the frames for L1 adults and on 97.9% for L2 adults.
Results
The main finding in Expt. 3 was that L1 adults took
advantage of gender-marked articles in online processing
when generalization was required, but L2 adults did not.
That is, on different-gender trials, L1 adults made use of
an article they had not yet heard paired with the novel
noun to identify the referent more quickly, while L2 adults

failed to take advantage of the article as a predictive cue.
Fig. 3a shows the time course of looking on same- and different-gender trials. Fig. 3b shows RTs for each participant
group.
Mean RTs were analyzed in a 2 (group)  2 (trial type)
mixed ANOVA. The main effect of group was significant,
F(1, 34) = 5.5, p < .03, g2p 1/4 :14, indicating that L1 adults
(M = 662, SD = 124) were faster in absolute processing
speed than L2 adults (M = 781, SD = 153), consistent with
results in the first two experiments. The main effect of trial
type was also significant: Participants responded faster
overall on different-gender trials than on same-gender
trials, F(1, 34) = 16.1, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :32. Moreover, the
group  trial type interaction was also reliable, as in
Expt. 1, F(1, 34) = 7.8, p < .01, g2p 1/4 :19. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc comparisons (p < .025) indicated that the
effect of trial type was significant for L1 adults (differentgender: M = 605, SD = 122; same-gender: M = 714,
SD = 112), t(17) = 4.6, p < .0005, d = .69, but not for L2

458

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

adults (different-gender: M = 776, SD = 119; same-gender:
M = 795, SD = 107), t(17) = .9, p = .29, d = .11. Mean RTs for
both trial types were similar in Expts. 1 and 3, showing
that L1 and L2 adults identified newly learned nouns as
quickly as familiar nouns.
Among L2 adults, overall RT was not significantly correlated with self-reported Spanish proficiency, years of Spanish classes, or age of exposure to Spanish. Efficiency of
processing (RT on same-gender minus RT on different-gender trials) was not correlated with classroom exposure or
age of exposure, but it was marginally correlated with
self-reported Spanish proficiency, r(17) = .40, p < .10, suggesting that those participants with better Spanish skills
were slightly faster in taking advantage of informative articles with newly learned words. In Exp. 3, the more challenging task of generalizing between article forms in
rapid language processing may have differentiated more
practiced L2 Spanish learners from those who had less
experience with the Spanish language.
Discussion
The adult L1 and L2 participants in these experiments
all had explicit knowledge of relations among different
forms of articles, and if asked, they could explain that the
articles una and la are both used only with feminine nouns,
while un and el are both used only with masculine nouns.
But how efficiently was this knowledge actually put to use
in real-time processing? Although the L1 and L2 adults in
Expt. 3 had all heard the novel nouns the same number
of times, thus equating for frequency of exposure, only L1
adults were able to generalize from the indefinite to the
definite article. That is, on different-gender trials, L1 adults
could make use of the gender-marked definite article to
identify the correct referent of a newly-learned object
name, just as they did with familiar object names in Expt.
1, even though they had never heard the new word paired
with a definite article. In contrast, when tested with different articles from those used in training, L2 adults waited to
hear the noun before initiating a gaze shift, as they also did
with familiar nouns in Expt. 1.
A possible limitation of the word-learning experiments
reported in Expts. 2 and 3 is that participants were trained
and tested on fewer items than is typical in most studies of
adult language processing. This decision was a consequence of our desire to use experimental designs with
adults that were comparable to those used with young
children, where the number of items is necessarily limited.
While the experiments did detect processing differences
between L1 and L2 adults, the findings would be more convincingly generalizable if participants were tested across a
wider range of stimulus materials. A second possible limitation is that L1 adults may in some sense have `learned'
the novel nouns better than L2 adults, a perspective suggested by research showing that proficient bilinguals have
an advantage over less proficient bilinguals in vocabulary
learning (Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009). But given that
there were only four novel noun-object pairings to learn
during the experimental session, this interpretation may
not be applicable. Although L1 and L2 adults showed equal
accuracy in finding the target referents, evident in the

near-perfect asymptotes of the curves in Fig. 3a, L1 adults
showed greater speed and efficiency than L2 adults in online interpretation of the article-noun phrase.
General discussion
This research explored differences in the speed and efficiency with which native and non-native Spanish-speaking
adults process article-noun pairs in relation to familiar and
novel referents, extending previous research with Spanishlearning 3-year-olds tested in the same speech-processing
task (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). In three experiments,
L1 Spanish-speaking adults took advantage of informative
gender-marked articles to establish reference more rapidly,
even when they had never heard these articles co-occurring
with novel nouns. In contrast, L2 Spanish-learning adults
exploited articles as predictive cues only under more limited circumstances. When listening to sentences with familiar nouns, L2 speakers were no quicker to orient to the
target referent when the article was potentially informative
than when it was uninformative. After learning novel
nouns, they did not make use of gender-marked articles unless those articles had co-occurred with the novel target
nouns throughout the experiment. Thus L2 adults did not
take advantage of informative gender-marked articles to
establish reference, confirming previous research on L2
learners' difficulty with grammatical gender.
Although speed in processing familiar article-noun pairs
by L2 adults varied somewhat as a function of Spanish proficiency, L2 adults were 120 ms slower in mean RT as compared to L1 adults. This is consistent with previous studies
of language processing by L2 adults, which interpreted
slower RT as an indication of processing difficulty (Hahne,
2001; Segalowitz, 2003). In the present study, difficulty in
processing gender was also evident in the fact that L2 adults
did not identify targets with greater efficiency when gender-marked articles were informative about noun identity,
i.e., on different-gender trials. How do these two measures
of gender interpretation--overall RT and efficiency of processing--relate to each other? Collapsing across the three
experiments, there was a marginally significant negative
correlation between overall RT and efficiency of processing,
r(55) = .28, p < .07, showing that L2 adults with slower
speed in lexical access were also those who did not initiate
eye movements faster on different-gender trials than on
same-gender trials. While each measure is individually
informative about gender processing, this correlation
shows that they are not entirely independent.
Could slower processing of Spanish sentences by L2
adults be a source of difficulty in processing gendermarked articles? Even if they did attend to the gendermarked article, the influence of the article might not have
been observable until the noun itself had influenced their
gaze, potentially masking sensitivity to prenominal gender
marking. However, our earlier findings with young children argue against this explanation. Although most
3-year-olds responded only after hearing part of the noun
and their mean RT was much slower overall than that of
the L2 adults, they still showed a significant processing
advantage on different-gender trials. Our methods cannot
reveal whether L2 adults took advantage of gender-marked

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

articles at a level that could not be detected, but it is clear
that the behavioral manifestation of efficiency in using
informative gender-marked articles was only apparent
among L1 toddlers and adults.
Studies of incremental language processing in adults
have explored how listeners use contextual information
from words early in a sentence to estimate the relative likelihood of later words. DeLong, Urbach, and Kutas (2005)
conducted a noteworthy investigation of listeners' ability
to anticipate upcoming words. They tested the processing
of functionally identical articles that convey no semantic
information, yet differ in phonological form: a and an,
which precede words beginning with consonants and vowels, respectively. Using ERP measures, DeLong et al. found
that adults used the article form to make probabilistic predictions about sentence completions. The three Spanish
experiments reported here provide convergent evidence
for incremental processing: native Spanish speakers reliably took advantage of the articles la and el, which indicate
whether a subsequent noun is feminine or masculine.
Differences between L1 and L2 learners related to age and
experience
Why were English-speaking adults who had studied
Spanish for several years unable to use gender-marked articles to guide their looking, while Spanish-learning 3-yearolds with a mean vocabulary of only 500 words used the
same articles in the same referential context so much more
efficiently? Why did Spanish-speaking adults generalize
automatically from one article form to another when identifying newly learned words, while English-speaking adults
learning Spanish as L2 did not--even though both groups
had learned the new word under identical conditions? The
observation that learning L1 early in life leads to greater fluency than learning L2 later in life is uncontroversial. Theorists with strong nativist views (e.g., Pinker, 1984; Ullman,
2004) as well as those who emphasize more gradual learning in language development (Abu-Akel, Bailey, & Thum,
2004; Pine & Lieven, 1997; Tomasello, 2000) all agree that
early experience is crucial, although their explanations as
to why children tend to learn language so readily and successfully vary considerably. Some researchers who describe
language from a nativist perspective would argue that L2
adults' reduced mastery of language structure resulted from
learning Spanish beyond a biologically determined period
of maximal sensitivity to input (e.g., Johnson & Newport,
1989). There are also enormous differences in the amount
and nature of language experienced by L1 and L2 learners.
For example, L1 participants in these experiments presumably learned Spanish in socially rich environments with
individual attention from caregivers, while L2 adults
learned Spanish through formal classroom instruction.
Clark (2003) estimated that there is a striking 20:1 ratio in
the amount of language experienced by L1 toddlers and L2
adults. Thus one reason why L2 adults in our experiments
were at a disadvantage relative to L1 participants could be
that as older learners, they had far fewer opportunities to
hear common article-noun sequences in Spanish.
L2 adults' attention to relations between articles and
nouns may also have been hindered by another factor

459

known to affect L2 learning. While L1 adults began learning Spanish as infants, without influence from another language, the native English-speaking L2 adults had first
learned a language with no grammatical gender system.
MacWhinney (2001) described how cross-language transfer from a highly entrenched L1 to a less practiced L2 contributes to L2 processing differences, positing that a
syntactic `accent' carries over to the processing of L2 structures. Several studies have explored the transfer of processing strategies associated with grammatical gender
(Costa, Kovacic, Franck, & Caramazza, 2003; Lemhofer, Spalek, & Schriefers, 2008; Sabourin, Stowe, & de Haan, 2006).
Sabourin et al. (2006) found that L1 Dutch speakers were
highly accurate in judging the grammaticality of Dutch
sentences with correct or incorrect gender agreement,
while accuracy was lower among L2 learners who grew
up learning other languages with gender systems, such as
German or French. However, these L2 learners then outperformed L2 learners who were native speakers of English, whose accuracy in identifying gender violations in
Dutch sentences was at chance. These findings suggest that
having no grammatical gender system in L1 makes it especially difficult for learners to master the complexities of
gender marking in L2. In the present experiments, L2
adults' default strategy for processing article-noun sequences may have been based on their experience in English, where they would have to wait for the noun before
identifying the referent in this particular referential context. Other evidence suggests that L2 adults automatically
access English labels for the objects presented in the referential scene, and thus may have defaulted to an English
processing strategy (Kroll & Sholl, 1992). However, the fact
that the L2 adults in Expt. 2 did successfully use informative articles shows that native English speakers do not adhere unconditionally to a processing strategy based on L1.
When a familiar article was a reliable cue to the noun that
followed, L2 adults were able to override their dominant
processing strategy in favor of a strategy used by L1 adults
that permits faster sentence interpretation.
An additional influence on the initial learning trajectories of child and adult language learners is that adults have
more mature perceptual and memory capabilities. Newport's (1990) ``less is more" hypothesis argues that young
children's cognitive limitations actually help them filter
the complexities of language structure. These internal constraints narrow their learning to simpler patterns in speech,
facilitating greater eventual success in language learning
relative to older learners. A complementary approach, the
``starting small" hypothesis (Elman, 1993), emphasizes an
external locus of differences between child and adult learners: because children have reduced information processing
capabilities, they elicit simpler speech from caregivers that
makes the basics of language structure more accessible
(Fernald, 1992; Fernald & Mazzie, 1991; Snow, 1972). There
are both computational (Elman, 1993) and human experimental data (Kersten & Earles, 2001) showing that grammar
learning is more successful when learners first process simpler relations among sounds and words, and are then gradually introduced to more complex segments of speech,
characteristic of parental use of child-directed speech. Thus,
age-related changes in processing capacities, as well as

460

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

environmental accommodations to the limitations of young
children, could converge to benefit younger language learners, providing insight into how L1 Spanish-speaking toddlers and adults achieved such fluency in processing
article-noun sequences.
These age- and experience-related differences suggest
that L1 and L2 learners follow different trajectories in
learning about grammatical gender, resulting in differences between L1 and L2 adults' knowledge and processing
of Spanish gender agreement. Research on L2 learning in
the Chomskian tradition often explains poorer performance by non-native speakers on language tasks in terms
of grammatical deficiencies (Bley-Vroman, 1990; Clahsen
& Muysken, 1986; Hawkins & Chan, 1997). Another proposal is that L2 learners' difficulties arise from problems
accessing and retrieving grammatical knowledge in situations that demand rapid language processing (Sharwood
Smith, 1986; see also Bialystok, 1978; Jiang, 2004). Deficiencies in these domains may be jointly relevant in
explaining why L2 adults did not exhibit native-like skill
in using articles to guide search behavior. Our experiments
cannot determine whether the differences observed between L1 and L2 adults are more attributable to grammatical representations or processing abilities, but by testing
L1 children, L1 adults, and L2 adults, our experiments do
speak to the divergent paths that children and adults take
in learning about articles and nouns.
Learning associations between articles and nouns
The experience of hearing simple sentence structures in
child-directed speech exposes young native speakers to
tight links between gender-marked articles and nouns, almost as if they comprise a single unit, as in lapelota. For
decades, language researchers have observed that young
children often treat common multiword phrases as single
lexical items, such as [eIdVnow], `I dunno' (Peters, 1983).
Is it possible that child learners also initially treat articles
and nouns as unanalyzed sound sequences, and only later
extract articles as distinct morphological units? Carroll
(1939), an early contributor to research on language learning, proposed that the article was likely to be bound to the
following noun in children's early language representations. MacWhinney (1978) also characterized the early
association between articles and nouns as an ``amalgamation" of sound sequences that are learned as rote items.
From a very different theoretical perspective, Pinker
(1984) described a comparable linkage between articles
and nouns, proposing that children progress from memorizing affixes and stems as unanalyzed forms (e.g., adog)
to understanding that the article encodes a distinct grammatical unit. Susanne Carroll (1989) also discussed how
young French-learning children encode articles as unstressed prefixes of nouns, or as ``arbitrary segments of
their hosts" (pp. 569). If young children go through a period of binding articles and nouns in unanalyzed sequences,
then there should be a very gradual diversification in the
contexts of early article use. Research on item-based learning suggests that children do indeed learn to produce certain structures like article-noun pairs in just such a
piecemeal fashion (Abu-Akel et al., 2004; Bassano, Maillo-

chon, & Mottet, 2008; Mariscal, 2009; Pine & Lieven, 1997;
Tomasello, 2000).
The article-as-prefix perspective must be reconciled
with a robust body of research showing that learners can
use statistical properties of language to segment words
(Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996). In the case of an article-noun sequence such as la pelota, transitional probabilities between those syllables that occur within the noun
(pe-lo-ta) are higher than those between the article and
the noun (la-pe), since nouns can co-occur with several
determiners. A small corpus analysis of Spanish child-directed speech on CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000) revealed
that the probability of hearing pelota after the article la is
just 0.002, showing that the article-noun boundary should
be a straightforward segmentation site. But critically, the
backward transitional probability between these words--
i.e., the probability of la preceding pelota--is .624, suggesting that familiar nouns and definite articles co-occur at a
striking rate. While most research on early statistical
learning has focused on forward transitional probabilities,
recent research shows that infants readily track backward
transitional probabilities as well (Pelucchi, Hay, & Saffran,
2009). The L1 participants in our experiments may have
begun the language learning process treating lapelota as
an unanalyzed unit, such that the ability to use the gender-marked article to find a ball in the visual field relied
on simple lexical recognition. Expt. 2 supports this possibility: only when L2 adults could treat the article and noun
as a single unit did they respond in ways that resembled
native Spanish speakers. Native speakers, however, reliably
took advantage of whatever linguistic information was
useful in each context.
Generalizing from item-specific associations to gender
categories
Both L1 and L2 adults presumably had top-down
knowledge about structural relations between articles
and nouns, but L1 adults may have benefited from a gradual process of generalizing beyond memorized sequences
of words and arriving at the correct parsing of article-noun
sequences. This trajectory of learning about grammatical
gender may set the stage for efficiency in generalization
that enables fluent listeners to use many forms of gender
marking to keep track of multiple referents in rapid, complex discourse.
How do children ultimately arrive at the correct parsing
of determiners and nouns and generalize beyond memorized sequences of words? One possibility is that consistent
phonological similarities between words--such as the suffixes -a on most feminine nouns and -o on most masculine
nouns in Spanish--facilitate the formation of gender classes
in Spanish (Braine, 1987). A robust finding from previous research is that assignment of new lexical items into existing
noun classes is easier in languages that mark nouns with
systematic, gender-specific indicators (Bordag, Opitz, &
Pechmann, 2006; Brooks, Braine, Catalano, Brody, & Sudhalter, 1993; Frigo & McDonald, 1998; Karmiloff-Smith, 1979;
MacWhinney, Leinbach, Taraban, & McDonald, 1989; PerezPereira, 1991). Determiners may also facilitate the discovery of gender categories, since la and el have perfect

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

informative value as a defining feature of feminine and masculine noun classes (Boloh & Ibernon, 2010). While learning
Spanish as children, our L1 participants may have noticed
that articles like la and el reliably preceded nouns, and only
then extracted them as functionally distinct units. Many
studies have shown that children compare information
across utterances to learn grammatical patterns (Childers
& Tomasello, 2001; Fisher, 1996; Pine & Lieven, 1997). It
seems likely that distributional regularities between determiners and phonological endings facilitate the formation of
noun classes. For example, Mintz (2003) has shown that
words surrounding a given target word are potentially useful as indicators of the target word's grammatical category.
Applied to Spanish, learners could infer that words occurring between the article (la) and noun ending (-a) belong
to a particular category (see MacWhinney et al., 1989;
Taraban, 2004; Taraban & Kempe, 1999). Nevertheless,
although L2 participants in the present studies were surely
able to assign lexical items to the appropriate gender classes, they did not show native-like fluency in interpreting
article-noun sequences. Given that most Spanish nouns belong to such phonologically transparent categories, it is all
the more surprising that L2 adults did not consistently take
advantage of informative gender-marked articles in identifying referents.
In Expt. 3, L1 adults not only categorized novel nouns
into appropriate gender categories, but they were also able
to access this category knowledge at an abstract level in
real-time processing, when they heard a different article
preceding the newly learned noun. This is a dimension of
fluency that has not been addressed in previous studies,
which have explored how speakers generalize across
nouns but not determiners (e.g., Brooks et al., 1993). L2
adults were unable to generalize across articles in Expt.
3, failing to transfer the functionality of una (the familiar
predictor of the novel feminine nouns) to la (the untested
predictor of the novel feminine nouns). For L2 Spanish
speakers, why was la not interchangeable with una as a
cue to noun identity in incremental language processing?
Goldberg (2006) has argued that accruing routinized
item-specific knowledge is an essential first step toward
making successful generalizations, a step that L2 learners
may have bypassed altogether.
Learning L1 and L2 in very different learning environments
In addition to characteristics of the learner that make it
easier to master a language starting early in life, the environments in which L1 and L2 learners typically experience
language vary in critically relevant ways. Preverbal infants
hear their language spoken for months before they begin to
talk, giving them extensive exposure to article-noun sequences before they have to produce them, and their first
productions consist of one-word utterances, with a gradual
emergence of multi-word utterances. In contrast, adult L2
learners are expected to understand and produce complex
sentences within the first weeks of instruction. This focus
on larger communicative goals in the classroom could hinder attention to local relations among words, such as links
between specific articles and nouns. Moreover, adult L2
learners frequently see articles and nouns as separate

461

items in written text, which could also interfere with the
process of establishing strong links between particular
determiners and nouns. Although top-down instruction
from a Spanish instructor about definite and indefinite
articles can help students form meta-level knowledge
about grammatical relations, this type of learning may
not facilitate the development of automaticity in using this
knowledge in online interpretation of spoken language.
Moreover, because non-native speakers learn Spanish in
classrooms with many other novices, they frequently overhear classmates making gender agreement errors, which
could also have negative consequences for the language
representations they are in the process of forming. All of
these factors indicate that infants and adults encounter a
new language in quite different ways. One consequence
is that adults learning L2 in a classroom do not go through
the period of very gradual item-based learning of language-specific collocations, such as gender-marked determiners and nouns, which Goldberg (2006) and others
have argued provides an essential foundation for L1 language learning.
Conclusion
In previous studies of gender processing, non-native
speakers did not take advantage of gender information as
skillfully as native speakers, even after many years of
immersion in their L2 (Guillelmon & Grosjean, 2001). The
experiments reported here confirmed these findings using
eye-tracking measures of real-time language processing.
Native Spanish-speaking children and adults showed
impressive efficiency in using grammatical gender to
establish reference. However, non-native Spanish speakers
were less successful, exploiting prenominal gender marking only when nouns were preceded by a single article
form with such regularity that the sequence could be
memorized as a single lexical item. In addition to the biological factors that have been the focus of most debate on
difficulties in late language learning, fundamentally different language learning environments may guide child and
adult learners along two quite different paths. One path
facilitates the formation of strong associations between
gender-marked articles and nouns, while the other fosters
attention to rules that denote noun class assignment. Native speakers are exposed to article-noun sequences
through consistent caregiver input during the first years
of life, establishing links strong enough for articles to serve
as useful, prefix-like cues that facilitate efficiency in rapid
language processing. Adult L2 learners, in contrast, typically learn about gender agreement from an instructor
who calls attention to rules that denote noun class assignment, an approach that is less likely to support formation
of the robust associations between articles and nouns
essential for maximizing efficiency in incremental processing of spoken language.
Acknowledgments
Thank you to the participating students, and to Virginia
A. Marchman, Nereyda Hurtado, Adriana Weisleder, Theres

462

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

Gruter, Grace Budde, Ricardo Bion, Kirsten Thorpe, Susan
Bobb, Renate Zangl, Ana Luz Portillo, Amber MacMillan,
Christina Marie Branom, Lucia Rodriguez Mata, Christine
Potter, Poornima Bhat, and other staff and students at the
Center for Infant Studies. The authors also gratefully
acknowledge Eve V. Clark, Ellen M. Markman, Herb H.
Clark, and Kenji Hakuta as well as three anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments on a previous version
of this manuscript. The first author was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.
This research was supported by grants from the National
Institutes of Health to Anne Fernald (HD 42235, DC
008838), and by a Dissertation Research Award from the
American Psychological Association to Casey LewWilliams.
Appendix: Speech stimuli with English translations
Expt. 1
Encuentra la pelota.
La ves?
Encuentra la galleta.
Te gusta?
Encuentra el zapato.
Lo ves?
Encuentra el carro.
Te gusta?
Donde esta la vaca?
La ves?
Donde esta la rana?
Te gusta?
Donde esta el pajaro?
Lo ves?
Donde esta el caballo?
Te gusta?
Expt. 2
Teaching trials
Mira, es la catela.
Mira, es la pifa.
Mira, es el durino.
Mira, es el tebo.
Test trials
Donde esta la catela?
Donde esta la pifa?
Donde esta el durino?
Donde esta el tebo?
Expt. 3
Teaching trials
Mira, es una catela.
Mira, es una pifa.
Mira, es un durino.
Mira, es un tebo.
Test trials
Donde esta la catela?
Donde esta la pifa?
Donde esta el durino?
Donde esta el tebo?

(`Find the ball.
Do you see it?')
(`Find the cookie.
Do you like it?')
(`Find the shoe.
Do you see it?')
(`Find the car.
Do you like it?')
(`Where's the cow?
Do you see it?')
(`Where's the frog?
Do you like it?')
(`Where's the bird?
Do you see it?')
(`Where's the horse?
Do you like it?')

(`Look, it's the
(`Look, it's the
(`Look, it's the
(`Look, it's the

[novel noun].')
[novel noun].')
[novel noun].')
[novel noun].')

(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')

(`Look,
(`Look,
(`Look,
(`Look,

it's
it's
it's
it's

a
a
a
a

[novel
[novel
[novel
[novel

noun].')
noun].')
noun].')
noun].')

(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')
(`Where's the [novel noun]?')

References
Abu-Akel, A., Bailey, A. L., & Thum, Y. M. (2004). Describing the acquisition
of determiners in English: A growth modeling approach. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 33, 407-424.
Allopenna, P., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Tracking the
time course of spoken word recognition using eye-movements:
Evidence for continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 419-439.
Andersen, R. W. (1984). What's gender good for, anyway? In R. Andersen
(Ed.), Second languages: A cross-linguistic perspective (pp. 77-100).
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Bassano, D., Maillochon, I., & Mottet, S. (2008). Noun grammaticalization
and determiner use in French children's speech: A gradual
development with prosodic and lexical influences. Journal of Child
Language, 35, 403-438.
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Hernandez, A., & Pizzamiglio, L. (1996). Gender
priming in Italian. Perception & Psychophysics, 58, 992-1004.
Bialystok, E. (1978). A theoretical model of second language learning.
Language Learning, 28, 69-84.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1990). The logical problem of foreign language learning.
Linguistic Analysis, 20, 3-49.
Boloh, Y., & Ibernon, L. (2010). Gender attribution and gender agreement
in 4- to 10-year-old French children. Cognitive Development, 25, 1-25.
Bordag, D., Opitz, A., & Pechmann, T. (2006). Gender processing in first
and second languages: The role of noun termination. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32,
1090-1101.
Braine, M. D. S. (1987). What is learned in acquiring word classes: A step
toward an acquisition theory. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of
language acquisition (pp. 65-87). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brooks, P. J., Braine, M. D. S., Catalano, L., Brody, R. E., & Sudhalter, V.
(1993). Acquisition of gender-like noun subclasses in an artificial
language: The contribution of phonological markers to learning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 76-95.
Carroll, J. B. (1939). Determining and numerating adjectives in children's
speech. Child Development, 10, 215-229.
Carroll, S. (1989). Second-language acquisition and the computational
paradigm. Language Learning, 39, 535-594.
Childers, J. B., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young
children's acquisition of the English transitive construction.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 739-748.
Clahsen, H., & Muysken, P. (1986). The availability of universal grammar
to adult and child learners - A study of the acquisition of German
word order. Second Language Research, 2, 93-119.
Clark, E. V. (2003). Critical periods, sensitive periods, and lateralization.
University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 9.2, 39-48.
Corbett, G. G. (1991). Gender. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Costa, A., Kovacic, D., Franck, J., & Caramazza, A. (2003). On the autonomy
of grammatical gender systems of the two languages of a bilingual.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 181-200.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2001). Time course of
frequency effects in spoken-word recognition: Evidence from eye
movements. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 317-367.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson, J. S. (2000).
Linguistic gender and spoken-word recognition in French. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42, 465-480.
DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005). Probabilistic word preactivation during language comprehension inferred from electrical
brain activity. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural networks: The
importance of starting small. Cognition, 48, 71-99.
Fernald, A. (1992). Maternal vocalisations to infants as biologically
relevant signals: An evolutionary perspective. In J. H. Barkow, L.
Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology
and the generation of culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fernald, A. (2004). The search for the object begins at the verb. Paper
presented at the 29th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development. Boston, MA.
Fernald, A., & Mazzie, C. (1991). Prosody and focus in speech to infants
and adults. Developmental Psychology, 27, 209-221.
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V. (2006). Picking up speed in
understanding: Speech processing efficiency and vocabulary growth
across the second year. Developmental Psychology, 42, 98-116.
Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., & McRoberts, G. W.
(1998). Rapid gains in speed of verbal processing by infants in the 2nd
year. Psychological Science, 9, 228-231.

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464
Fernald, A., Swingley, D., & Pinto, J. P. (2001). When half a word is enough:
Infants can recognize spoken words using partial phonetic
information. Child Development, 72, 1003-1015.
Fernald, A., Thorpe, K., & Marchman, V. A. (2010). Blue car, red car:
Developing efficiency in online interpretation of adjective-noun
phrases. Cognitive Psychology, 60, 190-217.
Fernald, A., Zangl, R., Portillo, A., & Marchman, V. A. (2008). Looking while
listening: Using eye movements to monitor spoken language
comprehension by infants and young children. In I. A. Sekerina, E.
M. Fernandez, & H. Clahsen (Eds.), Developmental psycholinguistics:
On-line methods in children's language processing (pp. 97-135).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fisher, C. (1996). Structural limits on verb mapping: The role of analogy in
children's interpretation of sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 31, 41-81.
Frigo, L., & McDonald, J. L. (1998). Properties of phonological markers that
affect the acquisition of gender-like subclasses. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 218-245.
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in
language. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., Cera, C., & Sandoval, T. C. (2008). More use
almost always means a smaller frequency effect: Aging, bilingualism,
and the weaker links hypothesis. Journal of Memory and Language, 58,
787-814.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J. Y., Cornu, E., Guillelmon, D., & Besson, C.
(1994). The gender marking effect in spoken word recognition.
Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590-598.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender marking effect in spoken
word recognition: The case of bilinguals. Memory & Cognition, 29,
503-511.
Hahne, A. (2001). What's different in second-language processing?
Evidence from event related brain potentials. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 30, 251-266.
Haith, M. M., Wentworth, N., & Canfield, R. L. (1993). The formation of
expectations in early infancy. Advances in Infancy Research, 8,
251-297.
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C. Y.-H. (1997). The partial availability of Universal
Grammar in second language acquisition: The ``failed functional
features hypothesis". Second Language Research, 13, 187-226.
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2007). Spoken word
recognition by Latino children learning Spanish as their first
language. Journal of Child Language, 37, 227-249.
Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D. J., Marchman, V. A., Newton, T., Fenson, L.,
& Conboy, B. (2003). MacArthur inventarios del desarrollo de habilidades
comunicativas: User's guide and technical manual. Baltimore, MD:
Brookes Publishing Co..
Jiang, N. (2004). Morphological insensitivity in second language
processing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 603-634.
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects in second
language learning: The influence of maturational state on the
acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21,
60-99.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1979). A functional approach to child language: A study
of determiners and reference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009). The bilingual advantage in novel
word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 705-710.
Kersten, A. W., & Earles, J. L. (2001). Less really is more for adults learning
a miniature artificial language. Journal of Memory and Language, 44,
250-273.
Kroll, J., & Sholl, A. (1992). Lexical and conceptual memory in fluent and
nonfluent bilinguals. In R. Harris (Ed.), Cognitive processing in
bilinguals (pp. 191-206). Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.
Lemhofer, K., Spalek, K., & Schriefers, H. (2008). Cross-language effects of
grammatical gender in bilingual word recognition and production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 312-330.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish
make rapid use of grammatical gender in spoken word recognition.
Psychological Science, 18, 193-198.
MacWhinney, B. (1978). The acquisition of morphophonology.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 43, 1-123.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk (3rd
ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (2001). The competition model: The input, the context,
and the brain. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language
instruction (pp. 69-90). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
MacWhinney, B., Leinbach, J., Taraban, R., & McDonald, J. (1989). Language
learning: Cues or rules? Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 255-277.

463

Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2008). Speed of word recognition and
vocabulary knowledge in infancy predict cognitive and language
outcomes in later childhood. Developmental Science, 11, F9-F16.
Mariscal, S. (2009). Early acquisition of gender agreement in the Spanish
noun phrase: Starting small. Journal of Child Language, 36, 143-171.
McDonald, J. L. (2000). Grammaticality judgments in a second language:
Influences of age of acquisition and native language. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 21, 395-423.
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of
second-language word learning: Minimal instruction produces rapid
change. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 703-704.
Mintz, T. H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical categories
in child directed speech. Cognition, 90, 91-117.
Neville, H. J., Coffey, S. A., Lawson, D. S., Fischer, A., Emmorey, K., & Bellugi,
U. (1997). Neural systems mediating American Sign Language: Effects
of sensory experience and age of acquisition. Brain and Language, 57,
285-308.
Newport, E. (1990). Maturational constraints on language learning.
Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Oldfield, R. C., & Wingfield, A. (1965). Response latencies in naming
objects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 17, 273-281.
Pelucchi, B., Hay, J. F., & Saffran, J. R. (2009). Learning in reverse: Eightmonth-old infants track backward transitional probabilities.
Cognition, 113, 244-247.
Perez-Pereira, M. (1991). The acquisition of gender: What Spanish
children tell us. Journal of Child Language, 18, 571-590.
Peters, A. M. (1983). The units of language acquisition. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. (1997). Slot and frame patterns and the
development of the determiner category. Applied Psycholinguistics,
18, 123-138.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sabourin, L., Stowe, L. A., & de Haan, G. J. (2006). Transfer effects in
learning a second language grammatical gender system. Second
Language Research, 22, 1-29.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by
8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1999). Statistical
learning of tone sequences by human infants and adults. Cognition, 70,
27-52.
Scherag, A., Demuth, L., Rosler, F., Neville, H. J., & Roder, B. (2004). The
effects of late acquisition of L2 and the consequences of immigration
on L1 for semantic and morphosyntactic language aspects. Cognition,
93, B97-B108.
Sedaris, D. (2000). Me talk pretty one day. New York, NY: Little, Brown and
Company.
Segalowitz, N. (2003). Automaticity and second languages. In C.
Doughtym & M. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language
acquisition (pp. 382-388). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1986). The competence/control model:
Crosslinguistic influence and the creation of new grammars. In E.
Kellerman & M. Sharwood Smith (Eds.), Cross linguistic influence in
second language acquisition (pp. 10-20). New York: Pergamon Press.
Slobin, D. (1985). The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition (Vols. I
and II). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Snow, C. (1972). Mothers' speech to children learning language. Child
Development, 43, 549-565.
Swingley, D., Pinto, J. P., & Fernald, A. (1999). Continuous processing in
word recognition at 24 months. Cognition, 71, 73-108.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy, J. C.
(1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken
language comprehension. Science, 268, 1632-1634.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy, J. C.
(1996). Using eye movements to study spoken language
comprehension: Evidence for visually mediated incremental
interpretation. In T. Inui & J. McClelland (Eds.), Attention and
performance XVI: Integration in perception and communication
(pp. 457-478). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Taraban, R. (2004). Drawing learners' attention to syntactic context aids
gender-like category induction. Journal of Memory and Language, 51,
202-216.
Taraban, R., & Kempe, V. (1999). Gender processing in native and
nonnative Russian speakers. Applied Psycholinguistics, 20, 119-148.
Thorpe, K., & Fernald, A. (2006). Knowing what a novel word is not: Twoyear-olds ``listen through" ambiguous adjectives in fluent speech.
Cognition, 100, 389-433.

464

C. Lew-Williams, A. Fernald / Journal of Memory and Language 63 (2010) 447-464

Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit measures of
sensitivity to violations in second language grammar. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 27, 173-204.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children's early syntactic
development. Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 156-163.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L. (1999). The
kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line sentence processing in
young children. Cognition, 73, 89-134.
Ullman, M. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language: The
declarative/procedural model. Cognition, 92, 231-270.
van Heugten, M., & Johnson, E. K. (in press). Gender-marked determiners
help Dutch learners' word recognition when gender information itself
does not. Journal of Child Language.
van Heugten, M., & Shi, R. (2009). French-learning toddlers use gender
information on determiners during word recognition. Developmental
Science, 12, 419-425.

Weber-Fox, C., & Neville, H. J. (2001). Sensitive periods differentiate
processing of open-and closed-class words: An ERP study of
bilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 44,
1338-1353.
Wicha, N. Y. Y., Moreno, E. M., & Kutas, M. (2004). Anticipating words and
their gender: An event-related brain potential study of semantic
integration, gender expectancy, and gender agreement in Spanish
sentence reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1272-1288.
Zangl, R., & Fernald, A. (2007). Increasing flexibility in children's online
processing of grammatical and nonce determiners in fluent speech.
Language Learning and Development, 3, 199-231.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Age-of-acquisition effects in
reading aloud: Tests of cumulative frequency and frequency
trajectory. Memory & Cognition, 32, 31-38.

