J. Child Lang. 37 (2010), 767-791. f Cambridge University Press 2009
doi:10.1017/S0305000909009568

Segmental distribution patterns of English
infant- and adult-directed speech*
S U E A N N S. L E E
Oklahoma State University
AND

B A R B A R A L. D A V I S
University of Texas
(Received 12 November 2007 - Revised 1 July 2008 - First published online 2 July 2009)

ABSTRACT

This study compared segmental distribution patterns for consonants
and vowels in English infant-directed speech (IDS) and adult-directed
speech (ADS). A previous study of Korean indicated that segmental
patterns of IDS differed from ADS patterns (Lee, Davis & MacNeilage,
2008). The aim of the current study was to determine whether such
differences in Korean are universal or language-specific. Results indicate
that consonant distribution patterns of English IDS were significantly
different from English ADS. Speakers who used IDS produced fewer
fricatives, affricates, nasals and liquids, but more stops and glides, than
speakers who used ADS. In terms of vowels, IDS speakers produced
more high-back vowels /u o/ and /cI/ diphthongs than ADS speakers.
These results indicate both general trends and language-specific segmental distribution patterns in IDS. When compared to previous findings on ADS and IDS in Korean, these results for English give support
to a more general assertion that segmental distribution patterns in IDS
seem to be mediated by linguistic and cultural factors across languages.

INTRODUCTION

It is well known that infants are able to discriminate phoneme contrasts
along various phonetic dimensions within the first few months of life and
[*] We would like to thank Dr Nadya Foaud and Dr Susan Cashin, who provided valuable
input on this article. We also thank Kendra Gefke, Ali Dammeir and Jaime Moore for
their assistance with data collection and data analysis. Address for correspondence :
Sue Ann S. Lee, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee - Communication Sciences and
Disorders, PO BOX 413, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201, United States. e-mail :
lees59@uwm.edu

767

LEE & DAVIS

extract segmental patterns from fluent speech input in their ambient
language (Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996). In contrast to infants' highly
developed perceptual abilities, vocal output repertoires during babbling and
first-word period are limited. Previous studies (e.g. Davis & MacNeilage,
1995 ; Locke, 1983 ; Stoel-Gammon, 1985) have commonly reported that
stop and nasal consonants are frequent while fricative and affricate
consonant manner of articulation is rare in infants' early output
repertoires. Moreover, glides are frequent while liquid consonants are
infrequent. In terms of vowels, predominant vowels are mid to low central
and front vowels whereas high, back and rounded vowels are infrequent
(Davis & MacNeilage, 1995 ; Kent & Bauer, 1985 ; Stoel-Gammon &
Harrington, 1990).
Some studies indicate that infant perceptual abilities relative to ambient
language regularities may be reflected in sound properties within their
limited babbling repertoires. For example, Boysson-Bardies & Vihman
(1991) found that French-learning infants produced more labial consonants
compared to infants in English, Swedish and Japanese language
environments, reflecting frequency of labials in the ambient languages.
These findings suggest that segmental distributions in speech input
available to infants should be investigated in order to fully understand the
relationship of ambient phonological patterns to characteristics of infants'
vocalization.
Regarding ambient phonological input, infant-directed speech (IDS),
a speech style directed to infants, may be the register that is most frequently
used by adults in formative stages of speech acquisition. Weijer (2002)
reported, however, that other types of speech registers in addition to IDS
are also available to infants such as adult-directed speech (ADS), childdirected speech (CDS), and child-child conversational speech (CCS). Since
CDS or CCS varies depending on communication patterns among family
members, IDS and ADS should be the major phonological patterns
consistently available to infants in most families. Thus, in order to obtain
valid insight into the role of linguistic input, it is important to examine
consonant and vowel distribution patterns in IDS as well as in ADS to gain
information about sound patterns available as input to infants in a natural
communication environment. Most previous investigations comparing IDS
to ADS have analyzed semantic and syntactic domains as well as acoustic
characteristics in order to characterize the nature of these registers (see
Pine, 1994, for more information). However, only a few studies of
segmental distributions in IDS are currently available.
Ferguson (1977) qualitatively described the phonological properties of
baby talk in several languages. He noted that baby talk contains
phonological simplifications, referring to a tendency toward simple
consonant and vowel forms and omissions of complex and difficult sounds
768

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

(e.g. liquid substitution), and reduplication of sounds within words. StoelGammon (1984) also qualitatively described phonological variability in two
types of mother-child speech: termed ` careful ' and `casual ' speech.
Vihman, Kay, Boysson-Bardies, Durand & Sundberg (1994) attempted to
characterize mothers' speech quantitatively across several languages with
respect to phonetic input characteristics. They analyzed consonant
repertoires and phonotactic structures. These studies examined only IDS ;
however, they did not compare consonantal and vowel segmental
characteristics of IDS with ADS within the same language.
Shockey & Bond (1980) and Bernstein Ratner (1984) compared
phonological characteristics of ADS and IDS. Shockey and Bond reported
that phonological processes such as palatalization, dental deletion, interdental deletion, and the conversion of ts/s appeared more frequently in IDS
than ADS. In contrast, Bernstein Ratner (1984) did not find any differences
between ADS and IDS in phonological process patterns except for
palatalization. According to Bernstein Ratner, ` their mothers seem to have
had input strategies which `` clean up '' phonological strings to make them
much more canonical or citation-like in nature' (p. 251). These two studies
still did not provide information on how such phonological processes
affected overall segmental distributions of consonants and vowels in ADS
and IDS. Finally, Zamuner (2003) reported the number and percentage
of coda consonants by using dictionaries, words in the MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory (CDI), and CDS. She did not
include comparative analysis of ADS or report overall characteristics of
consonants and vowels in CDS. Thus, previous studies have not provided
complete characterizations of segmental distribution patterns between ADS
and IDS.
As in other language domains, if segmental patterns of IDS are different
from ADS, what is the role of IDS in infants' speech development ? The
role of caregivers' speech in language development can be understood
within Vygotsky's (1978) sociolinguistic learning theory. Vygotsky asserted
that children's learning is accomplished by scaffolding, which comes about
as an adult engages the child in ways that build on and move beyond the
skills the child already possesses. A question raised here is how scaffolding
is constructed in the teaching and learning processes for ambient language
phonemes, given the highly developed nature of speech sound perception
capacities in infants. Several researchers have proposed that IDS is tailored
to children's output capacities (Cross, 1977 ; Sachs, 1977). Cross (1977)
noted that ` In general, the input to rapidly developing children is graded
continuously in tune with their linguistic and communicative abilities '
(p. 163).
In her Mother-Infant Phonetic Interaction Model (MIPhI), Sundberg
(1998) described IDS as a two-way interactive process. According to
769

LEE & DAVIS

Sundberg, infants' sensitivity to language-specific characteristics of IDS is
increased as they are exposed to IDS. At the same time, IDS speakers use
the infants' vocalizations to tune to the infants' phonological ability and
adjust their IDS to infants' level of phonological development. In spite of
the important function of caregivers' speech, there is a lack of precise
information on the role of SEGMENTAL input patterns in this speech register.
One step toward understanding the role of naturally occurring speech input
as a support for infants' mastery of ambient language patterns is to investigate frequencies of consonant and vowel categories in IDS compared to
ADS.
Recently, Lee et al. (2008) compared Korean IDS and ADS segmental
distribution patterns. One of the observations that inspired that study
was that Korean IDS speakers often used nonsense sounds and
onomatopoeia when talking to their infants (Lee & Nakayama, 2000).
Repeated syllables and stop and nasal consonants commonly appear in
nonsense sounds and onomatopoeia in Korean. These natural speech
tendencies mediated by cultural practices for input to young children
might lead to different segmental distributions between IDS and ADS in
Korean.
As a member of the Altaic language family, Korean has 19 phonemic
consonants and 8 monophthong vowels. The Korean consonant and vowel
systems are shown in Appendices A and B. One distinctive aspect of the
Korean consonant system is that stops and affricates at each place of
articulation include three-way distinctions : lenis, fortis and aspirated.
Compared with English, Korean has only two fricatives. Glides /w, j/ are
combined with a monophthong vowel to form a diphthong. Finally, the
same sound in Korean is allowed at the coda of the first syllable and at
the onset of the second syllable, resulting in geminates. In terms of vowels,
Korean has no tense-lax distinction, unlike English. Korean has no lowfront vowel /ae/, but the high-central vowel /i/. The vowel /a/ is categorized
as a low-central vowel.
Lee et al. (2008) found that Korean IDS speakers produced fewer
fricative consonants, and more language-specific Korean phones such as
fortis and geminate consonants than ADS speakers. Korean IDS speakers
also produced more mid and low central vowels, but fewer mid-front and
high-central vowels than ADS speakers. These segmental distribution
patterns in Korean IDS were similar to the infants' speech patterns,
suggesting that segmental distribution patterns in Korean IDS tended to
match their infants' production repertoire.
Lee et al. (2008) compared IDS and ADS segmental distributions in the
Korean language. It is not certain, however, whether such differences in
ADS and IDS patterns also exist in languages other than Korean. Thus, an
important step to making general assertions about the role of IDS in early
770

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

learning of ambient phonological regularities is to examine segmental
distribution patterns in other languages. English is different from Korean in
terms of both phonological patterns for consonants and vowels and cultural
characteristics related to word types frequently used by caregivers. Thus, a
comparison of segmental distributions in English IDS with ADS will
indicate whether differences found between ADS and IDS in the Korean
language exist in English.
Segmental distributions could be mediated by lexical and morphosyntactic factors. Lee et al. (2008) found that different segmental
patterns in ADS and IDS could be attributed to different use of lexical and
grammatical morphemes. For example, Korean IDS speakers produced
words containing fricatives less frequently than did ADS speakers. In
addition, Korean IDS speakers less frequently produced grammatical
morphemes containing fricatives such as perfect/past tense ess, past past/
past perfect ass-ess or ess-ess, honorific si, and conjunctor enders such as se,
kose, and myen-se than ADS speakers. Similarly, IDS speakers less
frequently used case particles containing high-central and mid-front
vowels than ADS speakers. Thus, the use of lexical and grammatical
morphemes in IDS leads to differing frequency of consonant and vowel
distributions than in ADS.
As segments are mediated by lexical and morphological characteristics,
lexical and morphosyntactic aspects are also influenced by cultural styles of
communicating with infants. Fernald & Morikawa (1993) proposed that
cultural norms underlying IDS have been reflected in syntactic as well as
semantic aspects of language input. Toda, Fogel & Kawai (1990) and
Fernald & Morikawa (1993) observed that American mothers often use
more direct sentence types such as questions and imperatives than Japanese
mothers. They also observed that American mothers produce fewer
nonsense sounds and onomatopoeia than Japanese mothers. Consistent
with previous studies, Lee & Nakayama (2000) reported different maternal
speech characteristics among Korean, American and Japanese mothers. The
authors proposed that Korean mothers tend to focus on teaching actions
using frequent verbs, but American mothers are more likely to teach nouns
by describing and asking object names, while Japanese mothers emphasize
teaching social skills by producing frequent socially related words to infants
such as ` hi ' and `thank you '. Consequently, the types of words mothers
frequently spoke to their infants were different among the three groups.
These studies concluded that semantic and syntactic characteristics of IDS
differed cross-linguistically due to different cultural norms. As previous
studies have indicated, if the lexicon is influenced by culture, segmental
distribution may be also affected because the frequency of occurrence of
segments could be mediated by the frequency of the specific characteristics
of the lexicon.
771

LEE & DAVIS

The purpose of this study was to characterize segmental consonant
and vowel distribution patterns in English IDS and ADS and to identify
potential roles of IDS in infant speech development. Frequency of
certain semantic properties was analyzed as well to examine whether these
properties affect segmental distributions in ADS and IDS. For comparison
with Korean, the same methodology used in Lee et al. (2008) was adopted.
Results will provide not only comparison of segmental characteristics of
English IDS and ADS, but enable cross-linguistic and cross-cultural
comparisons of English and Korean input to young children.
METHOD

Participants
To avoid any potential influence of IDS on ADS conversational speech, two
groups of female speakers were recruited for collecting IDS and ADS
samples separately. For the IDS samples, ten native-English-speaking
mothers living in a large Midwestern city in the US participated. Mothers
were selected if they had children who were aged approximately 1;0 (range
from 0; 11 to 1; 1), spoke only English to their infant and had limited
exposure to other cultures and languages. For the ADS samples, ten nativeEnglish-speaking female students enrolled at a large university in a
Midwestern city participated. All female speakers for the ADS samples
were single and did not have children.
Data collection
IDS speech samples were recorded at the Speech Acoustics Laboratory at a
Midwestern university. Only one mother's data were collected at her home.
Mothers wore a small traveling bag on their waist, with a Sony Minidisc
Recorder MZ-N10 inside. An MM-Lapel-1 microphone connected to the
recorder was clipped to their clothing. During the initial 2-3 minutes,
mothers were asked to play with their infants using several toys in the way
they usually interacted. Subsequently, four specific types of target toys were
provided to obtain the IDS samples analyzed. The types of toys included a
pair of stuffed animals (e.g. a dog and a pig), a pair of cars (e.g. truck and
car), toy foods (e.g. fruits and vegetables) and a miniature house with family
members (e.g. Daddy, Mommy, baby). These toys were the same toys used
in the previous study (Lee et al., 2008). Toys were selected because they are
commonly used in mother-child interaction in various cultures (Fernald &
Morikawa, 1993) and reflect daily activities at home for infants in this age
range. With each set of toys, mothers were asked to play with their infants
for approximately 5 minutes.
For the ADS samples, English-speaking female speakers were
interviewed by the primary investigator for 20-30 minutes at the Speech
772

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

Acoustics Lab. The investigator initiated a 5-minute introduction period to
explain procedures. Subsequently, toys used for the IDS samples were
provided. Each speaker was asked to talk about any idea that came to mind
when she saw the materials. Conversations for each toy lasted for
approximately 5 minutes. All speech samples were collected with the same
microphone and recorder used for the IDS samples.
Data analysis
As in the study of Korean (Lee et al., 2008), after excluding interjections
and people's names, the first 250 syllables produced with each set of test
materials in the ADS and IDS samples were selected for analysis. In total,
1000 syllables were obtained from each participant (i.e. 250 syllablesr4
types of test materials per participant).
Segmental analysis
The data were transcribed by native English speakers using IPA
conventions at the level of broad phonemic transcription. First,
consonants were analyzed in terms of manner of articulation. Manner of
articulation categories included stops /b p d t g k/, nasals /n m n/, fricatives
/f v h D s z s Z h/, affricates /dZ ts/, glides /w j/ and liquids /r l/. Then, each
consonant manner, if the manner was composed of more than one place,
was analyzed further in terms of each place. For example, stop and nasal
manners were analyzed into bilabial /b, p, m/, alveolar /d, t, n/ and velar
/g, k, n/ places. Glide manner was categorized into bilabial /w/ and palatal
/j/ places. Fricative manner was further divided into labio-dental /f v/,
inter-dental /h D/, alveolar /s z/, palatal /s Z/ and glottal /h/ places. Instead
of broader place categories such as labial, coronal, dorsal and glottal used in
the previous study (Lee et al., 2008), more finite place categories were used
in the current study to provide more detailed place information on
differences between ADS and IDS in English. Such detailed place
analysis is necessary in English because certain English consonants are
produced at more places of articulation than in Korean. For example, three
English fricatives are produced within the coronal place category (i.e. interdental, alveolar and palatal) while Korean fricatives are produced at one
place (i.e. alveolar). Without investigating place at a more finely grained
level, it is difficult to identify which place may contribute to differences in
segmental distributions between ADS and IDS. Vowel data were analyzed
in terms of ten vowel categories. The ten categories include seven
monophthongs (high-front /i I/, mid-front /e E/, low-front /ae/, mid-central
/e v/, high-back /u o/, mid-back/o c/, and low-back /a/, and three phonemic
diphthongs /aI/, /ao/ and /cI/).
773

LEE & DAVIS

Overall frequency of each consonant and vowel category was calculated
using the Logical International Phonetic Program (LIPP) computer
software. Multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) were conducted
for consonant and vowel categories to compare ADS and IDS at
a=0.05. Using Bonferroni correction, a new alpha level was set at
a=0.008 by dividing 0.05 by 6 (the total numbers of planned statistical
analysis).
To calculate reliability for phonetic transcriptions of vowel and consonant categories, a native English speaker, blind to study hypotheses,
re-transcribed 20 % of randomly selected utterances from the sample.
Consonant reliability was calculated categorically in terms of each
consonant manner and place of articulation. Also, vowel reliability for ten
categories was obtained. Voiced and voiceless distinctions for consonants
and tense-lax distinction for vowels were not considered. Consonants and
vowels showed 98% and 97% reliability in both samples.
Lexical analysis
The data were also transcribed using orthographic conventions by native
English speakers. The orthographic data were entered into the Systematic
Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT) program (version 7). The SALT
program was used for analyzing target lexical items used in ADS and IDS
samples.

RESULTS

Overall characteristics
A sample of 1000 syllables per participant was analyzed. Means for the total
number of utterances in ADS and IDS were 88 (SD=14) and 210
(SD=47). Means of the total number of words in ADS and IDS were 799
(SD=16) and 814 (SD=128), respectively. Thus, on average, each
utterance contained 9 words in ADS and 4 words in IDS. In addition, the
mean number of word types in ADS and IDS was 297 (SD=12) and 209
(SD=36), respectively. t-tests revealed that ADS contained significantly
fewer utterances (t(18)=x7.83, p<0.001) and more word types
(t(18)=7.331, p<0.001) than IDS. However, the total number of words
was not significantly different between ADS and IDS (t(18)=x0.377,
p=0.711).
Consonants
Overall, a total of 14 990 consonants and 14 450 consonants were produced
in ADS and IDS, respectively. The mean frequencies for consonants were
774

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

40%
ADS
IDS

35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Stop

Fricative

Affricate

Nasal

Glide

Liquid

Fig. 1. The percentages of consonant manner of articulation in ADS and IDS.

significantly different between the two groups (t(18)=2.37, p=0.03). IDS
speakers used fewer consonants than ADS speakers.
Figure 1 shows the percentages of six consonant manners in IDS and
ADS. The frequency order of each manner category was the same in both
IDS and ADS. The stop manner (37% for IDS and 33 % for ADS) was
most frequent, followed by fricative (26% for IDS and 28 % for ADS), nasal
(15% for IDS and 17 % for ADS), liquid (12% for IDS and 14% for ADS)
and glide (9 % for IDS and 6 % for ADS). The affricate manner was
produced least frequently in both ADS and IDS (1% for IDS and 2% for
ADS). Although the order of frequency of occurrence was similar between
ADS and IDS, the mean frequency of each consonant manner was different
between the two groups. More stops and glides were produced in IDS than
in ADS, while the other manners (fricative, affricate, nasal and liquid) were
more frequent in ADS.
A two-way MANOVA was conducted to determine the effect of ADS and
IDS groups on the six consonant manners. A significant difference was
found between the two groups, Wilks' lambda=0.212 (F(6, 13)=8.06,
p<0.001, g2=0.78). Means, standard deviations and F, and p values of
univariate ANOVA for each consonant manner in ADS and IDS are
presented in Table 1. All consonant manner categories were significantly
different between ADS and IDS. ADS speakers used fricative, affricate
nasal and liquid manners significantly more than IDS speakers, while IDS
speakers produced significantly more stops and glides than ADS speakers.
775

LEE & DAVIS
TABLE

1. Means, standard deviations (SD) and ANOVA statistics of
consonants in ADS and IDS
ADS Mean (SD)

Stop
Fricative
Affricate
Nasal
Glide
Liquid
NOTE :

a

544
374
16
212
130
169

(31.31)
(27.70)
(5.62)
(28.06)
(18.56)
(41.50)

p

11.27
11.55
27.41
18.42
28.36
8.29

0.004a
0.002a
<0.001a
<0.001a
<0.001a
0.008a

2. Means, standard deviations (SD), t and p values of each place
of articulation for stops, fricatives and glides

Stops
bilabial
alveolar
velar
Fricatives
labio-dental
inter-dental
alveolar
palatal
glottal
Glides
bilabial
palatal
a

(30.87)
(26.53)
( 7.02)
(16.67)
(19.29)
(21.94)

F (1, 18)

Statistically significant at a=0.008 using Bonferroni correction.

TABLE

NOTE :

497
416
31
257
85
213

IDS Mean (SD)

ADS Mean (SD)

IDS Mean (SD)

t (dF=18)

p

81 (13)
284 (28)
132 (13)

111 (27)
263 (28)
170 (20)

x3.04
1.63
x4.76

0.007a
0.119
<0.001a

92
69
189
20
45

44
109
159
13
49

(13)
(20)
(23)
(5)
(13)

7.78
x5.48
3.55
2.18
x0.79

<0.001a
<0.001a
0.002a
0.043
0.438

68 (14)
62 (11)

0.09
x10.42

0.92
<0.001a

(14)
(11)
(14)
(10)
(6)

68 (14)
17 (8)

Statistically significant at a=0.008 using Bonferroni correction.

Since stop, fricative, nasal and glide manners have more than one place,
follow-up analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted between ADS and
IDS for each manner separately. For stops, a two-way mixed ANOVA with
group as a between-subject factor (i.e. ADS and IDS) and three places (i.e.
bilabial, alveolar and velar) as a within-subject factor was conducted. There
were significant main effects for group (F(1, 18)=11.27, p<0.004, g2=0.38)
and for place (F(2, 36)=260.78, p<0.001, g2=0.93) as well as a significant
interaction (F(2, 36)=7.92, p<0.001, g2=0.31). Because of the significant
interaction effect, three independent t-tests for each stop place were
conducted comparing ADS and IDS (see Table 2). There were significant
differences for bilabial and velar places between ADS and IDS. IDS
speakers produced significantly more bilabial (20%) and velar (31 %) places
776

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

than ADS speakers (16 % for bilabial and 26% for velar). However, there
was no significant difference for alveolar place between ADS (58%) and
IDS (49%).
For fricatives, a two-way mixed ANOVA was also conducted with group
as a between-subjects factor (i.e. ADS and IDS) and five places (i.e. labiodental, inter-dental, alveolar, palatal and glottal) as a within-subject factor.
There were significant main effects for group (F(1, 18)=12.33, p<0.002,
g2=0.41) and for place (F(4, 72)=332.33, p<0.001, g2=0.95) as well as a
significant interaction (F(4, 72)=26.79, p<0.001, g2=0.59). Because of the
significant interaction effect, five independent t-tests for each fricative place
were conducted comparing ADS and IDS (see Table 2). There were
significant differences for labio-dental, inter-dental and alveolar places.
ADS speakers produced significantly more labio-dental (21 %) and alveolar
(46%) fricatives than IDS speakers (17% for labio-dental and 43 % for
alveolar). In contrast, IDS speakers used more inter-dental (29%) fricatives
than ADS speakers (17%). Palatal and glottal places were not significantly
different between ADS and IDS.
In terms of nasal consonants, an ANOVA indicated significant main
effects for group (F(1, 18)=18.42, p<0.001, g2=0.51) and for place
(F(2, 36)=469.72, p<0.001, g2=0.96). However, no interaction effect was
found (F(2, 36)=1.95, p<0.001, g2=0.09). ADS speakers produced more
nasals for all three places (M=78, SD=8 for bilabial ; M=157, SD=13 for
alveolar; M=20, SD=5 for velar) than IDS speakers (M=57, SD=13 for
bilabial ; M=139, SD=25 for alveolar; M=15, SD=8 for velar).
With respect to glides, there were significant main effects for group
(F(1, 18)=28.36, p<0.001, g2=0.61) and for place (F(1, 18)=61.45, p<
0.001, g2=0.77) as well as a significant interaction effect (F(1, 18)=41.29,
p<0.001, g2=0.69). Follow-up t-tests (see Table 2) indicated that
frequency of palatal glides was significantly different between ADS and
IDS. IDS speakers (48%) used palatal glides significantly more than ADS
speakers (20%). However, there was no difference for bilabial glides
between the two speech registers.
Vowels
Figure 2 shows the percentages of each monophthong vowel category in
IDS and ADS. Considering both monophthongs and diphthongs, the order
of frequency of each category in the two groups was similar to some extent
except for the high-back vowels and the diphthong /aI/ category. In both
IDS and ADS registers, mid-central vowels were most frequent and highfront vowels were second-most frequent. After the mid-central and highfront vowel categories, the order of frequent vowel categories in ADS was
mid-frontpdiphthong/aI/pmid-backplow-frontphigh-backplow-back.
777

LEE & DAVIS

Fig. 2. The percentages of monophthong vowels in ADS and IDS.

In IDS, the order was high-backpmid-frontpmid-backplow-frontplowback. Diphthongs /ao/ and /cI/ were the least and the second-least frequent
in ADS while the three diphthongs /aI/, /ao/ and /cI/ were the least frequent
in that order in IDS.
A two-way MANOVA was conducted to determine the effect of ADS and
IDS groups on the ten vowel categories. A significant difference was found
between the two groups, Wilks' lambda=0.028 (F(9, 10)=37.98, p<0.001,
g2=0.97). Means, standard deviations, and F and p values of univariate
778

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S
TABLE

3. Means, standard deviations (SD) and ANOVA statistics
of vowels in ADS and IDS

Vowel category
High-front
Mid-front
Low-front
Mid-central
High-back
Mid-back
Low-back
/aI/
/ao/
/cI/
NOTE :

a

ADS Mean (SD)
241
119
81
260
49
86
38
112
13
1

IDS Mean (SD)

(19.03)
(21.55)
(20.35)
(32.13)
(13.88)
(11.71)
(8.08)
(17.66)
(6.86)
(1.50)

244
108
70
261
112
90
44
41
21
9

(27.57)
(25.24)
(16.35)
(31.40)
(21.73)
(18.29)
(22.48)
(16.64)
(9.39)
(4.17)

F (1, 18)

p

0.05
1.03
1.61
0.001
60.42
0.39
0.65
85.35
4.60
28.55

0.823
0.322
0.220
0.972
<0.001a
0.539
0.430
<0.001a
0.046
<0.001a

Statistically significant at a=0.008 using Bonferroni correction.

ANOVA for each vowel category in ADS and IDS are presented in Table 3.
Three out of ten vowel categories (high-back and two diphthongs) were
significantly different between ADS and IDS. IDS speakers produced
significantly more high-back vowels and diphthong /cI/, but fewer
diphthong /aI/ than ADS speakers.
Lexical analyses
Some aspects of segmental distributions were different between ADS and
IDS. In particular, IDS speakers produced higher frequencies of bilabial
and velar stops, palatal glides, high-back vowels and the diphthong /cI/
than ADS speakers. Although fricative consonants were more frequent in
ADS overall, inter-dental fricatives were significantly higher in IDS.
To investigate whether frequent bilabial and velar stops, palatal glide, highvowels, the diphthong /cI/ and inter-dental fricatives in IDS were
influenced by lexical characteristics, the frequencies of words containing
these sounds were analyzed. In addition, two further analyses were
conducted. First, frequencies of occurrence of baby-talk words in English
IDS were examined in order to evaluate whether sounds frequently
occurring in baby-talk words affected segmental distribution differences
between ADS and IDS. Second, words containing bilabial glides were also
analyzed in order to confirm previous finding that questions were used more
frequently in IDS.
Baby-talk words. Table 4 shows baby-talk words spoken in IDS. These
baby-talk words were defined as action, food, onomatopoeia, adult-form
ending with /i/ and kin terms. On average, 40 baby-talk words and 9
different types of baby-talk words were produced by each mother. These
words comprised 5% of the total number of words in the IDS samples.
779

LEE & DAVIS
TABLE

Action
peekaboo

TABLE

4. Baby-talk words in English IDS

Food

Onomatopoeia

yummy

ruff, woof (dog)
wiggle (dog)
oink (pig)
kaboom, boom,
vroom (car)
beep (noise)

Adult-form
ending with /i/
doggie
piggy
blankie
puppy

Daddy/Dada
Mommy/Mama
sweetie

tummy
dolly

5. Frequencies and percentages of words containing bilabial
and velar stops in ADS and IDS
Bilabial

ADS
IDS

Kin terms

Velar

TTRW

NTTRW

TRW

NTTRW

11 (14%)
65 (59%)

69 (86%)
46 (41%)

23 (17%)
63 (37%)

109 (83%)
107 (63%)

NOTE :

TTRW indicates the target toy related words while NTTRW indicates non-target toy
related words.

In contrast, only 4 tokens, which were limited to two types of words, Mom
and Dad, were counted in ADS samples.
Lexical items containing stops. Table 5 shows the frequencies and
percentages of words containing bilabial and velar stops in ADS and IDS.
Words containing stops were categorized as target toy related words and
non-target toy related words. The target toy related words containing
bilabial stops included words such as apple, baby, banana, pineapple,
strawberry, boy, bark, bed, pig, piggy, puppy, push, pull, kaboom, boom,
peekaboo, etc. The target toy related words containing velar stops included
words such as car, truck, dog, doggy, pig, piggy, leg, corn, wiggle, bark, come,
go, knock, oink, peekaboo. etc. In general, English IDS speakers used the
target toy related words frequently when they interacted with their infants
while ADS speakers did not use the target toy related words as much. IDS
speakers used more bilabial stops for the target toy related words than the
non-target toy related words. In contrast, ADS speakers produced bilabial
stops more for the non-target toy related words than the target toy related
words. IDS speakers produced more velars for the target related words, but
both IDS and ADS speakers produced similar number of words containing
velar stops for the non-target toy related words.
780

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S
TABLE

6. Frequencies and percentages of word containing bilabial
and palatal glides in ADS and IDS
Bilabial

ADS
IDS

TABLE

ADS
IDS

Palatal

Questions

Others

You

Others

12 (18 %)
26 (38 %)

56 (82%)
42 (62%)

3 (19%)
45 (73%)

13 (81%)
17 (27%)

7. Frequencies and percentages of words containing inter-dental
fricatives in ADS and IDS

Articles

Demonstrative
pronouns

Adv/Pronouns

Pronouns

Others

18 (26%)
31 (28%)

13 (19%)
39 (36%)

3 (4 %)
13 (12 %)

8 (12 %)
7 (6 %)

27 (39%)
19 (18%)

Lexical items containing glides. Table 6 shows the frequencies and
percentages of words containing bilabial and palatal glides in ADS and
IDS. Words containing bilabial glides were divided into questions such as
what, where and when and other words such as wheel, well and want. Words
containing palatal glides were categorized into pronoun you and possessive
your and other words such as yes and yummy. English IDS speakers
produced more question forms than ADS speakers. Alternatively, ADS
speakers produced more diverse word types containing bilabial glides than
question words used in IDS. IDS speakers produced words such as you and
your more than ADS speakers while ADS speakers used these words only
three times on average.
Lexical items containing inter-dental fricatives. Table 7 shows the
frequencies and percentages of lexical items containing inter-dental
fricatives in ADS and IDS. Lexical items containing inter-dental
fricatives were categorized as: (1) the article the ; (2) demonstrative
pronouns such as this, that, those and these ; (3) the adverb and pronoun
there ; (4) the pronouns they and them; and (5) other words containing interdental fricatives such as think, thank, throw, etc. IDS speakers produced
more articles and demonstrative pronouns as well as the words and phrases
there or there is than ADS speakers. The frequency of the pronoun they was
similar between ADS and IDS, but other words containing inter-dental
fricatives were more frequent in ADS than in IDS.
Lexical items containing high-back vowels and diphthongs. High-back
vowels and diphthongs /cI/ were more frequent in IDS than in ADS in
this English data. As a result, word types containing these vowels were
781

LEE & DAVIS

analyzed. Although IDS speakers produced high-back vowels more frequently than ADS speakers, both groups produced similar types of
words containing high-back vowels. ADS speakers produced more varied
(M=21) word types than IDS speakers (M=17). Words containing highback vowels produced in ADS and IDS were could, choose, do, look, loose,
new, school, screw, shoes, took, used, would, you, food, fruit, cook, put, etc.
Similarly, the types of words containing /cI/ were not different between the
two groups. On average, IDS speakers produced three different words,
while ADS speakers produced only one word containing the /cI/ vowel.
Examples of words containing the /cI/ vowel were boyfriend, noise and toy in
ADS, and boy, toy, oink and noise in IDS.
DISCUSSION

Young children have demonstrated sophisticated perception based learning
capacities for segmental regularities in laboratory environments (Saffran
et al., 1996). Translation of these perceptual capacities to learning of
ambient language regularities reflected in infant production output requires
understanding of the nature of input speech to infants in natural
communication environments. IDS is a prominent speech style directed at
young infants in addition to ADS that is also available in an infant's
communication environment. An earlier study of Korean (Lee et al., 2008)
found that IDS speakers showed significant differences in consonant and
vowel patterns compared to ADS speakers, consistent with patterns
described for early infant output. Consonants and vowels in English IDS
and ADS were compared to examine whether differences between IDS and
ADS appear in another language environment.
Segmental distribution patterns
English IDS speakers produced fewer fricatives, affricates, liquids and
nasals and more stops, glides, high-back vowels and the /cI/ diphthong than
ADS speakers. Use of fewer fricatives, affricates and liquids, but more stops
and glides in IDS may be related to the relative production system
complexity demands associated with production of these consonant manner
categories. Dinnsen, Chin, Elbert & Powell (1990) identified five categories
of sound inventories based on forty functionally disordered children's
speech. Among the five categories, the simplest type of inventory included
stops, nasals and glides, which require ballistic movements incorporating
regulation of velo-pharyngeal valving and rate of articulation movement.
Fricative and affricate sounds were categorized as more difficult than stop,
nasal and glide consonants to produce. According to Kent (1992), `Fricative
and affricate production requires regulation of lingual configuration and fine
force control to generate frication ' (p. 75).
782

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

Previous studies of infant babbling (Boysson-Bardies & Vihman, 1991 ;
Davis & MacNeilage, 1995 ; Locke, 1983) have reported that across
languages stop, nasal and glide consonants are far more frequently
produced by infants than are fricatives, affricates and liquids. At the onset
of word use, however, 50% of English-learning children have been
described as producing word-initial fricative /f/ and /s/ at age 2;0 (StoelGammon, 1985 ; Dyson, 1988). Based on Dinnsen et al.'s (1990) sound
complexity analysis, infant speech can be characterized as containing
simpler sounds with relatively less articulatory complexity required for
production. Thus, the finding that English IDS speakers produced fewer
fricatives, affricates and liquids and more stops and glides suggests that
mothers tend to match phonetic properties that infants produce while they
interact with their infants, although mothers can certainly produce words
with more complex articulatory requirements as they use these sound
patterns in ADS.
These results for English support the fine-tuning argument that IDS
is tailored to children's capacities in this formative period of language
acquisition (Cross, 1977 ; Sachs, 1977). These findings are also consistent
with Sundberg's hypothesis (1998) that mothers provide segmental input
appropriate to their infants' production capacities. This result with English
speakers showing fewer fricatives in IDS than in ADS was consistent with
previous results for Korean ADS and IDS (Lee et al., 2008). In these two
diverse languages, consonant manner, in particular fricative distribution,
between ADS and IDS is similar.
Not every aspect of IDS was consistent with infant speech patterns.
English IDS speakers produced fewer nasal consonants than ADS speakers,
although nasal consonants are produced with relatively simple articulatory
positioning (Dinnsen et al., 1990). This result was not consistent with the
previous results on Korean IDS (Lee et al., 2008). Korean IDS speakers
produced significantly more nasals than ADS speakers. Why were relative
nasal consonant frequencies in IDS and ADS different between English and
Korean ? Lee et al. (2008) found that Korean IDS speakers frequently used
baby-talk words compared to ADS speakers. Those frequent baby-talk
words in Korean IDS often included nasal consonants, in particular
geminate nasal consonants such as mungmung ` woofwoof', mamma `meal ',
nenne ` sleep' and amma ` Mommy '. Since Korean IDS speakers produced
onomatopoeia more frequently compared to Korean ADS speakers, the
result was a difference in frequency of nasal consonants between ADS and
IDS based on the frequency of geminate consonants in onomatopoeia (i.e.
two nasal sounds). In English, although IDS speakers used more baby-talk
words than ADS speakers, baby-talk words did not contain the nasal
consonants found in Korean baby-talk words. Thus, unlike obstruents,
nasal consonant frequencies in IDS are different across languages and show
783

LEE & DAVIS

language-specific characteristics related to specific lexical-phonological
connections in Korean that are not present in English.
While consonant manner in IDS showed a strong tendency to match
phonetic properties in infant speech, vowel distributions in IDS did not
seem to match vowel characteristics described as typical of infants'
canonical babbling output. Previous studies of infants' babbling have
reported dominant mid, low, front and central vowels and less frequent
high, back and rounded vowels in infants' canonical babbling (Davis &
MacNeilage, 1995 ; Kent & Bauer, 1985). Similar patterns were found in a
French-learning infant (Levitt & Aydelott Utman, 1992). For example, the
French-learning infant produced a few front and back rounded vowels such
as /o c u/ at age 0; 11. According to the Frame dominance theory (Davis &
MacNeilage, 1995), sound repertoires in babbling result from a dominant
role of jaw movement with relative lack of lingual independence in vocal
output sequences. The recent variable linear articulatory model of Menard,
Schwartz & Boe (2004) supported the hypothesis that incomplete vowel
inventories in infants can be attributed to immature motor control
capabilities, not to vocal tract length or configuration. Given the fact that
infant vowel output repertoires are incomplete, this analysis of adult input
frequencies did not find equivalent patterns in English IDS. Rather,
English IDS speakers produced more high-back vowels than ADS speakers.
Why did English IDS speakers not show the phonetic matching behavior in
vowel production that was evident for consonants?
English-learning infants have been reported to establish vowel system
inventories and accuracy earlier than consonants (Hare, 1983; Paschall,
1983 ; Stoel-Gammon & Harrington, 1990). Based on analysis of 20 children
aged 1; 4-1 ; 6, Paschall (1983) reported that high and low vowels including
rounded vowels were produced with relatively high accuracy (range from
75 % to 81 %). Hare (1983) found that children aged 2;0 showed more than
84 % accuracy for all English vowels except for r-colored vowels. Although
it is still debated whether infants' vowel production is accurate by age 2 ;0,
it is commonly agreed that while English-learning infants produce mid,
low, front and central unrounded vowels more frequently than high, back
and rounded vowels in babbling, by age 2; 0 they produce most vowels,
including rounded vowels. If vowel acquisition is accomplished earlier than
consonants, in particular fricatives, affricates and liquids, which are
acquired after age 2; 0, vowel input in IDS may differ from consonant
input. In other words, unlike with consonants, English IDS speakers,
whose children are aged 1 ; 0, may produce frequent high-back vowel input
to support their infants in mastery of the entire ambient language vowel
repertoire. The results found for frequency of IDS vowels were consistent
with Vygotsky's scaffolding hypothesis that adults engage their child to
build on and move BEYOND the skills the child already possesses.
784

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

These results for consonants and vowels in IDS and ADS suggest that
caregivers are sensitive to their infants' developmental stage of segmental
production mastery and adjust their IDS to the level of infant production
capacities. This study also supports the hypothesis that IDS input may play
an active scaffolding role in assisting infants to develop their repertoire of
ambient language phonemes. Longitudinal studies are needed to investigate
developmental changes in IDS segmental patterns in order to verify this
hypothesis. If IDS and ADS speakers produce similar frequencies of
fricatives when infants start to produce fricatives (e.g. age 2; 0), the finding
can provide further supportive evidence that IDS speakers play an active
and changing role tuned to infant developmental level. Relative to the
Vygotsky hypothesis, caregivers could be viewed as providing scaffolding
for their infants' development of ambient language sound patterns in output.
Two studies have indicated that English-learning infants produced more
frequent high-back vowels than infants in other language environments
(Lee, Davis & MacNeilage, in press; Rvachew, Alhaidary, Mattock &
Polka, 2008). Rvachew et al. reported that English-learning infants
produced more frequent high-back vowel [u] than French-learning infants
through the age range of 0 ; 8 to 1; 6, supporting the hypothesis that infant
vowel production may begin to reflect the ambient language in this early
period of prelinguistic and early language based vocal output. Similarly,
English-learning infants produced more high-back vowels than Koreanlearning infants who were aged 0; 9 to 1; 0 (Lee et al., in press). These studies
suggest that English IDS speakers may be providing input containing more
high-back vowels. English-learning infants' vowel output, in turn, is
influenced by the greater frequency of high-back vowels in IDS input.
In Korean, the frequent use of fortis consonants in IDS may also
function to assist infants in perceptual access to less frequent phonemes in
their production repertoires. English-learning infants initially produce
voiceless and unaspirated stops (e.g. stops with short lag) and tend to
produce stops with long lag and distinguish voice and voiceless sounds at
around age 2; 0 (Macken & Barton, 1980). Similarly, Korean infants do not
produce fortis consonants at age 0; 7 to 0; 9, but start to produce them
around age 0; 10 to 1; 0 (Lee, 2003). Thus, Korean IDS speakers may
produce fortis sounds more often in IDS to provide early perceptual
scaffolding supporting infants' awareness of the presence of such phonemes,
even while they cannot yet produce them.
Influences of lexical choice on segmental distribution patterns
In part, the segmental distributions in English ADS and IDS are mediated
by lexical choices. Previous studies have indicated that IDS contains `here
and now' vocabulary and words are often repeated (Phillips, 1973; Snow,
785

LEE & DAVIS

1972). Thus, if the name of a salient target toy contains a sound, the sound
such as bilabial or velar stops may be produced more frequently in IDS
than in ADS. Lexical choices still influence segmental frequency, although
they are not frequently shown in infant's speech repertoire. For example, in
this study, some of the target toys contained velar stops in either initial or
final position of words such as pig, dog, car and truck. Frequent verbs used
with these toys also included velar stops such as come and go. When IDS
speakers interacted with their infants using these toys as the focus, the
frequency of velar stops consequently increased. Thus, the frequent velar
stops, which were inconsistent with their infant's production output, are
based on the target toys used in this study that contained velar stops. The
frequency of velar stops might be reduced if target toys did not contain
velars. Further studies should examine whether IDS speakers frequently
produce velar stops when target toys do not contain velar consonants.
The frequent palatal glides in IDS were influenced by the word you. As
can be seen in Table 6, the average frequency of you and your in IDS
(M=45) was more than ten times the frequency in ADS (M=3). English
IDS speakers often call their infant you. The word you has been reported as
the most frequent word in English IDS in one other study (Gerometta &
Shafer, 2008). The frequent use of pronoun you may be also attributed to
linguistic characteristics of English. In other languages, such as Korean and
Japanese, pronouns can be omitted without being considered a grammatical
error. The phenomenon is called ` empty pronoun ' (Suh, 1991). For
example, when a mother asks her infant to drink milk, she says `Do you
want to drink some milk ?' In this sentence, the pronoun you is
grammatically necessary. However, in Korean, the same question can be
asked without a pronoun, for example ` wuyu (milk) mekko (eat) siphe
(want) ? ' Thus, lexical choice for pronouns is also mediated by grammatical
characteristics of the ambient language.
Previous studies (Bernstein Ratner, 1984 ; Shockey & Bond, 1980) report
that English IDS speakers often used palatalization because, in part, the
word you appears after the past tense verb did. An alveolar /d/ and palatal
glide /j/ sequence results in a palatal affricate /dZ/. However, the current
results did not show frequent use of palatal affricates in IDS, although
English IDS speakers frequently used the word you to their infants. As
mentioned, because IDS speakers use most likely `here and now '
vocabulary (Phillips, 1973 ; Snow, 1972), the past tense verb did would not
appear frequently in IDS, especially when interaction between caregivers
and infants used novel toys in a new environment such as the laboratory
setting of the current study. Gerometta & Shafer (2008) also reported that
the most frequent element that preceded you was a pause (58 %). The word
did only occurred 3.3% before you in the home environment. Analysis of
phonological processes in IDS was not within the scope of the current
786

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

study. Further studies should examine how both phonological processes
and frequent items in the input lexicon influence segmental distribution
patterns in IDS compared to ADS.
Although the frequency of fricatives was higher in ADS than in IDS
overall, the frequency of inter-dental fricative (M=109) in IDS was higher
than ADS (M=69). As can be seen in Table 7, English IDS speakers
produced words containing initial inter-dental fricatives such as article the,
demonstrative pronouns this, that, these and those, and pronoun there more
frequently than ADS speakers. The frequency of inter-dental fricatives may
be related to English IDS speakers' frequent use of interrogative forms in
their speech to infants. As shown in Table 6, when English-speaking
mothers interacted with their infants, they used frequent question forms
such as ` What is this? ' and ` Where do you go ?' When they used question
forms, demonstrative pronouns were often spoken together. In addition,
frequent use of the may result from English IDS speakers' use of more
nouns in their speech to infants (Fernald & Morikawa, 1993; Lee &
Nakayama, 2000). As a result, frequent use of these lexical forms accounts
for the frequency of inter-dental fricatives in English IDS compared to
ADS.
Finally, the frequency of diphthongs is also mediated by lexical choice.
English IDS speakers frequently produced words such as boy, toy and oink
containing the diphthong /cI/. In particular, frequent onomatopoeic oink in
English IDS attributed to the higher frequency of the /cI/ diphthong. Thus,
similarly to velar stops, the frequency of the diphthong /cI/ may be due to
the target toy used. It may not necessarily be representative of IDS and
ADS differences.
Cultural influences on lexical choice
These results for English allowed the conclusion that several characteristics
of IDS may reveal general trends across languages. For example, IDS
contained simpler utterances (i.e. few words per utterance) and few word
types but more baby-talk words than ADS in English. These characteristics
have been documented in previous cross-linguistic studies of IDS (Fernald
& Morikawa, 1993 ; Lee & Nakayama, 2000).
Regardless of these similarities, English IDS speakers showed different
cultural characteristics from Korean IDS speakers (Lee et al., 2008),
although this study did not compare them directly. Frequent question
forms and use of the article the accounting for frequent glides and interdental fricatives in English IDS, may be attributed to cultural
characteristics of talk to infants. Previous studies (Fernald & Morikawa,
1993 ; Bornstein et al., 1992 ; Toda et al., 1990) report that English IDS
speakers produced more question forms than IDS speakers in other
787

LEE & DAVIS

languages such as Japanese, French and Spanish. Moreover, Lee &
Nakayama (2000) found that the frequency of nouns in English IDS was
higher than in Korean and Japanese IDS because American mothers tend to
teach nouns to their infants by asking questions. These results enabling
comparison of English ADS and IDS suggest that segmental distribution
patterns result from both linguistic and cultural characteristics. Further
studies should compare English and Korean IDS directly in order to
investigate complicated interaction among segmental distribution, lexical
choice and cultural aspects in IDS.
Implication and future directions
These results for English provide important implications for infant speech
acquisition. Previous studies investigating the effect of ambient language
input on infant speech acquisition output patterns have primarily examined
infant speech patterns compared with phonological structures in ADS or
dictionary counts (e.g. Levitt & Aydelott Utman, 1992 ; Teixeira & Davis,
2002). These analyses carried the assumption that spontaneous speech
samples of ADS or dictionary samples might be representative of an infant's
daily language environment. While infants may receive speech input from
ADS, caregivers across language communities frequently use IDS when
they interact with their infants. Thus, it is important to characterize
phonological properties of connected speech samples in both ADS and
IDS. This comparison can support a more complete understanding of the
nature of perceptually available natural speech input to infants who are
learning to reproduce ambient language regularities. This study revealed
that English ADS and IDS show different consonant and vowel distribution
frequencies. Differences in segmental input distributions are based partially
on differences in lexical choices between ADS and IDS. Further studies
should consider both ADS and IDS in understanding perceptual influences
on early learning of ambient language regularities from naturally occurring
connected speech.
Consideration of segmental distribution patterns between ADS and IDS
beyond age 1 ; 0 is also important to developing a full picture of the role
of naturally occurring ambient language input. Previous research (e.g.
Cross, 1977) showed that mothers' input to infants changes depending
on an infant's developmental age, although developmentally sensitive
modifications in input speech and language properties are debated.
Segmental modifications in input may be different if IDS is analyzed for
infants at age 0; 6 or at 2 ; 0. When infants are aged 0;6, English-speaking
caregivers may produce more stops, nasals and mid- and low-central vowels
to perceptually scaffold infants who are acquiring production capacities for
the earliest developed sounds. On the other hand, when infants are aged 2;0,
788

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

English-speaking caregivers may produce higher frequencies of fricatives
and affricates to assist infants who are in the process of acquiring later
developing sound types.
English-speaking mothers in this study were mid level socio-economic
status (SES). It is not certain whether segmental distribution patterns are
similar in caregivers from low SES families or in caregivers using different
dialects (e.g. African American dialect). Since English-speaking caregivers
in low SES families use fewer question forms or different vocabulary from
caregivers in mid SES, segmental distributions may not be the same.
Finally, investigation of segmental distribution patterns in languages other
than English and Korean should be conducted in order to obtain a more
comprehensive understanding of the nature of speech input for infants that
is affected by both linguistic and cultural influences.

REFERENCES
Bernstein Ratner, N. (1984). Phonological rule usage in mother-child speech. Journal of
Phonetics 12, 245-54.
Bornstein, M. H., Tal, T., Rahn, C., Galperin, C. Z., Pecheux, M., Lamour, M., Toda, S.,
Azuma, H., Orino, M. & Tamis-LeMonda, C. S. (1992). Functional analysis of the contents of maternal speech to infants of 5 and 13 months in four cultures : Argentina, France,
Japan, and the United States. Developmental Psychology 28, 593-603.
Boysson-Bardies, B. & Vihman, M. M. (1991). Adaptation to language : Evidence from
babbling and first words in four languages. Language 67(2), 297-319.
Cross, T. G. (1977). Mothers' speech adjustment : The contributions of selected child listener variable. In K. Snow & C. A. Ferguson (eds), Talking to children : Language input
and acquisition, 151-88. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Davis, B. L. & MacNeilage, P. F. (1995). The articulatory basis of babbling. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research 38, 1199-211.
Dinnsen, D. A., Chin, S. B., Elbert, M. & Powell, T. (1990). Some constraints on functionally disordered phonologies : Phonetic inventories and phonotactics. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research 33, 28-37.
Dyson, A. T. (1988). Phonetic inventories of 2- and 3-year-old children. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Disorders 53, 89-93.
Ferguson, C. A. (1977). Baby talk as a simplified register. In K. Snow & C. A. Ferguson
(eds), Talking to children : Language input and acquisition, 219-36. Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press.
Fernald, A. & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes and cultural variations in Japanese
and American mothers' speech to infants. Child Development 64(3), 637-56.
Gerometta, J. & Shafer, V. (2008). Frequent word analysis of infant directed speech across
communication contexts. Poster session presented at the 2008 American Speech Language
and Hearing Association Convention, Chicago, IL.
Hare, G. (1983). Development at 2 years. In J. V. Irwin & S. P. Wong (eds), Phonological
development in children : 18 to 72 months, 55-88. Carbondale, IL : Southern Illinois
University Press.
Kent, R. D. (1992). The biology of phonological development. In C. A. Ferguson, L. Menn
& C. Stoel-Gammon (eds), Phonological development : Model, research, implications, 65-90.
Timonium, MD : York Press.
Kent, R. D. & Bauer, H. R. (1985). Vocalizations of one-year olds. Journal of Child Language
12, 491-526.

789

LEE & DAVIS

Lee, S. (2003). The phonetic basis of early speech acquisition. Unpublished doctoral
Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Lee, S. & Nakayama, M. (2000). Characteristics of maternal speech in Korean : Do Korean
and Japanese maternal speech show similar characteristics? Proceedings of the Annual
Boston University Conference of Language Development 24, 486-97.
Lee, S., Davis, B. & MacNeilage, P. (2008). Segmental properties of input to infants : A
study of Korean. Journal of Child Language 35, 591-617.
Lee, S., Davis, B. & MacNeilage, P. (in press). Universal production patterns and ambient
language influences in babbling : A cross-linguistic study of Korean and English-learning
infants. Journal of Child Language.
Levitt, A. G. & Aydelott Utman, J. G. (1992). From babbling towards the sound systems
of English and French : A longitudinal two-case studies. Journal of Child Language 19,
19-49.
Locke, J. L. (1983). Phonological acquisition and change. New York : Academic Press.
MacKen, M. & Barton, D. (1980). The acquisition of the voicing contrast in English : A
study of Voice Onset Time in word-initial stop consonants. Journal of Child Language 7,
41-74.
Menard, L., Schwartz, J. & Boe, J. (2004). Role of vocal tract morphology in speech
development : Perceptual targets and sensorimotor maps for synthesized French vowels
for birth to adulthood. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 47,
1059-80.
Paschall, L. (1983). Development at 18 months. In J. V. Irwin & S. P. Wong (eds),
Phonological development in children : 18 to 72 months, 27-54. Carbondale, IL : Southern
Illinois University Press.
Phillips, J. (1973). Syntax and vocabulary of mothers' speech to young children : age and sex
comparison. Child Development 44, 182-85.
Pine, J. (1994). The language of primary caregivers. In C. Gallaway & B. J. Richards (eds),
Input and interaction in language acquisition, 15-37. Cambridge : Cambridge University
Press.
Rvachew, S., Alhaidary, A., Mattock, K. & Polka, L. (2008). Emergence of the corner
vowels in the babble produced infants exposed to Canadian English or Canadian French.
Journal of Phonetics 36, 564-77.
Sachs, J. (1977). The adaptive significance of linguistic input to prelinguistic infants. In C.
Snow & C. A. Ferguson (eds), Talking to children : Language input and acquisition, 51-61.
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N. & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old
infants. Science 274, 1926-28.
Shockey, L. & Bond, Z. S. (1980). Phonological processes in speech addressed to children.
Phonetica 37, 267-74.
Snow, C. (1972). Mothers' speech to children learning language. Child Development 43,
549-65.
Stoel-Gammon, C. (1984). Phonological variability in mother-child speech. Phonetica 41,
208-214.
Stoel-Gammon, C. (1985). Phonetic inventories, 15-24 months : A longitudinal study.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 28, 505-512.
Stoel-Gammon, C. & Harrington, P. (1990). Vowel systems of normally developing and
phonologically disordered children. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 4, 145-60.
Suh, S. (1991). Constituent structure processing in Korean. Proceedings of Eastern States
Conference on Linguistics 8, 347-58.
Sundberg, U. (1998). Mother tongue-phonetic aspects of infant-directed speech. Doctoral
dissertation, PERILUS XXI, University of Stockholm.
Teixeira, E. R. & Davis, B. L. (2002). Early sound patterns in the speech of two Brazilian
Portuguese speakers. Language and Speech 45(2), 179-204.
Toda, S., Fogel, A. & Kawai, M. (1990). Maternal speech to three-month-old infants in the
United States and Japan. Journal of Child Language 17, 279-94.

790

S E G M E N T A L D I S T R I B U T I O N I N E N G L I S H I D S V S. A D S

Vihman, M. M., Kay, E., Boysson-Bardies, B., Durand, C. & Sundberg, U. (1994). External
sources of individual differences? A cross-linguistic analysis of the phonetics of mothers'
speech to one-year-old children. Developmental Psychology 30(5), 651-62.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between Learning and Development. In M. Cole, V. JohnSteiner, S. Scribner & E. Souberman (eds), Mind in Society : The development of higher
psychological processes, 79-91. Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press.
Weijer, J. van de (2002). How much does an infant hear in a day? Proceedings of the
GALA2001 Conference on Language Acquisition, 279-82. Lisboa : Associacao Portuguesa
de Linguistica.
Zamuner, T. S. (2003). Input-based phonological acquisition. New York : Routledge.

APPENDIX A : INVENTORY OF KOREAN CONSONANTS
Coronal

Labial
Alveolar
Plosive

Fricative
Affricate

Lenis
Fortis
Aspirated
Lenis
Fortis

p
p'
pj

Post-alveolar

k
k'
kj
h
ts
ts'
tsj

m

n

n
l

APPENDIX B : INVENTORY OF KOREAN
MONOPHTHONG VOWELS

High
Mid
Low
NOTE :

Glottal

Velar

t
t'
tj
s
s'

Lenis
Fortis
Aspirated

Nasal
Lateral

Dorsal

Front

Central

Back

Unrounded

Unrounded

Rounded

I
(e) E

i
v
a

(e) only exists in orthography in contemporary Korean.

791

u
o

