Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 2011, 33, 589-624.
doi:10.1017/S0272263111000325

LEARNED ATTENTION IN ADULT
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
A Replication and Generalization Study
and Meta-Analysis

Nick C. Ellis
University of Michigan

Nuria Sagarra
Pennsylvania State University

This study investigates associative learning explanations of the
limited attainment of adult compared to child language acquisition in
terms of learned attention to cues. It replicates and extends Ellis and
Sagarra (2010) in demonstrating short- and long-term learned attention in the acquisition of temporal reference in Latin. In Experiment 1,
salient adverbs were better learned than less salient verb inflections,
early experience of adverbial cues blocked the acquisition of verbal
morphology, and, contrariwise--but to a lesser degree--early experience of tense reduced later learning of adverbs. Experiment 2 demonstrated long-term transfer: Native speakers of Chinese (no tense
morphology) were less able than native speakers of Spanish or
Russian (rich morphology) to acquire inflectional cues from the same
language experience where adverbial and verbal cues were equally
available. Learned attention to tense morphology in Latin was continuous rather than discrete, ordered with regard to first language: Chinese
This research was supported by National Science Foundation grant BCS-0717557. We
thank Katherine Martin for help designing, piloting, scoring, and administering these
experiments. The first author is grateful for the support of Freiburg Institute for Advanced
Studies (FRIAS) where he was based as an External Senior Fellow while revising this article.
Nuria Sagarra is now at Carnegie Mellon University.
Address correspondence to: Nick C. Ellis, English Language Institute, University of
Michigan, 500 E. Washington Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48104; e-mail: ncellis@umich.edu.
(c) Cambridge University Press 2011

589

590

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra
< English < Russian < Spanish. A meta-analysis of the combined
results of Ellis and Sagarra and the current study separates out positive and negative learned attention effects: The average effect size
for entrenchment was large (+1.23), whereas that for blocking was
moderate (-0.52).

Naturalistic foreign language acquisition (FLA) tends to stabilize at
levels short of nativelike ability. At its most extreme, this can present
itself as a basic variety of interlanguage that, although sufficient for
everyday communicative purposes, predominantly comprises just nouns,
verbs, and adverbs, with closed-class items--in particular, grammatical
morphemes and prepositions--failing to be put to full nativelike use
(Bardovi-Harlig, 1992; Clahsen & Felser, 2006; Klein & Rieck, 1982, cited
in Klein, 1986; Mangubhai, 1991; Schmidt, 1984; VanPatten, 1996, 2006).
Foreign language (FL) learners initially make temporal references
mostly by use of adverbials, prepositional phrases, serialization, and
calendric reference, with the grammatical expression of tense and
aspect emerging only slowly thereafter, if at all (Bardovi-Harlig, 1992,
2000; Lee, 2002; Meisel, 1987; Noyau, Klein, & Dietrich, 1995; Sagarra, 2001).
One factor determining cue selection is salience: Prepositional
phrases, temporal adverbs, and other lexical cues to time are quite
pronounced in the speech stream. Verbal inflections are not (consider
yesterday I walked). The low salience and low reliability of grammatical
cues tends to make them less learnable (Ellis, 2006c; Goldschneider &
DeKeyser, 2001) and could underlie late learners' difficulty in processing and producing FL verbal morphology (Jiang, 2004; Zobl & Liceras,
1994). However, salience and reliability affect first language (L1) acquisition and FLA alike--there has to be something else that accounts for
the limitations in FLA.
Associative learning theory documents a range of effects of transfer
and inhibition that shift learners' attention to input as a result of prior
experience. Kamin (1969) and Kruschke (2006) described the phenomenon of blocking. Learning that a particular stimulus is associated with
a particular outcome makes it harder to learn that another cue, subsequently paired with that same outcome, is also a good predictor of it.
For example, if an animal learns that a conditioned stimulus is a reliable
predictor of an unconditioned stimulus (e.g., that a light reliably predicts the onset of some painful stimulus such as a shock), then it will
not become conditioned to or learn that any other conditioned stimulus
predicts that unconditioned stimulus (e.g., that a bell predicts the onset
of the shock the same way the light did). The prior association essentially blocks further associations. Blocking is an effect of learned attention (Kamin; Kruschke & Blair, 2000; Mackintosh, 1975). It is a highly

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

591

robust and widespread phenomenon, occurring across animal and
human learning (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Shanks, 1995; Wills, 2005).
Ellis (2006c) reviews the phenomenon as it might apply in SLA. There
are many situations in natural language where cues are redundant
(Schmidt, 2001; Terrell, 1991; VanPatten, 1996) and thus, as a consequence of blocking, might be less readily learned. If a learners' L1 experience has led them to look elsewhere for cues to interpretation, they
might use these cues where available in the FL--and if they do, the principles of associative learning predict that this will be to the detriment of
learning other cues that might also be relevant. For example, L1-derived
knowledge that there are reliable lexical cues to temporal reference
(words like gestern, hier, ayer, yesterday) might block the acquisition of
verb tense morphology from analysis of utterances such as yesterday
I walked.
Various theories of SLA incorporate related notions of transfer and
learned attention. The competition model (MacWhinney, Bates & Kliegl,
1984; MacWhinney & Bates, 1989; MacWhinney, 2001) was explicitly formulated to deal with competition between multiple linguistic cues to
interpretation. Input processing theory (VanPatten, 1996) includes the
lexical preference principle: "Learners will process lexical items for
meaning before grammatical forms when both encode the same semantic
information" (VanPatten, 2006, p. 118). This principle encapsulates the
mounting evidence that FL learners prefer lexical to grammatical cues
(for oral tasks, see Lee, Cadierno, Glass, & VanPatten, 1997; Musumeci,
1989; for written tasks, see Lee, 1999). The preference for nonredundancy
principle is also included in this theory: "Learners are more likely to
process nonredundant meaningful grammatical markers before they
process redundant meaningful markers" (VanPatten, 2006, p. 119). The
associative-cognitive CREED (whereby SLA is construction-based, rational, exemplar-driven, emergent, and dialectic; Ellis, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c,
2008b) describes the limited end state typical of FLA directly in terms of
learned attention, salience, overshadowing, and blocking.
Ellis and Sagarra (2010) explored these phenomena of learned attention in two experiments. The first demonstrated short-term instructional sequence effects in adults learning temporal reference in Latin
using the standard blocking experimental paradigm (Kruschke, 2006)
but with linguistic content. Native English speakers learned a small
number of Latin expressions and their English translations. There were
three groups: adverb pretraining, control, and verb pretraining. In
Phase 1, adverb pretraining participants learned two adverbs and their
temporal reference: hodie "today" (present) and heri "yesterday" (past);
verb pretraining participants learned two verbs and their temporal reference: cogito "I think" (present) and cogitavi "I thought" (past); the control group had no such pretraining. In Phase 2, all participants were
shown sentences that appropriately combined an adverb and a verb

592

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

(e.g., heri cogitavi "yesterday I thought," hodie cogito "today I think,"
cras cogitabo "tomorrow I will think") and learned whether these sentences referred to the present, the past, or the future. In Phase 3 (the
reception test), all combinations of adverb (hodie "today," heri "yesterday," cras "tomorrow") and verb tense marking (cogito "I think," cogitavi
"I thought," cogitabo "I will think") were combined and the participants
were asked to judge, without feedback, whether each sentence referred
to the past, present, or future on a scale of 1 (past) to 5 (future). The
logic of the design was as follows. In Phase 2, every utterance contained
two temporal references--an adverb and a verbal inflection. If participants paid equal attention to these two cues, then in Phase 3, their judgments should be equally affected by both the adverb and the verb. If,
however, participants paid more attention to adverbial (or verbal) cues,
then their judgments would be swayed toward these cues in Phase 3.
The results showed that the three groups reacted to the cues in very
different ways. In two-word sentences, there was temporal information
cued by both an adverb and an inflection; when these cues deviated,
the verb pretraining group followed the verbal cue, the adverb pretraining group followed the adverbial cue, and the control group lay in between. Multiple regression analyses--one for each group, where the
dependent variable was group mean temporal interpretation for each of
the Phase 3 strings and the independent variables were the information
conveyed by the adverbial and verbal inflection cues--estimated the
differential cue use by each of the three groups, in standardized  coefficients, as shown in Table 1.
An additional design element allowed the inference that these results
illustrate attentional biases to particular dimensions of cue (adverb vs.
verbal inflection) rather than to particular words. In Phase 1, participants in the adverb and verb pretraining groups learned particular constructions relating to the present and the past. There was no reference
to future at this stage. Thus, whereas subsequent responses relating to
past and present judgments could reflect specific prior-learned associations, responses relating to future judgments could not. The Phase 3
results showed that the adverb and verb pretraining groups were as
unalike and dissociated in their performance on cras "tomorrow" and
cogitabo "I will think" items referring to the future as they were on the
other past and present reference ones.
Table 1. Differential cue use across groups in Ellis and Sagarra (2010)
Group
Adverb pretraining
Verb pretraining
Control

Time

Adjusted R2

0.97 Adverb + 0.23 Verb
0.12 Adverb + 0.97 Verb
0.60 Adverb + 0.72 Verb

0.98
0.96
0.85

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

593

Ellis and Sagarra's (2010) Experiment 2 illustrated long-term language
transfer effects whereby the nature of learners' L1 ( verb tense morphology)
biased the acquisition of morphological versus lexical cues to temporal reference in the same subset of Latin. Native speakers of Chinese (whose L1
does not exhibit verb tense morphology) learning under the control conditions of Experiment 1 produced Phase 3 performance reflecting cue use of
0.91 Adverb + 0.29 Verb, adjusted R2 = 0.90. Comparing these results with
those from Experiment 1, it can be seen that they lie closer to those of the
original adverb group rather than the original control group. These findings
suggest a long-term attention to language, a processing bias affecting subsequent cue learning that comes from a lifetime of prior L1 usage.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The current research aims to extend these findings, replicating the basic design but with a more typical, complete, and complicated verbal
paradigm. In Ellis and Sagarra (2010), there was just one verb form
(first-person singular) for each tense, a selection that artificially balanced the complexity and salience of the adverbial and inflectional
cues. Experiment 1 of the current study therefore extends the sample of
verbal inflections to more adequately reflect natural language. This manipulation allows determination of the replicability of these earlier demonstrations of learned attention--whether early experience of adverbial
cues blocked the acquisition of verbal tense morphology, and, contrariwise, early experience of tense blocked later learning of adverbs. It also
allows examination of whether, under control conditions devoid of pretraining, verbal inflections in themselves are less readily acquired than
adverbial cues, either as a result of their lower salience, greater complexity, or overshadowing by adverbial cues. Experiment 2 extends the
investigation of long-term learned attention effects to L1s with wider
variation in use of inflectional morphology. It investigates (a) whether
L1 speakers of Chinese (no verb tense morphology) are less able than
L1 speakers of Spanish or Russian (rich morphology) to acquire inflectional cues from the same language experience where adverbial and
verbal cues are equally available, and (b) whether learned attention to
inflectional tense morphology in Latin is continuous rather than discrete, ordered with regard to increasing L1 degree and means of use of
morphological cuing of tense: Chinese < English < Russian < Spanish.
EXPERIMENT 1
Experiment 1 involves the learning of a small number of Latin expressions
and their English translations. It investigates the effects of successive

594

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

learning of different types of cues for temporal reference, adverbs (hodie
"today," heri "yesterday," cras "tomorrow") and verbal inflections in three
tenses and three persons (cogito/cogitas/cogitat "I/you/he think(s),"
cogitavi/cogitavisti/cogitavit "I/you/he thought," cogitabo/cogitabis/
cogitabit "I/you/he will think"). It determines if the acquisition of one
set of cues is impaired if another is already known as a reliable indicator
of event time.

Participants
Fifty participants took part in this experiment; 45 were students from a
major university in the United States and 5 were other adults from the
local community. All were monolingual English speakers. They were
volunteers and were paid $10 for their participation in the experiment.
None had learned Latin previously. They were randomly allocated to
one of three groups: the adverb pretraining group of 5 males and 11 females, age range 18-24 years (mean: 20.0; median: 19.5); the verb pretraining group of 5 males and 12 females, age range 19-31 years (mean:
21.7; median: 21.0); or the no pretraining control group of 5 males and
12 females, age range 18-22 years (mean: 19.6; median: 19.0).

Procedure
The experiment was programmed in E-Prime (Schneider, Eschman, &
Zuccolotto, 2002). It took less than 1 hr and comprised four phases:
pretraining (Phase 1), sentence decoding (Phase 2), reception testing
(Phase 3), and production testing (Phase 4). The procedure of the first
three phases is schematized in Figure 1.
Phase 1. Participants in the adverb pretraining group had 36 randomized trials in which they saw either the adverb hodie "today" or the
adverb heri "yesterday." The participants had to choose whether the
correct translation was today or yesterday by clicking on the appropriate alternative with the mouse. These alternatives appeared in counterbalanced positions on the screen. A correct choice returned the
feedback "correct," whereas an incorrect one returned, for example,
"wrong--the meaning of hodie is today."
Participants in the verb pretraining group had 36 trials of training on
verb inflections rather than adverbs. On each trial they saw one of
the past (cogitavi "I thought," cogitavisti "you thought," cogitavit "he
thought") or present (cogito "I think," cogitas "you think," cogitat "he

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

595

Figure 1. The design of Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3 of Experiment 1.
The rating scale for Phase 3 ranged from 1 (past) to 5 (future).
thinks") verb inflections and learned that each corresponded to one of
the two translations X think(s) or X thought, clicking the appropriate
alternative with the mouse. A correct choice returned the feedback
"correct," whereas an incorrect one returned, for example, "wrong--the
meaning of cogitavi is I thought." The 36 trials in Phase 1 of verb pretraining thus comprised each of the three persons of present and past tense
presented six times in random order.
Note that for both groups, the stimuli presented in Phase 1 involved
only present and past temporal reference, no future. Participants in the
no pretraining control group had no Phase 1. After these different beginnings, all three groups of participants underwent identical Phase 2,
Phase 3, and Phase 4.
Phase 2. Participants were exposed to 18 sentences (hodie
cogito/as/at "today I/you/he think(s)," cogito/as/at hodie "I/you/he
think(s) today," heri cogitavi/visti/vit "yesterday I/you/he thought,"
cogitavi/visti/vit heri "I/you/he thought yesterday," cras cogitabo/bis/bit
"tomorrow I/you/he will think," cogitabo/bis/bit cras "I/you/he will think
tomorrow") that appropriately combined the adverb with a verb--half
in adverb-verb word order and half in verb-adverb order--and had to

596

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

choose whether these sentences referred to the present, the past, or
the future. Both word orders were used to counterbalance which cue
was experienced first across sentences. Each of the 18 sentences was
presented twice during this phase of the experiment. Again, participants were given feedback if incorrect.
Phase 3. As in competition model studies of cue use (MacWhinney,
1987), in the reception test of Phase 3, all single-word items (adverbs
hodie "today," heri "yesterday," cras "tomorrow" and verbs cogito "I
think," cogitas "you think," cogitat "he thinks," cogitavi "I thought," cogitavisti "you thought," cogitavit "he thought," cogitabo "I will think," cogitabis "you will think," cogitabit "he will think") were presented either
alone or in all their possible combinations, once in each of two possible
word orders, for a total of 66 test items: 12 single-word items + 54 (27
combinations x 2 word orders) two-word items. Both word orders were
used to counterbalance which cue was experienced first across these
test sentences. On each trial, participants were asked to judge the temporal reference of each string on a 5-point scale. The factorial crossing
of these cues resulted in sensible strings that the learners had experienced before, equivalent to, for example, today I think and tomorrow I
will think; words that they had not experienced separately before such
as cras "tomorrow" and cogitabo "I will think"; and strange combinations equivalent to, for example, yesterday I think. The possible scale
points were labeled 1 past, 2 between past and present, 3 present, 4 between present and future, and 5 future. Participants were asked to type
the number that they thought best applied. The responses to the individual word items and to the trials in which the adverbial and inflectional cues conflict allow the assessment of the relative weight that
learners put on these different cues to temporal reference. The average
weight of the two cues within each string, which will be called the semidiem (this being a Latin experiment), is provided on the right side of the
Phase 3 panel of Table 1. There was no feedback in Phase 3.
Phase 4. Finally, in the production test of Phase 4, participants
were asked to translate from English to Latin by typing in the Latin
equivalents of a selection of the various elements to which they had
been exposed. Nine unique items were given twice, for a total of 18
items. Three adverbs were given in isolation (yesterday, today, tomorrow), three verbs were given in isolation (X thought, X think(s), X will
think), and three sentences were given with the tense of the verb and
the temporal adverb matching (yesterday X thought, today X think(s),
tomorrow X will think). All of the target productions in this portion had
been used in Phase 2 of the experiment.
The logic of the experiment follows that of Ellis and Sagarra (2010).
In Phase 2, every sentence comprises two cues--an adverb and a

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

597

morphological inflection, which both cue the same temporal reference.
Every participant experiences these cues together. Control participants
only ever see them together. If participants pay equal attention to these
two cues, then in Phase 3, their judgments should be equally affected by
them, and in Phase 4, they should be equally good at producing adverbs
and verbal inflections. If, however, participants pay more attention to
the adverbial (or verbal) cues, then their judgments will be swayed
from the semidiem toward the adverbial (or verbal morphological) cues
in Phase 3, and they will better produce them in Phase 4.
Control group performance in Phase 3 and Phase 4 thus indicates
how native English speakers naturally weigh these two cues--whether,
for example, more salient lexical cues overshadow less obvious morphological ones. Performance in the adverb pretraining group assesses
potential learned attention and blocking as a detrimental effect of prior
learning of lexical cues upon later learning of inflectional cues. Performance in the verb pretraining group assesses potential blocking as a
detrimental effect of prior learning of inflectional cues upon later
learning of lexical cues.
Subsequent responses relating to past and present judgments could
reflect specific prior-learned associations as proactive interference effects where, as in paired associate learning experiments, memory for
association A-B (e.g., present-cogito "I think") is worse after prior
learning of A-C (present-hodie "today") in comparison with a control
condition involving prior learning of unrelated material D-E (Baddeley,
1976). However, the future reference sentences cras cogitabo "tomorrow
I will think" and cogitabo cras "I will think tomorrow" are a special case,
in that every participant, whether in the control, verb pretraining, or
adverb pretraining group, only ever experiences these two cues together in Phase 2. Nobody has prior experience of these in Phase 1.
They are thus a pure indicator of learned attention to adverbial or verbal cue type. Statistical analyses were performed using the statistics
package R (R Development Core Team, 2008).

Results
Phase 2. By the second half of Phase 2, control group performance,
despite a lack of prior training, was 75% correct compared to 97% for
the adverb and 87% for the verb pretraining conditions.
Phase 3 Perception Data. Participants in the three groups differed in
their cue use in Phase 3. Figure 2 illustrates the average group understanding
of the temporal reference of each of the constructions of Phase 3 in
terms of deviations from the semidiem averages given in Figure 1.

598

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Figure 2. Mean deviation of Phase 3 temporal interpretations from
semidiem average. Bias symbols mark the deviation of the adverbial
cues (circles) and verb inflection cues (diamonds) when these cues
conflict.

The strings are ordered from past on the left to future on the right. For
each string where the two cues are in conflict, the large solid diamond
shows the temporal information provided by the verb and the large
solid circle shows the temporal information provided by the adverb. In
the sentence cogito heri "I think yesterday," for example, with a verb
reference of 3 and an adverb reference of 1, the respective deviations
from the semidiem (2) are +1 and -1; for cogitabo heri "I will think yesterday," the verb reference is 5, the adverb reference is 1, and thus the
respective deviations from the semidiem (3) are +2 and -2.
Participant ratings are similarly plotted as deviations from the semidiem. For example, consider a participant rating heri cogitavi "yesterday I thought." The semidiem in this case is 1: (1 [yesterday] + 1
[I thought])/2. Thus, a rating of 2 would be plotted as +1 (a one-unit
deviation to the future: 2 [rating] - 1 [semidiem]); a rating of 1 would be
plotted as 0 (zero deviation: 1 [rating] - 1 [semidiem]), and so on. As a
second example, consider a participant rating cras cogito "tomorrow I
think." The semidiem in this case is 4: (5 [tomorrow] + 3 [I think])/2. So
a rating of 3 would thus be plotted as -1 (a one-unit deviation to the past:
3 [rating] - 4 [semidiem]; this is the score that someone who only interpreted cogito "I think" would get), a rating of 4 would be plotted as 0
(zero deviation: 4 [rating] - 4 [semidiem], indicating that the participant

599

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

was balancing the information from both cues), a rating of 1 would be
plotted as -3 (a three-unit deviation to the past: 1 [rating] - 4 [semidiem]), and a rating of 5 would be plotted as +1 (a one-unit deviation to
the future: 5 [rating] - 4 [semidiem]; this is the score that someone who
only interpreted cras "tomorrow" would get), and so on.
Figure 2 plots these scores averaged across the participants within
each of the three groups. Figure 2 shows that in the two-word strings of
Phase 3, when the temporal information cued by the adverb and the
verbal inflection differs, respondents overall tend to be more influenced
by the adverb than the verb. However, the three groups are differentially sensitive to verb inflections: The adverb pretraining group is not
at all sensitive to these cues, the control group is somewhat so--but
still more attracted by the adverb--and the verb pretraining group is
the most sensitive of the three groups to the verb cues.
These impressions are confirmed by three multiple regression
analyses--one for each group--where the dependent variable is group
mean temporal interpretation for each of the 54 two-word strings and
the independent variables are the interpretations cued by the adverbial
cue and by the verbal inflection. The differential cue use by each of the
three groups, in standardized  coefficients, is shown in Table 2.
Participants in the control group, who had not been pretrained on
either cue, were more reliant upon the adverbial cue ( = 0.93, p < .001)
than the verbal cue ( = 0.17, p < .001); adverbial cues determined 86%
of their ratings (0.932), whereas verbal morphology accounted for
just 3%. The confidence intervals (CIs) of the two coefficients are nonoverlapping. This performance might reflect the relative salience, simplicity,
and reliability of the adverbial cues compared to the verbal inflections.
Against this baseline, effects of prior exposure to cues can be measured. Participants in the adverb pretraining group were wholly reliant

Table 2. Regression analyses predicting mean temporal
interpretation in Phase 3
Group
Adverb pretraining
Adverb
Verb
Verb pretraining
Adverb
Verb
Control
Adverb
Verb
* p < .001.



95% CI

Adjusted R2

F

0.99*
-0.01

[0.96, 1.02]
[-0.04, 0.02]

0.99

2053*

0.76*
0.60*

[0.69, 0.83]
[0.54, 0.67]

0.94

413*

0.93*
0.17*

[0.84, 1.02]
[0.07, 0.26]

0.88

192*

600

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

upon the adverbial cue ( = 0.99, p < .001) and seemed to be unaffected by
the verbal cue ( = -0.01, p = .41). Adverbial cues determined 99% of their
ratings, the 95% CI spanning 1.0, whereas verbal morphology accounted
for 0%, the 95% CI spanning 0.0. Participants in the verb pretraining group
were reliant upon both the adverbial ( = 0.76, p < .001) and verbal ( =
0.60, p < .001) cues. Adverbial cues determined 58% of their ratings,
whereas verbal morphology accounted for 37%.
Comparing the 95% CIs for these coefficients across groups, adverb
pretraining and control participants were equally reliant upon the adverb cue and significantly more so than the verb pretraining participants. Verb pretraining participants were significantly more affected by
the verbal cues than are the other two groups, with control participants, in turn, being significantly more sensitive to these cues than adverb pretraining participants. These impressions are confirmed using
pooled variance CI estimates for the differences between these  coefficients (Edwards, 1984), which show (a) for adverb cue sensitivity, the
adverb pretraining and control groups were more sensitive to adverb
cues than was the verb pretraining group, p < .01; (b) for verb cue sensitivity, the verb pretraining group was most sensitive to these cues,
followed by the control group, and then the adverb pretraining group,
p < .01.
These differences in the relative amounts of variance explained by
the adverb and verb cues on the mean group ratings over the test
strings in Phase 3 are substantial. Nevertheless, as with all learning experiments, it is appropriate to ask whether the group performance
means are truly reflective of the individuals within that group or whether
they provide a central tendency that blurs individual within-group differences. To determine whether these patterns are reliable across individual group members, for each individual's responses in Phase 3, the
degree to which their temporal rating on each construction correlated
with the information provided by the verb cue and that provided separately by the adverbial cue was calculated. These Pearson's r correlations thus show the degree to which each participant was biased by
each cue. Figure 3, which plots each individual in the space defined in
this way, shows all of the adverb pretraining individuals to be heavily
influenced by the adverb cue and not at all by the verbs. Most of the
individuals in the control group were also predominantly influenced by
the adverb cue, with only 4 group members showing any effect of verb
cue greater than r = 0.2. The participants in the verb pretraining group
are more scattered: 7 behave like members of the adverb group and use
the adverb cue alone, but there are 9 group members who show sensitivity to the verb information at r > 0.2. Very few participants lie along
the 45 diagonal, equally affected by these two cues, as the  weights for
the verb group means might suggest. This finding is in line with others
demonstrating that in the early stages of acquisition of learning about a

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

601

Figure 3. Sensitivity to adverbial and verbal inflectional cues to temporal reference in each participant.
problem space that comprises multiple cues to interpretation, participants typically focus upon one cue at a time, exploring its utility and
only introducing others later, one-by-one, as they reduce error of estimation (Cheng & Holyoak, 1995; MacWhinney, 1987; Matessa & Anderson,
2000; McDonald, 1986). It also replicates the pattern found in Ellis and
Sagarra (2010).
The group means of these correlations are shown in Figure 4. These
group means of the individual correlations within each group are slightly
different from the correlations of the group mean scores over the individuals because of the different orders of steps of calculation, but the patterns are substantially the same. The adverb pretraining group continues
to be exclusively influenced by the adverb (M = 0.96, 95% CI [0.94, 0.98])
but not the verb (M = -0.02, 95% CI [-0.05, 0.015]). Control participants
are more influenced by the adverb (M = 0.48, 95% CI [0.23, 0.73]) than the
verb (M = 0.07, 95% CI [-0.13, 0.26]), whereas the verb pretraining group
is influenced by both the adverb (M = 0.49, 95% CI [0.22, 0.76]) and verb
(M = 0.38, 95% CI [0.17, 0.59]). An ANOVA shows this to be a highly significant interaction, F(2, 47) = 8.33, p < .001. Post hoc testing using Tukey's
honestly significant differences (HSD) test showed that the adverb pretraining group differed from both the control and verb pretraining groups
in adverb cue use (p < .001) but that these two groups did not differ
significantly. The verb pretraining group differed significantly from the

602

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Figure 4. Group mean correlations between individual participants'
Phase 3 sentence ratings and the information given by the corresponding adverb and verb cues.

adverb pretraining group in verb cue use (p < .05) but not from the control
group (p = .15), and these latter two groups did not differ significantly.
Phase 4 Production Data. The production data parallel these patterns. Table 3 shows two typical individuals' responses from Phase 4 of
the experiment, during which participants were asked to produce, for
the first time, utterances in Latin that related to event time. The adverb
pretraining participant provided the appropriate adverb on every trial
where required--and often on trials where they were not--alongside a
relatively unchanging central tendency of verb form, congitavi (an idiosyncratic blend of their own invention). The verb pretraining participant
usually provided the appropriate tense inflections where required. When
asked for a bare adverb, this participant did provide one--although
there was some confusion over hodie "today" and heri "yesterday,"
which suggests that they had started to acquire the items in this category but without yet realizing their proper mappings to meaning. Phase
4 was less transparent for control group participants because they had
not learned the translations in Phase 1, having started the experiment
with Phase 2. Nevertheless, most control participants attempted this
phase and, like language learners the world over, made a reasonable
stab at generalizing from what they already knew.
To analyze the production data across individuals, each response was
given a score of 0 to 1 for adverb or verb based on the following criteria:
For the adverb, a score of 0 was given if no adverb was provided or the
wrong adverb was provided, and a score of 1 was given if the adverb

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

603

was given and spelled correctly. Intermediate scores of .33 were given if
the adverb was misspelled by two letters but remained a close match to
the target (e.g., "codi" for hodie "today") and .66 if the correct adverb
was given but misspelled by only one letter. For the verbs, a key factor
in the scoring was the distinction between using a b in the ending for
the future tense, a v in the verb ending for the past tense, and a lack of
b or v for the present tense. A score of 0 was given if no verb was provided, and a score of 1 was given for the correct verb and correct
spelling. Intermediate scores of .33 were given if a unique verb form was
used to represent this tense--albeit one that did not make the correct
distinction between b or v--or the correct future-past distinction was
used (b vs. v) but the root was badly misspelled; a score of .66 was given
for answers that included cog or cogit as the root and included correct
use of the future-past distinction (b vs. v) but included some slight
misspelling.
Each participant translated nine unique items (listed in Table 3) twice,
for a total of 18 items. Among these 18 items, 12 required adverb production and 12 required verb production. Thus, each participant received
two scores--one for adverb and one for verb--each a score out of 12.
The group means of these production scores are shown in Figure 5. The
adverb group participants were able to produce adverbs (M = 10.18, 95%
CI [7.98, 11.39]) much more accurately than verbs (M = 1.08, 95% CI [0.02,
1.35]). The control group also produced more adverbs (M = 5.58, 95% CI
[2.88, 7.47]) than verbs (M = 2.52, 95% CI [-0.03, 2.50]). In parallel to their
perception data, the verb group showed knowledge of both adverbs
(M = 7.27, 95% CI [5.13, 8.63]) and verbs (M = 5.82, 95% CI [1.74, 6.02]).
An ANOVA shows this to be a highly significant interaction, F(2, 47) =
14.82, p < .001. Post hoc testing using Tukey's HSD test showed that the
adverb pretraining group differed from the control group in adverb cue
provision (p < .01) but not from the verb pretraining group (p = .10) and
that these latter two groups did not differ significantly. The verb pretraining group was superior to both the adverb pretraining (p < .001)
and control (p < .05) groups in verb cue provision, with no significant
difference between these latter two groups.
These results mirror the perception data; the adverb pretraining
group and the control group attended to adverb cues and were able to
produce this information accurately to a relatively high proficiency;
conversely, the production of verb information was low, even when no
pretraining had occurred as in the control group. The verb group was
superior at both the perception and production of verbal cues to temporal reference.
Cues or Content? A key element of the design of the experiment is
that all participants had equivalent exposure to the future items
cogitabo/bis/bit cras "I/you/he will think tomorrow" and cras cogitabo/bis/bit

Cogitavi / cogitavisti/ cogitavit
Cogito / cogitas / cogitat
Cogitabo / cogitabis / cogitabit
Heri
Hodie
Cras
Heri cogitavi / cogitavisti / cogitavit
Hodie cogito / cogitas/ cogitat
Cras cogitabo / cogitabis / cogitabit
Cogitavi / cogitavisti/ cogitavit
Cogito / cogitas / cogitat
Cogitabo / cogitabis / cogitabit
Heri
Hodie
Cras
Heri cogitavi / cogitavisti / cogitavit
Hodie cogito / cogitas/ cogitat
Cras cogitabo / cogitabis / cogitabit

Correct response

Representative responses from Phase 4 production testing

X thought
X think(s)
X will think
Yesterday
Today
Tomorrow
Yesterday X thought
Today X think(s)
Tomorrow X will think
X thought
X think(s)
X will think
Yesterday
Today
Tomorrow
Yesterday X thought
Today X think(s)
Tomorrow X will think

Stimulus

Table 3.

X congitavi
Congitavi hodie
Congitavi cras
Heri
Hodie
Cras
Heri X congitavi
Congitavi hodie
Cras congitavi
X congitavi
X congitavi
X congitavas?
Heri
Hodie
Cras
Heri X congitavi
Hodie X congitavi
Cras congitavas

Typical adverb
group response

Cogitavi
Cogitat
Cogitabo
Hodie
Heri
Curas
Hodie cogitavi
cogitat
Cras cogitabo
Cogitavi
Cogitat
Cogitabo
Heri
Hodie
Cras
Hodie cogivisti
Heri cogitat
Cras cogita

Typical verb
group response

604
Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

605

Figure 5. Group mean production scores for adverb and verb cues.
"tomorrow I/you/he will think" in Phase 2 and that no one had any experience with these items or any reference to future temporality beforehand. Every participant in the experiment encountered each of these six
utterances twice in Phase 2 and was shown that they relate to the future. Analysis of these items therefore allows for the identification of
pure effects of blocking devoid of prior training on particular content.
Performance on these strings must reflect attentional biases to particular
dimensions of cue (adverb vs. verbal inflection) rather than to particular words or tenses because neither these forms nor their functions
have been encountered before Phase 2.
Inspection of the right side of Figure 2 suggests that the adverb and
verb pretraining groups are as unalike and dissociated in their performance on cras "tomorrow" and cogitabo/bis/bit "I/you/he will think"
items referring to the future as they are on the past and present reference items in Phase 3.
Figure 6 isolates these future items for the adverb pretraining and
verb pretraining groups. The left panel shows the two groups' temporality ratings for the adverb cras "tomorrow" (adverb pretraining, M =
4.94, 95% CI [4.80, 5.07]; verb pretraining, M = 4.06, 95% CI [3.44, 4.67])
and the verb inflection cogitabo "I will think" (adverb pretraining, M =
3.54, 95% CI [3.11, 3.97]; verb pretraining, M = 3.61, 95% CI [3.13, 4.08])
when they are experienced on their own as individual words in Phase 3.
Both of these items, if fully acquired, should receive a future rating of 5.
However, the adverb pretraining group has learned more from the twoword utterances experienced in Phase 2 about cras "tomorrow,"
whereas the verb pretraining group has learned more from the same
exposure to the same utterances about cogitabo "I will think." A twofactor ANOVA (2 groups x 2 cues with participants nested within groups)

606

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Figure 6. Adverb pretraining and verb pretraining group comprehension rating (left) and production (right) of cras "tomorrow" and cogitabo
"I will think."
shows a main effect of group with the adverb pretraining group more
accurate overall, F(1, 31) = 4.99, p < .05, a main effect of cue with higher
overall accuracy on the adverb cue, F(1, 31) = 13.93, p < .001, and a significant two-way interaction, F(1, 31) = 3.76, p < .05 (one tailed).
These items can similarly be isolated in production. In Phase 4, the
participants were asked for the Latin translations of, on separate trials,
tomorrow, I will think, and tomorrow I will think. The right panel of Figure 6
shows the summed accuracy (out of a possible maximum 2.0) of the two
groups on the adverb cras "tomorrow" (adverb pretraining, M = 1.46,
95% CI [1.02, 1.90]; verb pretraining, M = 1.28, 95% CI [0.86, 1.70]) and
the verb inflection cogitabo "I will think" (adverb pretraining, M = 0.08,
95% CI [-0.02, 0.19]; verb pretraining, M = 0.57, 95% CI [0.24, 0.89]).

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

607

Although both groups seem to have picked up something about cras
from the two-word utterances experienced in Phase 2, the verb pretraining group has learned more from that same exposure to these utterances about cogitabo. A two-factor ANOVA (2 groups x 2 cues with
participants nested within groups) shows a nonsignificant main effect
of group, F(1, 31) = 0.96, p = .33, a main effect of cue with higher overall
accuracy on the adverb, F(1, 31) = 35.89, p < .001, and a significant twoway interaction, F(1, 31) = 3.60, p < .05 (one tailed).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 demonstrate that salient adverbs were
better learned than less salient verb inflections, that early experience of
adverbial cues led to subsequent reliance upon these rather than verbal inflections, and that making verbal inflections salient in pretraining
allowed participants to be sensitive to these cues in the processing of
subsequent utterances that contained both adverbial and morphological cues to temporal reference. The fact that these patterns were found
with the constructions relating to future temporality, which had not
been experienced before Phase 2, points to the conclusion that these
results reflect effects of learned attention to cue dimensions in the early
acquisition of language.
The results therefore replicate earlier findings but also extend them.
In Experiment 1 of Ellis and Sagarra (2010), participants in the English
L1 control condition (which involved just one verb form per tense)
showed a differential cue use to temporal interpretation, in standardized  coefficients, of 0.60 Adverb + 0.72 Verb. In the current experiment, with three verb forms per tense, the English L1 control group
exhibited cue use of 0.93 Adverb + 0.17 Verb. This difference might reflect the relative salience, simplicity, and reliability of adverbial cues
compared to verbal inflections and the fact that adult language learners
have prior knowledge of the use of adverbial temporal references from
their L1. This issue will be revisited in the general discussion.
These findings demonstrate that for linguistic constructions too--
as in the case of associative learning of other cue-outcome interpretations in medical diagnosis or in stock market prediction (Kruschke &
Blair, 2000; Shanks, 1995)--prior learning of one cue affects learner
attention so that they subsequently attend to that cue more than to
others, however reliable these are as predictors in their own right.
This experiment shows these learned attention effects in the shortterm of an experiment that manipulated instructional sequence. The
next experiment concerns whether learned attention also occurs in
the longer term.

608

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

EXPERIMENT 2
Usage-based, constructionist views of language acquisition (Barlow &
Kemmer, 2000; Collins & Ellis, 2009; Ellis, 1998, 2003; Ellis & Cadierno,
2009) hold that language experiences accumulate over time and that from
their integration there emerges the processes, representations, and attentional biases that constitute the language system. Experience of how
the L1 maps on to experience colors expectations of a second language
(L2), resulting in crosslinguistic transfer effects (MacWhinney, 1997;
Odlin, 1989; Robinson & Ellis, 2008). At least to some extent, limited adult
language attainment is grounded in L1 entrenchment, learned attention,
and transfer, rather than in age or biology per se (Ellis, 2006c).
Experiment 2 of Ellis and Sagarra (2010) showed that native speakers
of Chinese (whose L1 does not exhibit verb tense morphology) learning
under the control conditions of Experiment 1, where there was just one
verb form per tense, were less sensitive to morphological cues to tense
and more reliant on adverbial cues than native English speakers. In Chinese languages, there is no morphology, free or bound, that corresponds to tense: "a second factor in the lack of inflectional morphology
is that gender, plurality and tense are either indicated by lexical choice
or not indicated at all" (Li & Thompson, 1987, p. 825). Mandarin Chinese
does have aspectual markers, including the perfective marker -le, an
inflection that cannot be separated from the verb, which indicates a
recently completed event that has present relevance. This fact coupled
with the absence of verbal inflectional morphology renders its characterization as an exclusively aspect language (Lin, 2006; Xiao & McEnery,
2004). Instead of verbal tense inflections, speakers make heavy use of
temporal adverbials--both adverbs and prepositional phases--to encode temporal meanings. Ellis and Sagarra therefore concluded that
Chinese speakers' L1 experience had summed to long-term attentional
biases toward these types of cue, with consequent blocking of verbal
inflectional cues in the Latin learning experiment. Again, this is a result
that warrants replication and extension to both a richer target verb inflectional system as in Experiment 1 and to L1s that make more use of
tense morphology than English does.
In contrast to Chinese, many languages present a much richer verbal morphology than English, containing overt marking for number,
person, and gender agreement as well as tense and mood. Two typical languages that inflect in a similar fashion to Latin are Spanish and
Russian. All three of these languages evidence verbal inflection that
agrees with the subject in number and person through suffixation.
Russian makes a binary morphological distinction between past and
nonpast (i.e., present-future). In the nonpast, verbs agree with their
subject in person and number; in the past, they agree in gender and
number (Comrie, 1987). Spanish distinguishes among the future,

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

609

the present, the preterit, and the imperfect, with each paradigm
consisting of six forms that represent three grammatical persons in
both singular and plural (Green, 1987). These characteristics are, of
course, not limited to these three languages; most (if not all) languages
in the Romance and Slavonic language families have rich verbal morphology with respect to these same features. Spanish and Russian, like
Latin, are both also pro-drop or null-subject languages in which pronominal syntactic subjects are usually not present in the sentence (although they can be overtly pronounced in certain pragmatic contexts,
e.g., to communicate contrastive stress). Because of this omission, the
person and number information of the subject is encoded exclusively in
the verbal morphology. Of course, in addition to the verbal inflectional
ending that encodes tense, the language can make use of temporal adverbs, pragmatics, and other mechanisms to reinforce the interpretation of semantic tense outside the verbal domain. These aspects of
Spanish and Russian lead to the expectation, therefore, that speakers of
these L1s would have learned attentional biases toward verbal morphological cues and that these biases would transfer to FL learning. This
experiment therefore investigates this issue.
It also addresses two further questions. The first is whether these
long-term learned attention effects are a matter of degree. Are learners of
an inflection-light L1 (like English) more sensitive to verbal morphology
than inflection-free-L1 learners but less sensitive than inflection-rich-L1
learners? The second is whether there are separable effects of attention to
cue dimension and attention to cue content. Although Russian and Spanish are both languages that make rich use of verbal morphology, Spanish
is more similar to Latin in the way it cues time. Russian verbal morphology
is synthetic, with more than one meaning mapping to a single morpheme.
Spanish, a Romance language, derives via Latin from the Italic branch of
Indo-European. Thus, it bears similarity to Latin in both its use and manner
of verbal morphology, and although its overall degree of verbal morphology has declined somewhat from Latin levels, the most frequently
occurring forms of the verb remain highly synthetic in structure. In its
manner of inflection, it distinguishes among the future, the present, the
preterit, and the imperfect, with each paradigm consisting of six forms
that represent three grammatical persons in both singular and plural,
largely with each meaning mapping to different principal parts or roots
(Green, 1987). Verbs with Spanish infinitives in the -ar group derive
directly from Latin, and there are, thus, clear similarities in the Latin and
Spanish paradigms (compare Latin and Spanish present cogito/as/at "I/
you/he think(s)" and tomo/as/a "I/you/he take(s)," past cogitavi/visti/vit "I/
you/he thought" and tome/aste/o "I/you/he took," and future cogitabo/bis/bit
"I/you/he will think" and tomare/as/a "I/you/he will take").
Experiment 2 therefore compares the learning of four L1 groups
(inflection-free Chinese, inflection-light English, and inflection-rich

610

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Russian and Spanish--but with Spanish closer to Latin than is Russian
in its means and content of tense inflections) for their learning of
verbal morphology under the control conditions of Experiment 1, where
each tense is represented in three persons.

Participants
Participants were 63 adults who were either students at a major university in the United States (n = 46) or volunteers from the local community
(n = 17). They were placed in one of four groups based on their L1: native Spanish speakers (n = 15), native Russian speakers (n = 17), monolingual English speakers (n = 17), and native speakers of languages that
do not evidence inflectional morphology (n = 14; 12 Chinese, 1 Malay,
1 Indonesian). The Spanish group consisted of 9 males and 7 females,
age range 19-40 years (mean: 23.9; median: 21.0). The Russian group
consisted of 10 males and 7 females, age range 19-60 years (mean: 23.8;
median: 20.0); as can be seen from the measures of central tendency,
although the range here appears large, there was just one 60-year-old,
and the age distributions across the language groups were otherwise
similar). The English group consisted of the same participants as the no
pretraining control group of Experiment 1.
All participants in the first, second, and third groups were bilingual
with advanced English language proficiency sufficient to allow their
study at the university through the medium of English. Their performance in this experiment therefore approximates third-language
acquisition. None of the participants were natively bilingual--they were
selected providing their L2 learning had occurred postpuberty. All were
volunteers and were paid $10 for their participation in the experiment.

Procedure
The participants partook in an exact replication of the no pretraining
control group of Experiment 1. It comprised Phase 2 sentence decoding,
Phase 3 reception testing, and Phase 4 production testing.

Results
The performance of the four L1 groups in terms of deviation from
semidiem judgments in Phase 3 is shown in Figure 7. As in Experiment 1,

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

611

respondents tend to be more influenced by the adverb than the verb.
However, the degree to which this is so depends on L1 background. In
Figure 7, the Chinese group's performance lies to the adverb side of the
English group's line, tracking the information given by the adverbial cue
more than by that from the verbal morphology, whereas the performance of the Spanish and Russian groups lies on the other side, tracking
more the information given by the verbal inflections. Sensitivity to these
cues is, therefore, a matter of degree.
These impressions are confirmed by four multiple regression
analyses, one for each group, in which the dependent variable is group
mean temporal interpretation for each of the 54 two-word strings and
the independent variables are the interpretations cued by the adverbial cue and by the verbal inflection. The differential cue use by each of
the four groups, in standardized  coefficients, is shown in Table 4.
Participants in the Chinese group were highly reliant upon the adverbial cue ( = 0.95, p < .001), the 95% CI spanning 1.0, but were unaffected
by the verbal cue ( = -0.02, p = .65), the 95% CI spanning 0. Participants
in the English and Russian groups were broadly similar in that they,
too, were heavily influenced by the adverbial cues ( = 0.93, p < .001,
and  = 0.91, p < .001, respectively), again their CIs spanning 1.0. However, both of these groups were sensitive to the verbal morphology
( = 0.17, p < .001, and  = 0.22, p < .001, respectively). Participants in
the Spanish group were rather less influenced by the adverbial cues

Figure 7. Mean deviations of Phase 3 temporal interpretations from
semidiem average. Bias symbols mark the deviation of the adverbial
cues (circles) and verb inflection cues (diamonds) when these cues
conflict.

612

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Table 4. Regression analyses predicting mean temporal
interpretation in Phase 3 of Experiment 2
L1 Group
Chinese
Adverb
Verb
English
Adverb
Verb
Russian
Adverb
Verb
Spanish
Adverb
Verb



95% CI

Adjusted R2

F

0.95*
-0.02

[0.86, 1.04]
[-0.11, 0.07]

0.89

221*

0.93*
0.17*

[0.84, 1.02]
[0.07, 0.26]

0.88

192*

0.91*
0.22*

[0.82, 1.01]
[0.13, 0.32]

0.88

196*

0.75*
0.41*

[0.60, 0.89]
[0.26, 0.55]

0.71

66*

* p < .001.

( = 0.75, p < .001) and rather more the verbal inflections ( = 0.41,
p < .001). Pooled variance CI estimates for the differences between
these  coefficients (Edwards, 1984) showed the following differences
for sensitivity (where < indicates less sensitivity and  indicates relatively
equivalent sensitivity) at p < .05 to the adverb cues: Spanish < Chinese,
Spanish < English; Chinese  English  Russian; and to the verb cues:
Chinese < English, Chinese < Russian, Chinese < Spanish; English < Spanish,
Russian < Spanish.
As in Experiment 1, each L1 participant's temporal rating responses
for the strings in Phase 3 were correlated with the information provided
by the verb cue and that separately provided by the adverbial cue to
determine the degree to which each participant was biased by each
cue. Participant's production of the adverbs and verbs in Phase 4 was
also scored as in Experiment 1. Figure 8 plots the group means for the
rating and production data together, and again these illustrate a trend
whereby sensitivity to these cues is determined by the degree to which
the L1 makes use of inflectional morphology to mark tense.
However, as can be seen in the descriptive data for these measures in
Table 5, there was considerable within-group variability. A two-factor
ANOVA (4 groups x 2 cues with participants nested within groups) on
the Phase 3 data demonstrated a nonsignificant main effect of group,
F(3, 59) = 0.25, p = .86, a significant main effect of cue with more reliance,
overall, on the adverb, F(1, 59) = 24.12, p < .001, and a nonsignificant
Group x Cue interaction, F(3, 59) = 1.56, p = .21. The same analysis for
the production data likewise resulted in a nonsignificant main effect of
Group, F(3, 59) = 0.24, p = .87, a significant main effect of Cue with greater

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

613

Figure 8. Means scores of the four L1 groups in Experiment 2 as they
are affected by adverbial and verbal inflectional cues to temporal reference in comprehension in Phase 3 (left axis) and as they produce them
in Phase 4 (right axis).
accuracy overall on the adverb cue, F(1, 59) = 19.91, p < .001, and a nonsignificant Group x Cue interaction, F(3, 59) = 1.43, p = .24.
This pattern of results is clarified by plotting in Figure 9 the position
of each participant as defined by the correlation of their ratings of the
sentences in Phase 3 with the information separately given by the verb
and adverb cues. It can be seen that the majority of points cluster
around the axes: Participants seem to be picking up on either one cue
or the other and show different levels of mastery of this cue. There are
no participants in the Chinese group who show substantial sensitivity
to the verb cue. There are more participants in the Spanish and Russian
L1 groups affected by the verb cue--but by no means everybody in
these groups; there are still many who rely on the adverb. At these early

614

Table 5.

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Mean participant performance in Experiment 2
Correlation of rating and
cue (Phase 3)

L1 Group
Chinese
Adverb
Verb
English
Adverb
Verb
Russian
Adverb
Verb
Spanish
Adverb
Verb

Accuracy of cue
production (Phase 4)

Mean

95% CI

Mean

95% CI

0.57
0.00

[0.30, 0.84]
[-0.11, 0.11]

5.85
1.04

[3.31, 8.39]
[0.21, 1.87]

0.44
0.07

[0.21, 0.67]
[-0.08 0.22]

5.58
2.52

[3.26, 7.90]
[1.15, 3.89]

0.43
0.10

[0.21, 0.65]
[-0.06, 0.25]

5.11
3.20

[2.81, 7.41]
[1.58, 4.82]

0.27
0.15

[0.02, 0.52]
[-0.03, 0.33]

4.33
2.97

[1.88, 6.78]
[1.63, 4.30]

stages of learning, therefore, as in Experiment 1, participants seem to
be picking up on one cue or another. The cue that they begin with is
probabilistically determined by the degree to which the L1 uses inflectional morphology, but this is attenuated by a general bias toward the
simpler adverbial cue.
A further question is related to whether there might be transfer
of particular content--whether the similarity of inflectional system
between Spanish and Latin might afford Spanish L1 participants a
greater advantage over Russian L1 participants. Two-factor ANOVAs
(2 groups x 2 cues, with participants nested within groups) demonstrated that the Group x Cue interaction failed to reach significance
both for the rating data, F(1, 30) = 0.93, p = .34, and for the production
data, F(1, 30) = 0.09, p = .77.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 demonstrate a pattern whereby, when exposed to utterances that contain both cues to temporality, respondents
tend to be more influenced by the adverb than the verb. However, L1
speakers of inflection-light Chinese make relatively more use of adverbial cues in their processing, whereas L1 speakers of inflection-rich languages like Spanish and Russian are more sensitive to verbal inflectional
cues. These findings confirm a long-term influence of attention to
language, a cue processing bias that comes from a lifetime of prior L1

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

615

Figure 9. Sensitivity to adverbial and verbal inflectional cues to temporal reference in each participant.
usage. It is especially compelling, in that the Chinese L1 participants had
been exposed to a subsequent L2 prior to the Latin learning experiment,
the English in which they had become quite proficient and which, as a L2
learning experience, must have brought to their awareness the potential
productivity of inflectional cues in tense marking. It would be interesting
to compare the performance of this group with that of monolingual
Chinese speakers who have not been potentially sensitized in this way.
As in Experiment 1, the current results replicate earlier findings but
also extend them. Ellis and Sagarra's (2010) Experiment 2 showed that
native speakers of Chinese (whose L1 does not exhibit verb tense morphology) learning under the control conditions of Experiment 1--where
there was just one verb form per tense--showed a differential cue use
to temporal interpretation, in standardized  coefficients, of 0.91 Adverb
+ 0.29 Verb. In the current experiment, with three verb forms per tense,
the Chinese L1 control group cue use was 0.95 Adverb - 0.02 Verb. This
shift in reliance away from the inflectional cues as the paradigm is complexified parallels that found in the English controls in Experiment 1.
This difference too might reflect the relative salience, simplicity, and

616

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

reliability of adverbial cues compared to verbal inflections and the fact
that adult language learners have prior knowledge of the use of adverbial temporal references from their L1--in the case of Chinese L1
speakers, exclusively so.
Together, these data point more to a cline of long-term learned attention to verbal morphology rather than a binary distinction. In both the
comprehension and the production data, the Chinese group stood at
one extreme, the Spanish the other, and the English group lay in between, with Russian group participants more similar to the English
group on some measures and more similar to the Spanish group on
others. There also seemed to be an effect of L1-FL relatedness whereby
native Spanish speakers learning cognate Latin were more likely than
native Russian speakers to attend to verbal morphology: For example,
in the Phase 3 multiple regressions, Russian L1 speakers were less sensitive to morphological cues and more sensitive to the adverbs.
However, as these learners are considered individually, it becomes
clear that these biases are stochastic. There are few individuals who are
sensitive to both cues at these initial stages of learning; instead, participants pick up on one cue or another. The cue that they begin with is
probabilistically determined by the degree to which their L1 has sensitized them to inflectional morphology, and they subsequently explore
this cue dimension to varying degrees of achievement, a pattern also
found in the other experiments of the current study and in Ellis and
Sagarra (2010). Research looking at longer term learning from problem
spaces containing multiple cue dimensions suggests that participants
typically focus upon one cue at a time, exploring its utility and only
introducing others later, one by one, as they reduce error of estimation
(Cheng & Holyoak, 1995; MacWhinney, 1987; Matessa & Anderson, 2000;
McDonald, 1986).
SEPARABLE EFFECTS OF ENTRENCHMENT AND BLOCKING:
A META-ANALYSIS
Learned attention effects can be positive or negative. Experience can
lead people to pay more attention to cues known in the past, to process
them more fluently or automatically, to be more open to particular evidence, and to be positively disposed to arguments (positive). It can also
lead people to ignore new, foreign cues, to be blind to information, and to
be prejudiced against beliefs or explanations (negative). Although these
are often related, they are logically separable effects. In Experiment 1, for
example, adverb pretraining might cause participants to pay more
attention to adverbs in future language processing, but their future sensitivity to other morphological cues could be untouched by this history. Positive effects of frequency of exposure are those of entrenchment

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

617

(see Ellis, 2002, for a review of frequency effects). Alternatively, increased sensitivity to adverb cues might be accompanied by a reduced
sensitivity to morphological cues--that is, blocking as discussed in
Ellis's (2006c) review of learned attention. Increased reliance on one
cue, means, or method tends to diminish reliance on others but not
necessarily so. Not only are these logically separable effects, but they
are empirically separable as well. In Experiment 1, the precise history of
Phase 1 preexposure of the adverb pretraining group to adverb cues is
known, as is that of the verb pretraining group to verb cues. These two
groups had the same subsequent exposure to adverb and verb cues in
Phase 2, and this was equal to that of the control participants. Entrenchment effects are therefore indexed by increased sensitivity of
the adverb group to adverbs and by increased sensitivity of the verb
pretraining participants to verb cues, relative to control participants.
Blocking effects are indexed by decreased sensitivity of adverb pretraining participants to verb cues and by decreased sensitivity of verb
pretraining participants to adverb cues, relative to controls.
Tables 6 and 7 gather these data as effect sizes for entrenchment and
blocking respectively across the various indexes of sensitivity analyzed
in Experiment 1 of Ellis and Sagarra (2010) and the current study (s
from the group multiple regressions of cue use across the different test
strings of Phase 3, means of individual participant rs indicating cue sensitivity in Phase 3, production accuracy in Phase 4). These measures do
not obligate cue competition; they are independent, permitting equivalent accuracy on both cues up to maximum of 1.0 for  and r and 12.0 for
production accuracy (in Ellis & Sagarra, 2010, this was expressed as a
proportion). These different measures are converted into effect sizes to
allow their comparability in a meta-analysis across measures and experiments. The pooled standard deviation of control and comparison
groups was used to calculate the effect sizes in the meta-analyses.
A rule of thumb for judging effect sizes is as follows: d  0.2 indicates a
small effect; d  0.25 might reflect educational significance (i.e., something was learned); d  0.5 represents a moderate effect that is practically
or clinically significant (i.e., something really changed); d  0.8 indicates
a large effect (Cohen, 1992; Thalheimer & Cook, 2002). Across measures
and experiments, the average effect size for entrenchment is 1.23, a large
effect, 95% CI [0.99, 1.47]. Ten of the 12 effect sizes for entrenchment in
Table 6 are greater than 0.80. The average effect size for blocking is 0.52,
a moderate effect, 95% CI [0.17, 0.90]. There does seem to be some identifiable variability across experiment and cue. Figure 10 plots those effect
sizes broken down by experiment, cue, and entrenchment or blocking.
Overall, entrenchment is a stronger effect than blocking. Effects are
larger in Ellis and Sagarra (2010), in which the adverb and verb cues were
of approximately the same salience than in the current study, in which
the verb cues are less obvious than the adverbs. The salient adverbs in

SD

n

Experiment 1 of the Current Study
Multiple regression: Cue use in comprehension ()
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.99
0.09
54
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.60
0.20
54
Group mean correlation: Cue use in comprehension (r)
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.96
0.03
16
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.38
0.41
17
Cue production (M)
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
10.18
2.72
16
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
5.82
3.31
17

Experiment 1 of Ellis and Sagarra (2010)
Multiple regression: Cue use in comprehension ()
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.97
0.13
36
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.97
0.20
36
Group mean correlation: Cue use in comprehension (r)
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.78
0.26
19
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.80
0.13
17
Cue production (M)
Adverb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.90
0.19
19
Verb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.77
0.25
17

M

Comparison group

0.49
0.39
4.51
2.66

0.48
0.07
5.58
2.52

0.31
0.23

0.45
0.35

0.28
0.28

0.41
0.38

0.27
0.42

0.93
0.17

0.39
0.39

SD

0.59
0.72

M

Control group

Evidence for entrenchment from Ellis and Sagarra (2010) and this replication study

Comparison

Table 6.

17
17

17
17

36
36

16
16

16
16

36
36

n

1.23
1.10

1.36
0.79

0.26
1.45

1.78
1.71

1.54
1.37

1.31
0.83

Effect size
d

618
Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

SD

n

Experiment 1 of the Current Study
Multiple regression: Cue use in comprehension ()
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
-0.01
0.09
54
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.76
0.20
54
Group mean correlation: Cue use in comprehension (r)
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
-0.01
0.06
16
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.46
0.47
17
Cue production (M)
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
1.08
1.33
16
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
7.27
3.55
17

Experiment 1 of Ellis and Sagarra (2010)
Multiple regression: Cue use in comprehension ()
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.23
0.12
36
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.12
0.20
36
Group mean correlation: Cue use in comprehension (r)
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.23
0.35
19
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.13
0.20
17
Cue production (M)
Adverb pretraining-Control (verb use)
0.41
0.33
19
Verb pretraining-Control (adverb use)
0.33
0.30
17

M

Comparison group

0.29
0.45
2.67
4.51

0.07
0.44
2.52
5.58

0.23
0.31

0.35
0.45

0.28
0.28

0.38
0.41

0.42
0.27

0.17
0.93

0.39
0.39

SD

0.72
0.59

M

Control group

Evidence for blocking from Ellis & Sagarra (2010) and this replication study

Comparison

Table 7.

17
17

17
17

36
36

16
16

16
16

36
36

n

-0.68
0.42

0.41
0.05

-0.70
-0.55

0.21
-0.37

-0.53
-0.43

-1.70
-1.52

Effect size d

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition
619

620

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Figure 10. Meta-analysis of effect sizes for entrenchment and blocking
as a function of study and cue.

the present Experiment 1 tend not to be blocked by prior experience of
the more complicated and less salient morphological cues.
CONCLUSIONS
In the present experiments--in contrast to Ellis and Sagarra (2010)--
there was a strong overall bias toward the acquisition of adverbs in
control conditions where both cues were always present and where
there was no pretraining on any one cue. The stimuli used in Ellis and
Sagarra were a meager subset of Latin, where the three adverbs differed
from each other in relatively slight ways (hodie "today," heri "yesterday," cras "tomorrow") approximating the similarity of the verbal inflections (cogito "I think," cogitavi "I thought," cogitabo "I will think"). In
natural languages, this is not the typical case. Due to its high frequency,
verbal morphology is typically of low salience in its surface manifestations compared to lexical cues (yesterday, today, tomorrow vs. I walked,
I walk, I'll walk); thus, inflections are typically overshadowed by more
salient lexical and discourse cues (Bates & Goodman, 1997; Ellis, 2006b,
2006c). In the present experiments, in which the verbal paradigm reflected tense and person in a more naturally complete state, the participants relied much more on the adverbial cues. They were biased

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

621

toward reliable and salient lexical cues to temporality and this blocked
acquisition of less salient and complex morphological cues.
Ellis and Sagarra (2010) acknowledged that their experiments involved language learning in its simplest, most stripped-down form, but
they emphasized that they were so designed to allow tight replicable
comparisons. The present study demonstrates this replicability: The
experiments once again show that the early stages of adult language
learning are sensitive to blocking effects from varying sequences of cue
exposure and to L1 background (here with a greater range of L1s).
Although both of these studies admittedly concern only the first hour of
language learning, Sagarra, Ellis, and Gauthier (2011) demonstrated that
such effects extend to the sentence processing strategies of third- and
eighth-semester English-Spanish FL learners reading sentences in Spanish that contain lexical (adverb) and morphological (verbal inflection)
cues to temporal reference.
One key question is why children learning their L1 do not experience
this blocking. This issue is considered in some depth in Ellis and Sagarra
(2010), through a review of studies suggesting that 2- to 3-year-old children
learning English as their L1 focus on morphological means of temporal
reference because, at this stage, they do not yet know about pragmatic
means of temporal reference (such as recounting events in their order of
occurrence), nor do they clearly yet understand the meaning of temporal
adverbs. The development of temporal concepts in early childhood is
gradual, and there are important changes between 3 and 5 years in the
ability to reason about sequences of events in the past and future (see
commentary by Ellis, 2008a; McCormack & Hoerl, 2008). Adults, in contrast, have acquired all of these notions by the time they approach their L2.
There is scope for detailed comparisons of longitudinal corpora of the development of temporal reference in child L1 and adult L2 learners to more
fully investigate these ideas.
The findings of such experiments reinforce the possibility that the
limited attainment of adult L2 and FL learning follows general principles
of associative learning. Adult FL acquirers are limited in working
memory and time on task, and they have attentional biases to language.
They know that temporal adverbs are more reliable than nonsalient and
ambiguous verbal inflections and that they can usually satisfice (Simon,
1957) and get their message across by lexical means alone--however
ungrammatical, the basic variety is communicatively effective.
Together, these experiments demonstrate the following:
1. Short-term positive learned attention effects: FL cues learned early in the instructional sequence become entrenched and are preferentially processed.
2. Short-term negative learned attention effects: FL cues learned early in the
instructional sequence block the acquisition of later experienced FL cues to
the same interpretation.

622

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

3. Long-term learned attention effects: The more a learner's L1 makes use of
rich verbal morphology, the more they acquire knowledge of FL tense inflections from utterances that contain multiple cues to temporal reference.
4. Cue salience and complexity: The more complicated the FL verbal inflectional paradigm, the more adult learners rely upon salient and simple adverbial cues to time.
5. The magnitude of blocking depends on the competing cues, their relative
salience, and the stage of learning. Salient cues resist blocking; less salient
and complicated cues are more readily blocked.

(Received 13 January 2011)
REFERENCES
Baddeley, A. D. (1976). The psychology of memory. New York: Harper and Row.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1992). The use of adverbials and natural order in the development of
temporal expression. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching,
30, 299-320.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2000). Tense and aspect in second language acquisition: Form, meaning,
and use. Oxford: Blackwell.
Barlow, M., & Kemmer, S. (Eds.). (2000). Usage based models of language. Stanford, CA:
CSLI Publications.
Bates, E., & Goodman, J. C. (1997). On the inseparability of grammar and the lexicon: Evidence from acquisition, aphasia and real-time processing. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 12, 507-586.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1995). Adaptive systems as intuitive statisticians: Causality,
contingency, and prediction. In J.-A. Meyer & H. Roitblat (Eds.), Comparative approaches to cognition (pp. 271-302). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155-159.
Collins, L., & Ellis, N. C. (Eds.). (2009). Input and second language construction
learning: Frequency, form, and function [Special issue]. Modern Language Journal,
93(3).
Comrie, B. (1987). Russian. In B. Comrie (Ed.), The world's major languages (pp. 329-347).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Edwards, A. L. (1984). An introduction to linear regression and correlation (2nd ed.). New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Ellis, N. C. (1998). Emergentism, connectionism and language learning. Language Learning,
48, 631-664.
Ellis, N. C. (2002). Frequency effects in language processing: A review with implications
for theories of implicit and explicit language acquisition. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 24, 143-188.
Ellis, N. C. (2003). Constructions, chunking, and connectionism: The emergence of second
language structure. In C. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), Handbook of second language
acquisition (pp. 33-68). Oxford: Blackwell.
Ellis, N. C. (2006a). The associative-cognitive CREED. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams
(Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction (pp. 77-96). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ellis, N. C. (2006b). Cognitive perspectives on SLA: The associative-cognitive CREED. AILA
Review, 19, 100-121.
Ellis, N. C. (2006c). Selective attention and transfer phenomena in SLA: Contingency, cue
competition, salience, interference, overshadowing, blocking, and perceptual
learning. Applied Linguistics, 27, 1-31.
Ellis, N. C. (2008a). Temporal cognition and temporal language the first and second times
around. Language Learning, 58(Suppl. 1), 115-121.

Learned Attention in Adult Language Acquisition

623

Ellis, N. C. (2008b). Usage-based and form-focused language acquisition: The associative
learning of constructions, learned-attention, and the limited L2 endstate. In P. Robinson &
N. C. Ellis (Eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition
(pp. 372-405). London: Routledge.
Ellis, N. C., & Cadierno, T. (2009). Constructing a second language [Special section].
Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 7, 111-290.
Ellis, N. C., & Sagarra, N. (2010). The bounds of adult language acquisition: Blocking and
learned attention. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32, 553-580.
Goldschneider, J. M., & DeKeyser, R. (2001). Explaining the "natural order of L2 morpheme
acquisition" in English: A meta-analysis of multiple determinants. Language Learning,
51, 1-50.
Green, J. N. (1987). Spanish. In B. Comrie (Ed.), The world's major languages (pp. 236-259).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jiang, N. (2004). Morphological insensitivity in second language processing. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 25, 603-634.
Kamin, L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In B. A. Campbell &
R. M. Church (Eds.), Punishment and aversive behavior (pp. 276-296). New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Klein, W. (1986). Second language acquisition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kruschke, J. K. (2006, June). Learned attention. Paper presented at the Fifth International
Conference on Development and Learning, Bloomington, IN.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and backward blocking involve learned inattention. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 636-645.
Lee, J. F. (1999). On levels of processing and levels of comprehension. In J. GutierrezRexach & F. Martinez-Gil (Eds.), Advances in Hispanic linguistics (pp. 42-59). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Lee, J. F. (2002). The incidental acquisition of Spanish future morphology through reading
in a second language. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 55-80.
Lee, J. F., Cadierno, T., Glass, W. R., & VanPatten, B. (1997). The effects of lexical and
grammatical cues on processing past temporal reference in second language input.
Applied Language Learning, 8, 1-23.
Li, C. N., & Thompson, S. A. (1987). Chinese. In B. Comrie (Ed.), The world's major languages (pp. 811-833). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lin, J.-W. (2006). Time in a language without tense: The case of Chinese. Journal of Semantics, 23, 1-53.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention: Variations in the associability of stimuli
with reinforcement. Psychological Review, 82, 276-298.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). The competition model. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of
language acquisition (pp. 249-308). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (1997). Second language acquisition and the competition model. In
A. M. B. De Groot & J. F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 113-142). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (2001). The competition model: The input, the context, and the brain. In
P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 69-90). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
MacWhinney, B., & Bates, E. (1989). The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
MacWhinney, B., Bates, E., & Kliegl, R. (1984). Cue validity and sentence interpretation
in English, German, and Italian. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23,
127-150.
Mangubhai, F. (1991). The processing behaviors of adult second language learners
and their relationship to second language proficiency. Applied Linguistics, 12,
268-297.
Matessa, M., & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Modeling focused learning in role assignment.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 263-292.
McCormack, T., & Hoerl, C. (2008). Temporal decentering and the development of temporal concepts. In P. Indefrey & M. Gullberg (Eds.), Time to speak: Cognitive and neural
prerequisites of time in language (pp. 89-113). Oxford: Blackwell.
McDonald, J. L. (1986). The development of sentence comprehension strategies in English
and Dutch. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 41, 317-335.

624

Nick C. Ellis and Nuria Sagarra

Meisel, J. (1987). Reference to past events and actions in the development of natural second language acquisition. In C. Pfaff (Ed.), First and second language acquisition (pp.
206-224). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Musumeci, D. (1989). The ability of second language learners to assign tense at the sentence
level: A crosslinguistic study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign.
Noyau, C., Klein, W., & Dietrich, R. (1995). Acquisition of temporality in a second language.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Odlin, T. (1989). Language transfer. New York: Cambridge University Press.
R Development Core Team (2008). R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in
the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current theory and research (pp. 64-99). New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Robinson, P., & Ellis, N. C. (Eds.). (2008). A handbook of cognitive linguistics and second
language acquisition. London: Routledge.
Sagarra, N. (2001, October). Attention allocation to morphological cues during L2 sentence
processing: Evidence from eye-movement. Paper presented at the Fourth Conference
on the Acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese as First and Second Languages, UrbanaChampaign, IL.
Sagarra, N., Ellis, N., & Gauthier, J. (2011, June). Processing verbal morphological agreement
in L1 and L2: Language experience, working memory and linguistic effects. Paper
presented at the Seventh International Morphological Processing Conference,
Donostia, Spain.
Schmidt, R. (1984). The strengths and limitations of acquisition: A case study of an untutored language learner. Language, Learning, and Communication, 3, 1-16.
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3-32). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime user's guide. Pittsburgh, PA:
Psychology Software Tools Inc.
Shanks, D. R. (1995). The psychology of associative learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of man: Social and rational. New York: Wiley.
Terrell, T. (1991). The role of grammar instruction in a communicative approach. Modern
Language Journal, 75, 52-63.
Thalheimer, W., & Cook, S. (2002). How to calculate effect sizes from published research: A
simplified methodology. Retrieved June 29, 2010, from http://work-learning.com/
effect_sizes.htm
VanPatten, B. (1996). Input processing and grammar instruction in second language acquisition. Westport, CT: Ablex.
VanPatten, B. (2006). Input processing. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in
second language acquisition: An introduction (pp. 115-136). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wills, A. J. (2005). New directions in human associative learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Xiao, R., & McEnery, T. (2004). Aspect in Mandarin Chinese. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Zobl, H., & Liceras, J. M. (1994). Functional categories and acquisition orders. Language
Learning, 44, 159-180.

