C Cambridge University Press 2011 doi:10.1017/S1366728910000222
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 14 (3), 2011, 332-350 

Spanish gender agreement
under complete and incomplete
acquisition: Early and late
bilinguals' linguistic behavior
within the noun phrase

I R M A V. A L A R C O N
Wake Forest University

(Received: August 13, 2009; final revision received: March 13, 2010; accepted: April 2, 2010; First published online 19 January 2011)

The present study explores knowledge of Spanish grammatical gender in both comprehension and production by heritage
language speakers and second language (L2) learners, with native Spanish speakers as a baseline. Most L2 research has
tended to interpret morphosyntactic variability in interlanguage production, such as errors in gender agreement, as a lack of
native-like representation in the learner's grammar because of maturational constraints. From this perspective, adult
English-speaking learners of Spanish are incapable of acquiring gender fully, whereas heritage Spanish speakers, who have
been exposed to the language from birth, can attain complete gender acquisition. However, results of two tasks, one
measuring written comprehension and the other oral production, show that advanced proficiency L2 learners, as well as
advanced proficiency heritage speakers, have gender in their underlying grammars, and that the errors in oral production
that L2 learners occasionally produce are due to difficulties in the surface manifestations of the abstract features of gender,
i.e., the "mapping problem" (Lardiere, 2007).
Keywords: bilingualism, gender agreement, heritage Spanish speakers, second language acquisition

Leading researchers, most notably Valdes (2005, 2006),
argue that few connections have been made between
research on heritage language and second language
(L2) acquisition. But since heritage speakers, or early
bilinguals (see Valdes, 2000), have become a rapidly
growing presence in the United States, Ortega's (2005)
emphasis on real world needs suggests that we take a closer
look at the language development and (re)acquisition of
these language users, and at their potential contributions
to our understanding of L2 acquisition processes. Since
heritage language research is in its nascent stages,
systematic study of a particular grammatical feature,
such as gender, is undoubtedly a contribution to a
field in which almost everything is "uncharted territory"
(Polinsky, 2008, p. 41). Furthermore, grammatical gender
is an interesting linguistic category for analysis because
it provides a window on both lexical access and
syntactic processing (Carroll, 1989; Corbett, 1991).
For proficient speakers of a language, "grammatical
gender has become knowledge that is stored as part
of each noun's grammatical description in the mental
lexicon" (Schriefers & Jescheniak, 1999, p. 577). This
* The author would like to thank the editor Carmen Silva-Corvalan as
well as the anonymous reviewers for their many helpful suggestions,
which greatly improved the article.

knowledge allows native speakers to produce correct
gender agreements, suggesting gender is an example
of rule-governed behavior (Tucker, Lambert & Rigault,
1977). However, for English-speaking learners, whose
system lacks grammatical gender, mastery of gender
is one of the most frustrating and difficult aspects of
acquiring Spanish as an L2. Thus, heritage learners,
who have acquired Spanish in early childhood at home,
might provide a link between native speaker competence
and adult L2 learners, or late bilinguals, who have
learned Spanish after puberty in a formal classroom
setting.
A relevant issue in L2 acquisition research is whether
adult L2 learners are able to fully develop an implicit
grammar of the target language, particularly of L2
grammatical features that are absent in their native
(L1) language. In the present context, the interesting
question is whether L2 learners are able to acquire
competence of Spanish grammatical gender qualitatively
and quantitatively comparable to that of native speakers.
To address this question, the initial approach is to compare
L2 with L1 Spanish acquisition. For native Spanish
speakers gender agreement is acquired easily and early
in life (e.g., Hernandez-Pina, 1984; Lopez-Ornat, 1997).
In contrast, adult L2 learners exhibit persistent problems
with gender (e.g., Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Finnemann,
1992), and their acquisition appears to be incomplete.

Address for correspondence:
Wake Forest University, Department of Romance Languages, P.O. Box 7566, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, USA
alarcoi@wfu.edu

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
Moreover, the emerging research on heritage languages
shows that heritage speakers also display interrupted or
incomplete knowledge of gender (e.g., Montrul, Foote
& Perpinan, 2008, for Spanish, and Polinsky, 2008, for
Russian heritage speakers). This raises the questions
of how to account for the divergence between heritage
and native speaker gender acquisition, and whether this
divergence extends to heritage and L2 learners of various
proficiency levels.
From a theoretical perspective, there are two radically
different proposals accounting for morphosyntactic
variability in developing grammars. First are claims,
such as the Fundamental Difference Hypothesis (BleyVroman, 1989) and the Failed Functional Features
Hypothesis (Hawkins & Chan, 1997), that L1 and L2
are fundamentally different. The implication is that only
L1 learners have access to Universal Grammar (UG), and
thus only they are capable of fully acquiring grammatical
features, such as gender. Adult L2 learners, who are
past the critical period and therefore no longer have
access to UG, cannot acquire grammatical features that
are not present in their L1. From this perspective,
variability, which involves "an alternation between correct
and incorrect morphology" (McCarthy, 2008, p. 462),
i.e., the failure to achieve native-like proficiency is
explained in terms of a deficit in grammatical competence
or representation, which reflects either a developmental
problem (e.g., Vainikka & Young-Scholten, 1994, 1996)
or some type of permanent impairment (e.g., Clahsen,
1988; Meisel, 1991). Since age of acquisition is a
factor under these representational deficits accounts,
heritage Spanish speakers, who have acquired Spanish
gender in early childhood, should be able to perform
with native-like competence, and thus be more accurate
than L2 learners in both comprehension and production
tasks.
Alternatively, claims such as the Full Transfer /Full
Access Hypothesis (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1994, 1996)
and the Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis (Prevost &
White, 2000) hypothesize similarities between L1 and L2
acquisitions, including equal access to UG for both L1 and
L2 learners. Within this view, adult L2 learners are capable
of fully acquiring grammatical features absent in their
L1, including gender. In terms of mental representation,
gender is considered acquired despite occasional errors
in the surface realization of its abstract features. This
position implies that such errors among advanced L2
learners are better explained by a breakdown in the
morphosyntactic computation of gender rather than a
deficit in its underlying representation (Hawkins, 2000).
They are errors of performance rather than competence,
and stem from difficulties in accessing the abstract
features of gender from the lexicon and in mapping those
features onto their surface forms (see Lardiere, 2007, for a
full discussion). Evidence supporting the Missing Surface

333

Inflection Hypothesis comes from comprehension and
production data in which both intermediate and advanced
L2 learners, with L1s both with (French) and without
(English) grammatical gender, behaved similarly to native
Spanish speakers (e.g., White, Valenzuela, KozlowskaMacgregor & Leung, 2004). Such results indicate no
effects for L1. Since these findings suggest that age of
acquisition is irrelevant for acquiring gender features
not instantiated in a learner's native language, under full
access accounts there should be no difference between
heritage Spanish speakers and L2 learners with respect
to their implicit knowledge of gender as reflected by
comprehension tasks.
In the only published study thoroughly comparing
these two groups, Montrul et al. (2008) found that
incompleteness of gender acquisition was not unique to
adult L2 learners, but also characterized heritage speakers.
Their results also indicated selective advantages for each
group depending on task and modality: L2 learners
were better in written comprehension, while heritage
speakers performed better in oral production. Although
matched in overall language proficiency, Montrul et al.
compared L2 learners of various proficiency levels
with exclusively lower-proficiency heritage speakers (i.e.,
exposed to English before age 5). This leaves open the
question of whether heritage speakers and L2 learners
matched at a higher-proficiency level would also display
incomplete acquisition of gender, and, if so, whether
they would display similar patterns of errors. More
important, if advanced proficiency heritage speakers, who
were exposed to English after age 5, display completely
native-like gender behavior both in comprehension
and production, while advanced L2 learners do not,
one could argue that maturational constraints play
a role in the underlying representation of gender.
But if L2 learners display greater gender proficiency
in comprehension than in production, then their
production errors would be more plausibly attributable
to computational difficulties than to a representational
deficit. In this case, age of acquisition would play a role
only in the syntactic mapping (computation) of gender
morphology.
The present study addresses these issues by replicating
two of Montrul et al.'s (2008) tasks. The goal is to
verify whether their asymmetrical findings hold for
more advanced proficiency-matched heritage speakers,
with early and naturalistic exposure to Spanish, and L2
learners, whose first exposure was in the post-critical
period and in a formal classroom setting. As predicted
by the Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis, results
reveal that both heritage and L2 learners have acquired
gender in their underlying grammars, since there is no
significant difference between the two groups in written
gender comprehension. Nonetheless, results also indicate
that even advanced L2 learners have difficulties with the

334

Irma V. Alarcon

syntactic manifestations of gender in oral production.
Contrary to Montrul et al.'s results, the present study found
no advantage for L2 learners in the written comprehension
task, since both groups performed at ceiling, but agreed
with Montrul et al. that heritage speakers had an advantage
over L2 learners in an oral production task. These findings
support the Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis as
a full access account of L2 morphosyntax acquisition,
in which abstract knowledge of gender exists despite
impaired performance. The present results also provide
evidence that age of acquisition is fundamental in
predicting gender computation difficulties because the
advanced L2 learners, but not the advanced heritage
speakers, displayed errors in spontaneous oral production.
Furthermore, the difference between the heritage speakers
in Montrul et al.'s and in the present study, who
were successful even on the written task, highlights
the link not only between age of first exposure to the
heritage language, but also the connection between age
of L2 acquisition (English) and (in)complete L1(Spanish)
acquisition.
Spanish grammatical gender
Spanish has a binary gender system (see Gomez, 1998;
Lloret & Viaplana, 1998; and Alarcos, 1999, for detailed
discussions of Spanish gender), in which one of two
genders, masculine or feminine, is assigned to all nouns.
Animate nouns are those in which gender is assigned in
accordance with biological sex, and thus is semantically
motivated, and inanimate nouns are those whose gender is
assigned in a purely grammatical, semantically arbitrary
fashion (see Corbett, 1991, for a full discussion).
As opposed to animate nouns, gender assignment to
inanimate nouns is a puzzle, since "there is no correlation
with either meaning or [the] phonological shape of the
stem" (Harris, 1991, p. 36). Gender acquisition with
inanimate nouns occurs later than with animate nouns,
and both L1 and L2 learners tend to be less accurate
with them (e.g., Andersen, 1984; Fernandez-Garcia, 1999;
Hernandez-Pina, 1984). Therefore, the current study
focuses exclusively on gender agreement with inanimate
nouns.
In Spanish, noun gender and morphological marking
appear to co-occur in a systematic and predictable
way (Green, 1988): the noun endings -o and -a are
strongly correlated with masculine and feminine gender,
respectively. According to the Dicccionario de la Lengua
Espanola de la Real Academia, 99.8% of nouns ending
in -o are masculine and 96.3% of nouns ending in -a
are feminine (Teschner & Russell, 1984). Such nouns
thus have morphologically marked gender, and are called
overt gender nouns. All other nouns are referred to as
non-overt gender nouns, for which gender is displayed
by the agreeing elements in the noun phrase, as in,

for example, la pared blanca "the( FEM ) white( FEM )
wall( FEM )".
The acquisition of grammatical gender, in Spanish or
any other language with gender, involves acquiring gender
both at the lexical level, by learning the meaning of the
noun with its inherent gender feature (gender assignment),
and at the syntactic level, by being able to establish correct
agreements between the noun and the other elements in
the phrase or sentence (gender agreement). As Carroll
(1989) contended, gender assignment is "a permanent
characteristic of nouns independent of the context of
occurrence, whereas gender agreement involves a variable
characteristic of modifiers, and their gender specification
depends entirely on their occurring with a nominal
element elsewhere in a sentence" (p. 546). Learners
of Spanish thus need to acquire the nominal feature
of gender in their implicit knowledge systems before
being able to make valid form-function mappings in
the language. Therefore, if gender knowledge is part of
the learners' underlying representation, then agreement
errors in production must involve difficulties in mapping
the abstract gender features to the appropriate surface
manifestations. These mapping errors are syntactic,
not lexical, in nature, since they involve variable
forms, such as determiners and modifiers, which take
their gender from the nominal element. Nouns, the
genders of which are considered inherent and invariable,
determine the gender of the accompanying elements in
the noun phrase or sentence (Comrie, 1999; Corbett,
1991).
Investigating both lexical and syntactic gender
acquisition requires a practical method for distinguishing
the two (see Montrul et al., 2008, for such a method),
since gender concord in the noun phrase or sentence might
reflect both lexical and syntactic gender. For example,
the phrase la torre inclinada "the( FEM ) leaning( FEM )
tower( FEM )" displays both correct feminine assignment
and agreement, as indicated by the corresponding
correct feminine article and adjective. There is no
way to distinguish assignment from agreement here.
Now consider the phrases  una lapiz amarillo "a( FEM )
yellow( MASC ) pencil( MASC )" and  un lapiz amarilla
"a( MASC ) yellow( FEM ) pencil( MASC )". These errors of
gender concord between the noun and either the article or
the adjective, respectively, strongly indicate a syntactic
breakdown, an agreement rather than an assignment
error, because in both cases at least one of the items
correctly classified the noun as masculine. But if both
the article and the adjective were incorrect, as in  una
lapiz amarilla "a( FEM ) yellow( FEM ) pencil( MASC )", then
a lexical assignment error is indicated, since the noun has
been incorrectly classified as feminine. Learning Spanish
as either an L1 or L2 entails acquiring both the lexical
and the syntactic properties of gender as specified in the
lexicon.

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
L1 and L2 acquisitions of Spanish gender
Studies in L1 acquisition reveal that gender is acquired by
age 3-4 (among numerous examples, see Hernandez-Pina,
1984; Lopez-Ornat, 1997; Mariscal, 2009; Perez-Pereira,
1991, for Spanish; Carroll, 1989, for French; Maratsos,
1988, for Polish, German, and Russian; and Comrie, 1999,
for Isangu, a Bantu language). However, research in L2
Spanish acquisition indicates that gender is problematic
and is acquired relatively late in the learning process. Even
advanced L2 learners display persistent errors with gender
agreement, primarily in their spontaneous oral production
(e.g., Montrul et al., 2008). This is also true for L2 gender
acquisition in other languages, including French (Dewaele
& Veronique, 2001), Italian (Oliphant, 1998), German
(Rogers, 1987), and Russian (Taraban & Kempe, 1999).
Some L2 research, though, suggests that gender does
not involve a learnability problem (see Gass & Selinker,
2008, for a detailed discussion), but rather a mapping
problem (Lardiere, 2007), since even beginning learners
of Spanish have acquired the concept of gender in their
developing systems, as shown by their high accuracy rates,
but display difficulties with its syntactic manifestations
(e.g., Alarcon, 2006; Bruhn de Garavito & White, 2002).
Other studies suggest a critical role for the learner's L1 in
the L2 acquisition of gender, with native-like attainment
influenced by the status of gender features in the L1 (e.g.,
Franceschina, 2005; Sabourin, Stowe & de Haan, 2006).
Regarding the linguistic variables in the present study,
previous findings on the L2 acquisition of Spanish
grammatical gender show that learners operate with a
default gender value, which can be either masculine
or feminine, and over-generalize the masculine forms
of determiners and modifiers, but do show evidence
for incremental development as exposure/level increases
(e.g., Shlig, 2003; White et al., 2004). Agreement between
articles and nouns occurs earlier than agreement between
adjectives and nouns, and some studies have found that
L2 learners are significantly less accurate in gender
agreement with adjectives than with determiners (e.g.,
Bruhn de Garavito & White, 2002). Furthermore, animate
nouns, such as tia "aunt", are acquired earlier, and
learners show higher rates of accuracy with animate than
with inanimate nouns, such as cuchara "spoon" (e.g.,
Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Finnemann, 1992). Concerning
morphology, overtly marked nouns, such as libro "book",
are acquired earlier, and learners display higher accuracy
with them than with non-overtly marked nouns, such as
flor "flower" (e.g., Franceschina, 2001). Most of this
research, though, falls within a traditional framework,
employing data collected through oral interviews of
learners at only one proficiency level, and relying on error
analysis techniques for assessing acquisition.
Current psycholinguistic research on L2 Spanish
gender indicates that learners are sensitive to a variety
of linguistic variables when assessing gender agreement

335

correctness in online comprehension tasks (e.g., Alarcon,
2006, 2009; Keating, 2009; Sagarra, 2007; Tokowicz
& MacWhinney, 2005). Most of these studies either
measure real time processing, including eye tracking,
moving window, and event related potentials, or use
highly constrained instruments to measure accuracy and
reaction times. This research focuses exclusively on the
linguistic behavior of L2 learners. To date, however, there
are relatively few studies exploring gender agreement
behavior between heritage speakers and L2 learners,
and the little research that does exist focuses on lowerproficiency heritage learners (e.g. Montrul et al., 2008;
Montrul & Potowski, 2007).
The present study compares the performances of
advanced proficiency-matched heritage language learners
and L2 learners of Spanish, with native Spanish speakers
as a baseline, on comprehension and production tasks.
Linguistic similarities and differences between advanced
heritage and L2 learners have not been thoroughly
explored, and the connections between heritage and L2
research have not been consolidated. This study tries
to establish some of those connections by investigating
one grammatical feature, gender, which is a persistent
source of errors for adult L2 learners. Not only is the
explanation for these errors debated in L2 acquisition
research (see above), emerging studies of heritage learners
suggest that gender is also a difficult grammatical
feature for lower-proficiency heritage speakers (Montrul
et al., 2008). Therefore, a primary orientation of the
present study is to investigate whether proficiencymatched advanced heritage and L2 learners acquire the
Spanish gender system in similar ways. Among the many
relevant questions to address are: What kinds of errors
are associated with each type of learner? How similar
or different are L2 and heritage learners' grammatical
gender behaviors in written comprehension and oral
production? Does variability of gender agreement extend
to both comprehension and production? Is the behavior of
advanced heritage learners more similar to that of native
speakers or to advanced L2 learners'? Is age of acquisition
of fundamental importance in gender acquisition for both
heritage and L2 learners? These questions, and others, are
important for research in both grammatical gender and L2
acquisition. The present study attempts to address most of
them by focusing on gender agreement within the noun
phrase, and by examining linguistic behavior assessed
by different tasks (comprehension and production) and
different modalities (oral and written).

Method
Research questions
The specific research questions guiding the present study
are:

336

Irma V. Alarcon

1. Regarding both written comprehension and oral
production, are advanced heritage learners more
accurate than advanced L2 learners with gender
agreement in the noun phrase?

because the distribution of gender patterns, including
gender errors, would be systematic rather than random.

2. What gender patterns do heritage and L2 learners
display with respect to agreement domain (article
or adjective), noun morphology (overt or non-overt
ending), and noun gender (masculine or feminine)?

All participants (n = 53) completed an extensive language
background questionnaire and took lexical and grammar
tests (described below) in addition to completing the two
required tasks. They were compensated monetarily for
their participation in the study.
The L2 learners (7 males, 11 females) were all
raised as English monolinguals, implying that they spoke
exclusively English at home, learned how to read first in
English, and had their primary and secondary education
entirely in English. Most of them (78%) started to learn
Spanish formally around puberty (middle/high school),
and had been studying Spanish for over seven years. All
but one were Spanish majors and had studied Spanish
abroad. At the time of the data collection, all but one were
enrolled in advanced Spanish courses at their university.
Their average age was 21.2 (range: 20-24 years). In
general, these L2 learners reported feeling comfortable
with their Spanish language skills: 94% with speaking
and reading in Spanish, 89% with listening to Spanish, and
83% with writing. Their self-ratings were slightly lower:
89% self-assessed their reading skills as advanced, 83%
did the same with listening, and 78% with their speaking
and writing abilities.
The heritage language learners (8 males, 10 females;
mean age: 20.3, range: 18-27 years) participating in
the study were all students at the same university that
the L2 learners attended. This common educational
background reduced the heterogeneity characteristic of
heritage learners (see Valdes, 1997, and elsewhere)
by creating a proficiency-matched group of heritage
individuals. For most of them (78%), both parents were
native Spanish speakers who represented a wide variety
of national origins, including Chile, Colombia, Cuba,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru,
and the Dominican Republic. 61% of the heritage learners
were born in the U.S., and the rest were pre-pubescent
when they first came to live in the U.S. (range of ageof-arrival: 3-10 years), but are still considered bilinguals
(see Valdes, 2001, for a discussion of heritage speakers'
profiles). All spoke Spanish at home, particularly with
parents, and were exposed exclusively to Spanish until
age 5. They started learning English after their pre-school
years, but before puberty, and their formal schooling
was in English. When speaking with their siblings, they
reported using either Spanish (11%) or English (50%),
or both (39%); and the language they most frequently
used on a daily basis was English (89%). Since they had
been exposed to Spanish throughout their lives, 100% of
them indicated feeling comfortable when listening and
reading in Spanish, and 94% of them indicated the same
when speaking and writing. Furthermore, all of them

Before addressing the predictions for the research
questions, consider the difference in the population in
Montrul et al.'s (2008) and in the present study. In terms
of proficiency test results, both the L2 and the heritage
learner groups in Montrul et al.'s study displayed similar
means, SDs, and ranges: 70.1, 9.24 and 32-100; and 73.7,
8.17 and 30-96, respectively. The corresponding figures
for the native speakers were 97, 1 and 90-100. Although
these experimental groups were proficiency-matched, as
indicated by their similar means, both groups contained
subjects of widely varying proficiency levels. This is not
true of the present study, for which the ranges of the L2
and heritage speaker groups on a proficiency test were
75-92 and 80-97, respectively, and the means were closer
to the native speaker baseline (86.4 and 89.9, respectively,
compared with 97.7). Moreover, Montrul et al.'s heritage
speakers rated their own Spanish abilities with a mean of
78% (M = 3.9 out of 5) whereas the present study heritage
speakers self-rated their Spanish skills with a mean of 90%
(M = 3.6 out of 4). Furthermore, only 48% of Montrul
et al.'s heritage speakers felt they knew Spanish as a native
language, as opposed to 97% of the heritage speakers in
the present study.
Based on Montrul et al.'s (2008) findings, which
focused on L2 and heritage learners proficiency-matched
at a lower level, on average, with respect to their
native speaker baseline than those of the present study,
the predictions for the first research question suggest
an asymmetrical pattern of acquisition: advantages in
comprehension for the L2 learners and in production
for the heritage speakers. This result would suggest that
gender is problematic even at the advanced proficiency
level, and that both groups display incomplete gender
acquisition. Regarding the second research question,
based on previous findings of studies investigating the
effects of these variables on accuracy, including L1
(e.g., Hernandez-Pina, 1984; Lopez-Ornat, 1997), L2
(e.g., Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Franceschina, 2001), and
heritage learners (Montrul et al., 2008), both groups
are expected to be more accurate on gender agreement
with articles than with adjectives, with overt than with
non-overt ending nouns, and with masculine than with
feminine gender. If these patterns were consistent across
comprehension and production tasks for both groups, this
would offer strong evidence that gender is represented
in the implicit systems of both heritage and L2 learners

Participants

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
rated their Spanish listening and reading abilities as either
native or advanced, 94% gave that rating to their Spanish
speaking skills, and 83% evaluated their writing as native
or advanced. Although their overall Spanish skills could
be considered native-like, and 83% identified themselves
as Latino/Hispanic, only 44% of the heritage learners
were either majoring or minoring in Spanish. Of the rest,
half had taken at least one university course in Spanish.
Consequently, 72% of the heritage speakers had been
exposed to formal Spanish at the college level.
The native Spanish speakers (5 males, 12 females)
were included in the study to serve as a baseline
for comparisons. They came from a variety of
national backgrounds (Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Spain, Honduras, and Mexico, and were recruited from
the same university as the other participants: eight
were language instructors and the rest were from
the university community (instructors' friends and/or
relatives). Although they currently live in the U.S., and
had a mean length of residence of 13.1 years (range: 2-
27 years), they all arrived as adults, and had received
their K-12 schooling entirely in Spanish. Their average
age was 42.5 (range: 18-63 years). Due to the diverse
backgrounds of the native speakers, the tasks avoided
using vocabulary restricted to a specific Spanish variety.
The native speakers completed the same instruments
administered to the learners, and were tested under the
same conditions.
Procedure
To investigate the research questions and predictions,
the study consisted of two tasks: a Written Gender
Recognition Task, and an Oral Picture Description Task,
both modeled after Montrul et al. (2008).1 Each task
was administered in a separate testing session. Overall,
the study involved a total of three sessions: in the
first, a language background questionnaire, and a lexical
test were administered; the second included a grammar
proficiency test and Task 1; and Task 2 was given in the
third session.
Lexical test
To verify knowledge of the meanings of the words
included in the experiment, a lexical test was
administered. It contained a list of the 112 Spanish
nouns that were included in either of the two tasks, and
participants were asked to provide the English equivalent
or an English explanation of the meaning of each Spanish
1

Ideally, as one reviewer advised, both tasks would have been presented
in the same modality, preferably oral, to avoid methodological issues.
The comprehension-written and production-oral combinations were
maintained in the present study solely for replication purposes.

337

word. Although the native speakers also took the test,
their results are not relevant for this study. The heritage
speakers had a mean of 99.0% (SD = 1.26, range: 95-
100), and the L2 learners obtained a mean of 97.1% (SD =
2.02, range: 93-100). These means were compared using
an independent samples t-test, which showed that the
two groups were only marginally different from each
other (t(34) = 3.459, p = .051). So both experimental
groups were highly familiar with the task words, which
themselves are among the most frequently used words in
Spanish (Davies, 2006).
Grammar proficiency
According to Montrul et al. (2008, pp. 519-520), "if we
want to compare L2 learners and heritage speakers, we
need to have a basic measure to equalize the groups at
the outset and see how that measure correlates or not
with other aspects of the groups' linguistic performance".
Thus, in order to control the influence of grammatical
proficiency on the accuracy of gender agreement, all
participants, including native Spanish speakers, took a
grammar test. The same test had been used in a previous
study with L2 learners (Alarcon, 2006), but was refined
and expanded for the present population. It consisted of 60
multiple-choice questions presented in brief, meaningful,
and familiar contexts, including the copula ser/estar "to
be", demonstratives, object pronouns, and prepositions.
The native speakers had a mean of 97.7% (SD = 2.02,
range: 93-100), heritage learners obtained a mean of
89.9% (SD = 6.18, range: 80-97), and L2 learners 86.4%
(SD = 4.49, range: 75-92). Heritage and L2 learners'
scores were compared with an independent samples ttest, which indicated that the two groups did not differ
significantly from each other (t(34) = 1.944, p = .060).
Thus these two groups could be regarded as advanced
proficiency-matched.
Task 1: Written Gender Recognition
The goal of this task was to assess correct identification of
the masculine or feminine form of articles and adjectives
within the noun phrase based on the ending of the
noun. The first research question (first part) is addressed:
Are heritage learners more accurate than L2 learners
on written comprehension of gender agreement? Also
considered is the following question stemming from the
second research question: Are participants more accurate
with masculine than with feminine nouns; with overt
than with non-overt nouns; and with articles than with
adjectives? The task followed closely that of Montrul
et al. (2008), but with some significant modifications.
Montrul et al. mixed together attributive and predicative
adjectives, which could have affected their results, so
the present study included only attributive adjectives. In

338

Irma V. Alarcon

addition, the present task had a larger number of tokens
per experimental condition.
Task and materials
The task was a Written Gender Recognition Task
consisting of a short story (Ultimo Acto, by Pablo de la
Torriente Brau) adapted for the task by the researcher.
Adapting the story involved (i) replacing non-familiar
with highly frequent nouns and (ii) shortening long
sentences and paragraphs. The story displayed 48 gaps
in the article and adjective positions. Example (1) below
shows an excerpt from the text. (The entire text is in the
Appendix.) The nouns that were manipulated in the task
were the most frequent nouns from a frequency dictionary
of Spanish (Davies, 2006). Only inanimate nouns and only
adjectives in attributive position ending in -o/-a were used.
To test the agreement domain (article or adjective), there
were 24 article gaps and 24 adjective gaps. To assess
the effect of gender, half the nouns were masculine and
half feminine. Finally, to test the effect of noun ending
on gender recognition, half the nouns in each gender
group were overtly marked and half non-overtly marked
for gender.2
(1)
Ultimo Acto
En (1) un/una [ ] sector del jardin, en (2) el/la [ ]
lugar donde se elevaba (3) el/la [ ] arbol de la palma,
el hombre esperaba. La noche (4) profundo/profunda
[ ] lo envolvia todo. Solo se escuchaba el ruido (5)
monotono/monotona [ ] del silencio (6) lejano/lejana
[ ].
"In a section of the yard, where the palm tree stood, the
man waited. The black night wrapped everything. Only the
monotonous sound of the distant silence could be heard."
Procedure
The task was presented on a computer screen using the
program Blackboard. Participants were asked to select
the correct gender form of the article or adjective from
two given options (one masculine and one feminine),
and were instructed to enter their response by typing
the corresponding article and adjective. The program
was not sensitive to accent marks or capital letters.
The task was graded automatically by the software, but
was checked manually by the researcher, and by an
2

One reviewer pointed out that some contexts in this task
provide a gender cue through a determiner (article, possessive, or
demonstrative) or an overtly marked adjective, which might have
affected the results. This is a valid criticism: neither Montrul et al.
nor the present study (in which 16/48 of the written contexts
contained a gender cue: 2/24 for determiners and 14/24 for adjectives)
controlled for this effect. Further research manipulating those contexts
is required.

Figure 1. Correlations between accuracy on grammar
proficiency and the Written Gender Recognition Task:
Heritage language learners.

independent rater. The task was untimed, but took 10-
15 minutes to complete.
Results
For the 48 nouns on this task, correct responses received
a 1, and incorrect responses a 0. The average percentage
accuracy score for the native speakers was 99.6% (SD =
0.83, range: 97.9-100), which confirmed that gender
agreement is not a problem for native speakers of Spanish
(cf. Montrul et al., 2008). The heritage learners obtained
an overall score of 98.0% (SD = 3.55, range: 89.6-100),
and the L2 learners 96.9% (SD = 2.62, range: 91.6-100).
Independent samples t-tests showed that the heritage and
L2 groups did not differ significantly from each other
in written gender recognition behavior (t(33) = 1.032,
p = .310). The scatter plots in Figures 1 and 2 show
the distribution of the individual participants in these
two groups, and the correlation between the grammar
proficiency scores and the overall scores on the task,
respectively. One-tailed Pearson correlations between the
grammar and task scores were significant for the heritage
group (r = .650, p = .002), but not for the L2 learners (r =
.291, p = .121).
To investigate accuracy rates and variability in
performance, the task results were analyzed in a mixed
ANOVA with group (L2 learners, heritage language
learners, and native speakers) as the between-subjects
factor, and the linguistic variables as the within-subjects
factors (gender (masculine vs. feminine), agreement
domain (article vs. adjective), and morphology (overt
vs. non-overt)). Results showed a main effect of noun
ending on accuracy of gender agreement (F(1,33) =
16.366, p = .000), indicating that overall agreement
accuracy was significantly higher with overt than with

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals

339

Table 1. Written Gender Recognition Task: Masculine
conditions (means and standard deviations).
Article
Overt

Adjective

Non-overt

Overt

Non-overt

Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

HLL
L2L

100
100

-
-

100
97.2

-
6.5

98.1
100

8.0
-

97.1
93.4

12.1
10.2

HLL = heritage language learners; L2L = L2 learners

Table 2. Written Gender Recognition Task: Feminine
conditions (means and standard deviations).
Article

Figure 2. Correlations between accuracy on grammar
proficiency and the Written Gender Recognition Task: L2
learners.

non-overt morphology. No other main effects were found,
indicating that the gender of a noun, and whether the
agreement is with an article or an adjective, had no
significant effect on overall group performance on written
gender comprehension. The average accuracy scores
were high, suggesting that the experimental task was
insufficiently demanding to produce a main effect of
advanced proficiency group differences on accuracy rates
(compare accuracy rates in Montrul et al., 2008, in which
L2 learners performed better than lower-proficiency
heritage speakers on a similar task). Consequently, even
though both the heritage and the L2 groups were more
proficient with overt than with non-overt nouns, with
masculine rather than with feminine nouns, and with
articles rather than with adjectives (although for the L2
group the domain distinction was extremely small), most
of these differences were statistically insignificant. The
native speakers performed at ceiling with all the binary
linguistic variables, so their results are not reported, in
order to focus instead on the experimental groups.
There was a significant two-way interaction between
noun ending and group (F(1,33) = 7.544, p = .010). For
heritage speakers, accuracy scores with overt and nonovert nouns were 98.6% and 97.6%, respectively, while
for L2 learners the analogous accuracy scores were 99.5%
and 94.4%. Moreover, a significant three-way interaction
was found between gender, agreement domain, and noun
ending (F(1,33) = 5.427, p = .026). Tables 1 and 2 show
detailed results for the masculine and feminine conditions,
respectively.
Summarizing the results of Task 1, although heritage
learners displayed slightly higher accuracy scores than
the L2 learners on the Written Gender Recognition
Task, the difference was not significant. The two groups
displayed largely similar patterns of gender agreement:

Overt

Adjective

Non-overt

Overt

Non-overt

Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

HLL
L2L

100
98.1

-
5.5

95.1
92.6

9.8
11.7

96.1
100

9.4
-

98.1
94.3

8.0
8.2

HLL = heritage language learners; L2L = L2 learners

slightly more accurate with masculine than with feminine,
and with overtly than with non-overtly marked nouns.
In agreement domain, though, heritage learners were
slightly more accurate with articles than with adjectives,
while L2 learners were equally accurate with both.
Nonetheless, the difference between the accuracy scores
of the two groups on the Written Gender Recognition
Task was statistically insignificant. Despite the differences
in maturational constraints and acquisition contexts,
both groups displayed similar underlying knowledge of
Spanish gender.
Task 2: Oral Picture Description
The goal of this task was to test the oral production
of gender agreement in noun phrases. This addresses
the other half of the first research question: Are
heritage speakers more accurate than L2 learners
in oral production? Also addressed is the following
question stemming from the second research question:
Are speakers more accurate with masculine than with
feminine gender, with overt than with non-overt ending
nouns, and with articles rather than with adjectives? To
investigate these questions, an Oral Picture Description
Task, modeled on Montrul et al. (2008), was used.
The experimental conditions were modified substantially,
however. For example, the present study does not
include nouns with exceptional endings, such as
mano "hand( FEM )", or animate nouns, such as oveja

340

Irma V. Alarcon

"sheep( FEM )". Nouns showing dialectal variation, such as
radio "radio", which can take either the masculine or the
feminine article depending on the variety of Spanish, were
also excluded. Instead, for a more precise comparison, the
present task focused on the same experimental conditions
as Task 1 (the nouns were not identical, but belonged to
the same noun categories). In addition, more tokens were
analyzed than in the Montrul et al. study.
Task and materials
For the Oral Picture Description Task, participants were
asked to describe, using the structure [Veo un/una "I see a"
+ noun + adjective], what they saw in a series of pictures
presented one by one on a computer screen.3 The stimuli
consisted of 80 photographs of objects and places: the first
16 were practice to become familiar with the procedure,
and the remaining 64 were target items. Of these target
nouns, half were masculine and half feminine. Within
each gender, half the nouns had overt and half non-overt
endings. Within each of the four resulting subcategories,
half the nouns were examined for article agreement and
half for adjective agreement. As with Task 1, all the
nouns included in this task were taken from Davies'
(2006) frequency dictionary of Spanish. Each picture was
accompanied by the target noun written on top of the
photograph to avoid dialectal differences between Spanish
varieties with which participants might have been familiar
(such as habitacion vs. pieza for "bedroom"), as well as
to ensure that participants produced the specific target
noun and not another (such as carcel instead of prision
for "prison").
Procedure
Participants were instructed to describe what they saw
in each slide by using the sentence Veo un/una "I
see a" + noun + adjective. For example, Veo un
volcan nevado/majestuoso/hermoso "I see a( MASC ) snowcovered/majestic/beautiful( MASC ) volcano( MASC )". Participants were indirectly encouraged to produce
exclusively adjectives with overt endings. Whenever they
produced an unwanted response (including an adjective
with a non-overt ending or a prepositional phrase),
they were prompted with either: Que mas me puedes
decir? "What else can you tell me?" or Dame otra
caracteristica del objeto que ves "Give me another
characteristic of the object you see". Participants were
tested individually, and their responses were audio-taped,
but not timed, which replicated the conditions of Montrul
et al. (2008). Including the practice trials, the task took
3

A sample picture is available online, on the Journal's website, as
Supplementary Materials accompanying the present article (see the
online version of the present article at journals.cambridge.org/bil).

Figure 3. Correlation between grammar proficiency and
accuracy on the Oral Picture Description Task: Heritage
language learners.

most participants 15-20 minutes. All responses, which
were fast, brief, and spontaneous, were evaluated in real
time by the researcher using a prepared written answer
key, and later checked by an independent rater.

Results
Correct agreement responses received 1 point, incorrect
answers were assigned a 0. All native speakers scored
100%, indicating clearly that this task was extremely easy
for them. The heritage learners scored 97.1% (SD = 5.1,
range: 79.1-100), and the L2 learners 85.6% (SD = 5.2,
range: 72.0-94.5). An independent samples t-test indicated that the difference in means between the two groups
was statistically significant (t(33) = 6.621, p = .000).
The scatter plots in Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the
individual distribution of heritage and L2 learners by
grammar proficiency and accuracy in the Oral Picture
Description Task, respectively. Positive correlations
between grammar scores and overall task accuracy were
significant for both the heritage (r = .563, p = .009)
and the L2 (r = .526, p = .013) learners. The scatter
plots show also that substantially more heritage than L2
learners achieved 90% accuracy or higher.
As with Task 1, results of the Picture Description
Task were analyzed with a mixed ANOVA design, with
group (L2 learners, heritage language learners, and native
speakers) as the between-subjects factor, and the linguistic
variables (noun gender, noun morphology, and agreement
domain) as within-subjects factors. Tables 3 and 4 show
the accuracy scores on the masculine and feminine
conditions, respectively. Since the native speakers had
perfect scores, they are excluded from the present report
in order to focus on the two groups of learners.

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
Table 3. Oral Picture Description Task: Masculine
conditions (means and standard deviations).
Article
Overt

Adjective

Non-overt

Overt

Non-overt

Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

HLL
L2L

100
99.7

-
1.4

99.3
93.5

1.9
10.1

98.2
99.3

5.3
1.9

96.4
86.6

7.4
11.8

HLL = heritage language learners; L2L = L2 learners

Table 4. Oral Picture Description Task: Feminine
conditions (means and standard deviations).
Article
Overt
Group

M

SD

HLL
L2L

99.6 1.5
95.2 19.1

Adjective

Non-overt

Overt

M

SD

M

91.6
54.3

16.1 99.3
21.1 97.3

Non-overt

SD

M

SD

1.9
3.7

92.8 13.8
58.8 17.1

HLL = heritage language learners; L2L = L2 learners

341

respective accuracy scores with masculine and feminine
nouns were 98.5% and 95.8% for the heritage speakers,
but for L2 learners the gap was significantly wider, 94.8%
to 76.5%. Regarding the interaction between gender and
noun morphology, the difference in accuracy between
overt and non-overt nouns was greater for feminine than
for masculine nouns. In the gender vs. domain interaction,
performance with masculine nouns was significantly
higher with articles than with adjectives, but this was
not the case with feminine nouns. There was also a
significant interaction between group and noun ending
(F(1,33) = 68.767, p = .000). Heritage speakers were
more accurate with overt (99.3%) than non-overt (95.0%)
nouns, but, again, as with the group vs. gender interaction,
the analogous gap for the L2 group was wider (from
97.9% to 73.3%). Finally, gender and morphology were
also components in two significant three-way interactions,
with domain (F(1,33) = 5.271, p = .028), and with group
(F(1,33) = 14.065, p = .001).
Error analysis: Gender assignment and agreement
Because there were significant differences between heritage and L2 learners in their oral production, Task 2 errors
were examined in more detail. With the understanding
that gender acquisition involves both a lexical level
(assignment) and a syntactic level (agreement), errors
were categorized as pertaining to gender assignment if
both the article and the adjective were incorrect, or as
a gender agreement error if only one of the two were
incorrect. Examples of assignment errors produced by the
heritage and L2 learners in the study are shown in (2)-(3),
and examples of agreement errors in (4)-(5).
(2)  Veo una puente peligrosa
"I see a(FEM ) dangerous( FEM ) bridge(MASC )."


(3) Veo un catedral antiguo
"I see an(MASC ) antique( MASC ) cathedral( FEM )."


Figure 4. Correlation between grammar proficiency and
accuracy on the Oral Picture Description Task: L2 learners.

(4) Veo una pie blanco
"I see a( FEM ) white( MASC ) foot( MASC )."


(5) Veo un sillon comoda
Findings revealed main effects for group (F(1,33) =
43.832, p = .000), gender (F(1,33) = 27.332,
p = .000), and noun morphology (F(1,33) = 138.961,
p = .000). Overall accuracy on oral production, therefore,
was significantly higher for heritage than for L2 learners,
for masculine rather than feminine nouns, and with overt
rather than non-overt ending nouns.
Considering secondary effects, gender interacted
significantly with group (F(1,33) = 15.356, p =
.000), with morphology (F(1,33) = 31.534, p = .000),
and with agreement domain (F(1,33) = 6.556, p =
.015). Concerning the gender vs. group interaction, the

"I see a( MASC ) comfortable( FEM ) armchair( MASC )."
The ratio of the total number of errors to the total
number of opportunities (the number of noun phrases
produced by all the participants in Task 2) was 271/2,304.
Native speakers made no errors in their oral production, so
their results are not included in this analysis. The heritage
learners produced 62 (22.9%) of the errors, and the L2
learners produced the remaining 209 (77.1%). (Montrul
et al., 2008, found similar proportions.) 51.6% (32/62)
of the errors by the heritage learners were in assignment,
compared with 59.8% (125/209) for the L2 learners.

342

Irma V. Alarcon
Table 5. Oral production: Percentage of error types by noun gender and morphology.
Heritage language learners
Assignment

Agreement

L2 learners
Assignment

Agreement

Gender

Morphology

%

Count

%

Count

%

Count

%

Count

MASC

Overt
Non-overt
Overt
Non-overt

0
37.5
0
62.5

0/32
12/32
0/32
20/32

16.7
33.3
13.3
36.7

5/30
10/30
4/30
11/30

0
12.8
0
87.2

0/125
16/125
0/125
109/125

3.6
28.5
28.5
39.3

3/84
24/84
24/84
33/84

FEM

Both groups made more errors with feminine than
with masculine nouns, and of those errors with feminine
nouns, more were with assignment than with agreement.
Both of those results are consistent with the previous
findings, in both L1 and L2 Spanish grammatical gender
research, of a masculine default setting. In contrast,
errors with masculine nouns were mostly at the syntactic
level, i.e., in gender agreement with either the article
or the adjective, but not both. These patterns of gender
errors were observed in both the heritage and the L2
groups, and are consistent with Montrul et al.'s (2008)
findings.
The patterns of error distribution according to noun
morphology (overt or non-overt) were also similar for
both heritage and L2 learners: more errors were made
with non-overt than with overtly marked nouns. This is
also consistent with previous acquisition literature. In the
present study the percentage of errors associated with
non-overt nouns for the heritage and L2 groups were very
close (85.5% and 87.1%, respectively). In both groups,
100% of the assignment errors occurred with non-overt
nouns. When errors with overt nouns did occur, they were
exclusively agreement errors.
Table 5 offers a multivariate depiction of the patterns
of oral production errors by the heritage and L2
learners. This perspective, which includes all the variables
simultaneously, confirms the above results: both groups
were more accurate with masculine than with feminine
nouns, and with overtly rather than with non-overtly
marked nouns. Also, for both groups all assignment
errors were with non-overt nouns, and more of those
errors were with feminine rather than masculine nouns.
Moreover, agreement errors were also more frequent with
feminine non-overt nouns, suggesting that a masculine
default, which we have already seen at the lexical
level, also occurs at the syntactic level. Furthermore,
when errors with masculine nouns occur, they are more
likely agreement rather than assignment errors, and
exclusively with non-overt nouns. These findings accord
with Montrul et al.'s (2008) data of lower-proficiency
heritage learners. Contrary to their results, however,
both advanced heritage and L2 learners produced more
assignment than agreement errors.

Results also showed patterns of errors specific to each
group. For example, with masculine non-overt nouns,
heritage learners made more assignment errors, whereas
L2 learners made more agreement errors. In agreement,
heritage learners displayed about the same level of errors
with both genders, whereas L2 learners made more errors
with feminine than with masculine nouns. With non-overt
nouns, heritage learners showed similar gender patterns
in both assignment and agreement: they are better in
agreement with both genders; but L2 learners exhibited an
asymmetric gender pattern: better with masculine nouns
in assignment and with feminine nouns in agreement.
Summarizing the findings of the oral production
task, there was a clear distinction between the two
groups: heritage learners had significantly higher scores
than the L2 learners. Regarding agreement domain,
heritage learners were more accurate with articles than
with adjectives, but L2 learners were equally accurate
with both, just as they were on the gender recognition
task. Both groups were more accurate with masculine
and overt ending nouns than with feminine and nonovert ending nouns. As for the detailed error analyses,
including the error types (assignment or agreement) and
the patterns of distribution of these errors according to
gender and morphology, both groups displayed similar
linguistic behaviors overall. Both produced more errors
with assignment than with agreement, with feminine than
with masculine nouns, and with non-overt rather than with
overt ending nouns. Within both groups, assignment errors
were found only with non-overt nouns, and primarily
with feminine nouns. Although agreement errors were
distributed more widely, they were also more frequent
with feminine non-overt nouns. Consequently, the results
strongly support a masculine default that operates at both
the lexical and the syntactic levels, as well as a facilitatory
role for overt morphology in the accuracy of gender
assignment and agreement.
Comparing the results of the two tasks:
Comprehension and production
The results of the two tasks confirm that adult native
Spanish speakers have virtually no problems with gender,

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
Table 6. Overall accuracy on the two tasks (means,
standard deviations and ranges).
Written Recognition
Task

Picture Description Task

Group

M

SD

Range

M

SD

Range

NS
HLL
L2L

99.6
98.0
96.9

.8
3.6
2.6

97.9-100
89.6-100
91.6-100

100
97.1
85.6

.0
5.1
5.2

100-100
79.1-100
72.0-94.5

NS = native speakers; HLL = heritage language learners; L2L = L2 learners

since they performed at ceiling level on both tasks. In
general, the heritage and L2 groups made few gender
errors, in accordance with their advanced proficiencymatched levels. Nonetheless, results also showed that for
L2 learners, even at this level of proficiency, spontaneous
oral production of gender was still problematic. Although
heritage speakers displayed similar performance on both
tasks (above 95% accuracy on each), the L2 learners were
better in comprehension than in production (error rates
of about 5% and 15%, respectively). An error rate of
even 10% by L2 learners is significant and demands an
explanation (White et al., 2004). Thus, the type of task
made a significant difference both between the two groups
and within the L2 group. These results are displayed in
Table 6, which includes native speakers for comparison.
A mixed ANOVA was conducted on the average
scores of the two tasks. Results revealed main effects
for task (F(1, 49) = 63.395, p = .000) and group (F(2,
49) = 37.940, p = .000), as well as a task by group
interaction (F(2, 49) = 56.918, p = .000). For each
group, the difference in accuracy on the two tasks was
also examined. For the native speakers, the less than 1%
difference between scores on the written recognition and
oral production tasks was not significant (t(16) = -1.852,
p = .083). Likewise for the heritage learners, for whom the
1% difference between the two tasks was also statistically
insignificant (t(17) = 1.455, p = .164). But for the L2
learners, the difference between the scores on the two
tasks, slightly above 10%, was highly significant (t(17) =
9.150, p = .000). Furthermore, pairwise comparisons
among the proficiency groups' mean differences on
the two tasks indicated that the three groups were all
statistically distinguishable. Native speakers (M = 99.8%)
and heritage learners (M = 97.6%) had a mean difference
of 2.22, p = .037, and heritage speakers and L2 learners
(M = 91.3%) showed a mean difference of 6.321, which
was also significant, p = .000.
To investigate how close individual heritage and L2
participants came to native-like results on the two tasks,
the number of individuals in each of the learner groups

343

who scored within the range of variation of native speakers
was considered (cf. Montrul et al., 2008). The minimum
score among the native speakers was 97.9% on the written
recognition task and 100% on the oral picture description.
Although the means for the heritage and L2 groups on the
written recognition task were not significantly different,
14 of the 18 heritage speakers (77.8%) scored above the
native speaker minimum, but only 8 of the 18 (44.4%)
L2 learners managed to do so. On the oral production
task, 7 of the 18 heritage learners (38.9%), but none of
the L2 participants, scored 100%, which was the native
speaker minimum. So even at the advanced proficiency
level, the accuracy of gender agreement in oral production
by L2 learners was substantially below the level of native
speakers. This was not the case with the advanced heritage
learners, whose results were significantly closer to nativelike performance.
In summary, the findings of the study show that
there was no significant difference between advancedproficiency heritage and L2 learners on the gender recognition task (the lexical dimension of gender acquisition,
more deeply implicated in language competence than
performance). The picture description task, however,
revealed that spontaneous oral production remains
problematic for L2 learners. Results also show that, in
both comprehension and production, heritage and L2
learners were more accurate with masculine and with overt
nouns than with feminine and non-overt nouns. The results
for agreement domain were also consistent across tasks,
though they differed in each group: heritage speakers were
more accurate with agreement on the article than on the
adjective, while L2 learners were equally accurate with
both articles and adjectives. In relation to types of errors in
production, both groups made more errors in assignment
(lexical gender) than in agreement (syntactic gender),
particularly with feminine non-overt ending nouns.
Discussion
The original research questions guiding this study can
now be addressed. As predicted by the Missing Surface
Inflection Hypothesis, and contrary to representational
deficit accounts such as the Failed Functional Features
Hypothesis, both heritage and L2 learners were
comparably accurate in the gender comprehension task
(research question 1, first part). This finding supports
the full access accounts of L2 acquisition (cf. White
et al., 2003, 2004), since the age of first exposure to
Spanish did not affect the L2 acquisition of gender, a
grammatical feature not present in their L1. Nonetheless, a
look at the individual results per group indicated that more
heritage than L2 learners scored within the native-speaker
range. Therefore, even though both groups displayed
similar abstract knowledge of gender in comprehension,
the performance of heritage speakers was more native-like

344

Irma V. Alarcon

than that of the L2 learners. This might be explained by
several factors, including the context in which learning
Spanish took place (natural vs. formal classroom setting)
and the amount and frequency of input (daily language
exposure and interaction at home vs. limited classroom
input and opportunities for using the language). Also
consistent with the Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis,
which considers differences between L2 comprehension
and production as mapping problems, results revealed a
significant statistical difference in the oral production of
the two groups: heritage speakers were more accurate than
L2 learners on the production task (research question 1,
second part). While the heritage learners were equally
accurate in gender comprehension and production, the
L2 learners were significantly more accurate with gender
comprehension than production. Although some of the
heritage learners scored within the native speakers'
range on the production task, none of the L2 learners
achieved this. These results suggest that, for the L2
learners, there is a deficit in the computation of gender, a
divergence between their acquisition of abstract features,
as indicated by their high accuracy scores on the
comprehension task, and their continuing difficulties with
surface manifestations, as revealed by their significantly
lower scores on the production task. As the Missing
Surface Inflection Hypothesis predicts, the L2 learners
displayed performance errors. And, in contradiction of a
prediction of the Failed Functional Features Hypothesis,
the current findings provide evidence against a deficit
in the underlying representation of the morphosyntactic
features of gender, since both heritage and L2 learners
were statistically indistinguishable in their comprehension
of gender. With high accuracy scores in written
comprehension, both groups appear to have gender in
their underlying grammars.
Nonetheless, one might contend that the written
comprehension task measured more explicit knowledge
of gender, since participants were given the options
from which to choose, while the oral production task
measured more implicit knowledge because it required
fast, spontaneous, and automatic processing. Then, since
the L2 learners performed better on the written than the
oral task, it could be claimed that L2 learners had not yet
internalized gender rules as part of their implicit knowledge system (e.g., Ellis, 2005). Accordingly, the present
results could also be explained by the explicit/implicit
knowledge distinction, as one reviewer suggested, because
they show that advanced heritage speakers, but not
advanced L2 learners, display both explicit and implicit
knowledge of gender, and hence complete acquisition.
This alternative view offers a plausible account of
the differences in performance between high-proficiency
heritage and L2 learners on written and oral tasks. One
could also argue, however, that at advanced proficiency
levels it is difficult to determine whether a linguistically

non-demanding task, such as the written task in this study,
taps explicit or implicit knowledge of gender, particularly
when carried out smoothly and quickly by all participants,
and with a focus on meaning (since the noun phrases were
contextualized). As Ellis (2008) suggests, the distinction
between implicit and explicit is itself controversial. One
contentious issue, for example, is whether the distinction
is a continuum or a dichotomy. The current findings
are explained nicely by the Missing Surface Inflection
Hypothesis, which claims that advanced L2 learners
do have implicit knowledge of the target language,
even though this knowledge might not be accessible
when performing a specific task due to computation
problems. If gender is part of their linguistic competence,
then that knowledge must comprise an implicit gender
representation. This implies that both L2 and heritage
speakers might possess gender competence, but still
display performance errors, particularly in oral tasks.
The present results differ from Montrul et al.'s (2008)
finding that L2 learners were more accurate than lowerproficiency heritage speakers in gender comprehension
on a similar written gender recognition task. This
could be attributable to the difficulty of the written
stimuli: Montrul et al.'s task included adjectives in
both attributive and predicative positions. In contrast,
the present study focused only on attributive adjectives,
with which gender agreement is acquired earlier than
with predicative adjectives (e.g., Bruhn de Garavito &
White, 2002). Another possible set of factors relates to
the differences between lower-proficiency and advanced
heritage speakers in terms of literacy and exposure to
formal instruction (e.g., Valdes, 1997). Alternatively, the
varying results of the two studies could also be explained
by the differing profiles of the two L2 populations.
Montrul et al. included graduate students of Spanish
and Spanish instructors, who had a relatively strong
command of the language compared with the L2 group
in the present study, which was composed exclusively
of undergraduate language learners. Since differences
in knowledge, input exposure and experience do affect
gender acquisition (Ellis & Schmidt, 1997; Taraban &
Kempe, 1999), Montrul et al.'s L2 group was linguistically
more advanced than the L2 learners in the present study.
In accordance with Montrul et al.'s (2008) findings,
however, the heritage speakers in the present study were
superior to the L2 learners and closer to the native speakers
in their oral production. This finding strongly suggests
that heritage speakers, whether of lower (Montrul et al.)
or more advanced (the present study) proficiency, have
an advantage over advanced L2 learners when producing
gender agreement in oral production. L2 grammatical
gender research has demonstrated that L2 learners
consistently display errors in the oral production (e.g.,
Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Finnemann, 1992). These errors,
though, are systematic rather than random, since the same

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
patterns of errors observed in production also occur in
comprehension. How can we account for these persistent
errors in oral production in advanced L2 learners,
who have already acquired gender in their underlying
grammars? According to Lardiere (2000, p. 121), "the
most coherent explanation for the L2 data is . . . figuring
out how (and whether) to spell out morphologically
the categories they already represent syntactically, i.e.,
the `mapping problem'". This explanation does not
imply that the problems L2 learners have with gender
production will be solved. Some learners never overcome
these errors, despite further input, meaningful language
interactions, and continued feedback, and eventually
fossilize. Fossilization, though, "is attributable not to
a breakdown in the grammar as such but, rather, to
some kind of unreliability in the interface between the
syntax and other areas of the grammar" (White, 2003,
p. 201). There is still no widely accepted explanation
of the fact that some gender agreement production
becomes fossilized in some L2 learners and not in others;
this remains a controversial issue in L2 acquisition
research.
With respect to the second research question, the
gender-related pattern distributions observed in the data
were very similar in both the heritage and the L2
groups. This was unsurprising, since previous L1 and
L2 Spanish gender findings provide ample evidence for
significant effects of noun gender, noun morphology, and
agreement domain on the accuracy of gender agreement.
For example, the existence of a masculine default setting,
in both the lexical and the syntactic levels of gender, has
substantial support (e.g., Cain, Weber-Olsen & Smith,
1987; Schlig, 2003; White et al., 2001). In the present
study, however, the effects of the masculine gender on
accuracy were significant only in the oral production task.
L2 learners, in particular, were more likely to incorrectly
assign masculine gender to feminine nouns than feminine
gender to masculine nouns during oral elicitation. This
implies that the masculine gender emerges as the default
in Spanish (see Harris, 1991) when learners are unable to
link the abstract gender feature to its appropriate forms
in spontaneous oral production of gender agreement. The
use of a default in oral production reflects a mapping
problem, a performance issue, rather than a problem in
the underlying representation of gender in the speaker's
grammar. Evidence supporting this claim comes from
longitudinal (e.g., Hernandez-Pina, 1984; Lopez-Ornat,
1997) and cross-sectional L1 Spanish studies (e.g., Brisk,
1976; Cain et al., 1987) showing that monolingual
children tend to overuse and to be more accurate with
the masculine forms of determiners and modifiers. A
significant masculine default effect has also been found in
psycholinguistic studies of adult Spanish monolinguals.
For example, lexical-decision experiments indicate that
differences in reaction times are more significant with

345

masculine than with feminine words (Dominguez, Cuetos
& Segui, 1999). In L2 acquisition, this masculine default
is pervasive and persistent in the learners' interlanguage,
and in some cases, for unknown reasons, becomes a
long-term or even permanent problem. Moreover, the
emerging body of research on Spanish heritage language
(particularly Montrul et al., 2008), including the present
study, shows that the masculine default is also found
in heritage speakers' oral production, indicating that
it is part of both complete and incomplete grammars.
Therefore, the masculine default is a linguistic strategy
used by monolinguals and early and late bilinguals that
significantly affects oral production data as a result of
a variety of performance factors, including processing
demands and communication pressure.
In relation to noun morphology, the present results
show that heritage and L2 learners were significantly more
accurate with overtly than with non-overtly marked nouns,
both in comprehension and in production. An examination
of previous L1 and adult L2 production data suggests that
the gender of overt ending nouns is acquired before that
of non-overt ending nouns, and that accuracy is higher
with overt than with non-overt nouns (e.g., FernandezGarcia, 1999; Finnemann, 1992; Franceschina, 2001;
Gonzalez, 1978; Hernandez-Pina, 1984). The present
findings confirm those results. Noun morphology aids in
gender agreement, and is a reliable cue for establishing
correct agreements in the phrase and sentence. According
to the Competition Model (Bates & MacWhinney, 1982,
1987), an input processing model that tries to explain the
ways in which speakers of different languages are affected
by a variety of linguistic cues during syntactic processing,
when encoding the notion of agency, English speakers rely
primarily on word order, while Japanese speakers prefer
animacy as a cue, and German speakers use case marking.
The strength of competing linguistic cues varies with the
language. In Spanish, a morphologically rich language,
native speakers use overt morphology as a strong linguistic
cue for gender agreement in both comprehension and
production. Psycholinguistic research measuring both
accuracy and reaction times of gender agreement
demonstrate forcefully that morphology is a valid cue for
native speakers of Spanish: they are more accurate and
faster with overt than with non-overt ending nouns (e.g.,
Alarcon, 2006, 2009). The present results show that overt
morphology is also a valid cue for advanced heritage and
L2 learners when establishing gender agreement in the
comprehension and production of noun phrases. That both
groups responded to the same linguistic gender cue (noun
ending) that native Spanish speakers use for establishing
correct gender agreement suggests that advanced heritage
and L2 learners process gender agreement in the same
way as native Spanish speakers.
Previous L1 and L2 studies examining gender
agreement within the noun phrase indicate that gender

346

Irma V. Alarcon

agreement is acquired earlier with articles than with
adjectives, and that accuracy with articles is higher
than with adjectives (e.g., Bruhn de Garavito & White,
2002; Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Hernandez-Pina, 1984).
The present results for heritage speakers support these
findings: heritage speakers were more accurate with
agreement with articles than with adjectives. But the
present findings for L2 learners are inconsistent with
those earlier results, since the L2 learners were equally
accurate with both adjectives and articles. The salient
question is why the agreement domain did not affect
the L2 learners in the present study as it affected the
comprehension and production gender behavior of L2
learners in the earlier findings? One possible explanation
is that much of the earlier research exploring noun +
adjective agreement focused exclusively on either
predicative (e.g., Alarcon, 2006, 2009) or attributive (e.g.,
Sagarra & Herschensohn, 2008) adjective agreement.
Results might have been different if both types of
adjectives had been investigated simultaneously. For
example, Bruhn de Garavito and White (2002) found that
low-proficiency French-speaking learners of L2 Spanish
produced more gender agreement errors with predicative
adjectives (34.56%) than with attributive adjectives
(26.95%). Moreover, Keating (2009) investigated the
effects of syntactic distance on the processing of gender
agreement by comparing agreement with adjectives
that were adjacent to the noun (attributive position)
and adjectives in another syntactic phrase and clause
(predicative position). He measured the eye movements
of native speakers and of L2 learners at three proficiency
levels as they read sentences on a computer screen.
Results showed that only the advanced learners, and only
with attributive adjectives, performed like native speakers.
Since attributive and predicative adjectives differ in their
distance from the target noun, the difference in the
processing of gender agreement involving these two types
of adjectives can be explained by the syntactic distance
between the target noun and the agreeing adjective.
The Structural Distance Hypothesis and the Linear
Distance Hypothesis, which have been used to explain the
difficulty in processing of grammatical structures such
as relative clauses in L2 Korean by English-speaking
learners (O'Grady, Lee & Cho, 2003), also predict that
agreement rates with predicative adjectives will be lower
than with attributive adjectives. Since the present study
was limited to noun phrase agreement, only attributive
adjectives were included. But in terms of syntactic
distance, there is no difference between agreement with
articles and with attributive adjectives. Therefore, the
present results, in which advanced L2 learners, on
both comprehension and production tasks, performed
equally well with articles and attributive adjectives, are
consistent with the prediction derived from the distance
hypotheses.

Conclusion
This study supports the view that Spanish gender
agreement is acquirable irrespective of the age of
acquisition and the status of the gender features in the
learner's L1. The advanced L2 learners in the study
displayed the same level of implicit grammatical gender
knowledge on the comprehension task as the advanced
heritage speakers. Not only were the accuracy scores of
the two groups high, their patterns of gender agreement
were consistent in both comprehension and production.
Therefore, as predicted by full access accounts, learners
who are not exposed to grammatical gender until after
the critical period might still acquire abstract gender
representation in their underlying grammar.
Nonetheless, the L2 learners alone showed deficits
in spontaneous oral production. Gender agreement
variability at advanced levels of L2 proficiency stems from
performance issues (i.e., production-based factors) rather
than competence, and is predicted by full access accounts
such as the Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis. But
why is there a divergence between these two advanced
proficiency-matched groups in oral production? The
fundamental difference between the two groups involves
the age of first exposure to Spanish. Therefore, I argue that
post-critical period learners, due to their late acquisition
of gender, are more susceptible to computation deficits in
gender agreement than those who acquire the language
at birth, and who have mastered the gender system
by the time they are exposed to English. The present
findings suggest that maturational constraints affect
gender agreement performance, but not its representation
in L2 acquisition. Consequently, the L2 learners showed
incomplete acquisition of Spanish gender, which is,
indeed, expected in L2 acquisition (Bley-Vroman, 1989;
VanPatten, 2003).
The present study also provides evidence that heritage
speakers do achieve complete acquisition of gender
agreement, as shown by their consistently high accuracy
rates on both written comprehension and oral production
tasks, which approached the levels of native speakers.
Why, then, did Montrul et al.'s (2008) heritage speakers
exhibit problems on their gender comprehension task,
and thus incomplete acquisition? By definition, language
acquisition occurs early in childhood in all heritage
speakers, so there must be factors other than age of
exposure that affect the acquisition of gender. The
heritage learners in Montrul et al. (2008) were exposed to
English before the age of 5 (p. 518), so it is possible that
their Spanish gender systems were not fully developed by
that time, and subsequently either fossilized or atrophied.
Another possibility is that the gender system was already
in place, but was in some way attenuated by the early
Spanish-English contact situation (see Silva-Corvalan,
1994). In both cases, those heritage learners would have

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
experienced a reduction in meaningful Spanish input that
blocked their ultimate attainment of gender. In contrast,
the heritage speakers in the present study were exposed
exclusively to Spanish during their pre-school years, and
were introduced to English after age 5. By that time, their
gender agreement system had been fully developed and
consolidated, and was impervious to English influence.
Consequently, their acquisition of Spanish gender was
complete.
Several interesting pedagogical questions for further
research emerge from these conclusions, the answers to
which would also substantially enhance our understanding
of early bilingualism in the L2 context. What are the
effects, if any, of formal instruction on gender agreement
in the implicit knowledge systems of heritage speakers?
For example, do lower-proficiency heritage speakers
receiving formal training overcome their difficulties
with grammatical gender? Can advanced-proficiency
learners become even more native-like if exposed to
formal Spanish instruction in gender? The biggest
challenge for heritage language teaching programs is to
design curricula that effectively help heritage learners
to (re)acquire, develop, and maintain their heritage
languages according to their specific sociolinguistic
profiles and concrete linguistic needs. To date, as
Valdes, Fishman, Chavez and Perez (2008, p. 21) have
acknowledged, "very little empirical research is available
about the outcomes of different kinds of instruction given
particular goals". There is a pressing need to investigate
which types of instruction best help heritage speakers
reacquire gender and/or maintain their existing gender
systems.
Appendix. Ultimo Acto, by Pablo de la Torriente Brau
Adapted by the researcher from: http://www.lainsignia.
org/2003/mayo/cul_040.htm.
En (1) un/una sector del jardin, en (2) el/la lugar
donde se elevaba (3) el/la arbol de la palma, el hombre
esperaba. La noche (4) profundo/profunda lo envolvia
todo. Solo se escuchaba el ruido (5) monotono/monotona
del silencio (6) lejano/lejana. Su traje (7) oscuro/oscura,
lo convertia en sombra (8) intenso/intensa. Sus brazos
(9) poderosos/poderosas, manchados por (10) el/la aceite
de las maquinas, apenas se distinguian. Estaba inmovil.
Esperaba.
Aquella era su casa, pero en (11) el/la medianoche llena
de frio el esperaba. Dentro del (12) amplio/amplia bolsillo
de su pantalon, su mano ruda de hombre de las maquinas
contenia (13) el/la papel, hallado casualmente en la
oficina, hacia apenas (14) un/una hora, cuando fue a hacer
una consulta (15) serio/seria al Ingeniero Jefe. Habia visto
un sobre (16) dirigido/dirigida a su mujer, abandonado
en la mesa, lo habia cogido y ahora estaba detras de la
palma, al momento de la cita (17) tragico/tragica. La carta
decia: "Esta noche tu marido esta de guardia en la casa de

347

maquinas y a las doce ire de todas maneras . . . " "de todas
maneras" estaba subrayado. Era el "Administrador del
Ingenio" quien la firmaba. El hombre solo habia tenido
tiempo para correr a su casa y esconderse en (18) el/la
patio. Todavia su cerebro (19) confundido/confundida por
la sorpresa, por (20) el/la rabia y por la humillacion (21)
completo/completa no reaccionaba.
Y poco antes de las doce aparecio "el otro" que,
despues de asomar su cabeza por (22) el/la muro, miro
cuidadosamente el entorno. Luego, salio con mucha
precaucion. Venia con (23) un/una camisa de kaki.
"El otro" se detuvo un momento para escuchar (24)
los/las sonidos de la noche, el latido de su corazon
(25) asustado/asustada . . . (Desde detras de la palma
(26) los/las ojos de acero que lo espiaban llegaron a
esta conclusion (27) descriptivo/descriptiva: "Si es un
cobarde! . . . ") "El otro" fue avanzando con cuidado y
llego hasta la misma palma . . . Es extrano, pero "el otro"
no percibio la presencia del enemigo . . .
Fue todo rapido, electrico. La mano de acero del
hombre de las maquinas apreso su garganta y ahogo (28)
el/la grito terrible. Y el golpe (29) violento/violenta lo
dejo en el acto sin sentido. El hombre de las maquinas,
furioso, no tuvo (30) el/la paciencia que se habia propuesto
y ahora estaba de pie, al lado de "el otro", contemplando
su puno lleno de sangre (31) rojo/roja y con la mente (32)
vacio/vacia de impresiones. Asi estuvo un rato, inmovil,
como un tronco, cuando penso: "Si no he podido hablar
con el, hablare con ella". Le pego una patada brutal al
muerto y se dirigio a la casa . . . Iba con (33) el/la invisible
actitud y (34) silencioso/silenciosa velocidad de un gato
negro.
Cerca ya de la puerta del fondo, se detuvo. Un miedo
(35) raro/rara lo habia paralizado. Por un momento le
asalto (36) el/la emocion perturbadora de que el era en
realidad el amante, que era a el a quien ella esperaba. Y su
corazon se le agito con (37) perverso/perversa esperanza
y tuvo (38) el/la temor del burlador. Cuando llego a la
puerta se puso a escuchar y no oia nada. Sin embargo,
sintio que cerca estaba de ella. Hizo (39) un/una suave
presion sobre la puerta para que se abriera . . . Penso:
"Ella lo esperaba!" Y la ira le hizo empujar la puerta con
fuerza . . . Pero antes de llegar a dar dos pasos, sintio el
balazo en (40) el/la cuerpo y (41) el/la voz de ella que
decia: "Canalla, te lo dije! . . . "
Luego, se escucho un "Ay!" de dolor (42)
inmenso/inmensa y de sorpresa (43) espantoso/espantosa.
Ella lleno un espacio de silencio y asombro. Luego,
cuando encendio corriendo (44) el/la luz, el vio (45) el/la
cara de su esposa reflejando una pena (46) infinito/infinita.
Arrodillada estaba a su lado y, con (47) un/una angustia
insoportable, le decia "Por que, por que . . . ?" Sin
comprender el error (48) extremo/extrema y fatal . . . Pero
ya el rostro del hombre comenzaba a ponerse alegre,
alegre, como un nino que mejora . . .

348

Irma V. Alarcon

References
Alarcon, I. V. (2006). The second language acquisition of
Spanish gender agreement: The effects of linguistic
variables on accuracy. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Alarcon, I. [V.] (2009). The processing of gender agreement
in L1 and L2 Spanish: Evidence from reaction time data.
Hispania, 92 (4), pp. 814-828.
Alarcos, E. (1999). Gramatica de la lengua espanola. Madrid:
Espasa Calpe.
Andersen, R. (1984). What's gender good for, anyway? In
R. Andersen (ed.), Second languages: A cross-linguistic
perspective, pp. 77-99. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1982). Functionalist approaches
to grammar. In E. Wanner & L. R. Gleitman (eds.),
Language acquisition: The state of the art, pp. 173-218.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition, variation,
and language learning. In B. MacWhinney (ed.),
Mechanisms of language acquisition, pp. 157-193.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1989). What is the logical problem of foreign
language learning? In S. M. Gass & J. Schachter (eds.),
Linguistic perspectives on second language acquisition,
pp. 41-68. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brisk, M. E. (1976). The acquisition of Spanish gender by first
grade Spanish speaking children. In G. D. Keller, R. V.
Teschner & S. Viera (eds.), Bilingualism in the bicentennial
and beyond, pp. 143-160. New York: Bilingual
Press.
Bruhn de Garavito, J., & White, L. (2002). The second language
acquisition of Spanish DPs: The status of grammatical
features. In A. T. Perez-Leroux & J. M. Liceras (eds.),
The acquisition of Spanish morphosyntax: The L1/L2
connection, pp. 153-178. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cain, J., Weber-Olsen, M., & Smith, R. (1987). Acquisition
strategies in a first and second language: Are they the same?
Journal of Child Language, 14 (2), 333-352.
Carroll, S. (1989). Second language acquisition and the
computational paradigm. Language Learning, 39, 535-
594.
Clahsen, H. (1988). Parameterized grammatical theory and
language acquisition: A study of the acquisition of verb
placement and inflection by children and adults. In S. Flynn
& W. O'Neil (eds.), Linguistic theory in second language
acquisition, pp. 47-75. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Comrie, B. (1999). Grammatical gender systems: A linguist's
assessment. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28 (5),
457-466.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Davies, M. (2006). A frequency dictionary of Spanish: Core
vocabulary for learners. New York: Routledge.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Veronique, D. (2001). Gender assignment
and gender agreement in advanced French interlanguage:
A cross-sectional study. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 4 (3), 275-297.
Dominguez, A., Cuetos, F., & Segui, J. (1999). The processing
of grammatical gender and number in Spanish. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 28 (5), 485-498.

Ellis, N. C., & Schmidt, R. (1997). Morphology and longer
distance dependencies. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 19, 145-171.
Ellis, R. (2005). Measuring implicit and explicit knowledge of a
second language: A psychometric study. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 27, 141-172.
Ellis, R. (2008). Investigating grammatical difficulty in second
language learning: Implications for second language
acquisition research and language testing. International
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 18 (1), 4-22.
Fernandez-Garcia, M. (1999). Patterns of gender agreement in
the speech of second language learners. In J. GutierrezRexach & F. Martinez-Gil (eds.), Advances in Hispanic
linguistics: Papers from the 2nd Hispanic Linguistics
Symposium, pp. 3-15. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Finnemann, M. D. (1992). Learning agreement in the noun
phrase: The strategies of three first-year Spanish students.
International Review of Applied Linguistics in Teaching,
30 (2), 121-136.
Franceschina, F. (2001). Against an L2 morphological deficit
as an explanation for the differences between native
and non-native grammars. EUROSLA Yearbook, 1, 143-
158.
Franceschina, F. (2005). Fossilized second language grammars:
The acquisition of grammatical gender. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Gass, S. M., & Selinker, L. (2008). Second language acquisition:
An introductory course. New York: Routledge.
Gomez, L. (1998). Gramatica didactica del espanol. Madrid:
Ediciones SM.
Gonzalez, G. (1978). The acquisition of Spanish grammar
by native Spanish speaking children. Rosslyn, VA:
InterAmericana Research Associates.
Green, J. N. (1988). Spanish. In M. Harris & N. Vincent (eds.),
The Romance languages, pp. 79-130). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Harris, J. (1991). The exponence of gender in Spanish. Linguistic
Inquiry, 22 (1), 27-62.
Hawkins, R. (2000). Persistent selective fossilization in second
language acquisition and the optimal design of the language
faculty. Essex Research Reports in Linguistics, 34, 75-90.
Hawkins, R., & Chan, Y.-H. C. (1997). The partial availability
of Universal Grammar in second language acquisition: The
`failed functional features hypothesis'. Second Language
Research, 13, 187-226.
Hernandez-Pina, F. (1984). Teorias psicosociolinguisticas y
su aplicacion a la adquisicion del espanol como lengua
materna. Madrid: Siglo XXI.
Hoekstra, T., & Schwartz B. D. (eds.) (1994). Language
acquisition studies in generative grammar. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Keating, G. (2009). Sensitivity to violations of gender agreement
in native and nonnative Spanish: An eye-movement
investigation. Language Learning, 59 (3), 503-535.
Lardiere, D. (2000). Mapping features to forms in second
language acquisition. In J. Archibald (ed.), Second
language acquisition and linguistic theory, pp. 102-129.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Lardiere, D. (2007). Ultimate attainment in second language
acquisition: A case study. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Spanish gender agreement in bilinguals
Lloret, M. R., & Viaplana, J. (1998). El binarismo del genero
gramatical en castellano y catalan. VERBA, 25, 71-91.
Lopez-Ornat, S. (1997). What lies in between a pre-grammatical
and a grammatical representation? Evidence on nominal
and verbal form-function mappings in Spanish from 1;7
to 2;1. In A. T. Perez-Leroux & W. R. Glass (eds.),
Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition of Spanish
(vol. 1): Developing grammars, pp. 3-20. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Maratsos, M. (1988). The acquisition of formal word classes. In
Y. Levy, I. Schlesinger & M. Braine (eds.), Categories and
processes in language acquisition, pp. 31-44. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mariscal, S. (2009). Early acquisition of gender agreement in
the Spanish noun phrase: Starting small. Journal of Child
Language, 36, 143-171.
McCarthy, C. (2008). Morphological variability in the comprehension of agreement: An argument for representation over
computation. Second Language Research, 24 (4), 459-486.
Meisel, J. M. (1991). Principles of Universal Grammar and
strategies of language learning: Some similarities and
differences between first and second language acquisition.
In L. Eubank (ed.), Point counterpoint: Universal Grammar
in second language, pp. 324-376. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Montrul, S., Foote, R., & Perpinan, S. (2008). Gender agreement
in adult second language learners and Spanish heritage
speakers: The effects of age and context of acquisition.
Language Learning, 58 (3), 503-553.
Montrul, S., & Potowski, K. (2007). Command of gender
agreement in school-age Spanish-English bilingual
children. International Journal of Bilingualism, 11 (3),
301-328.
O'Grady, W., Lee, M., & Cho, M. (2003). A subject-
object asymmetry in the acquisition of relative clauses in
Korean as a second language. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 25, 433-448.
Oliphant, K. (1998). Acquisition of grammatical gender in
Italian as a foreign language. The Canadian Modern
Language Review, 54 (2), 239-262.
Ortega, L. (2005). For what and for whom is our research?
The ethical as transformative lens in instructed SLA. The
Modern Language Journal, 89 (3), 427-443.
Perez-Pereira, M. (1991). The acquisition of gender: What
Spanish children tell us. Journal of Child Language, 18
(3), 571-590.
Polinsky, M. (2008). Gender under incomplete acquisition:
Heritage speakers' knowledge of noun categorization.
Heritage Language Journal, 6 (1), 40-71.
Prevost, P., & White, L. (2000). Missing surface inflection or
impairment in second language acquisition? Evidence from
tense and agreement. Second Language Research, 16 (2),
103-133.
Rogers, M. (1987). Learners' difficulties with grammatical
gender in German as a foreign language. Applied
Linguistics, 8 (1), 48-74.
Sabourin, L., Stowe, L. A., & de Haan, G. J. (2006). Transfer
effects in learning a second language grammatical gender
system. Second Language Research, 22 (1), 1-29.
Sagarra, N. (2007). Online processing of gender agreement
in low proficient English-Spanish late bilinguals. In

349

J. Camacho, N. Flores-Ferran, L. Sanchez, V. Deprez
& M. J. Cabrera (eds.), Romance Linguistics 2006:
Selected papers from the 36th Linguistic Symposium on
Romance Languages (LSRL), New Brunswick, March-
April 2006, pp. 241-254. Amsterdam and Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Sagarra, N., & Herschensohn, J. (2008). Processing gender
in L2 Spanish. In H. Chan, H. Jacob & E. Kapia
(eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, pp. 427-437.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Schlig, C. (2003). Analysis of agreement errors made by thirdyear students. Hispania, 86 (2), 312-319.
Schriefers, H., & Jescheniak, J. D. (1999). Representation and
processing of grammatical gender in language production:
A review. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28 (6),
575-600.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. (1994). Word order and nonnative
case in nonnative language acquisition: A longitudinal
study of (L1 Turkish) German interlanguage. In Hoekstra
& Schwartz (eds.), pp. 317-368.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. (1996). L2 cognitive states
and the full transfer/full access model. Second Language
Research, 12, 40-72.
Silva-Corvalan, C. (1994). Language contact and change:
Spanish in Los Angeles. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taraban, R., & Kempe, V. (1999). Gender processing in native
and nonnative Russian speakers. Applied Psycholinguistics,
20, 119-148.
Teschner, R. V., & Russell, W. M. (1984). The gender patterns
of Spanish nouns: An inverse dictionary-based analysis.
Hispanic Linguistics, 1, 115-132.
Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit
measures of sensitivity to violations in second language
grammar. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27,
173-204.
Tucker, G. R., Lambert, W. E., & Rigault, A. A. (1977).
The French speaker's skill with grammatical gender: An
example of rule-governed behavior. The Hague: Mouton.
Vainikka, A., & Young-Scholten, M. (1994). Direct access to X
theory: Evidence from Korean and Turkish adults learning
German. In Hoekstra & Schwartz (eds.), pp. 265-316.
Vainikka, A., & Young-Scholten, M. (1996). Gradual
development of L2 phrase structure. Second Language
Research, 12, 7-39.
Valdes, G. (1997). The teaching of Spanish to bilingual Spanishspeaking students: Outstanding issues and unanswered
questions. In M. C. Colombi & F. X. Alarcon (eds.), La
ensenanza del espanol a hispanohablantes: Praxis y teoria,
pp. 8-44. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Valdes, G. (2000). Spanish for native speakers (vol. 1) (AATSP
Professional Development Series Handbook for Teachers
K-16). New York: Harcourt College Publishers.
Valdes, G. (2001). Heritage language students: Profiles and
possibilities. In J. K. Peyton, D. A. Ranard & S. McGinnis
(eds.), Heritage languages in America: Preserving a
national resource, pp. 37-77. Washington, DC: Center for
Applied Linguistics/Delta Systems.
Valdes, G. (2005). Bilingualism, heritage language learners, and
SLA research: Opportunities lost or seized? The Modern
Language Journal, 89 (3), 410-426.

350

Irma V. Alarcon

Valdes, G. (2006). Making connections: Second language
acquisition research and heritage language teaching. In R.
Salaberry & B. Lafford (eds.), The art of teaching Spanish:
Second language acquisition from research to praxis,
pp. 193-212. Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
Valdes, G., Fishman, J. A., Chavez, R., & Perez, W.
(2008). Maintaining Spanish in the United Status: Steps
toward the effective practice of heritage language reacquisition/development. Hispania, 91 (1), 4-24.
VanPatten, B. (2003). From input to output: A teacher's guide to
second language acquisition. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
White, L. (2003). Second language acquisition and Universal
Grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., &
Leung, I. (2003). Gender agreement in L2 Spanish:
Evidence against failed features. McGill Working Papers
in Linguistics, 17 (2), 153-182.
White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., &
Leung, I. (2004). Gender and number agreement in
nonnative Spanish. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 105-
133.
White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., Leung,
I., & Ayed, H. B. (2001). The status of abstract features
in interlanguage: Gender and number in L2 Spanish.
In A. H.-J. Do (ed.), Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development,
pp. 792-802. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

