C Cambridge University Press 2010 doi:10.1017/S1366728910000362
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 14 (4), 2011, 570-578 

RESEARCH NOTES

Development and use of
English evaluative expressions
in narratives of
Chinese-English bilinguals

LIANG CHEN
University of Georgia

R U I X I A YA N
Misericordia University

(Received: January 23, 2010; final revision received: July 5, 2010; accepted: July 13, 2010; First published online 15 November 2010)

This study compares the development and use of evaluative expressions in the English narratives elicited from 80
Chinese-English bilinguals and 80 American monolingual peers at four ages - five, eight, ten, and young adults - using the
wordless picture book Frog, where are you? (Mayer, 1969). Results revealed both similarities and differences between
monolingual and bilingual groups. On the one hand, regardless of bilingual status, there is a clear age-related growth in the
development and use of evaluative expressions. On the other hand, bilingual children in our study differed from monolingual
children in the quantity and quality of evaluative clauses used. The results are discussed with respect to linguistic and
cultural differences between English and Chinese.
Keywords: evaluative expressions, narrative development, Chinese-English bilinguals

The development and use of evaluative expressions is
an integral part of narrative development. Through the
use of evaluative devices such as expressions referring
to emotional and mental states, the narrators not only
provide information about narrated events, but may
also indicate the perceived significance of the narrated
events to themselves and others. According to Labov and
Waletzky (1967), a narrative includes not only sequences
of narrative clauses about what happened, but there may
also be individual clauses or clusters of evaluative clauses
about why the events may have occurred. The narrative
clauses serve a referential function, outlining the plot and
conveying information about the characters, settings, and
events in the story. The evaluative clauses, on the other
hand, serve an evaluative function, conveying information
about the narrators' mental worlds such as their attitudes
toward events, their interpretations of the protagonists'
motives and reactions to events, as well as inferences about
mental states such as feelings, thoughts, and intentions of
story characters. The use of the evaluative devices allows
the narrator to take the narrative out of its referential
context and suspend the sequentiality of events while

* This research was supported, in part, by a Faculty Research Seed Grant
from the University of Georgia Research Foundation (UGARF). We
would like to thank Dr. John W. Oller, Jr., Dr. Ning Pan, and our
research participants, particularly the children and their families, for
their assistance in the conduct of this research. We also wish to thank
the editors and anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments
on previous versions of this paper.

focusing on a particular mental state, or on an outcome of
behaviors and actions from an evaluative perspective.
There is a rich body of literature that documents
how monolingual English-speaking children develop their
ability to provide evaluative comments in oral narratives
(Berman, 1997). These studies first demonstrate that the
frequency of and variety in evaluative devices increases
with age. The oral narratives of personal experience
produced by four- and five-year-old American Englishspeaking children contained little evaluation of the story
events, and only at age six did children start to provide
slightly more frequent mention of why and how events
took place (Peterson & McCabe, 1983). Even nine-yearolds show a different narrative profile when compared
to adult narrators in terms of quantity of evaluative
devices (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, 1991; Reilly, Losh,
Bellugi & Wulfeck, 2004). Secondly, these studies suggest
that the children may not use evaluative devices for the
same purposes as adults. For example, nine-year-olds
are not yet in full command of the adult form-function
relationships of particular evaluative devices (Bamberg &
Damrad-Frye, 1991). Last but not least, the development
of the ability to use evaluative devices to index a global
hierarchical perspective from which the narrative gains
its overall coherence is a protracted process (Bamberg &
Damrad-Frye, 1991; Eaton, Collis & Lewis, 1999).
There seems to be an initial focus on evaluating locally
specific events, when young English-speaking American
children pay special attention to local aspects of events
or persons in the narrative (e.g., facial expressions of the

Address for correspondence:
Liang Chen, Communication Sciences and Special Education, University of Georgia, 542 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30602, USA
chen@uga.edu

Evaulative expressions in bilingual English narratives
story characters or an immediately preceding event). In
contrast, adult narrators are more capable of formulating
evaluations from a global perspective taking into account
the eventual outcome and the overall plot structure of the
story.
In short, studies have shown clear developmental
changes in monolingual English-speaking children's
ability to produce evaluative clauses that function to
make a coherent and engaging story. In comparison,
however, few studies have been carried out to document
the developmental trends in the use of evaluative devices
in narratives by bilingual children in general, and
children learning English as a second language (L2)
in particular. Several studies have examined the use of
evaluative devices in narratives in a second language
to address whether child second language acquisition
will reveal patterns that are similar to or different
from child first language acquisition. However, these
studies have produced mixed results. Some studies
suggest that the strategies used in children's development
of evaluative expressions to fulfill various discourse
functions are universal, and do not depend on their
linguistic background or on whether they are acquiring
a particular language as an L1 or L2 (McCabe &
Bliss, 2004/2005; Pearson, 2002). Other studies that
examined the use of evaluative devices in bilingual
narratives, by contrast, seem to suggest evidence for
unique patterns in the development and use of evaluative
devices in bilingual children as compared to their
monolingual peers. Shrubshall (1997), for example, found
that monolingual English-speaking children produced
more highly evaluated and more episodically structured
narratives than their Portuguese-English bilingual peers
whose home language was not English, and the
"monolingual advantage" persisted into pre-adolescence
and the bilingual children still had a long way to go
to improve the more sophisticated features of narrative
in English. Yet other studies find both similarities and
differences between bilingual and monolingual groups.
The study of van Beijsterveldt and van Hell (2009) on
the use of evaluative devices in written narratives in
Dutch is particularly revealing in this respect. These
authors compared the use of evaluative expressions in
the narratives written by four groups of children from
a bimodal bilingual perspective: deaf children who are
proficient in Sign Language of the Netherlands (SLN),
deaf children who are low-proficient in SLN but are able
to use oral Dutch, hearing children who speak Dutch
only, and hearing children who speak both Turkish and
Dutch regularly. Results indicated that proficiently signing
deaf children used considerably more evaluative devices
in their written narratives than low-proficiency signing
deaf children, hearing bilingual and hearing monolingual
children. The proficiently signing deaf children seem to
have used their knowledge of SLN to convey evaluation in

571

their written narratives in Dutch. Interestingly, however,
the researchers did not find any significant difference in
the use of evaluative devices between the hearing bilingual
children and hearing monolingual children. This study
seems to suggest that similarities and differences in the
use of evaluative devices in Dutch between monolinguals
and bilinguals may depend on the particular combinations
of languages involved (i.e., SLN and Dutch versus Turkish
and Dutch in this case).
Based on these considerations, the present study
explored the development and use of evaluation in the
narratives of Chinese-English bilingual children and
adults. The specific goals set out for the present study were
(i) to examine the types of evaluative devices Chinesespeaking children and adults use in their construction
of English oral narratives, (ii) to show how the use of
these devices changes with development, (iii) to identify
the possible influence of the first language on the use
of evaluative devices in the second language, and (iv) to
gain insight into narrative development in child second
language acquisition via an analysis of the similarities
and differences in the usage of evaluative devices between
monolingual and bilingual populations.
Method
Participants
Eighty Chinese-English bilingual speakers who came
from Chinese-speaking families residing in the United
States and 80 monolingual English-speaking children
and adults participated in this study. There were 35
males and 45 females in the bilingual group, whereas
there were 28 males and 52 girls in the monolingual
group. They included 20 speakers from each of the
following four age groups: five-year-olds, eight-yearolds, ten-year-olds, and young adults (college students
at American universities). The participants were recruited
from kindergartens, elementary or middle schools, and
universities. They had neither received speech or language
services in the past nor were they receiving such services
at the time of the data collection. All children were given
parental permission to participate. Consent forms were
obtained from the young adults. Table 1 provides the mean
ages and the age range of the participants.
The Chinese-English bilingual speakers came from
Chinese-speaking families residing in the United States.
All participants had been exposed to Mandarin Chinese
from birth. The maintenance of the Chinese language and
culture is highly valued and promoted at the home of
these participants. Their parents, who are from mainland
China, communicate with their children in Mandarin
Chinese, and have enrolled them in community-based
Chinese schools to learn to read and write in Chinese. All
participants were exposed to English primarily through

572

Liang Chen and Ruixia Yan

Table 1. Participant information.
5-year-olds 8-year-olds 10-year-olds Adults
Monolingual English speakers
Mean age 5;6
8;7
Age range 5;3-5;11
7;11-8;10
Chinese-English bilinguals
Mean age 5;6
8;7
Age range 5;3-5;11
7;11-8;10

10;8
10;3-11;1

20
19-22

10;8
10;3-11;1

20
19-22

television programs and library story times before the
age of three. At the age of four, the bilingual children
were enrolled in state-funded Pre-K program, and from
then on they had increasing opportunity for English input
and output, both in school and in the neighborhood.
Based on parental or self ratings of oral proficiency in
Chinese and English using a five-point scale (0 = no
proficiency, 4 = native-like proficiency), all participants
were reported to have native-like proficiency in Chinese,
and all but the five-year-olds were reported to have nativelike proficiency in English.
Materials
Spoken narratives were elicited from children and adults
using the picture book Frog, where are you? (Mayer,
1969). This book has been used by researchers around the
world to study first and/or second language acquisition
in both typically and atypically developing populations.
The book consists of 24 pictures (with no accompanying
text) portraying a series of complicated events involving
several animate referents. There are three main characters:
a boy, his dog, and his pet frog. The frog escapes one
night, and on their way to search for him, the boy and
the dog have several adventurous encounters with four
secondary characters: a ground squirrel, an owl, some
bees, and a deer. Eventually, the boy and the dog find their
frog with a mate and some baby frogs, and return home
with one of the baby frogs in the boy's hand. The pictured
events afford numerous opportunities for the narrator to
infer or attribute emotions and mental states to characters
(e.g., fear, joy, surprise, desire, thoughts), relationships
between characters (e.g., friendship, animosity), as well
as motivations and causal explanations for the characters'
actions. Thus it provides a rich context for the study of
evaluative devices in bilingual narrative development.
Procedure
The participants were seen individually, either at home
or at school, by a Chinese-English bilingual researcher
who informed them that they would tell a story in
English and/or Chinese based on some pictures. The

researcher then asked the participants to go over the
picture book page-by-page from the beginning to the end
to familiarize themselves with the story. The participants
were instructed to examine the pictures as long as they
wanted before beginning. When the participants were
ready, the researcher then asked the participant to return
to the first page and to tell the story from beginning to end.
The bilingual participants told the story in both English
and Chinese with roughly half a month interval between
tellings. Approximately half of the participants in each age
group told the story first in English and then in Chinese,
and the other half told the story first in Chinese and then
in English. In an attempt to minimize interviewer control
over participant narrations, only minimal instructions,
such as "This is a story about a boy and a dog", or verbal
prompting, such as "What's next?" or "What about the
boy?" were given (Berman & Slobin, 1994, pp. 22-25).
Transcription
Each oral narrative was audiorecorded using a portable
Marantz PMD660 solid-state recorder. The stories were
then transcribed according to the conventions of the
Child Language Data Exchange System, or CHILDES
(MacWhinney, 2000). The CHILDES system consists of
a transcription protocol (CHAT) and a series of language
analysis programs (CLAN). The recorded narrative texts
were transcribed verbatim in clauses following the
guidelines given by Berman and Slobin (1994, pp. 655-
664). Initial transcription of the English and Chinese
recording was completed by a native speaker of English
and a native speaker of Chinese, respectively. To assess
inter-rater agreement, the first author reviewed all the
audiotaped samples for correspondence to the transcript.
Those clauses where there was any disagreement were
reviewed and then transcribed and segmented jointly until
agreement was reached. Word-by-word agreement was
determined to be 100%.
Coding and analysis
Narrative analysis focused on evaluative clauses, types of
evaluative devices, and evaluative perspectives. Following
Easton et al. (1999), our first analysis focuses on the
proportion of evaluative clauses in each narrative. Every
clause in each transcript is categorized as either a narrative
clause or an evaluative clause. A clause is categorized as
evaluative, if it provides comments that are not directly
evident within the picture book, but rather represent
the narrator's interpretation of events. The proportion of
evaluative clauses is the total number of evaluative clauses
divided by the total number of clauses in each transcript.
Following Bamberg and Damrad-Frye (1991), five
categories of evaluative devices were analyzed: (i) frames
of mind, which include references to story character's

Evaulative expressions in bilingual English narratives

573

Table 2. Mean number of narrative and evaluative clauses as a function of
age and group.
5-year-olds
Monolingual English speakers
Narrative
35.80 (5.2)
Evaluative
10.43 (1.5)
Total
46.23 (13.11)
Chinese-English bilinguals
Narrative
26.66 (7.3)
Evaluative
12.84 (2.6)
Total
39.50 (12.87)

8-year-olds

10-year-olds

Adults

36.64 (5.4)
14.46 (1.2)
51.30 (8.11)

34.01 (3.4)
20.44 (1.5)
54.45 (12.16)

40.66 (2.1)
27.68 (2.1)
68.34 (9.89)

21.25 (5.1)
12.40 (2.9)
33.65 (7.98)

20.56 (5.3)
13.78 (3.5)
34.34 (13.04)

33.66 (2.1)
25.21 (3.4)
58.87 (11.03)

mental and emotional states and behaviors (e.g., happy,
sad, angry); (ii) character speech, which tends to attribute
an intentional state to a story character (e.g., the boy called
out the window, "Froggie, are you there?"; (iii) hedges
used as distancing devices (e.g., probably, looks like, kind
of); (iv) references to negative states and actions (e.g.,
when the boy woke up, he found his frog was no longer
there); and (v) causal connectors (e.g., because, so). An
evaluative clause may include one or more evaluative
devices (The boy was kind of upset).
Evaluative expressions in a narrative reflect the narrator's perspective on the characters and events. Bamberg
and Damrad-Frye (1991) suggest that young children
make limited use of evaluative devices because they are
less able to adopt a global perspective on the narrated
events. Following Bamberg and Damrad-Frye (1991) and
Eaton et al. (1999) we conducted a third analysis of evaluative perspective on four situations that include events in
pictures 1-3, events in picture 7, and events in picture 24
from Frog, where are you?. In picture 1, the boy is sitting
on a stool, regarding with a smile a frog in a large glass
jar. In picture 3, the boy is leaning over the foot of the bed
gazing at the empty jar with a distressed look on his face.
In picture 7, the boy is holding his pet dog with a stern face,
probably because the dog falls down from the window to
the ground and smashes a jar as portrayed in the previous
picture. And finally in picture 24, the boy has found his
pet frog with another big frog and several little frogs. He
is holding a little frog in one hand, and has the other hand
raised in a wave as if saying good bye to the other frogs.
Narrations of these situations were categorized into the
following three types: (i) a local evaluative perspective
when the narration was based on local situational and/or
facial cues; (ii) a global evaluative perspective when the
narration was based upon eventual story outcome and
ignored or overruled the immediate facial expression; and
(iii) no mention. Take picture 7, for example. A ten-yearold monolingual child told the story this way: The boy and
the dog looked out the winder, and the dog fell out. The boy
was very angry. Then they went into the woods to look for

the frog. Here the child referred to "anger" in this situation,
and left it as such. This is an example of evaluations from
a local perspective, because it is restricted to a purely
local outcome. A narrator may evaluate the situation from
a global perspective if he or she chooses to focus on the
overall plot-structure as well as the communicative need
to make this structure explicit, and thus to overrule the
immediate facial expression. This may be illustrated by
the way a bilingual adult chose to talk about the same
situation: The dog accidentally fell out of the window and
broke the jar that he kept his frog in. The boy went outside
and was very happy to find out that the dog was OK. The
dog seemed to be happy too since they were outside.
A trained research assistant coded all of the data
and a second independent assistant recoded 20% of the
transcripts for reliability. Both coders were blind to the
objectives of the study and uninformed of the identity
of the participants. For the classification of evaluative
devices into the five types, kappas ranged from .83 to
.94, and for the classification of evaluative perspectives,
kappa = .93. Disagreements were resolved by discussion
among the coders and the first author.
Results
In the following analyses, ANOVAs were used to evaluate
the effects of the following factors on the development and
use of evaluative expressions: group (monolingual group
with English as L1 versus bilingual group with English
as L2), and age within group. All statistical analyses were
run at an alpha level of .05 unless specified otherwise.
The production of evaluative clauses
Table 2 presents the mean number of clauses as a function
of group and age. It shows that the stories varied greatly in
length (as measured by the total number of clauses). Both
age (F(3,152) = 2.1, p < .001) and group (F(1,152) =
4.9, p < .001) have a significant effect on the story length.
In particular, the stories produced by the monolingual

574

Liang Chen and Ruixia Yan
Table 3. Mean proportions of evaluative devices (relative to total number of evaluative
devices) produced per age groups and language status (tokens in parentheses).
5-year-olds
Monolingual English speakers
Frames of mind
.41
Character speech
.11
Hedges
.15
Negative
.18
Causal connectors
.15
Total tokens
Chinese-English bilinguals
Frames of mind
.40
Character speech
.12
Hedges
.14
Negative
.20
Causal connectors
.14
Total tokens

8-year-olds

10-year-olds

Adults

(84)
(23)
(30)
(36)
(30)
203

.46
.10
.11
.13
.21

(133)
(28)
(31)
(37)
(62)
291

.46
.05
.17
.11
.21

(177)
(20)
(64)
(43)
(79)
383

.53
.04
.18
.13
.13

(321)
(24)
(110)
(77)
(79)
611

(98)
(29)
(34)
(51)
(36)
248

.44
.11
.13
.08
.24

(104)
(25)
(31)
(19)
(58)
237

.46
.06
.17
.13
.18

(158)
(20)
(59)
(43)
(61)
341

.52
.05
.16
.12
.15

(260)
(24)
(82)
(60)
(78)
504

speakers were longer than bilingual speakers at each
age level. In both the monolingual and bilingual groups,
the stories produced by the adult group were generally
longer than those produced by the children. There is one
difference between the bilingual and monolingual groups
in terms of story length: whereas the eight- and tenyear-olds produced longer stories than the five-year-olds
for the monolingual groups, the bilingual five-year-olds
actually produced longer stories than the older bilingual
children. This variation in story length suggests that story
length (in terms of number of clauses) by itself may not be
a good indicator of narrative proficiency of the bilingual
group.
The mean proportions of evaluative clauses were
entered for an Age (4) x Group (2) ANOVA. The analysis
revealed an overall significant effect of age (F(3,152) =
4.45, p < .005). Both monolingual and bilingual children
produced more evaluative clauses in their frog stories as
they grew older. There was also an overall significant
effect of group on the frequency of evaluative clauses
(F(1,152) = 8.54, p < .004), with higher proportions of
evaluative clauses in the bilinguals (M = 0.38) than in
monolinguals (M = 0.31). These effects were qualified by
an interaction of Age x Group (F(3,152) = 3.91, p <
.01). Post-hoc tests indicated that the bilinguals used
significantly higher proportions of evaluative clauses in
the frog stories than monolingual speakers at age five
(F(1,38) = 8.88, p < .005), at age eight (F(1,38) =
9.01, p < .005), at age ten (F(1,38) = 8.97, p < .005),
but not in adulthood (F(1,38) = 3.02, p < .09). There
was a progressively reduced difference in the proportion
of evaluative clauses in the frog stories produced by
monolinguals and bilinguals: 10% at five years, 9%

at eight years, 5% at ten years, and 1% in the adult
group.
Types of evaluative devices
Table 3 reports the frequency and proportion scores of the
five types of evaluative devices (relative to each other, not
relative to story length) produced by the different groups
of subjects.
For each of the five categories of evaluative devices,
the proportion scores were analyzed within an Age (4) x
Group (2) analysis of variance. For ease of presentation,
details of the statistical results are reported in Table 4.
Table 4 shows that the main effect of age was significant
for the following three categories only: frames of mind,
negatives, and causal connectors. The main effect of age
for the latter two categories was modified by an age by
group interaction. Post-hoc comparisons were performed
to gain insight into the developmental trends in these three
categories. Adults used significantly higher overall mean
use of frames of mind than the five-year-old children for
both the monolingual group (M = 0.53 versus M = 0.41,
p < .01) and the bilingual group (M = 0.52 versus M =
0.40, p < .01). For the category of negative, a significant
difference was found between the five-year-old children
and the eight-year-old children for the bilingual group
(M = 0.2 versus M = 0.08, p < .005), but not for the
monolingual group. Similarly, for the category of causal
connectors, there was a significant difference between the
five-year-old children and the eight-year-old children for
the bilingual group (M = 0.14 versus M = 0.24, p < .008),
but not for the monolingual group. No other comparisons
were significantly different.

Evaulative expressions in bilingual English narratives

575

Table 4. ANOVA of each category of evaluative devices by age and group
(significant values are in boldface to indicate patterns).

Frames of mind
Character speech
Hedges
Negative
Causal connectors

Age

Group

Age x Group

df = 3,152
F = 3.91, p < .01
F = 0.08, n.s.
F = 1.02, n.s.
F = 2.95, p < .03
F = 3.93, p < .01

df = 1,152
F = 2.74, n.s.
F = 1.54, n.s.
F = 1.09, n.s.
F = 2.09, n.s.
F = 3.21, n.s.

df = 3,152
F = 0.33, n.s.
F = 0.19, n.s.
F = 0.40, n.s.
F = 3.37, p < .02
F = 3.92, p < .01

Table 5. Mean proportions of the three categories of evaluations (i.e., from
a local perspective, from a global perspective, no mention) by age and by
group (tokens in parentheses).
5-year-olds
Monolingual English speakers
Local perspective
.67 (53)
Global perspective
.12 (9)
No mention
.21 (18)
Chinese-English bilinguals
Local perspective
.62 (49)
Global perspective
.08 (7)
No mention
.30 (24)

As Table 4 also shows, there was no effect for
group. This result confirms an initial observation of
Table 3 that suggests the distribution of the five categories
of evaluative devices is largely similar between the
monolingual and bilingual groups.

The development of a global evaluative perspective on a
narrative
In order to see whether the monolingual speakers and the
bilingual speakers were similar in how they formulated
their evaluative perspectives, and in particular their
development of the ability to adopt a global evaluative
perspective on a narrative, the narratives were coded for
their references to the "frame of mind" of the primary
story character, i.e., the boy in four of the scenes in
the picture book. The narrators have three options with
these scenes: to describe them from a local perspective, to
describe them from a global perspective, or to choose not
to mention them. The total score, all types combined, was
four for each narrator. Table 5 presents the proportions
of each of the three categories of narrations. The results
show that for these scenes, evaluations from a local
perspective are very common for both monolingual
and bilingual speakers, particularly the young children.
Overall, evaluations from a local perspective account for

8-year-olds

10-year-olds

Adults

.44 (35)
.40 (32)
.16 (13)

.42 (34)
.45 (36)
.13 (10)

.31 (25)
.63 (50)
.06 (5)

.60 (48)
.19 (15)
.21 (17)

.61 (49)
.28 (22)
.11 (9)

.42 (34)
.51 (41)
.07 (5)

46% of narrations produced by the monolingual speakers,
and 56% of narrations produced by bilingual speakers.
An Age (4) x Group (2) ANOVA was conducted to investigate whether bilingual and monolingual speakers differ in their tendency, as well as the developmental patterns,
to evaluate the three scenes from a global perspective.
The analysis revealed an overall significant effect of age
(F(3,152) = 6.99, p < .0002). As children grow older, they
tend to provide more evaluations from a global perspective
for the four situations. The analysis also revealed an
overall significant effect of group on the frequency of
evaluations from a global perspective (F(1,152) = 14.46,
p < .0002), with higher proportions of evaluations from
a global perspective in the monolinguals (M = 32, SD =
13.17) than in the bilinguals (M = 21.3, SD = 8.77). There
was also a significant interaction between age and group
(F(3,152) = 5.18, p < .002). Post-hoc tests showed that the
bilinguals provided significantly fewer evaluations from a
global perspective than monolingual speakers at age eight
(F(1,38) = 14.1, p < .0006), at age ten (F(1,38) = 13.66,
p < .0007), at adulthood (F(1,38) = 13.44, p < .0007),
but not at age five (F(1,38) = 3.02, p < .09).
Discussion
The study represents the first investigation of Chinese-
English bilingual children's development and use of

576

Liang Chen and Ruixia Yan

evaluative expressions in oral narratives. As a number
of researchers point out, research on bilingual children's
oral narrative development is only in the initial stages,
and there is still an urgent need for additional research
(Chen & Pan, 2009; Fiestas & Pena, 2004; GutierrezClellen, 2002, 2004; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). By examining
how American-born Chinese-speaking bilingual children
learn to produce evaluative comments in oral narratives
in English in comparison with their monolingual Englishspeaking peers, the present study contributes to a growing
body of knowledge on bilingual narrative development in
two respects. On the one hand, the results of this study
indicate a clear age-related increase in two aspects of
evaluations in both monolingual and bilingual speakers.
As they grow older, both bilingual and monolingual
speakers produce a greater number of evaluative clauses
in their stories, and they adopt an increasingly more
global perspective of the story's character's frame of
mind. This finding is consistent with previous studies
which have indicated that the development of narrative
skills is a gradual process that continues throughout
adolescence and into adulthood (Berman & Slobin,
1994). More importantly, the finding suggests that both
monolingual and bilingual children are guided by similar,
probably universal, strategies in their development and
use of linguistic devices for evaluative functions. If this
interpretation is correct, then the results provide further
support for the view that bilingual and monolingual
children, regardless of the languages they are exposed
to, rely on largely similar strategies for global discourse
production in the process of constructing their narrations
(Berman, 2001). The universal patterns may partly result
from the determining role of general cognitive processes
that guide monolingual and bilingual children's gradual
development of evaluation in narrative production. In
other words, developmental differences in such cognitive
abilities are not to be expected between children
acquiring different languages (Rozendaal & Baker, 2008),
nor should they be expected between monolingual
children and bilingual children. These language-universal
strategies may form part of a discourse grammar that
provides all language users with "mental processing
instructions" (Givon, 1990, p. 914) for the construction
of narrative discourse.
On the other hand, this study also reveals two important
differences between monolingual and bilingual groups in
their development and use of evaluative expressions in the
English narratives. First, our Chinese-English bilingual
children produced more evaluative clauses (relative to
story length) than the monolingual English-speaking
children. This difference is interesting considering the
fact that the bilingual children were exposed to English
two or three years later than the monolingual children. We
suggest this may be an instance of bilingual bootstrapping
in the sense that "something that has been acquired in

language A fulfills a booster function for language B"
(Gawlitzek-Maiwald & Tracy, 1996, p. 903). Chinese,
the more developed language, is performing a facilitative
role in boosting the development and use of evaluative
expressions in the less developed language, English.
In comparison to their American peers, monolingual
Chinese-speaking children have been found to make more
reference to the feeling states of story characters (Wang &
Leichtman, 2000), and include more affective elements
(Domino & Hannah, 1987) in their narratives. Thus, it
is likely that the way that our bilingual children evaluate
the characters and events within a narrative format in
the second language is shaped to some extent by their
cultural practice in the first language. The other difference
between monolingual and bilingual groups relates to
the ability to integrate evaluative comments into global
hierarchical relationships between the events portrayed
in the picture book. While we see a gradual increase
in the ability in both groups of speakers, results show
the bilingual speakers, particularly the younger children,
have more of a tendency to adopt a local perspective of
the story character's frame of mind. This difference in the
relative frequency of evaluations from a global perspective
observed in the present study between monolingual and
bilingual speakers is puzzling and may have more than
one interpretation. We present one interpretation here that
relates to the possible influence of the cultural values and
accordingly the narrative cultural conventions associated
with the first language of bilingual speakers. Narrative
production is a cultural activity. Children growing up in
different communities learn to organize their narrative
experiences in ways that respond to their community's
cultural expectations. According to Wang and Leitchtman
(2000), Americans and Chinese differ with respect
to their thinking and reasoning patterns. Americans
generally attend to the internal attributes of a person
or object, analyze individual components in isolation
and succession, and decontextualize a behavior from its
environment while making dispositional judgments. In
contrast, the situational context plays a significant role
in how Chinese people think and reason, and they tend
to focus on relations between a person or an object and
the environment as the antecedent of a behavior. This
cultural variation may have led Chinese young children
to be more sensitive to others' emotional states and
make references to the feeling states of story characters
and other people's emotions in their stories than their
American peers. Wang and Leichtman (2000) also found
that six-year-old Chinese children's narratives showed
greater concreteness than Americans' as reflected in the
description of more contextual information and situational
details. As a result, our bilingual children may have been
trained by the culture associated with their first language to
focus on situational details as is portrayed in the pictures
(e.g., the facial cues of the story character), and not to

Evaulative expressions in bilingual English narratives
DECONTEXTUALIZE the local situational cues in order
to incorporate a global perspective as the monolingual
children would do. If this is true, cultural values need to
be considered in order to better understand differences in
monolingual and bilingual narrative development.
Narrative is an instrument for making meaning that
dominates much of life in one's culture, and a child's
improvement in narrative skill is closely related to the
child's social life (Bruner, 1990). Bilingual children may
be influenced by the ways in which they are socialized
to use the first language in cultural ways, when they are
telling a story in a second language. These and other
factors (e.g., the observation that each language trains
its speakers to pay different kinds of attention to events
and experience when talking about them) affect not only
the development of evaluative expressions in narrative
discourse but other aspects of narrative development as
well (see e.g., Berman & Slobin, 1994). The development
and use of evaluative expressions is a complex process
which requires children to go beyond analyzing the formal
properties at the sentence level to internalize the intricate
system of form-function relations at the discourse level.
Such a process is more complex and intricate than
in monolingual children because bilingual children are
experiencing the interaction of two developing systems.
Partly for this reason, narratives produced by bilingual
speakers may be unique, and fall in between those
produced by their monolingual peers in each of the
languages.
Notably, further research is needed to elucidate
the influence of cultural values and practices on the
development and use of evaluative expressions in the
narratives of bilingual children. Although the present
study contributes to a deeper understanding of the
complexities involved in bilingual narrative development
through examining bilingual speakers exposed to a pair
of typologically and culturally distinct languages, i.e.,
English and Chinese, it is exploratory in nature and
is not a bidirectional study. Whereas most research in
bilingual development assumes the relationship between
two languages to be unidirectional, an increasing number
of studies have suggested the possibility of a bidirectional
relationship in some linguistic domains (e.g., Brown &
Gullberg, 2008, 2010; Gu, 2010; Jarvis & Pavlenko,
2008). We are currently examining the narratives in
Chinese collected from the same bilingual participants
in comparison with their Chinese-speaking monolingual
peers. If parallel influences of English on Chinese
and Chinese on English were found, we would have
another case of bidirectional crosslinguistic influence.
There is also a need to examine a variety of typological
and culturally distinct pairs of language combinations.
Crosslinguistic and crosscultural differences in the
production of evaluative expressions in narratives are
likely to be a continuum rather than a neat dichotomy.

577

For example, Kuntay and Nakamura (2004) analyzed
the use of evaluative devices in frog stories of Turkish
and Japanese speakers. They found that children in
these cultures avoided making explicit reference to
psychological or mental states of the characters. This
contrasts sharply with the practice of English- and
Hebrew-speaking children (Berman & Slobin, 1994).
Thus, there seems to be a continuum with respect to
the tendency to make explicit reference to the mental
states of story characters: Chinese-speaking children the
most frequent, Turkish- and Japanese-speaking children
the least frequent, and English- and Hebrew-speaking
children sitting in between. If this were indeed the case,
one would predict that the patterns in the use of evaluative
expressions in narratives would differ between different
groups of bilingual speakers such as Chinese-English
bilinguals on the one hand and Turkish-English bilinguals
on the other. Explorations along this direction would place
us in a more solid foundation to evaluate the uniqueness
of bilingual narrative production, as well as the role of
cultural values and practices on the acquisition and use of
evaluative expressions in narratives of bilingual speakers.

References
Bamberg, M., & Damrad-Frye, R. (1991). On the ability
to provide evaluative comments: Further explorations
of children's narrative competencies. Journal of Child
Language, 18, 869-710.
Berman, R. A. (1997). Narrative theory and narrative
development: The Labovian impact. Journal of Narrative
and Life History, 7, 235-244.
Berman, R. A. (2001). Crosslinguistic perspectives on narrative
development. In L. Verhoeven & S. Stromqvist (eds.),
Narrative development in a multilingual context, pp. 419-
428. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Berman, R. A., & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating events in
narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brown, A., & Gullberg, M. (2008). Bidirectional crosslinguistic
influence in L1-L2 encoding of manner in speech and
gesture. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 30 (2),
225-251.
Brown, A., & Gullberg, M. (2010). Bidirectional cross-linguistic
influence in event conceptualization? Expressions of path
among Japanese learners of English. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, doi:10.1017/S1366728910000064.
Published online by Cambridge University Press, October
12, 2010.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Chen, L., & Pan, N. (2009). Development of English referring
expressions in the narratives of Chinese-English bilinguals.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12 (4), 429-445.
Domino, G., & Hannah, M. (1987). A comparative analysis of
social values in Chinese and American children. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 18, 58-77.

578

Liang Chen and Ruixia Yan

Eaton, J. H., Collis, G. M., & Lewis, V. A. (1999).
Evaluative explanations in children's narratives of a video
sequence without dialogue. Journal of Child Language, 26,
699-720.
Fiestas, C. E., & Pena, E. (2004). Narrative discourse in bilingual
children: Language and task effects. Language, Speech and
Hearing Services in Schools, 35, 155-166.
Gawlitzek-Maiwald, I., & Tracy, R. (1996). Bilingual
bootstrapping. Linguistics, 34, 901-926.
Givon, T. (1990). Syntax: A functional-typological introduction
(vol. II). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gu, C. (2010). Crosslinguistic influence in two directions: The
acquisition of dative constructions in Cantonese-English
bilingual children. International Journal of Bilingualism,
14 (1), 87-103.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V. F. (2002). Narratives in two languages:
Assessing performance of bilingual children. Linguistics
and Education, 13, 175-197.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V. F. (2004). Narrative development and
disorders in bilingual children. In B. Goldstein (ed.),
Bilingual language development and disorders in Spanish-
English speakers, pp. 235-256. Baltimore, MD: Paul H.
Brookes.
Jarvis, S., & Pavlenko, A. (2008). Crosslinguistic influence in
language and cognition. New York & London: Routledge.
Kuntay, A., & Nakamura, K. (2004). Linguistic strategies
serving evaluative functions: A comparison between
Japanese and Turkish narratives. In S. Stromqvist & L.
Verhoeven (eds.), Relating events in narrative (vol. 2):
Typological and contextual perspectives, pp. 329-358.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967) Narrative analysis. In J. Helms
(ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts, pp. 12-44.
Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd edn., vol. 2): The database. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mayer, M. (1969). Frog, where are you? New York: Dial Press.

McCabe, A., & Bliss, L. S. (2004/2005). Narratives from
Spanish-speaking children with impaired and typical
language development. Imagination, Cognition and
Personality, 24 (4), 331-346.
Pearson, B. Z. (2002). Narrative competence among
monolingual and bilingual school children in Miami. In
D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (eds.), Language and literacy
in bilingual children, pp. 135-174. Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental
psycholinguistics: Three ways of looking at a child's
narrative. New York: Plenum.
Reilly, J., Losh, M., Bellugi, U., & Wulfeck, B. (2004).
Frog, Where are you? Narratives in children with specific
language impairment, early focal brain injury and Williams
Syndrome. Brain & Language, 88, 229-247.
Rozendaal, M. I., & Baker, A. E. (2008). A cross-linguistic
investigation of the acquisition of the pragmatics of
indefinite and definite reference in two-year-olds. Journal
of Child Language, 35, 773-807.
Shrubshall, P. (1997). Narrative argument and literacy: A
comparative study of the narrative discourse development
of monolingual and bilingual 5-10 year old learners.
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development,
18, 402-421.
Uccelli, P., & Paez, M. M. (2007). Narrative and vocabulary
development of bilingual children from Kindergarten to
first grade: Developmental changes and associations among
English and Spanish skills. Language, Speech, and Hearing
Services in Schools, 38, 225-236.
van Beijsterveldt, L. M., & van Hell, J. G. (2009).
Evaluative expression in deaf children's written narratives.
International Journal of Language & Communication
Disorders, 44 (5), 675-692.
Wang, Q., & Leichtman, M. D. (2002). Same beginnings,
different stories: A comparison of American and Chinese
children's narratives. Child Development, 71 (5), 1329-
1346.

