Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain & Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Sublexical ambiguity effect in reading Chinese disyllabic compounds
Hsu-Wen Huang a,, Chia-Ying Lee b,c,d,e, Jie-Li Tsai e,f, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng b,c
a

Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
c
Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan
d
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan
e
Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
f
Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Accepted 23 January 2011
Available online 24 February 2011
Keywords:
Chinese compounds
Sublexical semantic ambiguity
ERPs
N400
Laterality

a b s t r a c t
For Chinese compounds, neighbors can share either both orthographic forms and meanings, or orthographic forms only. In this study, central presentation and visual half-field (VF) presentation methods
were used in conjunction with ERP measures to investigate how readers solve the sublexical semantic
ambiguity of the first constituent character in reading a disyllabic compound. The sublexical ambiguity
of the first character was manipulated while the orthographic neighborhood sizes of the first and second
character (NS1, NS2) were controlled. Subjective rating of number of meanings corresponding to a character was used as an index of sublexical ambiguity. Results showed that low sublexical ambiguity words
elicited a more negative N400 than high sublexical ambiguity words when words were centrally presented. Similar patterns were found when words were presented to the left VF. Interestingly, different
patterns were observed for pseudowords. With left VF presentation, high sublexical ambiguity psudowords showed a more negative N400 than low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. In contrast, with right
VF presentation, low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords showed a more negative N400 than high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. These findings indicate that a level of morphological representation
between form and meaning needs to be established and refined in Chinese. In addition, hemispheric
asymmetries in the use of word information in ambiguity resolution should be taken into account, even
at sublexical level.
O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Reading is one of the most important acquired skills for human
beings. How we recognize words has been the focus of a myriad of
investigations employing a range of different methodologies. Research in alphabetic languages has shown that the speed or accuracy of identifying a word is affected by the existence of other
orthographically similar words, the so-called orthographic neighborhood size effect. These experiments have adopted Coltheart,
Davelaar, Jonasson, and Besner's (1977) definition of an orthographic neighbor: any word that can be created by changing one
letter of the stimulus word with the preservation of letter positions
(e.g., house and horde are orthographic neighbors of horse).
Models of visual word recognition assume that the lexical representations of the orthographic neighbors of a presented word
will be activated and will play an important role in lexical access.
According to the serial-search model (Forster, 1976), a series of
 Corresponding author. Address: Department of Psychology, University of
Illinois, 603 E. Daniel St. Champaign, IL 61820, USA.
E-mail address: hwhuang@illinois.edu (H.-W. Huang).
0093-934X/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2011.01.003

comparison processes will result in an inhibitory neighborhood
size effect: words with more neighbors would be processed slower
than those with fewer neighbors. In contrast, according to the
interactive-activation framework (McClelland & Rumelhart,
1981), the neighborhood size effect is facilitatory. Words with
more neighbors would receive more reciprocal activation from
their sublexical constituents, and reach the activation thresholds
more quickly than those with fewer neighbors. To date, however,
behavioral evidence of the neighborhood size effect has been
inconsistent. Snodgrass and Mintzer (1993) found an inhibitory
neighborhood size effect in the perceptual identification task- to
identify a fragmented word as it was gradually clarified- words
with a large neighborhood size needed more time to be identified,
which supported the serial-search model (Forster, 1976). On the
contrary, Andrews (1989) found that lexical decision and naming
latencies for low frequency words with large neighborhoods were
shorter than those with small neighborhoods. Facilitatory neighborhood size effects have also been reported by Forster and Shen
(1996) and Sears, Hino, and Lupker (1995), which support the
interactive-activation model (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981). It
seems that whether a facilitatory neighborhood size effect can be

78

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

obtained in the lexical decision task depends on the type of nonwords used as distracters, and whether task instructions stress response speed or accuracy (Andrews, 1989; Grainger & Jacobs,
1996). For example, a stronger facilitatory neighborhood size effect
was found when task difficulty was reduced by using less wordlike nonwords (Andrews, 1989).
These inconsistent behavioral findings might be due to the limitations of using reaction times in isolation when investigating cognitive processes that necessarily invoke parallel and overlapping
stages. More generally, some aspects of semantic processing may
not be easy to capture with discrete measures such as response
time or accuracy. In contrast, the event-related brain potential
(ERP) methodology provides data that reflects processing at each
millisecond from the onset of language stimuli, and multiple, differentiable cognitive operations. Previous electrophysiological
studies have described many ERP components associated with different stages of lexical processing. The N400, for example, is a negative polarity ERP component that is maximal over centro-parietal
electrode sites and reaches its maximal amplitude at around
400 ms. after the onset of word stimulation. It is widely accepted
that the N400 elicited by words is particularly sensitive to the processing of semantics, and is relatively insensitive to the decision or
response strategies that frequently influence behavioral responses
(Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). Holcomb, Grainger, and O'Rourke (2002)
investigated the neighborhood size effect in reading English using
ERPs. They showed that the larger the neighborhood size (using
either words or pseudowords) the more negative the N400 amplitudes. Behavioral lexical decision responses, on the other hand,
showed a facilitatory neighborhood size effect for words but an
inhibitory neighborhood size effect for pseudowords which consistent with previous studies (Andrews, 1989, 1992; Carreiras, Perea,
& Grainger, 1997; Grainger & Jacobs, 1996; Sears et al., 1995). This
indicated that the opposed behavioral effects of words and pseudowords were led by the same mechanism. Lexical activation was
heightened with an increasing number of word neighbors; and this
activation is used to set positive or negative response criteria for
the lexical decision task. The more negative N400 amplitudes for
words with large neighborhoods were interpreted as reflecting increased global lexical activity, which facilitated behavioral
responses.
The investigation of neighborhood size effects in Chinese can
shed light on Chinese lexical processing. Chinese words are different from English in two aspects. First, more than 80% of Chinese
words are disyllabic compounds. Second--and more importantly--in contrast to English, where words are composed of a
small set of meaningless letters, Chinese words usually consist of
characters that can be mapped onto syllables and morphemes with
clear boundaries. The constituent Chinese characters of compound
words can be regarded as perceptual units at the orthographic level, but also as semantic units at the morphemic level (Hoosain,
1991).
In previous studies, neighbors of a Chinese compound have
been defined as words that share the same constituent character
with preservation of the character position, regardless of the character meaning (H. W. Huang et al., 2006; Tsai, Lee, Lin, Tzeng, &
Hung, 2006). For instance, a two-character word (e.g., , hua1
shi4, flower market), has the neighbors sharing the first constituent
character, termed as NS1 (such as , hua1 yuan2; flower garden)
or the second constituent character, termed as NS2 (such as ,
du1 shi4, city). The regression analyses in H. W. Huang et al.
(2006) have demonstrated that the neighborhood size of the first
character constituent played a more important role in lexical processing than the neighborhood size of the second character constituent did. Similarly, Tsai et al. (2006) have shown that the lexical
decision latencies of words with large neighborhoods were shorter
than words with small neighborhoods, and the authors suggested

that the neighborhood of a word sharing the initial constituent
character plays a supportive role in lexical access. Evidence from
eye movement studies also found that words with many neighbors
showed higher skipping rate and shorter gaze durations than
words with fewer neighbors (Tsai et al., 2006). These findings
pointed to that: (1) neighborhood size of the first character being
important in lexical processing and (2) the facilitatory NS1 effect
in Chinese may be similar to findings from languages with alphabetic writing systems.
However, Chinese words are composed of characters that can be
mapped onto morphemes with clear boundaries. In terms of this
characteristic, neighbors could share the same orthographic form
and the same morpheme, such as  (hua1 shi4, flower market)
and  (hua1 yuan2, flower garden), or neighbors could share
the same orthographic form but different morphemes, such as 
 (hua1 shi4, flower market) and  (hua1 qian2, spend money).
Therefore, in addition to the supportive role of neighbors at the
orthographic level, whether the constituent morphemes affect
word recognition is an unclear issue. One way to test this possibility is to manipulate the relationship between the whole word
meaning and the meaning of its constituent morphemes which is
described as semantic transparency. At one end, there are idiomatic compounds, like  (he2 shang4, monk), in which the
meaning of the word has nothing to do with the meaning of the
constituent elements, and hence are termed as opaque words. On
the other hand, there are compositional compounds, such as 
(shu1 dian4, bookstore), in which the meaning of the word can be
computed from the meanings of the constituent elements, and
hence are termed as transparent words. To our knowledge, there
is only one study that addresses this question. The NS1, NS2 and
the semantic transparency were manipulated in a study by C. M.
Huang (2005). The hypothesis was that if the facilitative NS1 effect
was mainly originated at the level of orthographic form, both
semantically transparent and semantically opaque words would
show similar NS1 effects. On the other hand, if the neighborhood
size effect also reflected semantic activation at the morphemic level, neighborhood effects would interact with word types. The results showed a clear interaction between neighborhood size and
semantic transparency in lexical decision response times--specifically, a facilitative NS1 effect for transparent words but an inhibitory NS1 effect for opaque words. This suggests that neighborhood
size effects in Chinese may not purely originate at the orthographic
level; instead, the morphemes of constituent characters must additionally be considered.
Many studies have examined the role of morphological structure in the lexical representations of compound words (Taft, Liu,
& Zhu, 1999; Taft & Zhu, 1995; Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1994;
Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1995; Zhou et al., 1999). It has been proposed that whereas each constituent character in a Chinese compound has its own orthographic, phonological, and semantic
representations, the whole word representation exists only at the
semantic level (Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1994, 1995). When a visual compound is presented, the semantic representations are accessed through the connections from the orthographic and
phonological representations of its constituent characters. The
activated semantic representations include both the whole word
and its constituent morphemes. Taft (2006) proposed a connectionist framework for the representation of poly-morphemic words
by contrasting free morphemes, bound morphemes, and binding
characters (for example, neither character of  (qiu1 yin3 earthworm) ever occurs in any other context). In this framework, there is
a level of representation that mediates between word forms and
semantics called ``lemma". Morphemic information is primarily
captured in lemmas, with lemma distinctiveness depending on
the correlation between form and meaning. Hence free-standing
words and bound morphemes have representations at lemma

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

level, but binding characters have no representation of their own.
What is unknown from Taft's study (2006) is how to represent
multiple morphemes of a character--specifically, one orthographic
form conveys more than one meaning (e.g. ``" not only means
flower, but also spend and trick related)at lemma level.
Based on the previous finding that the first character will play a
key role in the whole word reading (H. W. Huang et al., 2006; Tsai
et al., 2006), this study is primarily focused on the ambiguity of the
first constituent character, which we term sublexical ambiguity. We
aim to understand that in addition to the neighborhood size effects
at orthographic level whether sublexical semantic ambiguity affects the processing of compounds. The investigation of sublexical
ambiguity effects of Chinese words can shed light on Chinese lexical processing.

79

with more than one meaning do have separate representations at
the morphemic level, a sublexical ambiguity disadvantage is predicted. ERPs were recorded as participants were doing a lexical
decision task. The N400 component was used as an index, since
this component is particularly sensitive to the semantic process.
2.1. Methods
2.1.1. Participants
Twenty-one healthy undergraduate or graduate students (age
range 19-25, mean age 21.9 years) participated for cash in this
experiment. All were native speakers of Mandarin Chinese with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants were right-handed,
as determined by a handedness scale (Chapman & Chapman,
1987); three reported having left-handed family members.

2. Experiment 1
In lexical ambiguity literatures, two types of ambiguity are distinguished. In homonymy, a single word form has two (or more)
semantically unrelated meanings. For example, the word bank
has the meanings ``river side" and ``financial institution". In polysemy, on the other hand, a single word form is associated with
two or more semantically related senses. For instance, the word
paper can be used to refer to a material, as in ``shredded paper",
or to the content of a publication, as in ``Today's paper was interesting". Prior work examining these two types of ambiguity in lexical decision has demonstrated an ambiguity disadvantage for
homonymous words, and a sense advantage for polysemous words
(Rodd, Gaskell, & Marslen-Wilson, 2002). Similar results were also
obtained on an MEG study: the latency of the M350 component, an
index of lexical activation, was slower for homonyms than for nonhomonyms, and also faster for words with many senses than for
words with few senses (Beretta, Fiorentino, & Poeppel, 2005).
These findings imply that unrelated meanings were listed in separate entries, whereas related senses are stored as a single core
meaning.
To examine how sublexical ambiguity affects Chinese word processing, in the current study the sublexical ambiguity was manipulated while orthographic neighborhood sizes (NS1 and NS2) were
matched (see Fig. 1, described below). Assuming that characters

2.1.2. Materials
2.1.2.1. Index for number of meanings. The number of meanings corresponding to each character was accessed from a norming study
done by 270 university students (age range 18-28) in an unpublished database of 5640 Chinese characters. They were all native
speakers of Chinese. 5640 characters were selected from the Academia Sinica balanced corpus (C. R. Huang & Chen, 1998), and then
randomly divided into 15 lists; within each, 376 characters were
included. During norming, one character was presented at a time
on the center of the screen and remained there until the participant made a response by pressing a number key (1-5). Participants
were asked to think of as many two-character words as possible by
using the target character, no matter whether the character was in
the first or second position. Then, participants used a 1-5 rating
scale to estimate the number of different meanings corresponding
to the presented character. Rating 1 represented that the meaning
of the character is explicit and only one meaning is available, or the
character is always bound with the other character even though
there is no explicit meaning when it stands alone. Rating 5 represented that the meaning of the character is highly diverse and can
have more than five different meanings.
A corpus analysis has shown that number of meanings
corresponding to a character is highly correlated with its neighborhood size (R = 0.6, p < .0001). Given that characters with lager

Fig. 1. Examples of high sublexical ambiguity and low sublexical ambiguity words while controlling the neighborhood sizes. Underlined words are target examples. NS1
refers number of neighbors sharing the first constituent character. The number following the written pronunciation denotes the tone of the word in Mandarin.

80

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

neighborhoods also tend to have more meanings, to better understand the mappings from orthographic forms to morphemes is to
match the neighborhood sizes.
2.1.2.2. Stimuli. Word frequency and neighborhood size are available from the Academia Sinica balanced corpus (C. R. Huang &
Chen, 1998), 120 Chinese two-character words were selected.
Words were divided into four subsets by manipulating word frequency and sublexical ambiguity (number of meanings corresponds to the first character of a word). High frequency words
had a frequency of occurrence at least 150 per 10 million (range
150-2000, mean 687), and low frequency words had a frequency
of occurrence less than 30 per 10 million (range 1-30, mean 13).
Low sublexical ambiguity words were those whose first character
had a meaning rating smaller than 1.7 (range 1.1-1.7, mean 1.5)
and high sublexical ambiguity words were those whose first character had a meaning rating larger than 2.8 (range 2.8-3.8, mean 3).
The neighborhood size for first (NS1) and second (NS2) characters
were matched across conditions (high frequency low sublexical
ambiguity words: 15.1 vs. 15; high frequency high sublexical ambiguity words: 15.1 vs. 14.8; low frequency low sublexical ambiguity
words: 15; 15.3; low frequency high sublexical ambiguity words:
14.8; 14.3). Other possible confounding factors such as log transformed character frequency, subjective familiarity rating of the
characters and the number of meanings corresponding to the second
character were controlled. The subjective familiarity is based on an
unpublished corpus of 5640 Chinese characters. The data were
collected from 160 college students by using a 7-point scale for
familiarity rating (see Table 1).
A total of 120 pseudowords were created for the lexical decision
task by concatenations of two characters that do not occur in the
word corpus. Characters used for pseudowords were not overlapped with characters used for real words. Sublexical ambiguity
for pseudowords was matched with those of real words. Half of
them had low sublexical ambiguity (range 1.1-1.8, mean 1.5)
and the other half of them had high sublexical ambiguity (range
2.8-3.6, mean 3). NS1 and NS2 were matched for two pseudoword
conditions (low sublexical ambiguity pseurdowords: 14.3 vs. 14.4;
high sublexical ambiguity words: 13 vs. 13.8). Pronunciation of
pseudowords was controlled so as not to resemble that of real
words. Practice trials contained 10 words and 10 pseudowords.
2.2. Procedure
Participants were tested in a single experimental session conducted in a sound-proof, electrically-shielded chamber. They were
seated in a comfortable chair 70 cm in front of a monitor, and were
instructed to read the words for comprehension. They first participated in a practice run in order to familiar themselves with the
procedure; this was followed by a formal run. Each participant received 240 randomized experimental trials in four test blocks. A
two-to-three minute break was given to prevent eyestrain and
fatigue.
Each trial began with a white cross presented centrally for
500 ms. Then, the stimulus was presented and remained onscreen
for a maximum of 1300 ms, or until the participant made a lexical
decision response by pressing a mouse button. At the end of each

trial a capital B was presented in the center of the screen for
1500 ms, which indicated to participants that blinking was now allowed. Participants were asked not to blink their eyes until the
appearance of the capital B to minimize the interference of eye
movement artifacts. The inter-trial interval was 1500 ms.
Participants were instructed to make a lexical decision judgment. If they judged the stimulus to be a word, they were instructed to press the right mouse button; otherwise they were to
press the left mouse button. Speed and accuracy were stressed
equally. Response time, accuracy, and event-related potential data
were collected during the process.
2.3. EEG data acquisition and preprocessing
The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 64 sintered
Ag/AgCl electrodes mounted on an electrode cap (QuickCap, Neuromedical Supplies, Sterling, USA) and referenced to the bilateral
mastoid. The EEG was continuously recorded and digitized at a rate
of 500 Hz and the signal was amplified by SYNAMPS2O (Neuroscan, Inc.) amplifiers with the band-pass at 0.1-100 Hz for off-line
analysis. Eye movements and blinks were monitored with supraand infra-orbital electrodes and with electrodes in the external
canthi. Electrode impedances remained below 5 kX.
Epochs started 100 ms pre-stimulus, lasted to 922 ms, and used
the 100 ms pre-stimulus for baseline correction. Artifact rejection
was performed in two stages. The first stage was eye-movement
rejection in which trials with voltage variations larger than
100 lV in either VEOG or HEOG were rejected. In the second
stage, trials with voltage variations larger than 60 lV in at least
one of the rest of the channels were rejected. The data were then
band-pass filtered between 0.01-30 Hz (zero phase shift mode,
12 dB/oct). By averaging over corresponding trials, ERPs were computed for every subject, electrode and experimental condition for
correct trials only. Statistical analyses were performed on mean
amplitudes in the N400 window after Geisser-Greenhouse
correction.
2.4. Results
2.4.1. Behavior
For words, analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with the within-subject factors of word frequency and sublexical ambiguity were performed on reaction times and accuracy. Trials with incorrect
responses or reaction times that exceeded two SD from the subject's mean were removed from the analysis.
The main effect of word frequency was significant: high frequency words were responded to more rapidly than low frequency
words [F(1, 20) = 51, p < .0001]. The main effect of sublexical ambiguity was not significant [F < 1]. The interaction between two factors was not significant [F(1, 20) = 2.7, p = .13]. Since there were no
baseline differences, pairwise comparisons of sublexical ambiguity
effects for each word frequency were then conducted separately,
given the apriori goal of determining sublexical ambiguity effect
patterns in two frequency types. Results revealed that sublexical
ambiguity effect for low frequency words were marginally significant, with slower response times to high sublexical ambiguity
words (597.8 ms) than to low sublexical ambiguity words

Table 1
Example stimuli.
High frequency

Low frequency

Low sublexical ambiguity

High sublexical ambiguity

Low sublexical ambiguity

High sublexical ambiguity


tang2 jiang1 molasses


ke1 ji4 technology


xie2 dian4 shoe store


liang4 biao3 inventory

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

(588.8 ms) [t(20) = 1.4, p = .08]. There was no such tendency in
high frequency words (low sublexical ambiguity words: 557 ms;
high sublexical ambiguity words: 553 ms) [t(20) = 1.1, p = .27].
The accuracy analysis revealed a significant main effect of word
frequency: low frequency words were responded less accurately
than high frequency words (low frequency words: 95%; high frequency words: 98%) [F(1, 20) = 20.5, p < .001]. Additionally, the
interaction between word frequency and sublexical ambiguity
was significant [F(1, 20) = 9.6, p < .01]. Post-hoc analysis showed
that there is a significant sublexical ambiguity effect for low frequency words: accuracy for high sublexical ambiguity words
(93%) was lower than those low sublexical ambiguity words
(98%) [F(1, 40) = 21.7, p < .001]. There is no sublexical ambiguity effect for high frequency words (low sublexical ambiguity words:
98%; high sublexical ambiguity words: 98%) [F < 1].
Paired t-tests of reaction time and accuracy for pseudowords revealed no differences between two groups (low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords: 630.7 ms, 96%; high sublexical ambiguity
pseudowords: 630.6 ms, 97%).
2.4.2. ERPs
Typically, N400 effect is somewhat larger over the right than
left hemisphere (Kutas & Van petten, 1994). In order to access
the full pattern of results, we separated N400 (250-550 ms) analyses on midline and lateral data for both words and pseudowords.
For words, word frequency, sublexical ambiguity and electrode (FZ,
FCZ, CZ, CPZ and PZ) were included as within-subject factors in the
midline analysis. In the lateral analysis, word frequency, sublexical
ambiguity, laterality (left and right), and electrode (F3/4, FC3/4, C3/
4, and CP3/4) were used as within-subject factors. As for pseudowords, sublexical ambiguity and electrode sites were used as within-subject factors in the midline analysis. In the lateral analysis,
sublexical ambiguity, laterality and electrodes were used as within-subject factors. For each ANOVA, the Geisser-Greenhouse
adjustment to the degrees of freedom was applied to correct for
violations of sphericity associated with repeated measures. For
all F tests with more than one degree of freedom in the numerator,
the corrected p-value is reported.
The midline analysis revealed a significant effect of word frequency [F(1, 20) = 21.29; p < .001]; low frequency words elicited
larger N400s than high frequency words. The two-way interaction
between word frequency and sublexical ambiguity was significant
[F(1, 20) = 6.04; p < .05]. Post-hoc comparison revealed that the
sublexical ambiguity effect was significant in the low frequency
words [F(1, 40) = 4.95; p < .05] but not in the high frequency words
[F(1, 40) = 2.39; p = .14]. Low frequency, low sublexical ambiguity
words elicited larger N400s than low frequency, high sublexical
ambiguity words (Fig. 2).
The lateral analysis showed a significant main effect of word
frequency [F(1, 20) = 22.5; p < .001]; low frequency words elicited
greater N400 than high frequency words. The two-way interaction
between word frequency and sublexical ambiguity was significant
[F(1, 20) = 7.27; p < .05]. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that the
sublexical ambiguity effect was significant in the low frequency
words [F(1, 40) = 4.95; p < .01] but not in the high frequency words
[F(1, 40) = 0.76; p = .39]. Low frequency, low sublexical ambiguity
words elicited larger N400s than low frequency, high sublexical
ambiguity words (Fig. 2).
For pseudowords, no sublexical ambiguity effect reached significance in either analysis (midline: [F(1, 20) = 2.93; p = .10]; lateral:
[F(1, 20) = 1.52; p = .23]), although numerically high sublexical
ambiguity pseudowords (midline: 1.05 lV; lateral: 0.73 lV) were
slightly more negative than low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords(midline: 1.67 lV; lateral: 1.12 lV). And the sublexical
ambiguity did not interact with other factors in either analysis
[Fs 6 2].

81

2.5. Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that sublexical ambiguity affects
word recognition, which suggests that in reading a disyllabic compound, semantic representations are accessed through connections
from the orthographic and semantic representations of constituent
characters. For behavioral results, low frequency high sublexical
ambiguity words showed a tendency towards longer reaction
times and more errors than low frequency low sublexical ambiguity words. This is consistent with previous studies on semantic
ambiguity showing an ambiguity disadvantage (Rodd, Gaskell, &
Marslen-Wilson, 2004; Rodd et al., 2002). The sublexical ambiguity
disadvantage may indicate difficulty in mapping a single orthographic form to multiple morphemic representations. However,
low sublexical ambiguity words also showed larger N400s.
Our N400 results seemed inconsistent with previous ambiguity
studies (Beretta et al., 2005) on the surface. However, most of the
studies addressed ambiguity effects at the word level instead of
sublexical level of a word. In Chinese, there is one study presents
the initial character of a compound first and then presents the
whole word (H. W. Huang, 2009). For the epoch of initial character,
high ambiguity characters elicited more negative N400s than low
ambiguity characters these finding are in line with previous findings at lexical level (Beretta et al., 2005). But when a character is
imbedded in a two-character word, whole word presentation
might provide contextual information that could help resolve sublexical ambiguity (among multiple meanings) very quickly. In
other words, at an earlier stage of processing, words with high sublexical ambiguity first character might be more difficult than
words with low sublexical ambiguity first character at narrowing
multiple meanings to just one meaning. At the later stage of processing, to identify a unique word with the same meaning of the
initial character is easier for words with high sublexical ambiguity.
Because when the orthographic neighborhood size is controlled,
high sublexical ambiguity implies smaller number of words share
the same initial meaning whereas low sublexical ambiguity implies larger number of words share the same initial meaning.
Therefore, there are fewer competitors sharing the same initial
meaning for high sublexical words than low sublexical ambiguity
words (Fig. 1). For pseudowords, however, only processes for the
first stage are applicable. Therefore, pseudowrds with high sublexical ambiguity showed a tendency of more negative N400 than
those with low sublexical ambiguity.
Another possible explanation of our ERP results is based on the
results from studies for hemispheric asymmetries in processing
lexical ambiguity stimuli (e.g. BANK) by using the visual half-field
(VF) priming paradigm. This technique takes advantage of the fact
that stimuli presented in the left side of the visual field are initially
processed exclusively by the right hemisphere and vice versa.
Although information presented in this manner can be later transmitted to both hemisphere, the interpretation of VF paradigms
rests on the assumption that responses to stimuli presented briefly
to one VF reflect mainly the processing of that stimulus by the contralateral hemisphere, so that responses to targets in the right visual field (RVF) reflect left hemisphere (LH) processes and
responses to targets in the left visual field (LVF) reflect processes
in the right hemisphere (RH).
Semantic processes in the cerebral hemispheres have been
extensively explored using behavioral measures along (e.g.,
Beeman et al., 1994; Burgess & Simpson, 1988), or with electrophysiological measures (e.g., Atchley & Kwasny, 2003; Meyer &
Federmeier, 2007). There is an emerging understanding that the
two hemispheres play complementary roles during meaning
retrieval (Jung-Beeman, 2005). For instance, word priming studies
have shown that when ambiguous homonyms are presented in a
neutral context, the LH selects the dominant meaning, whereas

82

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

F3

FZ

F4

C3

CZ

C4

CP3

CPZ

CP4

-5 uV

0

400

800 ms

Fig. 2. Grand average ERPs to low frequency, high sublexical ambiguity and low frequency, low sublexical ambiguity words are shown at nine electrode sites. Low sublexical
ambiguity words elicited more negative N400 responses than high sublexical ambiguity words.

the RH activates and maintains both the dominant and subordinate
meanings (Burgess & Simpson, 1988). Similarly, Faust and Chiarello
(1998) have investigated hemispheric asymmetries in resolving
lexical ambiguity within sentence contexts. Sentences that bias towards a single meaning of sentence-final ambiguous words were
followed by lateralized targets related to the sentence-congruent
or -incongruent meaning of the ambiguous word, or unrelated
word. In the RVF/LH, sentence-congruent targets were facilitated,
while incongruent targets were not primed. In contrast, related targets were facilitated in the LVF/RH, regardless of sentence context.
These studies seem to indicate that the LH controls meaning selection processes, whereas RH maintains all possible meanings. However, studies involving unilateral RH damage participants have
suggested that RH contributes to the meaning selection as well
(Tompkins, Baumgaertner, Lehman, & Fassbinder, 2000). Finally,
recent ERP evidence, has demonstrated that two hemispheres responded similarly when contextual information is provided. In
contrast, when using a neutral context, LH tends to maintain multiple meanings, whereas RH activates one meaning (Meyer &
Federmeier, 2007).
In the current experiment, all of the stimuli were centrally presented; hence the first character was presented to the left of fixation (right hemisphere). However, the presentation time of stimuli
was much longer than those used in the split visual field studies
(500 ms vs. 150 ms). This might increase the crosstalk of the two
hemispheres and thus the effect was diluted. In Experiment 2 we
will use a divided visual field paradigm to further investigate
how sublexical ambiguity affects word recognition in two

hemispheres. If whole word presentation did help ambiguity resolution very fast and there are hemispheric asymmetries in processing ambiguous stimuli, based on the hypothesis that LH selects one
meaning (Burgess & Simpson, 1988) we expect to see the low sublexical ambiguity words elicit more negative N400s than high sublexical words with RVF/LH presentation. In contrast, with LVF/RH
presentation, since RH maintains all meanings (Burgess & Simpson,
1988), we expect to see high sublexical ambiguity words elicit
more negative N400s than low sublexical ambiguity words. However, if RH also involves in the selection process, we shall see the
results showing similar patterns as those with RVF/LH presentation. As for pseudowords, if the absence of contextual information
did affect meaning selection processes in two hemispheres (Meyer
& Federmeier, 2007), we predict to see high sublexical ambiguity
pseudowords elicit more negative N400s than low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords in the LH. On the other hand, under this circumstance, RH activates one meaning; therefore low sublexical
ambiguity pseudowords will show more negative N400s than high
sublexical ambiguity pseudowords in the RH.

3. Experiment 2
3.1. Materials and methods
3.1.1. Participants
Twenty-one healthy undergraduate or graduate male students
(age range 19-25, mean 22.1) participated in Experiment 2 for

83

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

cash. They were all native speakers of Chinese with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants were right-handed, as determined by the handedness scale (Chapman & Chapman, 1987); two
reported having left-handed family members.
3.1.2. Stimuli
One hundred and twenty low frequency Chinese two-character
words were selected from the Academia Sinica balanced corpus
(C. R. Huang & Chen, 1998) for this experiment. The words were
divided into four subsets of 30 words by manipulating VF (RVF
vs. LVF) and sublexical ambiguity. Low sublexical ambiguity words
were those whose first character had a meaning rating smaller
than 1.6 (range 1.1-1.6, mean 1.5) and high sublexical ambiguity
words were those whose first character had a meaning rating
larger than 2.8 (range 2.8-3.8, mean 3). A total of 120 pseudowords
were created for the lexical decision task by concatenating two
characters that do not occur together in the corpus. Pronunciations
of pseudowords were controlled so as not to resemble those of real
words. We also manipulated the sublexical ambiguity of pseudowords. Half of them had low sublexical ambiguity (range 1-1.7,
mean 1.6) and the other half had high sublexical ambiguity (range
2.6-3.8, mean 2.9). Characters used for pseudowords were not
overlapped with characters used for real words. The pronunciations of pseudowords were controlled so as not to resemble those
of the real words. Possible confounding factors such as NS1, NS2,
log transformed character frequency, subjective familiarity rating
of the characters and the number of meanings corresponding to
the second character were controlled. Practice trials contained 24
words and 24 pseudowords.
3.1.3. Procedure
Participants were tested in a single experimental session conducted in a sound-proof, electrically-shield chamber. They were
seated in a comfortable chair 70 cm in front of a monitor and were
instructed to read the words for comprehension. They first participated in a practice run in order to familiarize themselves with the
procedure; a formal run followed. Each participant received 240
randomized experimental trials in six test blocks. A two-to-three
minute break was given to prevent eyestrain and fatigue.
To make sure that subjects fixated at the center of the screen for
each trial, a white fixation ``+" was first presented in the centrally,
and a small circle was also presented around the fixation. Subjects
held a mouse in their hands. The stimulus was triggered to present
only when subjects use the mouse to center the circle on the cross.
The target word was then presented with its inner edge two degrees and subtended three degrees to either the left or right of
the fixation for 150 ms, followed by a blank screen for a maximum
of 1500 ms or until participant made a lexical decision response by
pressing the button of mouse. If subjects judged the stimulus to be
a word, they were instructed to press the right mouse button with

PO7

-4

3.2. Results
3.2.1. Behavior
Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with the within-subject factors
of VF and sublexical ambiguity were performed on reaction times
and accuracy for each of the word types (words and pseudowords
separately). Trials with incorrect responses or reaction times that
exceeded 2 SD from the subject's mean were removed from the
analysis. For words, neither main effects nor interactions were significant for reaction time analysis (all Fs 6 1; LVF/RH: 753 ms for
high sublexical ambiguity and 746 for low ambiguity words;
RVF/LH: 746 ms for high sublexical ambiguity and 750 ms for
low ambiguity words). Again, neither main effects nor interactions
reached significance for the reaction time of pseudowords (all
Fs 6 2; LVF/RH: 874 ms for high sublexical ambiguity and 892 ms
for low ambiguity pseudowords; RVF/LH: 893 ms for high sublexical ambiguity and 900 ms for low ambiguity pseudowords).
The sublexical ambiguity was significant on the accuracy analysis [F(1, 20) = 4.1, p = .05]. High sublexical ambiguity words were
responded less accurately (86%) than low sublexical ambiguity
words (89%). This was true for presentation to both hemispheres,
as there was no main effect of visual filed [F < 1], and VF did not
interact with sublexical ambiguity [F < 1]. For pseudowords, the
main effect of sublexical ambiguity was significant for accuracy
[(F(1, 20) = 18.1, p < .001]. High sublexical ambiguity pseudowords
were responded to more accurately (91%) than low sublexical
ambiguity pseudowords (87%). The main effect of visual filed
[F < 1] is not significant. And the effect of visual did not interact
sublexical ambiguity [F = 1].
3.2.2. ERP asymmetries contingent on presentation side
Fig. 3 shows ERP responses at posterior channels to words presented in the LVF and RVF, collapsed across lexicality and sublexical ambiguity. To confirm that lateralized presentation of the
stimuli resulted in the expected lateralization of visual processing,
mean amplitude N1 responses (150-200 ms) were measured at 10
posterior channels (P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, PO5, PO6, PO7, PO8)
where this component tend to be largest. These measures were
subjected to an omnibus 2 (lexicality: word vs. pseudoword)  2
(VF: LVF vs. RVF) x2 (sublexical ambiguity: high vs. low)  2

PO8

-4

uV

uV

400

4

their right index finger, otherwise, they were told to press the left
button of mouse with their left index finger. At the end of each trial
a capital B was presented in the center to allow blinking for
1500 ms. Participants were asked not to blink their eyes until the
appearance of the B in order to minimize eye movement artifacts.
The inter-trial interval was 2000 ms. Speed and accuracy were
stressed equally. Response time, accuracy, and event-related
potentials data were both collected during the process. EEG data
acquisition and preprocessing are the same as experiment one.

400

800

800

4

Time(ms)
Fig. 3. Effects of stimulus lateralization on ERP. Grand average ERPs to all stimuli presented in the RVF/LH (at left) and LVF/RH (at right) are shown at two representative
electrode sites (positions indicated by darkened shapes on the head diagram). N1 responses are larger contralateral to VF of presentation and are followed by an extended
negative-going effect that is also larger contralaterally.

84

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

(laterality: left vs. right recording sites)  5 (electrode) ANOVA.
The amplitude of the N1 was larger over the right than the left
hemisphere ( 1.1 vs. 1.9 lV) when stimuli appeared in the LVF/
RH, and it showed reverse asymmetry (2.4 vs. 1.6 lV) when stimuli appeared in the RVF/LH [VF  laterality, F(1, 20) = 53.5,
p < .001]. The reversed asymmetries of the visual N1 contingent
on hemifield were as expected; it confirmed that the procedures
for maintaining central gaze fixation and rejection of trials with
lateral eye movements were adequate to ensure lateralized processing, at least at the level of visual processing indexed by the
N1 (Hillyard & Anllo-Vento, 1998; Neville, Kutas, & Schmidt, 1982).
Previous studies measuring ERPs to lateralized visual stimuli
have reported a sustained late negative-going effect (has been referred to as the selection negativity) over lateral and posterior
scalp sites contralateral to the visual filed of stimulus presentation
(Federmeier, Mai, & Kutas, 2005; Neville et al., 1982), and we also
observed a visually similar effect in this study (Fig. 3). The term
selection negativity was taken from the literature on spatial
attention in which it refers to an ERP component elicited in target
detection paradigms that involve central fixation with selective
attention directed to peripheral targets (see, e.g., Hillyard &
Anllo-Vento, 1998).
3.2.3. ERP effects of sublexical ambiguity
The analysis of ERPs in the N400 time window (350-550 ms)
was conducted separately for words and pseudowords with two
repeated-measures ANOVAs for each word type according to
standard procedures. The first midline analysis was carried out
over the five electrodes (FZ, FCZ, CZ, CPZ and PZ) and used three
within-subject factors: 2 (VF: LVF vs RVF)  2 (sublexical ambiguity: high vs. low)  5 electrode sites. The second lateral analysis

was carried out with four within-subject factors: 2 (VF: LVF vs.
RVF)  2 (sublexical ambiguity: high vs. low)  2 (lateral: left vs.
right recording sites)  4 electrode sites (F3/4, FC3/4, C3/4, and
CP3/4). The interactions between VF and sublexical ambiguity on
the midline and the lateral analyses were significant for both words
and pseudowords [words-midline: F(1, 20) = 5.1, p < .05; wordslateral: F(1, 20) = 3.9, p = .05; pseudowords-midline: F(1, 20) = 11.7,
p < .01; pseudowords-lateral F(1, 20) = 11.3, p < .01]. Follow-up analyses were thus conducted separately in each VF.
For words (Fig. 4) with RVF/LH presentation, no sublexical
ambiguity effects were observed in either the midline or lateral
analyses (Fs < 1). With LVF/RH presentation, a sublexical ambiguity
effect was significant in the N400 window in both analyses [midline: F(1, 20) = 10.7, p < .01; lateral: F(1, 20) = 7.9, p < .01], with
more negative N400 responses to low sublexical ambiguity words
than high sublexical ambiguity words. For pseudowords (Fig. 5)
with RVF/LH presentation, sublexical ambiguity was marginally
significant in the midline analysis [F(1, 20) = 3.8, p = .07] and significant in the lateral analysis [F(1, 20) = 4.3, p = .05]. Low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords elicited more negative N400 than high
sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. In contrast, with LVF/RH presentation, high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords elicited more
negative N400 than low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords [midline: F(1, 20) = 10.7, p < .01; lateral: F(1, 20) = 7.9, p < .01].
3.3. Discussion
The goal of this experiment was to examine the sublexical
ambiguity effect in two hemispheres. With RVF/LH presentation,
we did not find any effect. Instead, with LVF/RH presentation, we
found different sublexical ambiguity effects in reading words and

Fig. 4. Grand average ERPs to high sublexical ambiguity and low sublexical ambiguity words presented in the RVF/LH (at left) and LVF/RH (at right) are shown at six
representative electrode sites. With RVF/LH presentation, no sublexical ambiguity effect was observed. In contrast, with LVF/RH presentation, low sublexical ambiguity words
elicited more negative N400 responses than high sublexical ambiguity words.

85

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

Pseudowords

-5 uV

0

200

400

600

800 ms

rvf/LH display

lvf/RH display

F3

F4

F3

F4

C3

C4

C3

C4

CP3

CP4

CP3

CP4

Fig. 5. Grand average ERPs to high sublexical ambiguity and low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords presented in the RVF/LH (at left) and LVF/RH (at right) are shown at six
representative electrode sites. With RVF/LH presentation, low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords elicited more negative N400 responses than high sublexical ambiguity
pseudowords. In contrast, with LVF/RH presentation, high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords were associated with more negative N400 responses than low sublexical
ambiguity pseudowords.

pseudowords. The finding that low sublexical ambiguity words
elicited more negative N400 than high sublexical ambiguity words
was consistent with Experiment 1. In contrast, high sublexical
ambiguity pseudowords elicited more negative N400 than low
sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. Similar findings in two experiments for words supported our hypothesis that the presentation
of the whole word provided a context for the first character to pick
up the most relevant meaning very quickly. However, this mechanism is not applicable for pseudowords, since its constituent characters had never been concatenated together before. For low
sublexical ambiguity pseudowords, the meaning of the first character is relatively more explicit, whereas for high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords, the meaning of the first character is less
precise. Therefore, it is difficult to make a no response to low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. This may be the reason why low
sublexical ambiguity pseudowords were responded to less accurately than high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords.
Our data showed that the sublexical ambiguity effect appeared
in the RH. No effect was found in the LH, which may not contrary to
a number of alternative accounts of hemispheric asymmetries in
semantic processing. For example, the coarse coding hypothesis,
states that the LH and the RH differ in the granularity of their
semantic activation with smaller, more focal activation in the LH
and larger, more diffuse activation in the RH (Jung-Beeman,
2005). Other accounts have stated that controlled semantic mechanisms are recruited differently in two hemispheres. Specifically,
multiple incompatible meanings are maintained in the RH because
of the absence of attention-driven, controlled inhibition processes
that act to narrow the range of relevant meanings (this process

being selectively available to the LH; Burgess & Simpson, 1988).
Some researchers have focused on differences in the hemispheres'
use of context information rather than semantic activation processes as the source of asymmetries observed in semantic priming
paradigms. It has been suggested that the LH is more likely to use
context to engage in active meaning selection (e.g., Faust & Gernsbacher, 1996), such that remotely related information is discarded
or actively suppressed in the LH, but remains available in the less
selective RH. A similar proposal suggests that asymmetries in language processing arise because the LH is more top-down or expectancy driven; actively predicting upcoming information, whereas
the RH seems to integrates new information in a more bottomup manner (Federmeier, 2007). Finally, some accounts have argued
that two hemispheres use different strategies in word processing.
Studies have found that word length has a greater impact on visual
word recognition when letter strings are presented to the LVF than
to the RVF (Ellis, Young, & Anderson, 1988; Young & Ellis, 1985). In
lexical decision experiments, RVF reaction times are not affected
by the number of letters, while each additional letter increases
LVF reaction times (Ellis et al., 1988). The asymmetry of the length
effect has often been taken to imply differential modes of lexical
access stemming from the efficient, parallel processing of letters
in the LH and the non-parallel processing in the RH (Ellis et al.,
1988; Young & Ellis, 1985).
Taken together, the disappearance of the sublexical ambiguity
effect for words in the LH does not mean that there was no semantic activation or selection there. Instead, the LH may use the
existence of top-down semantic information provided by the
whole word to pick up one relevant morpheme and suppress other

86

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87

alternative morphemes quickly. In contrast, the more bottom-up,
sequential processing mode initiated by the RH allows us to see
sublexical ambiguity effects. These findings are also in line with
evidence showing RH is involved in meaning selection (Meyer &
Federmeier, 2007; Tompkins et al., 2000). However, when processing pseudowords--which cannot provide top-down information--
the RH does maintain all morphemes. Therefore, high sublexical
ambiguity elicited more negative N400s than low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. Under this circumstance, the LH still picks up
one morpheme among alternatives. The meanings of the first character for low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords are more precise
than high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords. Therefore, low sublexical ambiguity pseudowords showed more negative N400 than
high sublexical ambiguity pseudowords.

4. General discussion
Words vary largely in their morphological structure, ranging
from mono-morphemic words to poly-morphemic words. Despite
wide acceptance that words are ``decomposed" into their constituent morphemes during visual word recognition, there are fewer
consensuses on how or when this decomposition occurs. In order
to solve this problem, one must first specify how morphological
information is stored in long-term memory. This issue is particularly important for Chinese because most Chinese words are
poly-morphemic compounds, and the constituent characters can
map onto one or more than one morpheme. Although Taft
(2006), using a character decision task, suggested a lemma level
of morphological representation in linking word forms and meanings, the exact nature of this morphological representation in lexical memory is still vague.
In this study, we used subjective ratings of the number of meanings corresponding to a character as an index of sublexical ambiguity, and aimed to investigate the morphological representation of
two-character words. The sublexical ambiguity disadvantage in
behavioral results supported separate entries of morphemes.
Clearly, a level of morphological representation of Chinese is
needed (Fig. 2). In the ERPs, however, words with high sublexical
semantic ambiguity elicited less negativity than those with low
sublexical semantic ambiguity words. We suggested that more
morphemes corresponding to the initial character implies smaller
numbers of words within a meaning when the neighborhood size
was controlled. In addition, the whole word presentation of a Chinese word provides top-down information, and we showed different sublexical ambiguity patterns of words and pseudowords in
two hemispheres. Further studies in exploring sublexical ambiguity of Chinese words should take hemispheric asymmetries into
account.
Ultimately, it is still hard to explain ``when" readers pickup only
one relevant meaning among multiple alternatives. On the one
hand, there is a potential problem with the subjective rating on
number of meanings associated with a character; more meanings
might carry two ideas: A character stands for many distinct meanings, and a character that stands for many related meanings. Studies of lexical ambiguity have proposed that senses of polysemous
words are represented as a single, core meaning rather than different words, whereas meanings of homonymous words are represented as different lexical entries. However, this distinction may
not able to be determined according to the subjective rating itself.
On the other hand, it is worth knowing whether two types of
sublexical ambiguity representations are needed for Chinese
words. Further studies are needed to refine the morphological
representation and to evaluate whether there are sublexical
ambiguity disadvantages and sense advantage effects in Chinese.

Acknowledgment
We thank Dr. Jeremy Boyd for his constructive comments.

References
Andrews, S. (1989). Frequency and neighborhood effects on lexical access:
Activation or search? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15(5), 802-814.
Andrews, S. (1992). Frequency and neighborhood effects on lexical access: Lexical
similarity or orthographic redundancy? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18(2), 234-254.
Atchley, R. A., & Kwasny, K. M. (2003). Using event-related potentials to examine
hemispheric differences in semantic processing. Brain and Cognition, 53(2),
133-138.
Beeman, M., Friedman, R. B., Grafman, J., Perez, E., Diamond, S., & Lindsay, M. B.
(1994). Summation priming and coarse semantic coding in the right
hemisphere. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(1), 26-45.
Beretta, A., Fiorentino, R., & Poeppel, D. (2005). The effects of homonymy and
polysemy on lexical access: An MEG study. Cognitive Brain Research, 24(1),
57-65.
Burgess, C., & Simpson, G. B. (1988). Cerebral hemisphere mechanisms in the
retrieval of ambiguous word meanings. Brain and Language, 33(1), 86-103.
Carreiras, M., Perea, M., & Grainger, J. (1997). Effects of orthographic neighborhood
in visual word recognition: Cross-task comparisons. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 23(4), 857-871.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1987). The measurement of handedness. Brain and
Cognition, 6(2), 175-183.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D. (1977). Access to the internal
lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and performance VI (pp. 535-555). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ellis, A. W., Young, A. W., & Anderson, C. (1988). Modes of word recognition in the
left and right cerebral hemispheres. Brain and Language, 35(2), 254-273.
Faust, M., & Chiarello, C. (1998). Sentence context and lexical ambiguity resolution
by the two hemispheres. Neuropsychologia, 36(9), 827-835.
Faust, M. E., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (1996). Cerebral mechanisms for suppression of
inappropriate information during sentence comprehension. Brain and Language,
53(2), 234-259.
Federmeier, K. D. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and roots of prediction in
language comprehension. Psychophysiology, 44(4), 491-505.
Federmeier, K. D., Mai, H., & Kutas, M. (2005). Both sides get the point: Hemispheric
sensitivities to sentential constraint. Memory and Cognition, 33(5), 871-886.
Forster, K. I. (1976). Accessing the mental lexicon. In R. Wales & E. Walker (Eds.),
New approaches to language mechanisms (pp. 257-287). Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Forster, K. I., & Shen, D. (1996). No enemies in the neighborhood: Absence of
inhibitory neighborhood effects in lexical decision and semantic categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 22(3),
696-713.
Grainger, J., & Jacobs, A. M. (1996). Orthographic processing in visual word
recognition: a multiple read-out model. Psychological Review, 103(3), 518-565.
Hillyard, S. A., & Anllo-Vento, L. (1998). Event-related brain potentials in the study
of visual selective attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 95(3), 781-787.
Holcomb, P. J., Grainger, J., & O'Rourke, T. (2002). An electrophysiological study of
the effects of orthographic neighborhood size on printed word perception.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(6), 938-950.
Hoosain, R. (1991). Psycholinguistic Implications for linguistic relativity: A case study of
Chinese. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Huang, C. M. (2005). Neighborhood size effect in reading chinese two-character
words: an ERP study. Unpublished master's thesis. National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Huang, H. W. (2009). The sublexical semantic ambiguity effect for reading Chinese
disyllabic compounds. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Huang, C. R., & Chen, K. J. (1998). Academia Sinica balanced corpus (version 3). Taipei,
Taiwan: Academia Sinica.
Huang, H. W., Lee, C. Y., Tsai, J. L., Lee, C. L., Hung, D. L., & Tzeng, O. J. L. (2006).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in reading Chinese two-character words.
Neuroreport, 17(10), 1061-1065.
Jung-Beeman, M. (2005). Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural
language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(11), 512-518.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Event-related brain potentials to semantically
inappropriate and surprisingly large words. Biological Psychology, 11(2), 99-116.
Kutas, M., & Van Petten, C. (1994). Psycholinguistics electrified: Event-related brain
potential investigations. In M. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of psycholinguistics
(pp. 83-143). New York: Academic Press.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation model of
context effects in letter perception: Part 1. An account of basic findings.
Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.
Meyer, A. M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2007). The effects of context, meaning frequency,
and associative strength on semantic selection: Distinct contributions from
each cerebral hemisphere. Brain Research, 1183(1), 91-108.

H.-W. Huang et al. / Brain & Language 117 (2011) 77-87
Neville, H. J., Kutas, M., & Schmidt, A. (1982). Event-related potential studies of
cerebral specialization during reading. I. Studies of normal adults. Brain and
Language, 16(2), 300-315.
Rodd, J., Gaskell, G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (2002). Making sense of semantic
ambiguity: Semantic competition in lexical access. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46(2), 245-266.
Rodd, J. M., Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2004). Modelling the effects of
semantic ambiguity in word recognition. Cognitive Science, 28(1), 89-104.
Sears, C. R., Hino, Y., & Lupker, S. Y. (1995). Neighborhood size and neighborhood
frequency effects in word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 21(4), 876-900.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Mintzer, M. (1993). Neighborhood effects in visual word
recognition: Facilitatory or inhibitory? Memory and Cognition, 21(2), 247-266.
Taft, M. (2006). Processing of characters by native Chinese readers. In P. B. Li,
Elizabeth, Li Hai Tan, Ovid J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), The handbook of East Asian
psycholinguistics (pp. 237-249). Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Taft, M., Liu, Y., & Zhu, X. (1999). Morphemic processing in reading Chinese. In A.
Inhoff, J. Wang, & H.-C. Chen (Eds.), Reading Chinese script: A cognitive analysis
(pp. 91-113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

87

Taft, M., & Zhu, X. (1995). Processing bound morphemes in English and Chinese. In L.
Feldman (Ed.), Morphological aspects of language processing. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tompkins, C. A., Baumgaertner, A., Lehman, M. T., & Fassbinder, W. (2000).
Mechanisms of discourse comprehension impairment after right hemisphere
brain damage: Suppression in lexical ambiguity resolution. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 43(1), 62-78.
Tsai, J. L., Lee, C. Y., Lin, Y. C., Tzeng, O. J. L., & Hung, D. L. (2006). Neighborhood size
effects of Chinese words in lexical decision and reading. Language and
Linguistics, 7(3), 659-675.
Young, A. W., & Ellis, A. W. (1985). Different methods of lexical access for words
presented in the left and right visual hemifields. Brain and Language, 24(2),
326-358.
Zhou, X., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1994). Words, morphemes and syllables in the
Chinese mental lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 393-422.
Zhou, X., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1995). Morphological structure in the Chinese
mental lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 545-600.
Zhou, X., Marslen-Wilson, W., Taft, M., & Shu, H. (1999). Morphology, orthography,
and phonology in reading Chinese compound words. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14, 525-565.

