Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

How does distinctive processing reduce false recall?
R. Reed Hunt , Rebekah E. Smith, Kathryn R. Dunlap
Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 11 October 2010
revision received 27 May 2011
Available online 2 July 2011
Keywords:
False memory
Distinctive processing

a b s t r a c t
False memories arising from associatively related lists are a robust phenomenon that
resists many efforts to prevent it. However, a few variables have been shown to reduce this
form of false memory. Explanations for how the reduction is accomplished have focused on
either output monitoring processes or constraints on access, but neither idea alone is sufficient to explain extant data. Our research was driven by a framework that distinguishes
item-based and event-based distinctive processing to account for the effects of different
variables on both correct recall of study list items and false recall. We report the results
of three experiments examining the effect of a deep orienting task and the effect of visual
presentation of study items, both of which have been shown to reduce false recall. The
experiments replicate those previous findings and add important new information about
the effect of the variables on a recall test that eliminates the need for monitoring. The
results clearly indicate that both post-access monitoring and constraints on access contribute to reductions in false memories. The results also showed that the manipulations of
study modality and orienting task had different effects on correct and false recall, a pattern
that was predicted by the item-based/event-based distinctive processing framework.
O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Roediger and McDermott's (1995; see also, Read, 1996)
resurrection of Deese's (1959) preparation instigated a
flood of studies on false memory (see Gallo, 2006, for a
thorough review). In the Deese (DRM) paradigm, the participant is asked to remember a list of words. All of the presented words are related to a single word, which is not
presented in the list. All things equal, the non-presented
word is remembered at about the same level as the presented words and with the same degree of confidence in
both recognition and recall tests (e.g., Payne, Elie, Blackwell, & Neuschatz, 1996; Roediger & McDermott, 1995,
2000). Although false memories can be difficult to prevent
(e.g., Gallo, Roediger, & McDermott, 2001; Kimball & Bjork,
2002; McConnell & Hunt, 2007; Neuschatz, Lynn, Benoit, &
Payne, 2003), research has uncovered some variables that
reduce, if not eliminate, false memory.
 Corresponding author.
E-mail address: reed.hunt@utsa.edu (R.R. Hunt).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2011.06.003

One set of such variables is the mode of study list presentation. For example, Schacter and his colleagues (e.g.,
Schacter, Cendan, Dodson, & Clifford, 2001; Schacter, Israel,
& Racine, 1999) found that false memory is reduced if pictures accompany the auditory presentation of list words
relative to presentation of the visual word along with the
auditory word. Likewise, fewer false memories occur when
associated word lists are seen as opposed heard (Cleary &
Greene, 2002; Gallo, McDermott, Percer, & Roediger,
2001; Kellogg, 2001; Smith & Engle, 2011; Smith & Hunt,
1998; Smith, Hunt, & Gallagher, 2008; Smith, Lozito, & Bayen, 2005). Another prominent set of variables that reduces
false memory is the activity performed on the study list.
For instance, Smith and Hunt (1998) found that rating
the pleasantness of each list item reduced false memory
relative to intentional memory instructions. McCabe,
Presmanes, Robertson, and Smith (2004) showed that
pleasantness rating reduced false memory relative to a
sorting tak. Dodson and Schacter (2001) required participants to read each study word aloud, which reduced false
memory compared to reading the words silently, and

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

Seamon et al. (2003) found that writing the words as they
are heard reduces false memory relative to just hearing the
words. The purpose of the research reported here is to
examine the output processes that mediate the effects of
variables that reduce false memory.
Output processes: early selection or late correction?
The issue of output processes mediating false memory
is framed nicely by Jacoby, Kelley, and McElree (1999)
who distinguished between early selection and late correction. They argue that memory accuracy can be controlled
either by editing what comes to mind (late correction) or
alternatively restricting what comes to mind in response
to a cue (early selection). Both types of control have been
proposed to account for the reductions in false memory.
The better known of these positions is post-access monitoring in which the products of retrieval are edited for
accuracy before output.
Late correction: the distinctiveness heuristic
The distinctiveness heuristic (Schacter et al., 1999) is
the predominant example of post-access monitoring. The
distinctiveness heuristic is a strategy adopted at the time
of a memory test. On the meta-memorial belief that some
feature shared by all of the target items will be particularly
memorable, all accessed items are strategically monitored
at test for evidence of that original processing. The information believed to be memorable is said to be ``distinctive'', hence the distinctiveness heuristic. The absence of
evidence for the distinctive processing is evidence for the
absence of the item in the original experience (Schacter
et al.). The distinctiveness heuristic has received substantial support in prior research. (e.g., Dodson & Schacter,
2002; Gallo, Meadow, Johnson, & Foster, 2008; Gallo, Weis,
& Schacter, 2004; Schacter et al., 2001).
Early selection: impoverished relational processing
Prior research has also produced evidence supporting
the early selection approach to explaining the beneficial effect of certain variables on false memory. Using the DRM
paradigm, Arndt and Reder (2003) varied the font in which
study words were presented such that all of the words
from an associative theme appeared in the same font or
all words appeared in different fonts. False recognition of
critical lures was reduced in the unique font condition,
and this effect occurred regardless of whether the font
manipulation was within- or between-subjects. Arndt
and Reder proposed an access-based explanation for their
data that appeals to the distinction between relational
and item-specific processing (e.g., Hunt & Einstein, 1981).
Relational processing is the processing of information
shared by all of the elements of an event. Item-specific processing is the processing of information unique to an item
in the list. An obvious dimension of relationship among the
items of a DRM list is the information corresponding to the
critical, non-presented item to which all other items are
related. Arndt and Reder suggested that their font manipulation affected the relative balance of relational and
item-specific information. When each item is in a different
font, study processing is directed toward item-specific

379

features and away from relational attributes thus reducing
the probability of activation of the critical item. Thus, the
critical item is less likely to come to mind at test.
The access interpretation was directly tested by Hege
and Dodson (2004), who used the picture-word manipulation to reduce false memory of critical DRM list items. The
focal variable in this study was the type of instructions given at test, either standard or inclusion instructions. Standard test instructions were to recall the items shown at
study. Inclusion instructions were to recall the items from
study as well as other related items that come to mind. A
version of these instructions were first used in DRM studies by Brainerd and Reyna (1998), who found that more
critical items are recalled under inclusion than under standard instructions, as would be expected if post-access
monitoring were part of retrieval. Inclusion instructions
should disengage post-access monitoring allowing more
critical intrusions in the inclusion test than in the standard
test. On this reasoning, Hege and Dodson predicted that
the normal reduction in false recall following picture + word study should disappear in the inclusion condition. To the contrary, their results showed a comparable
reduction of false recall under inclusion and standard recall
instructions. Hege and Dodson interpreted their data in
line with the reduction in relational processing proposed
by Arndt and Reder (2003). That is, the beneficial effect
of picture presentation at study is the result of encoding
processes that reduce the probability of the critical item
coming to mind and subsequently being remembered. In
sum, the explanations proposed by Arndt and Reder
(2003) and Hege and Dodson (2004) converge on the conclusion that the reduction in false memory was due to a
deficit in relational processing at study.
An alternative view
In contrast to Arndt and Reder (2003) and Hege and
Dodson (2004), we presume that the constraint on false
memory imposed by the variables we investigate is not
due to impoverished relational processing, but instead
we propose an explanation in which item-specific and relational processing work in concert, resulting in distinctive
processing that can reduce false memories. However, our
conceptualization of distinctive processing is unlike that
of the distinctiveness heuristic. Distinctive processing will
be defined as the processing of difference in the context of
similarity, a position that grew out of the research surrounding the distinction between item-specific and relational processing (Hunt & Einstein, 1981; see Hunt &
McDaniel, 1993, for a review of this research). Relational
processing encodes some dimension(s) of similarity among
a set of items, e.g., spatial/temporal and semantic, whereas
item-specific processing entails information specific to
individual items. If difference (item-specific) is encoded
in the context of similarity and that difference processing
is reinstated at retrieval, i.e., distinctive processing is reinstated at retrieval, precise memory for the studied items
will occur.
Distinctive processing has been invoked to explain the
effect of encoding operations on false memory. Dobbins,
Kroll, Yonelinas, and Liu (1998) and Gruppuso, Lindsay,

380

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

and Kelley (1997) reported experiments in which subjects
were shown two separate lists of words and then asked to
remember the items only from the second list. Memory
was better when different orienting tasks were performed
on the two lists compared to the same task on both lists,
and the difference was due entirely to fewer false memories of first list items following the different orienting
tasks. The effect was attributed to distinctive processing
but contrary to the foregoing description of distinctive processing, there was no effect on studied items. To reconcile
the two accounts, Hunt (2003) noted that the preparation
used by Dobbins et al. and Gruppuso et al. did not vary distinctive processing within the target study list (i.e., all
items in the list received distinctive processing). Consequently, one would not predict an effect on hits from distinctive processing. However, the effect on false alarms
can be explained in terms of distinctive processing if one
assumed that the unit to which that distinctive processing
applied is the unit of the lists. That is, the two lists appeared in a similar spatial/temporal context but within
that encoding context similarity, a different orienting task
was applied to each list. Thus, two different orienting tasks
promoted distinctive processing, not at the level of studied
items, but at the level of the lists.
Event-based and item-based distinctiveness
To capture the difference between item and list processing, Hunt (2003) proposed a distinction between
item-based distinctive processing and event-based distinctive processing. In both cases distinctive processing is defined as processing difference in the context of similarity,
but in one case the difference occurs at the level of the
individual items within the target list and in the other it refers to difference between two lists. As discussed in greater
detail in the discussion section, the definition of items and
events will be determined largely by the way in which
memory is probed or cued. In the two list paradigm, the
individual list words constitute the items and each list constitutes an event. Within a list, each item can receive processing that differentiates that item from the other items
in the list, resulting in item-based distinctive processing.
If the two lists are processed in different ways (for instance
one receives pleasantness ratings while the other is sorted
into categories), this provides for differentiation of the two
lists within the shared context of the overall study episode.
In other words, processing the two lists in different ways
allows for event-based distinctiveness with each list constituting an event. Hunt (2003) demonstrated that manipulations of item-based and event-based distinctive
processing exerted independent effects on memory for target items and on false alarms.
Applied to false memory in the DRM paradigm (Table 1),
the study list constitutes the event and the words within
the list constitute the items. Event-based distinctive processing presumes that differences in processing the DRM
target list and the critical item will reduce false memory
of the critical item. At one level, processing of targets and
the critical item is always different in that the critical item
is not subject to perceptual processing. This distinction
alone is sufficient to support accurate responses to some
critical items; we are unaware of any study reporting false

responses to 100% of the critical items. Beyond that difference, various manipulations exaggerate processing differences between list items and critical items. The two
manipulations that we shall study here are orienting tasks
and modality of study presentation. Semantic orienting
tasks and visual study presentations have been shown to
reduce critical false alarms relative to auditory study presentations under intentional memory study, and we argue
that this is due to event-based distinctiveness. Semantic
orienting tasks have also been shown to improve correct
recall, a finding that we attribute to item-based distinctiveness. Thus, as considered in greater detail in the general
discussion, the theory of event-based and item-based distinctive processing described above will be shown to be
useful for predicting the effects of these manipulations
on false recall as well as correct responses.
Comparing standard and inclusion recall tests
The primary purpose of the current experiments is to
investigate control processes at output by comparing performance on the inclusion test used by Hege and Dodson
(2004) with standard free recall. In other words, we will
apply the inclusion test to evaluate whether the effects of
event-based and item-based distinctiveness in the DRM
paradigm occur through early-selection, late correction,
or some combination of the two. The first two experiments
will feature manipulations of orienting tasks. The third
experiment will manipulate both orienting task and
modality of study presentation.
Experiment 1
The first experiment examined the effects of orienting
tasks at study on false recall of DRM lists as a function of
the type of recall instructions. The three encoding conditions were intentional memory, a deep orienting task
(pleasantness rating), and a shallow orienting task (vowel
counting). Test instructions were either standard free recall instructions or inclusion instructions. The latter explicitly allowed recall of items related to the list items, even if
the related items had not been in the study list.
Previous research has found a reduction in false recall
following a deep orienting task at study relative to intentional memory instructions (Smith & Hunt, 1998). Thus,
we predicted that for the standard recall test, pleasantness
rating would reduce false recall relative to intentional
study. The particular deep processing task used in this
experiment, pleasantness rating, encourages both itemspecific and event-based processing. Therefore, the deep
processing condition will show an increased level of correct recall, as well as a reduction in false recall, relative
to the intentional memory condition.
The shallow orienting task was included in the first
experiment to allow us to address a second issue. In contrast to Smith and Hunt (1998), several studies have reported that deep orienting tasks produce more false
memories for DRM lists (e.g., Rhodes & Anastasi, 2000;
Thapar & McDermott, 2001; Toglia, Neuschatz, & Goodwin,
1999). All of these studies have compared the effect of
deep tasks to shallow tasks whereas Smith and Hunt used

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

381

Table 1
Definitions, examples, and predictions for item-based and event-based distinctiveness.
Item-based distinctiveness

Event-based distinctiveness

Definition

List items receive item-specific processing the in context of
similarity

Within a similar temporal/spatial context, different events
are processed in event-specific ways

Example

Items in the DRM study list share the similarity of being
associated with the non-presented critical item. A
pleasantness rating task adds differential processing of the
item-specific information for each study list item within
this context of similarity

Items that are in the study list share the perceptual
information associated with the study list event that is
designated by the study list presentation. The critical items
are not part of this event and do not share this perceptual
information

Correct recall

Item-based distinctive processing increases correct recall

Correct recall is not affected by event-based distinctive
processing

False recall

Reduced by item-based distinctive processing if this
processing contributes to event-based distinctive
processing (i.e., items that were not part of the target list do
not receive the same type of processing)

Reduced by event-based distinctive processing

Effect of PR vs IS
orienting tasks

Correct recall better following PR than following IS

False recall reduced following PR than following IS

Effect of visual vs
auditory study
presentation

Correct recall not affected by study modality because study
modality does not increase item-based distinctive
processing

False recall reduced following visual study relative to

Note: PR = pleasantness rating. IS = intentional study.

intentional memory study instructions as the comparison
on the assumption that Roediger and McDermott's (1995)
procedures were the standard against which reductions
in false memory for DRM lists should be judged. This
experiment is the first study to simultaneously compare
the three conditions in a single experiment.
As Gallo et al. (2008) noted, the increase in false memory following a deep orienting task compared to a shallow
task is not surprising in the DRM paradigm because false
memory results from comprehension of the list items.
Shallow processing focuses on non-semantic attributes of
the list items and consequently is less likely to entail activation of the representation of the critical item, whether it
be by reducing the activation of that representation or by
eliminating the gist processing that represents the item.
In short, the shallow task limits access to the critical false
item as well as to the list items because of impoverished
relational processing of the list items at study. Based upon
the previous studies, we also predicted that false recall on
the standard recall test would be reduced following vowel
counting relative to pleasantness rating.
In addition, the first experiment was conducted to
determine if the same reduction patterns would occur under inclusion test instructions. From the standpoint of
post-access monitoring, any reduction of false recall following the deep orienting task under standard test instructions should disappear under inclusion instructions.
Alternatively deep processing could be the basis for constraining access to the targeted list items. If so, deep processing should reduce false recall in the inclusion recall
condition as well as the standard test condition. A third
possibility is that both retrieval mechanisms are in play.
There is no reason to assume that they are mutually exclusive. In that event, more false items would be recalled under inclusion test instructions than under standard recall
instructions in all study conditions, but the deep orienting
task would continue to show a reduced level of false recall
relative to the intentional study condition.

Method
Participants and design
One hundred and eighty introductory psychology students from the University of Texas at San Antonio participated for course credit. All were native English speakers.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three study
tasks: intentional memory instructions, pleasantness rating (deep processing), or vowel counting (shallow processing). Half of the people in each study condition were
assigned randomly to either the standard recall test or an
inclusion recall test conditions. Thus, six groups of participants were established based on the orthogonal combination of study condition and test instructions.
Materials
The study lists were composed from the same six associatively related lists that were used by Roediger and
McDermott (1995, Experiment 1). Those lists were chosen
because they elicited high levels of false memory. For each
of those six lists, the study items were the 12 highest associates, which were presented blocked by associative category in decreasing order of associative relation to the
critical item. Each of the 72 study items was shown for
3 s on individual computer monitors.
Procedure
Participants completed the experiment in groups of up
to six people per session. Once the participant was seated
at their testing station, informed consent was obtained
and then study instructions were given. Everyone was told
that they would see a list of words presented individually
on the monitor and that their memory for these words
would be tested. The intentional memory group simply
was instructed to pay attention to each word and try to
remember it. The pleasantness rating (PR) group was asked
to rate each word on a scale from 1 to 5 for perceived
pleasantness. The vowel counting (VC) condition was

382

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

Table 2
Experiments 1 and 2: proportion of non-presented critical items and study list items produced on the standard free recall and inclusion tests.
Experiment

1

2

Type of test

Encoding condition

Critical items

Study list items

N

M

SE

M

SE

Standard

Intentional study
Pleasantness rating
Vowel counting

33
27
30

.18
.12
.02

.03
.03
.01

.26
.30
.07

.02
.02
.01

Inclusion

Intentional study
Pleasantness rating
Vowel counting

30
30
30

.33
.22
.09

.04
.03
.03

.28
.31
.09

.01
.02
.01

Standard

Intentional study
Pleasantness rating

31
31

.32
.15

.04
.03

.25
.30

.01
.01

Inclusion

Intentional study
Pleasantness rating

30
30

.34
.25

.03
.04

.23
.29

.02
.01

instructed to count the number of vowels in each word. Responses to the orienting tasks for the PR and VC conditions
were entered on the number pad of the keyboard during
the 3 s presentation period. Immediately following the
study list, recall instructions were given. Standard recall
instructions were to write all of the words that could be
remembered with encouragement to be reasonably sure
that the word had been seen before including it in their response. Inclusion instructions followed those of Hege and
Dodson (2004): participants were instructed to recall all
of the list words that could be remembered and to also
write down any related words that came to mind when
trying to remember the list items. Three minutes were
allocated for the recall tests.
Results
Two dependent measures were analyzed: false recall of
critical intrusions, where the critical intrusions were the
non-presented associates of the items in the study lists,
and correct recall of studied items.1 All analyses reported
as reliable reached at the .05 alpha level.

1
We also examined the number of non-critical intrusions; however,
given that these intrusions were infrequent, the interpretation of results
was complicated in some cases by floor effects. Nonetheless, we provide a
brief summary of the results for non-critical intrusions here. In Experiment
1, the number of other intrusions was significantly affected by study
condition, F(2, 174) = 20.38, MSE = 3.98, p < .001, g2p = .19, (vowel counting:
M = 2.80, SEM = .39; pleasantness rating: M = .81, SEM = .19; intentional
study condition: M = .78, SEM = .16) and the main effect of test type was
also significant, F(1, 174) = 8.40, MSE = 3.98, p = .004, g2p = .05 (inclusion
test: M = 1.89, SEM = .27; standard recall test: M = 1.03, SEM = .19), but the
two variables did not interact, F(2, 174) = 2.06, MSE = 3.98, p > .13. In
Experiment 2, the number of other intrusions, was significantly affected by
the type of test, F(1, 118) = 8.34, MSE = 6.37, p = .005, g2p = .09 (inclusion
test: M = 1.93, SEM = .45; standard recall test: M = .61, SEM = .10), but the
effect of orienting task was not significant and the two variables did not
interact, Fs < 1, ps > .66. Finally, in Experiment 3, the number of other
intrusions was significantly affected by study modality, F(1272) = 6.97,
MSE = 1.91, p = .009, g2p = .03 (visual study: M = .60, SEM = .13; auditory
study: M = 1.04, SEM = .11) and by test type, F(1, 272) = 6.97, MSE = 1.91,
p = .009, g2p = .03 (inclusion test: M = 1.04, SEM = .15; standard recall test:
M = .60, SEM = .07), but neither the effect of orienting task nor any of the
interactions reached significance, Fs < 1.81, ps > .18.

False recall of critical intrusions
The proportion of non-presented critical items produced on the recall test is shown in Table 2. An analysis
of variance of the critical intrusions as a function of study
condition and test type yielded a reliable effect of study
condition, F(2, 174) = 27.36, MSE = .02, p < .001, g2p = .24.
The intentional study condition had the highest rate of critical intrusions, M = .25, SEM = .02, a rate that was significantly higher than in the pleasantness rating condition,
M = .17, SEM = .02, t(118) = 2.48, p = .015, d = .42, which in
turn was significantly higher than the rate of critical intrusions in the vowel counting condition, M = .06, SEM = .01,
t(115) = 4.51, p < .001, d = .75. The main effect of test type
also reached significance with participants producing more
critical intrusions in the inclusion test condition, M = .21,
SEM = .02, than in the standard free recall condition,
M = .11, SEM = .01. F(1, 174) = 22.64, MSE = .02, p < .001,
g2p = .12. The two variables did not interact,
F(2, 174) = 1.21, p > .30.
Because the non-significant interaction in this analysis
speaks to the issue of whether post-access monitoring
underlies the effects of orienting task, we conducted a
power analysis using GPower 3.1.2 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang,
& Buchner, 2007). The power analysis revealed that our
power to detect medium size interactions (f = .25) was
.85; furthermore, over one thousand participants would
be required to reach the same level of power for detecting
an effect as small as that observed for the interaction
(f = .10). Nonetheless, additional comparisons were carried
out to specifically address whether study task condition
would affect false recall on the inclusion test. Under inclusion test instructions, PR study reduced intrusions of critical items relative to intentional study, t(58) = 2.28, p = .03,
and VC study reduced false recall below that in the PR
study condition, t(58) = 3.27, p = .002.
Additional analyses were conducted to evaluate our
specific predictions regarding false recall in the standard
test condition. One-tailed test were used to evaluate these
a priori predictions. Specifically, we predicted that we
would replicate the findings reported in Smith and Hunt
(1998) showing a reduction in false recall following PR
study relative to intentional study. The PR study condition
produced fewer false recall responses relative to the

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

intentional study condition, t(58) = 1.71, p < .05. We also
expected to replicate previous studies showing a reduction
in shallow processing conditions relative to deep processing conditions (e.g., Rhodes & Anastasi, 2000; Thapar &
McDermott, 2001; Toglia et al., 1999). As expected, false
recall was further reduced in the VC study condition relative to the PR study condition, t(61) = 5.40, p < .001 .

Correct recall
The proportion of studied items that were correctly recalled (Table 2) was affected by study condition,
F(1, 174) = 140.63, MSE = .01, p < .001, g2p = .62. Correct recall in the pleasantness rating condition, M = .30,
SEM = .01, was higher than in the intentional study condition, M = .27, SEM = .01, t(118) = 2.08, p = .04, d = .35,
which in turn was higher than correct recall in the vowel
counting condition, M = .08, SEM = .01, t(121) = 14.17,
p < .001, d = 2.47. Neither the effect of test type,
F(1, 174) = 1.04, MSE = .01, p > .30, nor the interaction between study condition and test type reached significance,
F < 1, p = .98.

Discussion
Performing a PR orienting task reduced the production
of non-presented critical items (i.e., false recall) relative
to intentional memory instructions at study, a finding that
replicates previous results (Smith & Hunt, 1998). The novel
finding in the current experiment is that the reduction in
false recall also was present on the inclusion test. Such
an outcome would not be expected if post-access monitoring of the retrieved items were the only mechanism for
editing memory. One aspect of the data however suggests
that post-access monitoring was part of the output process. The number of intrusions in the inclusion test condition increased substantially over the number in the
standard recall conditions. The inclusion instructions disengage the editing of related non-presented items, producing more false recall of critical items than was found with
standard recall instructions. In other words, post-access
monitoring does play a role in standard recall tests; however, this occurs for all study conditions and because the
overall pattern of false recall reduction is the same in the
two types of tests, the post-access monitoring proposal
cannot explain completely the effects of orienting task on
false recall.
A second issue addressed in the first experiment concerned a contradiction in the literature, namely that some
studies report reduced false memory following a deep processing task (e.g., Smith & Hunt, 1998) while others report
an increase in false memory following a deep processing
task (e.g., Rhodes & Anastasi, 2000; Thapar & McDermott,
2001; Toglia et al., 1999). A major difference in these studies is the comparison condition. In the case of reported
reductions in false memory, the deep task is compared to
intentional memory instructions whereas in the case of increases in false memory, the comparison task is a shallow
orienting task. Both of the previously reported patterns are
replicated in our data. Thus, the effect of a deep orienting

383

task on false recall of a DRM list depends on the comparison task, fewer false memories occur relative to an intentional task and more false memories occur relative to a
shallow orienting task.
The overall pattern in the current experiment suggests that the reductions in false memory produced by
deep and shallow orienting tasks have different causes.
The purpose of a shallow orienting task is of course to
reduce or eliminate meaningful processing of the study
words. To the extent that this purpose is achieved, correct recall will be quite low, as it was here, due to
impoverished semantic processing of the list words
(e.g., Craik & Lockhart, 1972). Impoverished semantic
processing also would discourage the processing of the
critical, non-presented associate in a DRM list. That is,
the item is less likely to come to mind at study and consequently would be a less likely candidate for retrieval at
test. As Gallo et al. (2008) point out, reduction in false
memory following a shallow task relative to a deep task
probably is due to the simple fact that the deep task
encourages processing of the non-presented item and
the shallow task discourages that processing at study.
However, the reduction of false memory following the
deep task relative to intentional memory obviously cannot be attributed to impoverished processing at study.
If anything, the deep task is more likely to bring the critical item to mind than the intentional instructions, nonetheless recall of critical items is reduced relative to the
intentional instructions. We believe that the comparison
of deep orienting tasks with intentional memory instructions is pertinent because intentional study instructions
were used to establish the false memory phenomenon
with DRM lists (e.g., Deese, 1959; Roediger &
McDermott, 1995). Thus, Experiments 2 and 3 do not
include the shallow orienting task and instead focus on
the comparison of the deep processing condition with
intentional memory instructions in the second and third
experiments.

Experiment 2
The second experiment was a close replication of the
comparison of the PR and IS conditions from Experiment
1, except that we changed the modality of study list presentation. Visual presentation was used for all items in
the first experiment, but visual presentation itself has been
shown to reduce false memory in the DRM paradigm
(Cleary & Greene, 2002; Gallo, McDermott, et al., 2001;
Smith & Hunt, 1998). To examine the effect of deep orienting tasks on false memory divorced from the effect of visual presentation, the words were presented auditorially
in the second experiment. Auditory presentation has been
the standard in the DRM literature, used by every study
published prior to Smith and Hunt (1998). Based upon
the results of Experiment 1 and Smith and Hunt, we predicted that deep processing would reduce false memory
relative to the intentional memory condition. Based upon
Experiment 1 we also predicted that this pattern would
emerge for both the standard recall test and the inclusion
test.

384

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

Method
Participants and design
One hundred twenty-two introductory to psychology
students from the University of Texas at San Antonio volunteered for course credit. The participants were assigned
randomly to either intentional memory or PR orienting
task at study. Half of each of study condition was assigned
randomly to standard free recall test and the other half to
an inclusion recall test.
Materials and procedure
The same six DRM lists that were used in Experiment 1
were used in Experiment 2. The lists were recorded in a female voice and presented to the subjects over headphones.
The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1 except for
the modality of study presentation.
Results
False recall of critical items
False recall of critical items is shown in Table 2 as a
function of study condition and type of test. Intentional
memory instructions, M = .33, SEM = .03, led to significantly greater false recall than the PR orienting task,
M = .20, SEM = .02, F(1, 118) = 14.64, MSE = .04, p < .001,
g2p = 11. There was a trend for false recall to be higher in
the inclusion test condition, M = .30, SEM = .02, than in
the standard free recall condition, M = .23, SEM = .03,
F(1, 118) = 3.45, MSE = .04, p < .07, g2p = 03. As in Experiment 1, the two variables did not interact,
F(1, 118) = 1.12, MSE = .04, p = .29. We had a power of .85
to detect medium effects (f = .25) and nearly one thousand
participants would be required to reach a power level of
.85 for detecting the observed effect size for the interaction
(f = .09). Nonetheless, additional analyses were conducted
to separately test our predictions for the standard and
inclusion recall tests. One tailed tests were used to test
these a priori predictions. In the case of the inclusion test,
there was a reduction in false recall following PR study relative to intentional study, t(58) = 1.95, p = .03. Also as predicted, PR study reduced false memory relative to
intentional study instructions for the standard recall test,
t(60) = 3.47, p < .001 for this one-tailed test.
Correct recall
Correct recall is shown in Table 2 as a function of study
condition and type of test. Correct responding was affected
reliably by study condition, F(1, 118) = 15.67, MSE = .01,
p < .001, g2p = .12. Participants recalled more of the study
list items following PR, M = .30, SEM = .01, than following
intentional memory instructions, M = .24, SEM = .01.The effect of test type on correct recall was not significant and
the two variables did not interact, Fs < 1, ps > .46.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 replicate the findings from
comparable conditions in Experiment 1. The PR orienting
task reduced false recall of critical items in both the
standard free recall and the inclusion test. As in the first

experiment, the parallel reductions in false memory on
the two types of test are inconsistent with the post-access
monitoring explanation of the effects of deep processing on
false memory. On the other hand, there was a trend toward
more intrusions on the inclusion test than on the standard
test, an outcome consistent with predictions from post-access monitoring.
Distinctive processing can account for the effects of orienting task on both correct and false memory in our experiments. Correct recall was higher for the PR study
condition than for intentional study in the first two experiments. Because each item's meaning is different, the deep
orienting task supports item-based distinctive processing
of items on the study list, which in turn enhances correct
recall (Hunt, 2003). As first suggested by Smith and Hunt
(1998), the deep orienting task also provides a better basis
for event-based distinctive processing than intentional
study because the list items are subjected to processing
not required of non-list items, just as would be the case
if the list items all had to be spoken or written. The third
experiment will serve to replicate this pattern of results
and to extend the application of the item-based and
event-based distinctive processing view to both false and
correct memory.

Experiment 3
In the third experiment, modality of study presentation,
visual versus auditory, was combined with the manipulation of orienting task. When using a standard recall test
in the DRM paradigm, visual presentation is known to reduce false recall of critical items relative to auditory presentation (e.g., Cleary & Greene, 2002; Gallo, McDermott,
et al., 2001; Smith & Hunt, 1998). Experiment 3 addresses
the following question: Does study modality exert its effect
on false recall solely through post-access monitoring of retrieved items? The modality manipulation was orthogonal
to a manipulation of study task, either intentional memory
or PR orienting task, as well as to test type, standard free
recall or inclusion free recall. This design allows a replication of the results of the first two experiments within a single experiment.
While our primary focus is on false memory, the results
for correct recall provide an additional test of the eventbased and item-based distinctive processing explanation.
Although we expect visual presentation of study items
and PR orienting tasks to have the same effect on false
memory, we predict different effects of the two variables
on correct performance (Table 1). Correct memory for
studied items is assumed to be directly related to itembased distinctive processing. Theoretically, the PR task
facilitates item-based distinctive processing in that the
task encourages the encoding of meaning for each item. Given that each item has a different meaning, the PR task
encourages the encoding of differences among the items
in the context of the semantic and temporal/spatial similarity of list items. The effect is to enhance correct recall.
On the other hand, all of the study items share the modality of presentation and thus it is not a potential contribution to item-based distinctive processing. That is, the

385

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

information associated with visual presentation is the visual processing required to read the words. Because it is
shared by all of the study items, visual processing is not
a basis for differentiating among the study items. Therefore, visual presentation will not affect correct recall. Thus
the distinctive processing analysis predicts similar effects
of presentation modality and orienting tasks on false memory but no effect of modality on correct memory.
Method
Participants and design
Two hundred and eighty introductory psychology students from the University of Texas at San Antonio participated for course credit. Participants were assigned
randomly to the eight conditions defined by the orthogonal
combination of study task (intentional memory vs. PR
task), presentation modality (visual vs. auditory), and test
type (standard free recall vs. inclusion free recall).
Materials and procedure
The lists were those used in Experiments 1 and 2. The
procedure for the visual condition was the same as in that
in Experiment 1, and the procedure for the auditory condition was the same as that used in Experiment 2.

among the variables were reliable, all Fs < 1 and ps > .36.
Our power to detect medium effects was .98 and 2900 or
more participants would be needed to reach a power level
of .85 for detecting effects as small as those observed for
the interactions in this analysis (fs < .06). Nonetheless, we
conducted a separate analysis for the inclusion test condition. The pattern demonstrated in the omnibus test was
confirmed: the main effects of study task and study modality were both significant, Fs(1, 136) > 9.00, MSE = .05,
p = .003, g2p = .06, and the variables did not interact, F < 1,
p > .51.
Correct recall
The mean proportion of study list items recalled is
shown in Table 3. Correct recall was affected reliably by
study task, F(1, 272) = 13.81, MSE = .01, p < .001, g2p = .05.
Recall of study list items was better following the pleasantness rating task, M = .29, SEM = .01, than following the
intentional memory instructions, M = .26, SEM = .01. Study
task did not interact with either presentation modality or
test type, Fs < 1, ps > .64. The effects of test type, F < 1,
p > .75, and modality, F(1, 272) = 1.74, MSE = .01, p > .18,
were not significant, nor did these two variables interact,
F(1, 272) = 2.11, MSE = .01, p > .14. Finally, the three-way
interaction was not reliable, F(1, 272) = 1.26, MSE = .01,
p > .26.

Results
Discussion
False recall of critical items
The mean proportion of critical items that were produced on the recall test is shown in Table 3 as a function
of study task, presentation modality, and type of test. False
recall was higher following intentional memory instructions, M = .33, SEM = .02, than following pleasantness rating, M = .24, SEM = .02, F(1, 272) = 13.85, MSE = .04,
p < .001, g2p = .05. Likewise, visual presentation at study
led to lower false recall, M = .24, SEM = .02, than did auditory
study
presentation,
M = .33,
SEM = .02,
F(1, 272) = 13.85, MSE = .04, p < .001, g2p = .05. The main effect of test type also was reliable, F(1272) = 7.93, MSE = .04,
p = .005, g2p = .03. More critical items were produced on the
inclusion test, M = .32, SEM = .02, than on the standard free
recall test, M = .25, SEM = .02. None of the interactions

Consistent with prior research (e.g., Cleary & Greene,
2002; Gallo, McDermott, et al., 2001; Smith & Hunt,
1998), visual presentation of the words at study led to fewer false recalls of critical items than auditory presentation
under standard free recall instructions. The novel component of the third experiment is the effect of modality on
the inclusion test where visual presentation continued to
suppress false recall relative to auditory presentation.
These data suggest that the effect of visual presentation
on reduced false recall is not due exclusively to post-access
monitoring.
The effect of the study tasks on false recall of critical
items replicated the results of the first two experiments.
The PR task led to lower recall of critical items on both

Table 3
Experiment 3: proportion of study list items and non-presented critical items produced on standard free recall test and the inclusion test.
Type of test

Standard

Inclusion

Encoding condition

Study modality

Critical items

Study list items

M

SE

M

SE

Intentional study

Auditory
Visual

.32
.26

.03
.03

.24
.28

.01
.02

Pleasantness rating

Auditory
Visual

.26
.19

.03
.03

.29
.30

.01
.01

Intentional study

Auditory
Visual

.42
.33

.04
.04

.26
.26

.01
.01

Pleasantness rating

Auditory
Visual

.33
.20

.04
.03

.29
.29

.01
.01

Note: N = 35 for all conditions.

386

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

standard and inclusion free recall tests. As in the first two
experiments, the level of false recall was greater following
inclusion recall instructions than following standard free
recall instructions. This result provides an important marker for the presence of post-access monitoring in all of the
conditions.
As predicted, the effects of study task and presentation
modality on correct recall of list items were different. The
PR task led to better correct recall than the intentional
memory instructions, but modality of presentation had
no effect on correct recall. Our prediction was based on
the assumption that the PR task enhanced the processing
of differences in the context of the shared semantic and
spatial/temporal similarity among the list items, i.e., PR enhanced item-based distinctive processing (Hunt, 2003;
Hunt, 2006). Presentation modality is shared by all list
items and hence does not contribute to the processing of
differences among the list items. In other words, itembased distinctive processing does not differ for visual versus auditory presentation and therefore correct recall was
not affected by the manipulation of study presentation
modality.

General discussion
In three experiments we posed the following question:
What are the mechanisms through which deep processing
reduces false memory relative to intentional study instructions? The third experiment also considered the mechanisms by which visual study presentation reduced false
memory relative to auditory study presentation. These
questions were addressed by comparing the effects of
these manipulations on a standard recall test and an inclusion test. Both tests requests recall of study list items, but
the latter test also reduces the need for monitoring as
items related to the study list items are to be included in
the inclusion test responses. Across the three experiments
the data were consistent in showing that deep processing
reduced false memory relative to intentional memory
instructions and in the third experiment visual study presentation reduced false memory relative to auditory presentation under standard free recall test instructions,
replicating previous studies (e.g., Gallo, McDermott, et al.,
2001; Smith & Hunt, 1998). The important new results occurred with inclusion recall instructions which encouraged
recall of list items as well as any related items that came to
mind. Under these more lenient test instructions, the suppression of false memories following deep processing and/
or visual presentation did not abate. Noteworthy is that
false recall was greater in the inclusion recall test than in
the free recall test in all of the experiments.
The pattern of the data implicates two mechanisms in
the output process. One is post-access monitoring. The fact
that false recall was higher under inclusion instructions
than standard test instructions is consistent with the operation of a process that examines accessed memories for
evidence of their presence in the cued event. When the
requirement for accuracy is relaxed under the inclusion
instructions, the monitoring strategy is attenuated to accept related items, resulting in more false recall than under

standard instructions. Our data cannot speak to the particular form of monitoring, that is, whether monitoring in
these cases is general source monitoring or the more specific distinctiveness heuristic. Nonetheless the results from
all three experiments point to a role for post-access monitoring in reducing false recall.
The conclusion that post-access monitoring is necessary
stems from the assumptions made to explain why false recall is higher under inclusion than standard recall instructions. Namely, the inclusion instruction reduces the need
for a monitoring process that attempts to accurately recognize list items, as first argued by Brainerd and Reyna
(1998). Ironically, this same assumption leads to the conclusion that monitoring, while necessary, is not sufficient
to explain the data. If the suppressing effect of our variables on false memory in standard free recall were entirely
the result of monitoring, one would expect that the suppressing effect of these variables would be eliminated or
considerably reduced in the inclusion test. That did not
happen. Consequently a second mechanism is required,
and we favor the notion that the variables in question
influence direct access to the items. That is, under certain
conditions access at test is constrained to the items specified by the test cue, which in this case are the studied
items. Obviously the constraint provided by the conditions
of our experiment were not perfect: false memory does occur following visual presentation and following deep processing under standard instructions and increases under
inclusion instructions. Nonetheless, these variables did improve memory accuracy through a reduction in false recall
that cannot be accounted for by post-access monitoring.
In principle, the constraint on access could be due to reduced relational processing in the PR and visual presentation conditions of our experiments (Arndt & Reder, 2003;
Hege & Dodson, 2004). This interpretation seems unlikely
for two reasons. A number of studies have shown that
impoverished relational processing lowers correct recall
(Hunt & McDaniel, 1993), yet the reduced false memory
in the PR and visual presentation conditions were not
accompanied by reduced memory for study items. Moreover, in previous research direct indices of relational processing (clustering, category recall) show no reduction in
relational processing as a function of either a PR orienting
task or visual presentation of items (e.g., Hunt & Einstein,
1981; Hunt & Seta, 1984). Thus the failure to access critical
lures in these experiments does not appear to be due to reduced relational processing at study.
Although our experiments were not designed to explore
the relationship between direct access and monitoring, the
obvious candidate is the traditional generate-recognize
theory, where each accessed item is subjected to a recognition decision prior to output. This theory, however, cannot
explain our data. From the perspective of generate-recognize theory, all false memory results from monitoring failure, and our inclusion data speak against that position.
A more complicated approach assumes that the problem is a failure to monitor all accessed items. That is, some
items may be accessed with sufficient fluency that monitoring is by-passed, as first proposed by Jacoby and Hollingshead (1990). Such a combination of direct access
and access plus monitoring can account for our results. If

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

the fluency with which some items were accessed allowed
monitoring to be by-passed, those items were destined for
output, and in the event that they are not targets, they represent phantom recollection (Brainerd, Wright, Reyna, &
Mojardin, 2001).

Precise memory and distinctive processing
Avoiding false memory requires precision in the joint
action of initial processing and the reinstatement of that
processing at retrieval. One approach to describing that
precision is distinctive processing (e.g., Hunt, 2006; Nairne,
2006). Defining distinctive processing as the processing of
difference in the context of similarity has proven useful in
previous analyses of memory (Hunt, 2003; Hunt, 2006).
This approach is derived from work on similarity/difference judgment that shows the processing of difference
among items in the context of similarity is highly diagnostic of a particular item (Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner,
1993). Applying that thinking to the joint action of encoding and retrieval yields precision in memory.
In addition, our analysis assumes that distinctive processing occurs at the level of both items and events (Table 1). All direct tests of memory begin with a cue that
constrains the set of items from which the response is to
be drawn. Thus the event is functionally defined by the
cue. The event circumscribes a set of discrete items that
comprises the correct responses to the memory query.
The constraint provided by the cue can vary in grain size,
which in turn changes the grain size of the items. For
example, the event could be ``What did you do in Chicago?''
for which an item might be ``Dinner at Topolobampo.'' But
a different event and set of items are defined by the query
is ``What did you have for dinner at Topolobampo?''. We
assume that this distinction between events and items
not only has heuristic value for analytic purposes but in
fact describes real psychological units of memory. Note,
however, that these units are not defined at encoding but
rather by the test cue.
Both item and event memories are influenced by similarity. In the case of items, the similarity in question is
among the items of an event, which will share spatial/temporal features and almost always will share semantic features (with the exception of unrelated word lists in the
laboratory). Processing differences in the context of the
similarity of these items confers the diagnosticity necessary to distinguish particular items within the event,
enhancing correct memory for target items (Hunt &
McDaniel, 1993). Similarity among events reduces discriminability among the events. Event similarity increases the
probability of producing an incorrect item to the cue, i.e.,
false memory (e.g., Dobbins et al., 1998). Processing differences among events in the context of their similarity lowers the probability of false memory. Previous research has
shown that the effect of item-based distinctive processing
is to increase correct responding to target items, and the
effect of event based distinctive processing is to decrease
incorrect responses to incorrect items. Interestingly, these
effects seem to be independent of each other (Dobbins
et al., 1998; Gruppuso et al., 1997; Hunt, 2003).

387

This distinction between item- and event-based distinctive processing provides a useful description of our data.
For example, if all list items have been rated for pleasantness, the list items differ on that dimension of processing
from other events, such as the critical lure in the DRM lists.
Likewise, visual processing of list items at study is different
from the processing of the critical lure at study, apparently
much more so than is auditory processing of list items. Evidence from reality monitoring indicates that correct attribution of source is more highly correlated with visual
detail than with auditory detail, suggesting that auditory
perception is less different from thought than is visual perception (Johnson, Nolde, & De Leonardis, 1996).
Event-based distinctive processing can be strategically
used for monitoring purposes but in addition, our data suggest that event-based distinctive processing increases precision through direct access. To that extent, the data are
consistent with Nairne's (2006) theory of distinctive processing which he defines as the relationship between a
cue and target whereby the cue brings a particular target
to mind to the exclusion of other items. Jacoby and his colleagues have demonstrated convincingly that aspects of
prior processing can be used to constrain access at test (Jacoby & Shimizu, 2005; Jacoby, Shimizu, Daniels, & Rhodes,
2005). Their idea of source constrained retrieval, as opposed to post-access source monitoring, captures an
important function of event-based distinctive processing,
which is limiting access to the cued event.
The distinction between item-based and event-based
distinctive processing also provides insight into the effect
of particular variables on correct responses relative to
incorrect responses. In brief, a variable that encourages
item-based distinctive processing will enhance correct responses to target items while a variable that encourages
event-based distinctive processing will enhance correct
rejections. Consider the effect of study task and mode of
presentation in Experiment 3. The PR task led to a mirror
effect, more correct recall and less false recall, relative to
intentional memory instructions, but visual presentation
reduced false memory without affecting correct recall relative to auditory presentation. A deep processing task
encourages the processing of difference among the items
sharing the temporal/spatial and semantic attributes of
the list in that the meaning of each item is different. Therefore, we predicted that the deep processing of DRM target
would increase correct recall. Visual presentation of the
items, however, is an attribute shared by all of the list
items, and consequently the mode of presentation will
not affect item-based distinctive processing unless each
item is presented in a different mode (e.g., see Arndt & Reder, 2003). Thus, the item-based/event-based distinctive
processing framework successfully predicted association
and dissociation between correct and false memory.
False recall and false recognition
As with any research on a topic as broad and as fundamental as the nature of retrieval processes, conclusions
from our data are limited by the choice of particular variables and their values. Of special note is that our experiments used recall as the criterion tests. Hege and Dodson

388

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389

(2004) reported the only other comparison of standard and
inclusion tests using recall and came to essentially the
same conclusions as we do. As Gallo (2006) points out,
most of the research investigating post-access monitoring,
the bulk of which has been concerned with the distinctiveness heuristic, has used recognition tests. The general conclusion from the work involving recognition tests is that
post-access monitoring is sufficient to account for the beneficial effects of variables on false memory.2
Summary
Given that non-presented information often arise during the processing of the presented information, there
can be little to distinguish psychologically between the
presented and the self-generated aspects of prior experience. If discrimination between the two is required, the
probability of false memory is high unless some aspect of
prior processing is available to differentiate presented
from non-presented items. Variables encouraging such
processing with DRM lists have been identified, and two
of those were investigated here, deep orienting tasks and
visual presentation of studied items. In both cases, false
memory for critical, non-presented items was reduced relative to control conditions. On our description, deep processing and visual study presentation encourage eventbased distinctive processing relative to the set of items
that come to mind during the processing of the studied
items. The data clearly indicated that event-based distinctive processing functions both to constrain access to studied items as well as input to a post-access monitoring
process. Of special note is the differential effect of the variables on correct responses to studied items and to nonstudied items. The predictions for both correct and false
memory were derived cleanly from the distinction between item-based and event-based distinctive processing,
indicating that the distinction is of use in understanding
false memory and its occasional prevention.
Acknowledgments
Support for this project was provided in part by Grant
SC1 AG034965 from the National Institute on Aging to
RES. The authors thank Ana Alvarez-Keesee, Crystal Armitage, Joshua Brunsman, Laura Carrizales, Sadaf Kazi, Deborah Persyn, and Emmanual Villarreal for assistance with
data collection.
2
For example, Pierce, Gallo, Weiss, and Schacter (2005) investigated the
modality suppression effect on false recognition using inclusion instructions and found no modality effect on the inclusion recognition test, which
suggests that post-access monitoring is sufficient to explain the effects of
modality on false recognition. Similar evidence using picture versus word
manipulation was provided by Dodson and Hege (2005) who a speeded
recognition test rather than an inclusion test to examine the question.
Monitoring is an intentional strategy and the completion of such a
controlled process is assumed to require time. A stringent time requirement for the recognition response would disrupt monitoring and thus
eliminate the suppressive effect of a variable on false memory. That is
exactly what Dodson and Hege found. Benjamin (2001) reported similar
data showing that the suppressive effect of list repetition on false
recognition was eliminated when a speeded response was required on
the recognition test.

References
Arndt, J., & Reder, L. M. (2003). The effect of distinctive visual information
on false memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 1-
15.
Benjamin, A. S. (2001). On the dual effects of repetition on false
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 27, 941-947.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (1998). When things that were never
experienced are easier to remember than things that were.
Psychological Science, 9, 484-489.
Brainerd, C. J., Wright, R., Reyna, V. F., & Mojardin, A. H. (2001). Conjoint
recognition and phantom recollection. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 307-327.
Cleary, A. M., & Greene, R. L. (2002). Paradoxical effects of presentation
modality on false memory. Memory, 10, 55-61.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework
for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
11, 671-684.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal
intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58,
17-22.
Dobbins, I. G., Kroll, N. E. A., Yonelinas, A. P., & Liu, Q. (1998).
Distinctiveness in recognition and free recall: The role of
recollection in rejection of the familiar. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 381-400.
Dodson, C. S., & Hege, A. C. G. (2005). Speeded retrieval abolishes the false
memory suppression effect: Evidence for the distinctiveness
heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 726-731.
Dodson, C. S., & Schacter, D. L. (2001). ``If I had said it, I would remember
it'': Reducing false memory with a distinctiveness heuristic.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 155-161.
Dodson, C. S., & Schacter, D. L. (2002). When false recognition meets
metacognition: The distinctiveness heuristic. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46, 782-803.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). GPower 3: A
flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral,
and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 175-191.
Gallo, D. A. (2006). Associative illusions of memory: False memory research
in DRM and related tasks. New York: Psychology Press.
Gallo, D. A., McDermott, K. B., Percer, J. M., & Roediger, H. L. III, (2001).
Modality effects in false recall and false recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27,
339-353.
Gallo, D. A., Meadow, N. G., Johnson, E. L., & Foster, K. T. (2008). Deep
levels of processing elicit a distinctiveness heuristic: Evidence from
the criterial recollection task. Journal of Memory and Language, 58,
1095-1111.
Gallo, D. A., Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (2001). Associative false
recognition occurs without strategic criterion shifts. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 8, 579-586.
Gallo, D. A., Weis, J. A., & Schacter, D. L. (2004). Reducing false recognition
with criteria recollection tests: Distinctiveness heuristic vs. criterion
shifts. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 473-493.
Gruppuso, V., Lindsay, D. S., & Kelley, C. M. (1997). The processdissociation procedure and similarity: Defining and estimating
recollection and familiarity in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23,
259-278.
Hege, A. C. G., & Dodson, C. S. (2004). Why distinctive information reduces
false memories: Evidence for both reduced relational processing and
the distinctiveness heuristic. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 787-795.
Hunt, R. R. (2003). Two contributions of distinctive processing to accurate
memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 811-825.
Hunt, R. R. (2006). The concept of distinctiveness in memory research. In
R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen (Eds.), Distinctiveness and memory. New
York: Oxford University Press (pp. 1-25).
Hunt, R. R., & Einstein, G. O. (1981). Relational and item-specific
information in memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 19, 497-514.
Hunt, R. R., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993). The enigma of organization and
distinctiveness. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 421-445.
Hunt, R. R., & Seta, C. E. (1984). Category size effects in recall: The roles of
relational and individual item information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 454-464.
Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1990). Toward a generate/recognize
model of performance on direct and indirect tests of memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 29, 433-454.

R.R. Hunt et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 378-389
Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., & McElree, B. D. (1999). The role of cognitive
control: Early selection versus late correction. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope
(Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 383-400). New
York: The Guildford Press.
Jacoby, L. L., & Shimizu, Y. (2005). Similarity guided depth of retrieval:
Constraining at the front end. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 59, 17-21.
Jacoby, L. L., Shimizu, Y., Daniels, K. A., & Rhodes, M. G. (2005). Modes of
cognitive control in recognition and source memory: Depth of
retrieval. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 852-857.
Johnson, M. K., Nolde, S. F., & De Leonardis, D. M. (1996). Emotional focus
and source monitoring. Journal of Memory & Language, 35, 135-156.
Kellogg, R. (2001). Presentation modality and mode of recall in verbal
false memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 27, 913-919.
Kimball, D. R., & Bjork, R. A. (2002). Influences of intentional and
unintentional forgetting on false memories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131, 116-130.
McCabe, D. P., Presmanes, A. G., Robertson, C. L., & Smith, A. D. (2004).
Item-specific processing reduces false memory. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 11, 1074-1079.
McConnell, M. M., & Hunt, R. R. (2007). Can false memories be corrected
by feedback in the DRM paradigm? Memory & Cognition, 35,
999-1006.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects for similarity.
Psychological Review, 100, 254-278.
Nairne, J. S. (2006). Modeling distinctiveness: Implications for general
memory theory. In R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen (Eds.), Distinctiveness
and memory. New York: Oxford University Press (pp. 27-46).
Neuschatz, J. S., Lynn, S. J., Benoit, G. E., & Payne, R. (2003). Effective
warnings in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott false-memory
paradigm: The role of identifiability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 35-40.
Payne, D. G., Elie, C. J., Blackwell, J. M., & Neuschatz, J. S. (1996). Memory
illusions: Recalling, recognizing, and recollecting events that never
occurred. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 261-285.
Pierce, B. H., Gallo, D. A., Weiss, J. A., & Schacter, D. L. (2005). The modality
effect in false recognition: Evidence for test-based monitoring.
Memory & Cognition, 33, 1407-1413.

389

Read, D. J. (1996). From a passing thought to a false memory in 2 minutes:
Confusing real and illusory events. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3,
105-111.
Rhodes, M. C., & Anastasi, J. S. (2000). The effect of a levels of processing
manipulation on false recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7,
158-162.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (2000). Distortions of memory. In E.
Tulving & F. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory. New York:
Oxford Press (pp. 149-162).
Schacter, D. L., Cendan, D. L., Dodson, C. S., & Clifford, E. R. (2001).
Retrieval conditions and false recognition: Testing the distinctiveness
heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 827-833.
Schacter, D. L., Israel, L., & Racine, C. (1999). Suppressing false recognition
in younger and older adults: The distinctiveness heuristic. Journal of
Memory and language, 40, 1-24.
Seamon, J. G., Goodkind, M. S., Dumey, A. D., Dick, E., Aufseer, M. S.,
Strickland, S. E., et al. (2003). ``If I didn't write it, why would I
remember it?'': Effects of encoding, attention, and practice on
accurate and false memory. Memory & Cognition, 31, 445-457.
Smith, R. E., & Engle, R. W. (2011). Study modality and false recall: The
influence of resource availability. Experimental Psychology, 58,
117-124.
Smith, R. E., & Hunt, R. R. (1998). Presentation modality affects false
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5, 710-715.
Smith, R. E., Hunt, R. R., & Gallagher, M. P. (2008). The effect of study
modality on false recognition. Memory & Cognition, 36, 1439-1449.
Smith, R. E., Lozito, P., & Bayen, U. J. (2005). Adult age differences in
distinctive processing: The modality effect on false recall. Psychology
and Aging, 20, 486-492.
Thapar, A., & McDermott, K. B. (2001). False recall and false recognition
induced by presentation of associated words: Effects of retention
interval and levels of processing. Memory & Cognition, 29, 424-432.
Toglia, M. P., Neuschatz, J. S., & Goodwin, K. A. (1999). Recall accuracy and
illusory memory: When more is less. Memory, 7, 233-256.

