JLS397288
S30210.1177/0261927X10397288Heaton and NygaardJournal of Language and Social Psychology

JL

Charm or Harm: Effect
of Passage Content
on Listener Attitudes
Toward American
English Accents

Journal of Language and Social Psychology
30(2) 202-211
(c) 2011 SAGE Publications
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X10397288
http://jls.sagepub.com

Hayley Heaton1 and Lynne C. Nygaard1

Abstract
This study examined how passage content influences attitudes toward American
English Accents. Participants listened to passages differing in topic content spoken
in an American Southern English or Standard American English accent. Although
Southern-accented speakers were rated higher in sociality, but lower in status, than
standard-accented speakers, sociality ratings varied as a function of passage topic only
for standard-accented speakers. Linguistic content appeared most likely to influence
listeners' attitudes when preexisting assumptions based on regional accent were absent.
Keywords
accent, listener attitudes, speech perception
Differences in how individuals and groups speak, whether with accents or dialects,
appear to profoundly influence how individuals and groups of individuals interact
(Baugh, 2003; De la Zerda & Hopper, 1979; Matsuda, 1991; Squires & Chadwick,
2006). Listeners attribute certain characteristics to speakers, such as whether they are
friendly, smart, or trustworthy, just by hearing them speak (Demirci & Kleiner, 1999;
Edwards, 1982; Lambert, 1967; Preston, 1999; Sebastian & Ryan, 1985). For example,
Giles, Henwood, Coupland, Harriman, and Coupland (1992) found that when producing a standard British accent, a speaker was judged as more competent but less benevolent than when using a nonstandard British accent. Lambert (1967) found that both
1

Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

Corresponding Author:
Lynne C. Nygaard, Department of Psychology, Emory University, 36 Eagle Row, Atlanta, GA 30320, USA
Email: lnygaar@emory.edu

Heaton and Nygaard

203

English and French Canadian students rated the more "prestigious" English Canadian
speakers to have "positive" attributes, such as being more attractive, intelligent, and
dependable relative to French Canadian speakers.
The present study was designed to examine the extent to which these types of attitudes can change depending on aspects of a communicative situation. We focused on
one particularly salient factor that could potentially influence listeners' attitudes--
message content or meaningful topic of spoken materials. Relatively less attention has
been paid to systematic evaluations of how what is being said might influence judgments of speaker attributes arising from differences in speaking style, accent, or dialect. Our goal was to determine if and how the content of speech interacts with accent
to determine listeners' judgments of speaker attributes.
To that end, the present experiment focused on attitudes toward two varieties of
American English--an American Southern accent, one of the many regional varieties
of speech in the United States, and Standard American English.1 We focused on the
use of accents rather than dialects to isolate the effects of pronunciation on listener
attitudes apart from differences in factors such as vocabulary usage and syntactic
construction.
The two accents were chosen in part because each can be identified from differences in pronunciation alone (e.g., Clopper & Pisoni, 2004), and particular assumptions or stereotypes appear to be associated with the Southern dialects (Cooke-Jackson
& Hansen, 2008). Preston (1999) found that students identified the South as a distinct
dialect region in comparison with other regions of the United States and that Southern
speech styles were considered more friendly, but less correct than standard speech
styles. These and other similar findings (e.g., Giles et al., 1992; Luhman, 1990) suggest that regional accents, and Southern accents in particular, significantly influence
our perception of others and may be indicative of stereotyping.
Although relatively less is known about the impact of passage content on judgments
of speakers with regional accents, context in general, in the form of information related
to the subject (e.g., location, occupation) appears to influence judgments (Barden,
Maddux, Petty, & Brewer, 2004; Wittenbrink, Judd, & Park, 2001). With respect to
linguistic content, language users appear to use a speaker's word choices to infer the
competence of a speaker (Nath, 2007). Levin, Giles, and Garrett (1994) found that the
perceived formality of lexical items based on word origins (Latinate vs. Germanic)
influenced listeners' judgments of speakers' personality traits. The current study
extends this finding by examining whether the overall theme or topic of the speech
sample will influence speaker attribute judgments and influence judgments differently
depending on whether the accent is standard or nonstandard.
In the experiment, participants listened to two passages that varied along several
meaning dimensions, but primarily differed in being rated as more typical of the South
(hunting and cooking) or not typical of the South (medicine and investment). The passages were read by both standard and Southern-accented speakers. Following each
passage, participants completed an attitude questionnaire. Ratings of individual attributes were predicted to vary with type of accent. Individuals speaking a Southern

204

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 30(2)

accent were expected to be rated as lower status and more friendly than individuals
speaking a standard accent. In addition, however, it was predicted that accent ratings
would vary depending on passage topic. Speakers were expected to be rated differently both in terms of their status and their overall friendliness depending on the passage content or topic.

Method
Participants
Participants were 64 undergraduate students (51 female, 13 male) at Emory University.
Participants were either paid $10 or received research credit for their participation.
A variety of regions were represented, including the North (n = 6), Northeast (n = 19),
South (n = 19), Midwest (n = 3), Southwest (n = 3), and West (n = 5).

Stimulus Materials
Passages. Two passages were constructed to be consistent with typical Southern
activities (hunting and cooking). The hunting passage described how to load a gun and
the cooking passage described preparing a souffle. Two passages were constructed to
be inconsistent or neutral with respect to Southern stereotypes (medical and investment).
The medical passage described how to perform an appendectomy and the investment
passage described short-selling. All passages were matched on number of words
(between 220 and 230) and sentences (between 14.5 and 15) and on reading difficulty
(between 58 and 67 on the Flesch Reading Ease scale and 8.5 on the Flesch-Kincaid
Grade Level scale; Flesch, 1948).2
Twelve raters reported on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (very) how characteristic
passage topics were for seven American regions (West, Northeast, North, Northwest,
Midwest, South, and Southwest). Because the passages necessarily varied on other
attributes as well, ratings of other aspects of passage meaning were also collected.
A separate group of 33 raters judged how formal, rural, and characteristic of a leisure
activity each of the passages was on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (very).On the basis of
these ratings, medicine and investment constituted the non-Southern or "neutral" topics whereas hunting and cooking constituted the Southern topics. Southern topics were
rated as significantly more characteristic of the South, t(11) = 3.94, p = .01 than neutral
topics. Southern topics were also rated as less formal, t(32) = 3.51, p = .01; more rural,
t(32) = 11.87, p = .01; and more leisure, t(32) = 18.65, p = .01 than the neutral topics.
Recording. Standard- and Southern-accented male and female speakers recorded
each of the four passages. The two standard-accented speakers (56 and 53 years old)
were both from Cleveland and had been raised in Ohio. The two Southern-accented
speakers (52 and 48 years old) were from Anderson, South Carolina and were raised in
Tennessee and South Carolina. All speakers graduated from college and three held
postgraduate degrees.

Heaton and Nygaard

205

Pilot tests were performed to confirm that the speakers' accents were associated with
the intended regions and that the passages were equally comprehensible. Fifteen raters
were presented with the first three sentences of each passage over headphones and asked
to rate on a scale of 1 (not likely) to 5 (very likely) how likely it was that each speaker was
from each of the seven regions (see above). Standard-accented speakers were rated as being
significantly less likely to be from the South, t(14) = 5.73, p < .01 than Southern-accented
speakers. Likewise, Southern-accented speakers (M = 4.39) were rated as being significantly more likely to be from the South, t(14) = 12.76, p < .01 than from other regions.3
A separate group of 12 participants read each passage and answered a set of 10 questions to assess baseline comprehension of the passages. Independent means t tests using
a Bonferroni-corrected alpha level of .008 confirmed that the passages did not differ
significantly from one another in baseline comprehensibility.
Attitudes assessment. An attitudes assessment was developed to evaluate judgments
about the speaking style of each talker. The scale consisted of 22 adjectives formatted
and adapted from Giles et al. (1992) and Preston (1999). The scale was intended
to assess a range of attitudes about the speaker and speaking style. The attitudes of
most interest for the current experiment were characteristics of status and competence,
such as intelligent, smart, competent, good English, and well-educated, and characteristics of sociality, such as friendly, sociable, trustworthy, sympathetic, and nice. These
characteristics have been found in the previous literature to differ significantly depending on dialect or accent (Edwards 1982; Giles et al., 1992; Lambert, 1967; Preston
1999; Sebastian & Ryan, 1985).

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions (Southern speakers/
Southern passages, Southern speakers/non-Southern passages, standard speakers/Southern
passages, standard speakers/non-Southern passages). In each condition, participants
were presented two passages auditorily over headphones. Each group listened to both
a male and female speaker from the same region reading a different passage with the
same regional content. Across participants, the order in which the passages were
heard and which speaker produced which passage was fully counterbalanced. After
each passage, participants answered a set of comprehension questions to ensure that
they were attending to passage content and then pressed a button on the computer to
continue to the attitudes assessment. Participants rated each speaker (on a scale
from 1 to 7) on each of the 22 adjectives. Ratings were collected online with each
adjective pair being presented one at a time. Presentation of passages and the collection of responses were controlled online by E-Prime experimental software (Schneider,
Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002).

Results
Ratings were collapsed across individual passages to yield means for Southern-typical
and non-Southern content passages. Because the male and female speakers were not

206

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 30(2)

rated significantly differently, ratings were collapsed across the two Southern and the
two standard talkers as well.

Factor Analysis
A factor analysis (principle components analysis with varimax rotation) was performed
on the attitude ratings. Two factors accounted for 54% of the variance and represented the
least number of factors accounting for most of the variance, according to a Scree test. The
first factor corresponded to a construct that has been characterized as status or intelligence
in previous work (34.82% variance, eigenvalue = 7.7) with attributes such as intelligent
(0.86), competent (0.81), and well-educated (0.88) loading highly on this factor. The
second factor corresponded to what has been described as solidarity in previous research
(19.19% variance, eigenvalue = 4.2) with attributes such as sociable (0.74), cheerful
(0.78), and friendly (0.85) loading highly on this factor. The differential loading of subsets
of the rating scale suggests that raters were evaluating speakers along at least two dimensions, corresponding to their status or competence and to their solidarity or sociality.

Effects of Passage Content and Accent
on Judgments of Speaker Attributes
Preliminary examination of speaker gender and the region of origin of our listeners
indicated no significant main effects or interactions with other variables and, as such,
neither variable was considered further. In addition, few consistent effects of passage
order were found and no interactions with passage content or speaker accent were
found. As a consequence, this variable was also not considered further.
To evaluate the extent to which passage content and accent type influenced listeners'
ratings of speaker attributes, a series of 2 x 2 analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were
conducted using each of the 22 adjective ratings as a dependent measure. Passage
content (Southern typical vs. non-Southern) and accent type (Southern vs. standard)
were between-subjects factors.

Passage Effects
When the speakers were reading the non-Southern content passages, they were rated
as significantly more intelligent, F(1, 60)= 7.83, p < 0.01; educated, F(1, 60) = 17.49,
p < .01; important, F(1, 60) = 7.06, p = .01; richer, F(1, 60) = 19.06, p < .01; and as
having better English, F(1, 60) = 8.19, p < .01, than when reading Southern content
passages. Each of these attributes was associated with the status factor derived from
the factor analysis.

Speaker Effects
Speakers with a standard accent were rated significantly more intelligent, F(1, 60) = 4.14,
p = .05; more arrogant, F(1, 60) = 5.47, p = .02; smarter, F(1, 60) = 4.49, p = .04;

Heaton and Nygaard

207

better educated, F(1, 60) = 5.02, p = .03; and as having better English, F(1, 60) =
12.90, p < .01, than Southern-accented speakers, regardless of passage type. These
attributes all appeared to be associated with status.
Speakers with a Southern accent were rated as more amusing, F(1, 60) = 8.16,
p < .01; friendlier, F(1, 60) = 11.44, p < .01; more polite, F(1, 60) = 3.65, p = .06; and
nicer, F(1, 60) = 2.89, p < .01, than standard-accented speakers, regardless of passage
type. Southern-accented speakers were also rated as significantly more sociable,
F(1, 60) = 24.98, p < .01 and more cheerful, F(1, 60) = 11.48, p < .01, although these
main effects were mediated by significant interactions between accent and passage type.

Interactions
The analyses revealed significant interactions between passage content and speaker
accent for ratings of sociability, F(1, 60) = 6.24, p = .02; likeability, F(1, 60) = 5.77,
p = .02; and cheerfulness, F(1, 60) = 4.33, p = .04. Follow-up means comparisons
showed that standard-accented speakers were considered significantly more sociable,
t(30) = 2.58, p < 0.02; likeable, t(30) = 2.19, p = .04; and cheerful, t(30) = 2.03, p = .05
when producing the Southern passages than when producing the non-Southern passages. Judgments of Southern-accented speakers did not vary with passage content
(all ps > .05).

Status and Sociality
Two overall 2 x 2 ANOVAs were conducted using a status or competence measure that
collapsed across ratings with high loading (>.40) on Factor 1 and a sociality or friendliness measure that collapsed across ratings with high loadings (>.40) on Factor 2.
For the composite measure of status, significant main effects, but no interactions, were
found for passage content, F(1, 60) = 7.71, p < .01 and speaker accent, F(1, 60) = 4.53,
p = .04. For both content and accent, ratings of status were at or above the midpoint of the
scale regardless of passage content. However, non-Southern content passages were rated
as higher status than Southern-themed passages. Likewise, standard-accented speakers
were rated as higher status than Southern-accented speakers.
In the analysis of the sociality measure, a significant interaction was found,
F(1, 60) = 5.74, p = .02 as well as a main effect for speakers, F(1, 60) = 14.22, p < .01.
Follow-up means comparisons showed that Standard speakers were rated as significantly higher in sociality when the passage had Southern (or rural, casual, or leisure)
content than when the passage had non-Southern content, t(30) = 2.02, p = .05, but no
difference was found for Southern speakers (p > .05).

Discussion
Both passage content and speaker accent influenced listeners' ratings of speaker
attributes. Southern passages and Southern-accented speakers were rated as lower in

208

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 30(2)

status attributes and higher in sociality attributes than non-Southern passages and
standard-accented speakers. However, for sociality attributes, ratings varied as a function of passage content for standard, but not Southern, speakers.
Consistent with previous research, the two factors that emerged from the speaker
attribute ratings broadly corresponded to the constructs of "status" and "solidarity"
and were differentially associated with the standard and Southern-accented speakers.
There is considerable evidence at this point that nonstandard dialects or accents
are judged as higher in sociality or solidarity whereas standard dialects or accents are
judged as higher status (Demirci & Kleiner, 1999; Edwards, 1982; Giles et al., 1992;
Lambert, 1967; Preston, 1999). Much of the previous research had focused on dialects,
however, in which changes in lexical choice or sentence structure could have led to
differences in attitude judgments (Demirci & Kleiner, 1999; Lambert, 1967; Levy &
Cook, 1973; Luhman, 1990; Purnell, Idsardi, & Baugh, 1999; Squires & Chadwick,
2006). The present finding confirms that the pronunciation of speech sounds themselves, or phonological variation, affects listeners' attitudes.
Significant differences in attitudes also appeared as a function of passage content.
Passages were judged differently based on what the topic was, regardless of the accent
type. In the case of status, this finding indicates that in some cases, message content
may override speaker accent in the evaluation process and is consistent with previous
work demonstrating the influence of lexical formality on listeners' ratings of intelligence and competence (Levin et al., 1994; Nath, 2007). However, the current finding
extends previous work to the domain of passage content.
Crucially, passage content and accent type were not entirely independent. Passage
content and accent type not only interacted for three of the individual attitude measures but also for the overall composite measure of sociality. Attitudes toward standardaccented speakers changed depending on passage topic, while attitudes toward
Southern-accented speakers tended to remain more stable across passage topics. One
possible explanation may be that standard-accented speech does not necessarily elicit
strong associations with sociality attributes. As a consequence, ratings of these associated traits were more flexible. In contrast, because Southern accents are closely associated
with attributes such as sociality, their ratings remained relatively more stable across
conditions. In the case of a "marked" accent such as Southern English, the accent may
be quickly used to generate initial expectations or biases about speaker traits. When
the accent is considered standard, no specific expectations may be created, at which
point other aspects of the communicative situation, such as content, may influence
judgments about speaker attributes.
Although the current results strongly suggest significant effects of passage content
and accent type on listeners' attitudes, there were limitations to the study. One concerns
the range of passage topics that was examined. Certainly, the passages differed on a
variety of dimensions other than whether each activity was typical of Southern regions.
Future work will need to isolate the role of perceived typicality of content for a certain
region from the myriad other ways in which passages can differ. Our results are also
limited with respect to types of standard and nonstandard accented speech that were

Heaton and Nygaard

209

used. Our standard speakers came from one particular region and our Southern speakers
were representative of only a certain type of Southern speech. Although the results are
consistent with previous work on attitudes toward Southern-accented speech in general,
conclusions about the extent to which our findings can be generalized to other varieties
of standard and nonstandard speech should be drawn with caution.
In conclusion, this experiment examined attitudes toward common standard and
nonstandard American regional accents. Within this context, judgments of speaker
attributes were influenced by a talker's particular speaking style as well as by passage
content. The content of spoken language may act as one kind of linguistic context that
frames the listener's overall assessment of characteristics of that speaker. Future
research will need to take into account not only properties of a particular speaking
style in explaining social evaluations in speech but also properties of the communicative and linguistic setting in the form of conversational topic or content.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Barbara Strock, Susan Tamasi, and two anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments on an earlier draft of this article. We would also like to thank Jessica Alexander
and Lauren Clepper for their help with stimulus and protocol preparation and participant
recruitment.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship and/or
publication of this article.

Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research and/or authorship
of this article:
This research was supported in part by an Emory College Scholarly Research and Inquiry
at Emory (SIRE) undergraduate research grant to the first author and by NIDCD Research
Grant R01 DC 008108.

Notes
1. Although the speakers are referred to here and throughout the article as having an American
Southern English or Standard American English accent, it should be noted that only one
variety of Southern English, South Carolina, is represented by our speakers. Likewise, our
standard speakers are both from Ohio and thus, may most closely display a Midwestern
accent. Listener ratings outlined in the Methods section were used to confirm that our population of participants recognized and labeled each set of speakers as having accents either
characteristic or not of the South.
2. Passages are available on request from the second author as are further descriptive details of
the pilot studies, including dependent variables, and descriptive statistics.
3. It should be noted that although the two standard accented speakers were from Ohio, participants had difficulty specifying their regional dialect, with ratings for regions other than

210

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 30(2)

the South and Southwest falling within a narrow range. Indeed, the highest rating for these
speakers was given to the Northeast.

References
Barden, J., Maddux, W., Petty, R., & Brewer, M. (2004). Contextual moderation of racial bias:
The impact of social roles on controlled and automatically activated attitudes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 5-22.
Baugh, J. (2003). Linguistic profiling. In S. Makoni, G. Smitherman, A. Ball, & A. Spears (Eds.),
Black linguistics: Language, society, and politics in Africa and the Americas (pp. 155-168).
New York, NY: Routledge.
Clopper, C., & Pisoni, D. (2004). Some acoustic cues for the perceptual categorization of American
English regional dialects. Journal of Phonetics, 32, 111-140.
Cooke-Jackson, A., & Hansen, E. (2008). Appalachian culture and reality TV: The ethical
dilemma of stereotyping others. Journal of Mass Media Ethics, 23, 183-200.
De la Zerda, N., & Hopper, R. (1979). Employment interviewers' reactions to Mexican American
speech. Communication Monographs, 46, 126-134.
Demirci, M., & Kleiner, B. (1999). The perceptions of Turkish dialects. In D. Preston (Ed.),
Handbook of perceptual dialectology (pp. 263-281). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Edwards, J. (1982). Language attitudes and their implication among English speakers. In
E. Ryan & H. Giles (Eds.), Attitudes towards language variation: Social and applied contexts
(pp. 20-33). London, England: Edward Arnold.
Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32, 221-233.
Giles, H., Henwood, K., Coupland, N., Harriman, J., & Coupland, J. (1992). Language attitudes
and cognitive mediation. Human Communication Research, 18, 500-527.
Lambert, W. (1967). The social psychology of bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues, 23, 91-109.
Levin, H., Giles, H., & Garrett, P. (1994). The effects of lexical formality and accent on trait
attributions. Language and Communication, 14, 265-274.
Levy, B., & Cook, H. (1973). Dialect proficiency and auditory comprehension in standard and
Black non-standard English. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 16,
642-649.
Luhman, R. (1990). Appalachian English stereotypes: Language attitudes in Kentucky. Language
in Society, 19, 331-348.
Matsuda, M. (1991). Voice of America: Accent, antidiscrimination law, and a jurisprudence for
the last reconstruction. Yale Law Journal, 100, 1329-1407.
Nath, L. E. (2007). Expectation states: Are formal words a status cue for competence? Current
Research in Social Psychology, 13, 50-63.
Preston, D. (1999). A language attitude approach to the perception of regional variety. In
D. Preston (Ed.), Handbook of perceptual dialectology (pp. 359-373). Amsterdam, Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
Purnell, T., Idsardi, W., & Baugh, J. (1999). Perceptual and phonetic experiments on American
English dialect identification. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 18, 10-30.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime 1.2 [Computer software].
Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology Software Tools.

Heaton and Nygaard

211

Sebastian, R., & Ryan, E. (1985). Speech cues and social evaluation: Markers of ethnicity,
social class, and age. In H. Giles & R. St. Clair (Eds.), Recent advances in language communication and social psychology (pp. 112-143). London, England: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Squires, G., & Chadwick, J. (2006). Linguistic profiling: A continuing tradition of discrimination
in the home insurance industry? Urban Affairs Review, 41, 400-415.
Wittenbrink, B., Judd, C., & Park, B. (2001). Spontaneous prejudice in context: Variability in
automatically activated attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 815-827.

Bios
Hayley Heaton received her BA in psychology with highest honors at Emory University. Her
research interests include stereotypes and language use, particularly the role of dialects and
accents in communicative interactions. She is currently working toward her MA in linguistics
at North Carolina State University.
Lynne C. Nygaard is an associate professor of psychology at Emory University. She is associate
editor for Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics. Her research interests include perceptual
learning in speech perception and spoken language processing.

