Applied Psycholinguistics 32 (2011), 687-710
doi:10.1017/S0142716411000026

Definitions as a window to the
acquisition of relative clauses
NAAMA FRIEDMANN, DORIT ARAM, and RAMA NOVOGRODSKY
Tel Aviv University
Received: December 31, 2008

Accepted for publication: May 2, 2010

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Naama Friedmann, Language and Brain Lab, School of Education, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
69978, Israel. E-mail: naamafr@post.tau.ac.il
ABSTRACT
Definitions that children provide can be a valuable measure of their syntax, and specifically, of their
ability to produce relative clauses. This research explored the acquisition of subject, object, and indirect
object relative clauses in 121 Hebrew-speaking children aged 3 years, 5 months to 8 years, 6 months
(3;5-8;6). The children were asked to define 14 nouns, and their responses were collected and analyzed
for various syntactic aspects. The main results were that children started using relative clauses in their
definitions at age 3;8, and their use of relative clause increased consistently until they were 6 years
old. Retesting 38 of the 6-year-olds at age 8;6 indicated no differences in several syntactic measures
between their production of relative clauses at age 6 and 8;6, suggesting that the ability to produce
relative clauses stabilizes around age 6. The participants made almost no grammatical errors at any
of the ages, probably because they avoided the use of relative clauses when they had not mastered
them yet. In the early stages participants produced mainly headless relatives, and with age the use of
a relative head increased. The acquisition of relative clauses was not related to the ability to embed or
to the ability to use pronouns: these abilities existed already in the youngest age group and remained
constant throughout the age groups.

"A thief is someone who takes things and who returns them later," said determinedly one of our 4-year-old participants. This might not be the best definition
for a thief, but it can certainly teach us something about the syntactic abilities
of this child. For example, it teaches us that he is able to use the subject relative
construction. This study looked at definitions from a new angle: as a valuable tool
for assessing the syntactic ability of children as it develops throughout various
stages of language acquisition.
Definition tasks are traditionally used to assess semantic and pragmatic abilities of children. They provide information regarding their categorization abilities
and about lexical knowledge and lexical retrieval abilities (Aram, 2005; Benelli,
Arcuri, & Marchesini, 1988; Litowitz, 1977; Markowitz & Franz, 1988; Snow,
1990; Wehren, De Lisi, & Arnold, 1981; Wolman & Barker, 1965). Providing definitions is an ability that is valued in classrooms and on intelligence tests (Wechsler,
1974). Children's definitions have been found to be related to the formation of the
(c) Cambridge University Press 2011 0142-7164/11 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

688

concept of the word (Dickinson & Tabors, 1991), as well as to reading comprehension achievements (Aram & Levin, 2004; Snow, 1993).
It is important that the definitions might also be revealing with respect to
syntactic abilities, because a common definition usually uses the structure "An
X is a Y that. . . .", namely, a structure of a relative clause. Relative clauses
have drawn much attention in language acquisition research, because although
they occur frequently in the input, children acquire them relatively slowly, and
with intriguing differences between production and comprehension (GunzbergKerbel, Shvimer, & Friedmann, 2008) and between various types of relative clauses
(Correa, 1982, 1995; de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta, & Cohen, 1979; Diessel
& Tomasello, 2000; Friedmann, Belletti, & Rizzi, 2009; Friedmann & Costa,
2010; Friedmann et al., 2010; Guasti & Cardinaletti, 2003; Kidd & Bavin, 2002;
Sheldon, 1974; Tavakolian, 1981).
Relative clauses are derived by movement of a phrase from within the embedded
clause, which is related to the head of the relative clause. For example, in the
subject relative (1) below, the head of the relative clause, "the girl," moves from
the subject position of the embedded clause, leaving behind an empty position,
marked here by an underline. In sentence (2), which is an object relative, "the girl"
moves from the embedded object position, and in sentence (3), an indirect object
relative clause, it is the indirect object that moved.1
(1) Subject relative: This is the girl that __ is drawing the grandmother.
(2) Object relative: This is the girl that the grandmother is drawing __.
(3) Indirect object relative: This is the girl that the grandmother talked about __.

Relative clauses may thus be used as a window to the acquisition of structures
that are derived by movement of a phrase. Their higher frequency in the input of
children (compared to passives or clefts, e.g., which are also derived by phrase
movement but are far less frequent in Hebrew) makes them a good candidate
for research in language acquisition: in our count of 6,047 sentences in Hebrew
children's books, 14.4% of the sentences were relative clauses (Friedmann &
Novogrodsky, 2004). Maschler and Shaer (2011) found 178 relative clauses (115
with a referential head and 63 free relatives) in 158 min of free conversations of
Hebrew-speaking adults with their friends and relatives, namely, more than one
relative clause per minute.
In the course of language acquisition, children produce relative clause sentences
as early as around age 3 years (Berman, 1997; Crain, McKee, & Emiliani, 1990;
de Villiers, de Villiers, & Hoban, 1994; Labelle, 1990, 1996; McKee & McDaniel,
2001; McKee, McDaniel, & Snedeker, 1998; Varlokosta & Armon-Lotem, 1998;
Varlokosta & Crain, 1997).
Findings from spontaneous speech analysis and from elicited production tests
indicate that Hebrew-speaking children start producing relative clauses around the
age of 3 years, similarly to reports from other languages. Berman (1986; Berman
& Neeman, 1994) found that one-quarter of the Hebrew-speaking children aged
3 to 4 years produced relatives in a story telling task, half of the children aged 5
to 8 years produced relatives in their stories, and most of the fourth graders aged
9 to 10 years produced relative clauses, in a proportion similar to that of adults.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

689

Clark and Berman (1987) found that children use relatives from the age of 3 in a
description task for novel noun compounding.
Some researchers have suggested that although these early relative clauses
superficially look like the adult structures, at least some of them are represented
by the children as structures without movement. This is reflected in the preference
to produce relative clauses with a resumptive pronoun (such as "This is the girl
that the grandmother is drawing her"), which creates a structure without movement (Shlonsky, 1992). This overuse of pronouns at the gap position in relative
clauses is characteristic of early relative clauses in various languages (English: de
Villiers, 1988; Perez-Leroux, 1995; French: Ferreiro, Othenin-Girard, Chipman,
& Sinclair, 1976; Labelle, 1990; Greek: Varlokosta & Armon-Lotem, 1998; and
Spanish: Ferreiro et al., 1976; Perez-Leroux, 1995; for discussions of movement in
early relative clauses, see Guasti & Shlonsky, 1995; Varlokosta & Armon-Lotem,
1998; Varlokosta & Crain, 1997; for the report of different rates of resumptive
pronouns in different relative clause structures, see Guasti & Cardinaletti, 2003).
Suner (1998) showed that whereas children use resumptive pronouns also in
languages and structures in which resumptive pronouns are ungrammatical in the
adult target languages, they actually use an option that is grammatical in some
adult languages. Hebrew is one such language in which resumptive pronouns are
sometimes grammatical. In Hebrew, resumptive pronouns are ungrammatical in
subject relatives, optional in object relatives, and obligatory in indirect object
relatives. Young children who acquire Hebrew, however, use resumptive pronouns
in all types of relatives. Varlokosta and Armon-Lotem (1998) reported that children
aged 2 years, 8 months (2;8) to 5;5 produced 24% of their subject relatives with
resumptive pronouns in subject position, 93% of their object relatives, and 91%
of the indirect object relatives. Gunzberg-Kerbel et al. (2008) found that 9%
of the subject relatives produced by 22 Hebrew-speaking children aged 3;7 to
5;0 included an (ungrammatical) resumptive pronoun in the embedded subject
position, and 62% of the object relatives were produced with a resumptive pronoun.
The heavy reliance on resumptive pronouns in relative clauses decreases when the
children reach school age (Friedmann & Costa, 2011; Friedmann, Novogrodsky,
Szterman, & Preminger, 2008; Friedmann & Szterman, 2006; Novogrodsky &
Friedmann, 2006).
Further studies reported interesting differences between four types of relatives
in Hebrew: subject relatives, object relatives, object relatives with resumptive
pronouns, and indirect object relatives. In a picture description task aimed to elicit
various types of relative clauses (Berman, 1986), 3- to 4-year-olds produced 37% of
the target subject relatives, 28% of the object relatives, and only 13% of the indirect
object relatives. Significantly better production of subject relatives compared to
object relatives was also reported by Gunzberg-Kerbel et al. (2008) for Hebrewspeaking children aged 3;7 to 5;0: of 616 utterances they produced in a relative
clause elicitation task, 28.7% were subject relatives, and only 18.5% were object
relatives (see also Friedmann et al., 2009, for the comparison between subject and
object relatives). By the age of 5 to 6 years the children in Berman's study already
produced 65% of the subject relatives and 62% of the object relatives but only 36%
of the indirect object relatives, indicating a relatively delayed acquisition of indirect
relative clauses. Varlokosta and Armon-Lotem (1998) used a toy elicitation task in

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

690

Hebrew-speaking children aged 2;8 to 5;5 years to elicit relative clauses. Out of the
72 target relatives of each type, their participants produced 42 subject relatives, 38
object relatives, and 35 indirect object and prepositional phrase relatives. Although
Varlokosta and Armon-Lotem's study did not divide the participants into age
groups as Berman's study did (3-4, 5-6), the developmental pattern was similar,
with indirect object relatives and prepositional phrase relatives acquired later than
subject and object relatives. Armon-Lotem, Botwinik-Rotem, and Birka (2006)
showed that the resumptive pronoun in locative and oblique indirect object relatives
is frequently omitted in children aged 3;4 to 6;0.
Why are indirect object relatives acquired later? In Hebrew, indirect object
relatives include a preposition inflected for the relevant pronoun. For example, the
preposition "on" inflects for the various third person pronouns (singular masculine,
singular feminine, plural masculine, plural feminine) in the following manner:
alav, aleiha, aleihem, and aleihen, respectively. According to Berman (1978, 1986)
the difficulty in the acquisition of indirect object relatives lies in the association
between the preposition and the pronoun.2
One way to explore this suggestion is to test when pronouns with and without
prepositions are produced outside of a relative clause context ("you sit on-it"),
compared to these pronouns in relative clauses, an analysis we will conduct in the
current study.
Another aim of this study was to see whether the later acquisition of relative
clauses in general relates to the acquisition of embedding. Relative clauses include
not only movement of a phrase, but also embedding, using "that" or "who." We will
test whether relative clauses appear in children's speech together with embedded
sentences that do not require syntactic movement, or later. Previous studies of
Hebrew report that children start producing embedded sentences already after the
age of 2 years, and that the first embedded clauses are not relative clauses. The
assessment of relative clause production using narrative analysis and story telling
indicated that the use of embedded sentences increases with age: from 10% at the
age of 3 years to 15% at the age of 4 and 18% at the age of 9 to 10 years. As
for adult sentences, 23% of the sentences produced are embedded (Berman, 1988,
1997; Dromi & Berman, 1986).
Berman (1997) concluded that a consistent increase in the use of embedding
with age is strong evidence that the amount of embedded clauses produced is
a reliable index for the level of language development within and between age
groups. She further noted that from the age of 3 this is a better index than mean
length of utterance, because at this age children reach grammatical mastery that
cannot be defined by the mean length of utterance index (p. 77). The participants
in the current study are at this age range. It is interesting to see if the syntactic
analysis of the definition task supports this trend.
With respect to the order of acquisition of embedded clauses without movement
and relative clauses, which are embedded sentences with movement, an analysis
of speech samples of Hebrew-speaking children indicates that embedded clauses
without movement precedes the production of relative clauses: in a longitudinal
analysis of spontaneous speech corpora of 5 children between the ages of 1;4 and
3;0 (encompassing 21,285 utterances), sentential embedding appeared in their
spontaneous speech before relative clauses, except for 1 child who produced one

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

691

subject relative 12 days before her first production of an embedding without
movement (Friedmann, Reznick, & Lavi, in press; but see Armon-Lotem, 2005).
An analysis of speech samples from 56 children aged 1;6 to 6;1 (including 6,400
utterances) yielded similar results: all the children who produced relative clauses
also produced embedding without movement (43% of the children), but there were
children who already produced embedding without movement who did not produce
any relative clause (34% of the children). There was no child who produced
relatives but did not also produce embedding without relatives (Friedmann et al.,
in press).
Finally, dependencies between two constituents can occur both in sentences
that are derived by syntactic movement, as is the case in relative clauses, and in
sentences without movement that include pronouns. Syntactic movement creates
a dependency between the moved element and its original position (its "trace").
Pronouns also create a dependency to a noun that appeared earlier. Is the difficulty
in the production of relative clauses at an early age and the gradual mastery of
relative clauses with age related to the ability to create long distance dependencies
in general, or is it related to the specific ability to create movement dependency
between the trace and the element that has moved? If it is related to dependencies,
both types of structures should appear only later and should develop in parallel, but
if the difficulty is specifically related to syntactic movement rather than to syntactic
dependencies in general, then sentences without movement with pronouns are
expected to appear before sentences that require movement. For this aim we
analyzed the use of pronouns and compared it to the use of relative clauses.
Thus, this study used a traditional task for a novel aim: we used the analysis
of children's responses to a definition task to evaluate the course of acquisition
of various aspects of relative clauses, embedding, and pronoun use in Hebrewspeaking children.
METHOD

Participants

The study included 121 Hebrew-speaking children. There were 64 girls and
57 boys, who were aged 41 to 72 months (3;5-6;0, M = 57.7 months, SD =
9.8 months). Thirty-eight of the children who participated in the 67- to 72-month
age group (20 girls, 18 boys) were first tested when they were in kindergarten
(in January) and were then retested 2.5 years later when they were at the end of
second grade (in June). This allowed for the testing of correlations and differences
between their production abilities in the two ages. In the tables throughout the
article, the participants were subdivided into six age groups, as shown in Table 1.
The children were recruited from two low socioeconomic status Israeli townships: one in central Israel, geographically adjacent and administratively affixed to
the major city of Tel Aviv, and the second from the northern periphery of Israel.3
Procedure

Each child was requested to define 14 nouns (e.g., "What is a clock?") using an
adaptation of the definitions task (Snow, Cancino, Gonzalez, & Shriberg, 1989)

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

692

Table 1. Descriptions of the age groups
No. of
Definitions

No. of
Participants

Age Range
(months)

Age Group
(years;months)

67
307
331
322
558
570
2155

6
24
25
25
41
38
121

41-43
44-48
49-54
55-66
67-72
97-102

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8a
Total

a

Retested.

to Hebrew (Aram & Levin, 2001). The nouns were alef-bet, ofanayim, cipor,
sha'on, yahalom, xamor, perax, regel, kova, sakin, masmer, shrafraf, ganav, mitriya
(alphabet, bicycle, bird, clock, diamond, donkey, flower, foot, hat, knife, carpentrynail, stool, thief, umbrella).
The instruction for the child (translated from Hebrew) was the following: "Now
I will say several words, and you will tell me what is the meaning of each word--
what is each thing." Then, the experimenter asked about each word: "What is
. . . " (e.g., ma ze mitriya?, "what is an umbrella?"). No time limit was set. The
experimenter did not give the participants any response-contingent feedback as
to their success or failure on the test items, only general encouragement. The
examiner gave the next target word when the participant finished her previous
definition.
Analysis

A total of 2,155 definitions were collected. For each definition each child produced,
we analyzed whether it included a relative clause or not, and whether it included
an embedded sentence. A definition was classified as including a relative clause
with a head when it included a nominal head, a complementizer4 (the Hebrew
complementizer she-, that), and a clause with a verb and a resumptive pronoun
agreeing with the head, or a trace. A definition was classified as a headless relative
clause when it had the same structure but included no head, but rather started with
the complementizer.
For sentences that included a relative clause, we analyzed the type of the relative
clause: subject, object, or indirect object relative clause; we also assessed for each
relative clause whether it was grammatical or not, and if it was ungrammatical,
we coded the type of ungrammaticality. Within the responses that included an
embedded sentence we counted how many of them included relative clauses,
and which types of embedding were used (including purpose clause, temporal
clause, and sentential embedding to a verb). We also analyzed other indications of
dependency that did not include a relative clause, such as the use of sentences with
pronouns that did not include embedding (such as "one rides on it" for bicycle).

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

693

Table 2. General production of grammatical and ungrammatical relative clauses
out of the total number of definitions and the number of participants producing
relative clauses out of the number of children in this age group
No. Participants Producing

Age Group
(years;months)

Relative
Clauses

Grammatical
Headed
Relative Clause

Ungrammatical
Relative
Clause

Headed
Relative
Clauses

Relative Clauses
With or Without
Head

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

0%
6%
6%
8%
21%
24%

0%
4%
5%
6%
19%
23%

0%
2%
1%
2%
2%
1%

0/6
6/24
6/25
7/25
22/41
25/38

1/6
17/24
17/25
16/25
31/41
31/38

Some children provided no response for some of the target words, and some
children provided more than a single definition for a target noun. Therefore, for
each participant, the total number of definitions produced was counted.

RESULTS

Production of relative clauses in general

The six youngest children, aged 3;5 to 3;7, did not produce any headed relative
clause in the 67 definitions they provided. However, already at age 3;8, children
used relative clauses in their definitions (6%), and the rate of relative clauses
out of the total number of definitions increased with age (r = .32, p < .0001).
Table 2 reports the rate of production of full relative clauses with a relative head
by age group, the rate of ungrammatical relatives per age group, and the number
of participants in each age group who produced relative clauses with and without
a relative head.
Production of grammatical and ungrammatical relative clauses. As seen in

Table 2, the rate of grammatical relative clauses out of the total number of definitions produced also increased with age (r = .39, p < .0001). It is important that
there were hardly any ungrammatical relative clauses. In all age groups, the rate of
ungrammatical relative clauses did not exceed 2% of the definitions produced, and
there was no difference in the rate of ungrammatical relative clause production
between the groups, and no correlation with age (r = -.02, p = .77).
The few errors that occurred related exclusively to resumptive pronouns: productions of a pronoun where it is ungrammatical, and omissions of an obligatory
pronoun. In Hebrew, resumptive pronouns are ungrammatical in subject relatives
( "A thief is someone who he steals."); are obligatory in indirect object relatives
("A knife is something that mommy can cut with-it."); and are optional in direct

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

694

object relative clauses. Out of 152 subject relatives produced, there were 13 errors
of inserting a resumptive pronoun at the embedded subject position; see Example
(4). Out of 97 indirect object relatives, 15 were produced without the obligatory
prepositional phrase that includes a resumptive pronoun; see Examples (5) and (6).
(4) M.D., 4;6, defining a donkey:
mishehu she-hu doher
somebody that-he gallops
"Someone who he gallops."
(5) M.Y., 4;9, defining a knife:
mashehu she-xotxim
something that-(arbitrary pro)5 -cutting (omitted: with-it)
"Something that one cuts."
(6) M.Y., 4;9, defining a nail:
mashehu she-metaknim
something that-(arbitrary pro)-fixing (omitted: with-it)
"Something that one fixes."

None of the children produced ungrammatical subject, object, or indirect object
relatives with doubling of the relative head at the gap position (i.e., they did not
produce ungrammatical sentences like  The horse that the horse jumps, or  The
furniture that one puts legs on the furniture), which are characteristic of the relative
clauses produced by school-age children with a hearing impairment (Friedmann
et al., 2008; Friedmann & Szterman, 2006), and also occur, to a lesser extent, in
young children acquiring Hebrew in relative clause elicitation tasks. For example,
the age 3;7 to 5;0 children in Gunzberg-Kerbel et al. (2008) produced 7.5% and
2.1% doubling at the gap position in subject and object relatives, respectively.
Another interesting finding is that the children in our study never omitted
the complementizer in a relative clause. Whereas in English relative clauses can
occur without a complementizer (A flower is something you pick), in Hebrew
complementizerless relative clauses like maxshir xotxim ito ( a tool cut-arbitrarypro with-it), and mashu merixim ve-kotfim ( something smell- arbitrary-pro and
pick-arbitrary-pro) are completely ungrammatical without the complementizer
she- (and perfectly grammatical with this complementizer). In a study of English
relative clauses, Diessel and Tomasello (2000) reported that the children did
produce relative clauses without a complementizer. The difference between the
findings probably results from the fact that in English some relative clauses without
a complementizer are possible and are "produced in natural conversations by adult
native speakers of English," and "This construction is . . . so widely attested that
its existence cannot be disputed" (Diessel & Tomasello, 2000, p. 140).
Thus, the gradual acquisition of relative clause production is evinced in the
rate of relative clauses produced, but not in the number of errors--young children
usually produce definitions without a relative clause, but when they do produce a
relative clause, it is usually grammatical. It seems that this stems from the relatively
free nature of the definition task, which, unlike relative clause elicitation tasks,
does not force the child to produce a relative clause when it is not yet mastered,
and allows the use of varied structures instead.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

695

Table 3. Embedding with and without relative clause of the definitions produced

Age Group
(years;months)

Nonrelative
Embedding

Relative Clause
Embedding

Total
Embedding

Relative Clause
Embedding/Total
Embedding

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

6%
6.5%
7%
12%
6%
9%

0%
5.5%
6%
8%
21%
24%

6%
12%
13%
20%
27%
33%

0%
46%
45%
40%
79%
74%

Embedding

Relative clauses are embedded structures. Is the increase in the rate of relative
clauses produced with age a result of an improved ability to embed sentences?
For this aim we divided all embedded sentences into embedded sentences with a
relative clause and embedded sentences without relative clauses.6 The embedded
sentences without relative clauses were 89 sentences that included a temporal
clause (she-/ kshe-/ axrei she-/matai she- = when/after), 66 purpose clauses (she/bishvil she-/kedei she- = in order to), as well as three sentential complements of
verbs.
The striking finding was that whereas the production of embedded structures
that include relative clauses increased with age, the number of embeddings without
relative clauses showed no effect of age (r = .09, p = .25) and remained steady
throughout the ages tested. This was manifested also in the increase in the rate of
relative clauses out of the total number of embedded sentences produced in the
definitions (r = .36, p < .0001; see Table 3).
Thus, relative clauses and embedded structures without movement share the
embedding of a complementizer phrase (CP, a full sentence) and the embedding
marker in CP and differ with respect to movement. Our results indicate that it is
not the shared property of CP embedding that delays the production of relative
clauses. Because embedded structures without movement are produced very early
on and do not show an increase with age within the ages tested, it should rather
be something that is specific to relative clauses that delays the production of these
structures, such as syntactic movement.
Relative clauses with and without a relative head

One characteristic that changed significantly with age was the production of the
relative clause with a head noun. Relative clauses without a relative head, as
shown in Example (7), were more characteristic of early relative clause definitions,
whereas the older participants produced mainly relative clauses with a relative
head. Examples (7) and (8) show definitions of the word flower without a relative
head and with a relative head, respectively.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

696

Table 4. Relative clauses with and without a head noun out of the total
number of definitions

Age Group
(years;months)

With Head

Without Head

Relative Clause
Without Head/Total
Relative Clause

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

0%
6%
6%
8%
21%
24%

3%
17%
12%
15%
10%
9%

100%
75%
66%
66%
32%
27%

Relative Clause

(7) She-merixim oto
that-(arbitrary-pro)-smelling it
"That one smells it."
(8) Mashehu she-godel ba-sadot
something that-grows in-the-fields
"Something that grows in the fields."

With age, more relative clauses included a head, and the rate of relative clauses
that did not include heads out of all definitions decreased. There was a significant
reversed correlation between the production of headless relative clauses and the
production of relative clauses with a head noun (r = -.25, p = .03). The rate
of headless relative clauses from the total number of relative clauses with and
without a head decreased with age (r = -.33, p = .04), as seen in Table 4.
Production of long distance dependencies with and without movement

To test whether the delayed use of relative clauses stems from a delay in the
ability to use dependencies, we compared relative clauses to sentences without
movement that include pronouns. Syntactic movement in relative clauses creates
a dependency between the moved element and its original position (its "trace"), as
seen in (9), where the gap refers to the head of the relative clause, "something." In
(10), the pronoun "oto" (= it or him) creates a dependency to the word hat, given
by the experimenter.
Definition of a hat:
(9) Dependency with movement:
mashehu she-xovshim __ al ha-rosh
something that-(arbitrary-pro)-wearing on the-head
"Something that one wears on the head."
(10) Dependency without movement: (a response to "what`s a hat?")
xovshim oto al ha-rosh
(arbitrary-pro)-wearing it on the-head
"One wears it on the head."

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

697

Table 5. The rate of sentences with pronouns out of the total
number of productions
Age Group
(years;months)

Object
Pronouns

Indirect Object
Pronouns

Total
Pronouns

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

3.0%
3.6%
2.7%
2.8%
6.1%
6.8%

10.4%
8.5%
9.4%
4.7%
10.2%
11.9%

13.4%
12.1%
12.1%
7.5%
16.3%
18.8%

If the difficulty in the production of relative clauses in the early ages and the
gradual mastery of relative clauses with age is related to the ability to create
dependencies in general, both relative clauses and sentences with pronouns should
appear only later and should develop concurrently. If, however, the delay is related
to the acquisition of syntactic movement, rather than to syntactic dependencies in
general, sentences without movement such as (10) are expected to appear before
the sentences that require movement.
We analyzed the use of pronouns that refer to the target word, both object
pronouns (him/it), and indirect object pronouns (with-him/it, in-him/it). Many
(grammatical) responses were produced with pronouns but without a relative
clause, with a total of 315 responses: 204 indirect object pronouns, 104 object
pronouns, and 7 possessive pronouns. We compared the use of these structures
with the use of relative clauses.
The production of relative clauses did not correlate with the ability to produce
either object pronouns without movement (r = .06, p = .67) or indirect pronouns
without movement (r = .09, p = .38). Unlike the use of relative clauses, which
increased with age, the percentage of use of direct and indirect object pronouns in
sentences without movement out of the total number of definitions did not show a
linear increase with age, as seen in Table 5. These results are in line with previous
studies that found that Hebrew-speaking children use singular pronouns correctly
at an early age (Berman, 1985; Rom & Dgani, 1985).
A reversed correlation was found between the production of indirect object
relatives and indirect pronouns without movement (r = -.22, p = .006), namely,
the more relative clauses with indirect pronouns were produced, the fewer indirect
pronouns were produced without a relative clause, and a marginally significant
reversed correlation was found between the production of object relatives and the
production of object pronouns without movement (r = .14, p = .07). The rate
of production of relative clauses to sentences with pronouns but without relative
clauses increased significantly with age (r = .30, p = .002.) That is, in the early
ages children preferred to use sentences with pronouns without relative clauses,
and with age they started to be able to increasingly use relative clauses. In the two
older age groups relative clauses outnumbered sentences with pronouns without a
relative. Table 6 presents the rates of relative clauses to sentences with a pronoun

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

698

Table 6. The rate of relative clauses of a certain type to sentences with
pronouns of the same type

Age Group
(years;months)

Object Relatives
to Object
Pronouns

Indirect Object Relatives
to Indirect Object
Pronouns

Total Relatives
to Pronouns

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

0.0%
27.3%
44.4%
55.6%
52.9%
56.4%

0.0%
3.8%
19.4%
40.0%
75.4%
60.3%

0.0%
10.8%
25.0%
45.8%
67.0%
58.9%

of the relevant type (the number of relative clauses of a certain type divided by
the number of sentences with pronouns of this type): direct object relatives to
sentences with direct object pronouns, and indirect object relatives to sentences
with indirect object pronouns.
Subject relatives, object relatives, and indirect object relatives

The definition task required the children to provide definitions for various words,
some lending themselves to a definition using subject relative, some calling more
for a direct or an indirect object relative. Thus, the nature of the task makes it
impossible to use the number of relatives of each type that was produced as a
measure of its difficulty. However, we can still see whether there is a difference in
trends, namely, whether all relative clause types depend on age in the same way,
and whether the rate of production of the three types changes across different ages.
In general, the production of each of the three structures increased with age for
subject (r = .37, p < .0001), object (r = .25, p = .002), and indirect object (r =
.31, p < .0001) relatives.
Note that the definition task is flexible enough to reflect preferences between
relative clause types. This is because definitions for the same target word can
be made using various types of relative clause. For example, the word umbrella
elicited definitions in the form of subject relatives, object relatives, and indirect
object relatives, as seen on Table 7. The preference for various relative clause
types in the various ages can thus be telling.
Keeping this relatively free choice of relative clause types in mind, we can take
the ratio of the production of the three relative clause types in the second grade
participants as some indication of the target ratio. This ratio was approximately
3:2:1 subject relative/indirect object relatives/object relative. As seen in Table 8,
throughout all ages subject relatives outnumbered the other two types, but the near
adult trend of twice as many indirect object relatives than direct object relatives
only appeared around age 5. Until this age object relatives were produced more
or less at the same rate as indirect object relatives. This might indicate a difficulty
in the production of indirect object relatives in the early ages.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

699

Table 7. Definitions children gave to the word "umbrella"
Subject relative

Object relative, then
subject relative
Object relative

Indirect object relative

mashehu she-shomer aleynu she-lo yipol aleynu geshem
something that-guards on-us that-not will-fall on-us rain
"Something that guards us that rain will not fall on us."
davar she-lokxim oto, she-ozer lanu neged ha-geshem
thing that-(arbitrary pro)take it, that-helps us against the-rain
"A thing that one takes, that helps us against the rain."
mashehu she-potxim
something that-(arbitrary pro)open
"Something that one opens."
kli she-holxim ito matai she-yesh geshem
tool that-(arbitrary pro)go with-it when that-there's rain
"A tool that one goes with it when there's rain."

Note that the results reported in the previous section, according to which even
the youngest participants already produced indirect pronouns, which are inflected
prepositions, and at a rate similar to the oldest participants, suggest that the
relatively late development of indirect object relatives is not related to a difficulty
in the production of inflected prepositions (in contrast to Berman's 1978, 1986,
explanation). The results of these analyses should be taken cautiously, however,
because of the relatively small number of object and indirect object relatives
produced (a total of 149 sentences).
The production of object relatives

In general, very few object relatives were produced in the definition task. Until
age 5;5 only 12 object relatives were produced overall out of 1,027 definitions.
After age 5;6, 40 object relatives were produced, and there was no longer any
correlation with age (r = .08, p = .49). The object relatives that were produced
included both object relatives with a resumptive pronoun and object relatives
without a resumptive. As shown in Table 9, the production of object relatives both
with and without resumptive pronouns increased with age (r = .20, p = .01; r =
.18, p = .03, respectively).
The relation between the production of relative clauses in kindergarten and
in second grade

For the 38 children that were tested in kindergarten and retested 2.5 years later
when they were at second grade, we analyzed the correlation between their production of relative clauses in the two ages. The rate of production of relative
clauses in the definition task (for each child out of the total number of responses
s/he produced) at age 5;7 to 6;0 correlated significantly with the rate of production
of relative clauses of the same children when they were 8;1 to 8;6 (r = .39,
p = .01).

Table 8. Types of relative clauses
% of Total Definitions

% of Total Relative Clauses

Number

Age Group
(years;months)

Subject
Relative

Object
Relative

Indirect
Object
Relative

Subject
Relative

Object
Relative

Indirect
Object
Relative

Subject
Relative

Object
Relative

Indirect
Object
Relative

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

0
3
3
3
9
13

0
1
1
2
3
4

0
0
2
2
8
7

47
50
36
45
53

18
20
20
15
16

6
30
24
37
30

0
8
10
9
53
72

0
3
4
5
18
22

0
1
6
6
43
41

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

701

Table 9. Number of object relative clauses produced with and without
resumptive pronouns
Object Relative
Age Group
(years;months)

No. of
Definitions

Total No. of
Object Relatives

With
RP

Without
RP

3;5
3;8
4
4;6
5;6
8

67
307
331
322
558
570

0
3
4
5
18
22

0
0
2
0
8
9

0
3
2
5
10
13

Note: RP, resumptive pronoun.

No correlation was found between the production of relative clauses without a
head in kindergarten and the production of either relative clauses without a head
or relative clauses in general in the second grade (r = .06, p = .74; r = -.07, p =
.67, respectively).
This group of children did not show significant differences between the two ages
in the number of ungrammatical relative clauses, in the rate of headless relative
clauses to all relative clauses, in the number of object relatives with resumptive
pronouns, in the rate of embedding with and without relative clause, or in the rate
of object relatives to subject relatives (using t tests, all comparisons p > .14). It
is important that no difference was detected in the general rate of grammatical
relative clauses (out of the responses produced) in the younger and older time
points (M = 18% and 22%, respectively), t (37) = 5.29, p = .32. This finding
indicates that the ability to produce relative clauses of the types produced in this
task already stabilizes by the age of 5;6 to 6, and does not change when retested
2.5 years later.
DISCUSSION

The analysis of the definitions children produced in various ages indicated that
definitions can be a useful tool for the assessment of syntactic development.
The detailed analysis of children's definitions suggests some interesting insight
into the development of syntactic abilities. Specifically, the results indicated that
Hebrew-speaking children start using relative clauses in their definitions before
the age of 4 years, and the rate of relative clauses as well as the rate of headed
relative clauses increase with age up to age 6, when this ability seems to stabilize.
This is also the age at which all three types of relative clauses (subject relatives,
object relatives, and indirect object relatives) are produced, whereas in younger
ages indirect object relatives and object relatives are scarce. Children very seldom
produce an ungrammatical relative clause. They prefer to avoid a structure at
the age they do not yet master it. When they do produce an ungrammatical
structure this is usually due to the insertion of a resumptive pronoun in subject

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

702

relatives, and to the omission of obligatory resumptive pronouns in indirect object
relatives, in line with previous research on relative clauses in spontaneous speech
and elicited production. The developing ability to produce relative clauses is not
related to improved embedding ability, which remains constant throughout the
ages tested, nor is it associated with a general ability to use dependencies, as
the use of pronouns does not change and is actually in reversed correlation with
the use of relative clauses. Rather, it seems that it is the ability to construct syntactic
movement that supports the ability to produce well-formed relative clauses.

The development of relative clauses

The results indicate that the rate of production of relative clauses (and grammatical
relative clauses) out of the total number of definitions increases with age, until
around age 5;6, and then stabilizes. This result is consistent with previous studies
that examined the development of relative clauses in Hebrew (Berman, 1986). It
is interesting that the definition task yielded hardly any ungrammatical relative
clauses in the children's productions. In all age groups, even for the youngest
children, the rate of ungrammatical relative clauses did not exceed 2% of the
definitions produced. These results are different from studies that used elicitation
tasks and found a higher rate of ungrammatical relatives (Berman, 1986; GunzbergKerbel et al., 2008; Hakansson & Hansson, 2000; Perez-Leroux, 1995). This
difference probably arises from the difference in the task requirements. In more
formal relative clause elicitation methods the child is required to produce the target
sentences as relative clauses, and if some of the abilities that underlie relative clause
production are not mastered yet, relative clauses can be produced with errors. But
in tasks like the definition task, when children have other options to respond, they
simply refrain from using syntactic structures that they do not master yet. Thus,
in the younger ages, the incomplete acquisition of relative clauses reflects in a
much lower rate of relative clauses rather than in the production of ungrammatical
relative clauses.7
Another result that stems from the analysis of definitions is that the delayed
use of relative clauses does not originate in a delay in the acquisition of the
ability to embed. A comparison of embedded structures with and without relative clauses showed that whereas the production of embedded structures that
include relative clause was absent in the young age groups and increased with age,
the rate of embedded sentences without relative clauses did not show an effect of
age, it existed already in the young groups, and remained steady throughout the
ages tested. Because relative clauses and embedding without movement share the
inclusion of an embedded CP and an embedding marker in CP, but differ in whether
they include Wh-movement, the findings that the ability to produce embedding
without movement is present very early on suggest that the embedded CP and the
embedding marker in CP are present already in the earliest ages we tested. The
delay in the production of relative clauses thus cannot be ascribed to a difficulty in
CP embedding. An additional ability beyond CP embedding is required in order
to start producing relative clauses.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

703

We suggest that this further ability that should be added to CP embedding in
order to allow the production of relative clauses is the ability to represent and
process syntactic movement. Which part of syntactic movement is relevant in this
case? Is it the ability to leave a trace and assign thematic roles via a chain to the
trace, or is it related to a more general ability to form dependencies? Toward this
goal, we analyzed the ability of our participants to produce utterances that include
dependencies but do not include movement. We analyzed their use of sentences
that include pronouns that relate to the target word, but without relative clauses.
This also allowed us to see whether the acquisition of the pronouns themselves
and their paradigms were responsible for the later development of indirect object
relative clauses. This analysis showed that pronouns were already used in the
very young age groups, and that the percentage of object pronouns and indirect
pronouns did not increase with age within the ages tested (see also Berman, 1985;
Rom & Dgani, 1985). The rate of object and indirect object relative clauses to
direct and indirect pronouns in sentences without movement increased with age.
In the beginning children used more pronouns, and then they started using relative
clauses more and more frequently. That is, whereas the ability to use pronouns
and dependencies is present already early on, relative clauses start to emerge only
later and show an increase with age. Therefore, the scarce use of relative clauses
in the early stages of language acquisition cannot be ascribed to a difficulty in
forming dependencies in general or to a difficulty in using pronouns, but rather
to some additional ability, presumably the ability to form syntactic movement of
phrases.
One source of evidence that links the development of relative clauses to syntactic
movement can be seen in the error pattern. Although only few ungrammatical sentences were produced, an analysis of these errors can be revealing with respect to
the bits of syntactic ability that have not matured yet. Two types of ungrammatical
sentences were produced. One involved the insertion of a resumptive pronoun at
the embedded subject position, which is ungrammatical in Hebrew. This addition of a resumptive pronoun in subject position was also reported in Varlokosta
and Armon-Lotem's (1998) for 24% of the subject relatives their participants
produced, and in Gunzberg-Kerbel et al. (2008) for 4.4% of the subject relatives. Such an error indicates a failure in the construction of a movement-derived
structure, because a resumptive pronoun is produced in the position of the trace.
Shlonsky (1992) suggested, for normal syntax, that resumptive pronouns are used
when syntactic movement is blocked. The use of resumptive pronouns by young
children who are in the course of acquiring syntax (as well as by children with an
impairment in syntactic movement) might be explained by the fact that the construction of a syntactic structure with movement is unavailable to them, and they
therefore use a resumptive pronoun to salvage the sentence and produce it without
movement (see Friedmann & Costa, 2011).
The second error type was omission of the obligatory preposition with a resumptive pronoun from indirect object relatives. The children always obeyed
the restriction that a preposition cannot appear without a pronoun in a Hebrew
relative clause, but they did omit the whole prepositional phrase, including both
the preposition and the pronoun (for similar findings, see Berman, 1986). This

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

704

type of error might also indicate a deficit that is related to movement and cannot
be ascribed to a problem with indirect pronouns, which were produced correctly
outside the context of relative clauses.
Another structure that appeared in a nonadult way in the children's definitions
and gradually disappeared with age is the headless relative, such as "That brays"
instead of "An animal that brays" as a definition of a donkey. Although this structure
is pragmatically correct and appropriate for the definition task, as it can be taken
as a continuation of the noun produced by the experimenter, it is syntactically
incomplete, and was clearly disfavored by the older children. Children start out
producing only headless relative clauses, and then the rate of headless relatives
to relatives with a head significantly decreases with age. Sentences with relative
clauses include two chains: one is the chain of movement of an element (the
relative head or an operator, depending on the analysis; see note 1) within the
relative clause to the left periphery of the clause (spec-CP), and the other relates
the left periphery of the embedded clause to the relative head (by coindexation
or by a further movement). It might be that the production of headless relatives
in the early stages of acquisition enables the children to refrain from at least
one of these complex operations, the second one. Another possibility, in line
with Friedmann et al. (2009), is that headless relatives are easier for the children
because they only include one lexically restricted noun phrase (in contrast with
fully headed relative clauses, which include two). This tendency to avoid two lexically restricted noun phrases can also account for Diessel and Tomasello's (2000)
finding that most of the early relatives in their corpus included an intransitive
verb.
The results of the current study bear not only on the change in relative clause
production with age but also on when this change stops. Children aged 5;6 to
6;0 who were retested 2.5 years later, at second grade, showed no difference in
the rate of grammatical relative clauses produced between the two time points.
Other measures for syntactic movement and embedding development also remained unchanged between these ages: no significant difference was found in
the production of ungrammatical relative clauses, in the rate of headless relative
clauses to all relative clauses, in the number of object relatives with resumptive
pronouns, in the rate of embedding with and without relative clause, or in the
rate of object relative to subject relative clauses. These findings indicate that
the ability to produce relative clauses of the types examined in this task already
stabilizes by age 5;6 to 6;0, and does not change when retested 2;6 years later.
This finding might indicate that at the age of 5;6 to 6;0 children already master
the syntactic abilities required for the definition of words. Note, that it is still
possible that further development that is related to formal teaching and world
knowledge might manifest in further change in definitions in older ages (for discussion of formal learning of conversational relatives in Romance, see also Guasti
& Cardinaletti, 2003). These results are also consistent with results regarding the
comprehension of relative clauses in Hebrew: whereas children aged 4 to 5 years
were still unable to understand right branching object relatives (Friedmann et al.,
2009; Fattal, Friedmann, & Fattal-Valevski, in press), children at the age of 6
already show good comprehension of this structure (Friedmann & Novogrodsky,
2004).

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

705

Clinical markers for abnormal syntactic development

The current results can be used not only to indicate the course of normal syntactic
development but are also suggestive of clinical markers for abnormal language
development. Several indices emerge from these results. First, because children in
this study produced less than 2% ungrammatical relative clauses, the production
of a larger number of ungrammatical relatives in the definition task, especially
of errors that do not involve resumptive pronouns, might indicate a deficit in
syntactic development. Furthermore, as the general rate of embedding showed
a clear development over time, as did the rate of relative clauses, a low rate of
embedded sentences and of relatives in comparison to the child's age group might
indicate abnormal syntactic development. It is important that, because the rate of
embedding without relatives did not change with age, the relevant marker within
this age range relates to the rate of embedded clauses including relatives, or only
relatives. Embedded clauses without relatives cannot serve as a developmental
index for syntactic development in this task. If, however, embedded sentences of
any kind do not occur in a child's definition, this can clearly serve as an additional
marker for a syntactic difficulty.
Furthermore, some ungrammatical forms never appeared in the children's definitions. The production of these ungrammatical forms can also be taken as a
marker for syntactic difficulty. Specifically, we refer here to doubling of the
relative head at the gap position, which did not occur in the definitions of the
participants in the current study, but which is characteristic of relative clauses
produced by school-aged children with hearing impairment who have difficulties
in the comprehension and production of movement-derived sentences (Friedmann
et al., 2008; Friedmann & Szterman, 2006; Geis, 1973). Doubling errors occur
in the speech of hearing-impaired individuals both in relative clause elicitation
tasks and in spontaneous production. The production of doubling errors in young
children might be related to the nature of the task, with doubling errors occurring in constrained tasks that directly target relative clauses, such as the relative
clause elicitation task in Gunzberg-Kerbel et al. (2008), in which young typically
developing Hebrew-speaking children (aged 3;6-5;6) did produce some doubling
errors. However, in structured tasks that are less constraining to the production
of relative clauses, such doubling errors are not witnessed, probably because
children find other ways to produce the sentence. In the definition task reported
in the current study, none of the participants, not even the younger ones, made
this error. Thus, doubling in spontaneous production or in structured tasks that do
not directly trigger relative clause, such as the definition task in Hebrew, might
indicate a syntactic impairment.
Finally, another index for the abnormal development of relative clauses can be
the rate of headless relatives compared to relatives with a head noun. With age,
this rate significantly decreases. Thus, a rate of headless relatives that is higher
than the rate typical to the age range might be taken as another clinical sign for a
syntactic difficulty (see also Hakansson & Hansson, 2000).
To summarize, this study indicated that much can be learned about language
acquisition from definitions children produce. Whereas definitions have been traditionally used to test the semantic ability of children and their vocabulary, this

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

706

study suggests another way to look at definitions: a definition is a task that can
serve as a window to syntactic ability.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant 1296/06, to N.F.) and
by the Lieselotte Adler Laboratory for Research on Child Development. We thank Joao
Costa and Maya Yachini for discussion of the research and for their helpful comments on
the article.

NOTES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

According to some analyses, it is the relative head itself that moves from a position
within the relative clause to a position outside it; according to other analyses, it is a
relative operator within the embedded relative clause that undergoes Wh-movement
to the specifier position of CP and is then coindexed with the head of the relative
clause (see Bianchi, 1999; Chomsky, 1981, 1986; Haegeman, 1994; Kayne, 1994;
Vergnaud, 1974, for the two approaches; and see Carlson, 1977, and Sauerland, 2000,
for discussion). This difference in analysis will not be relevant for the discussion in
the current study, and we use the raising analysis here for simplicity of presentation.
Slobin (1971) suggested that the difficulty in the production of indirect object relatives
stems from the larger distance between the preposition and the relative head noun
phrase compared to the distance between the relative head and the gap in subject
relatives. However, this explanation fails to account for the difference in acquisition
between direct object relatives with resumptive pronoun and indirect object relatives:
the distance in both structures is identical, but nevertheless object relatives with resumptive pronouns are produced earlier.
According to Central Bureau of Statistics (1997) the residents of these towns are mainly
of low socioeconomic status. The unemployment rate is higher than the general rate
in Israel, and 25% to 30.1% of the residents regularly receive local welfare services in
comparison to 16.3% in Tel Aviv.
In Hebrew the complementizer is obligatory in relative clauses. There are only two
types of relatives that can occur with a complementizer other than "that"; but both
are used only in high register and formal contexts, and neither of them occur in
children's output (or in everyday conversations). One is the reduced relative structure,
which includes a determiner instead of the complementizer (Friedemann & Siloni,
1997; Siloni, 1994, 1997). The other structure is the indirect or direct relative with the
resumptive noun phrase or prepositional phrase within the relative clause topicalized.
In this structure, some speakers do not use "that" (possibly using the topicalized
resumptive as the relative pronoun). Each of these two types of relative appeared in
our study only in the definitions of one child.
Hebrew speakers very frequently use an arbitrary-pro construction (Belletti & Rizzi,
1988; Friedmann et al., 2009; Shlonsky, 1997). Arbitrary-pro can be used in simple
matrix clauses as well as within relative clauses, and it can be identified in Hebrew
by the empty subject position and plural inflection on the verb. Thus, for example, the
sentence mashehu she-metaknim (6), literally something that-fix-plural, which uses the

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

6.

7.

707

arbitrary pro, can be roughly translated into English as Something you fix, Something
that one fixes, or Something that is fixed. Of the 1,506 finite verbs in the definitions,
most verbs appeared in the plural with an arbitrary pro subject (854 of the verbs).
There were only 384 verbs that appeared with a subject (356 of them singular), and
268 singular verbs without a subject. The high rate of the arbitrary pro structure did
not change between the age groups in this study.
Relative clauses without a relative head (7) were not included in this analysis because it
is not completely clear whether they should be classified as embedding with or without
movement.
At older ages, the complete lack of relative clauses in the definitions might be indicative
of a syntactic difficulty, but cannot be immediately ascribed to such a difficulty, because
it might reflect some individual style. Therefore, to determine that a difficulty in
the production of relative clause does exist, a more structured task that triggers the
production of relative clauses is needed, such as the relative clause preference task in
Friedmann and Szterman (2006), and Novogrodsky and Friedmann (2006).

REFERENCES
Aram, D. (2005). The continuity in children's literacy achievements: A longitudinal perspective from
kindergarten to second grade. First Language, 25, 259-289.
Aram, D., & Levin, I. (2001). Mother-child joint writing in low SES: Socio-cultural factors, maternal
mediation and emergent literacy. Cognitive Development, 16, 831-852.
Aram, D., & Levin, I. (2004). The role of maternal mediation of writing to kindergartners in promoting
literacy achievements in second grade: A longitudinal perspective. Reading and Writing: An
Interdisciplinary Journal, 17, 387-409.
Armon-Lotem, S. (2005). The acquisition of subordination: From preconjunctionals to later use. In D.
Diskin Ravid & H. B. Shyldkrot (Eds.), Perspectives on language and language development:
Essays in honor of Ruth Berman (pp. 192-204). New York: Kluwer.
Armon-Lotem, S., Botwinik-Rotem, I., & Birka, S. (2006). The acquisition of relative clauses in
Hebrew: Prepositions and resumptive pronouns. In A. Belletti, E. Bennati, C. Chesi, E. Di
Domenico, & I. Ferrari (Eds.), Language acquisition and development (pp. 1-14). Cambridge:
Cambridge Scholars Press.
Belletti, A., & Rizzi, L. (1988). Psych-verbs and theta-theory. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
6, 291-352.
Benelli, B., Arcuri, L., & Marchesini, G. (1988). Cognitive and linguistic factors in the development
of word definitions. Journal of Child Language, 15, 619-635.
Berman, R. A. (1978). Comments on how and why a child acquires her first words. International
Journal of Psycholinguistics, 5, 21-39.
Berman, R. A. (1985). The acquisition of Hebrew. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic study of
language acquisition (Vol. 1, pp. 255-371). NJ: Erlbaum.
Berman, R. A. (1986). Relative clauses in Hebrew preschool usage. Unpublished manuscript, Tel Aviv
University.
Berman, R. A. (1988). On the ability to relate events in narratives. Discourse Processes, 11, 469-
497.
Berman, R. A. (1997). Early acquisition of syntax and discourse in Hebrew. In Y. Shimron (Ed.),
Psycholinguistic studies in Israel: Language acquisition, reading, and writing (pp. 57-100).
Jerusalem: Magnes Press (in Hebrew).
Berman, R. A., & Neeman, Y. (1994). Development of linguistic forms: Hebrew. In R. A. Berman
& D. I. Slobin (Eds.), Relating events in narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study
(pp. 285-328). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bianchi, V. (1999). Consequences of antisymmetry: Headed relative clauses. Berlin: Mouton De
Gruyter.
Carlson, G. N. (1977). Amount relatives. Language, 58, 520-542.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

708

Central Bureau of Statistics. (1997). Characterization and classification of local authorities by the
socio-economic level of the population 1995. Jerusalem, Israel: Author.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1986). Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, E. V., & Berman, R. (1987). Types of linguistic knowledge: Interpretation and producing and
producing compound nouns. Journal of Child language, 14, 547-568.
Correa, L. M. (1982). Strategies in the acquisition of relative clauses. Working Papers of the London
Psycholinguistic Research Group, 4, 37-49.
Correa, L. M. S. (1995). An alternative assessment of children's comprehension of relative clauses.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 183-203.
Crain, S., McKee, C., & Emiliani, M. (1990). Visiting relatives in Italy. In L. Frazier & J. de Villiers
(Eds.), Language processing and language acquisition (pp. 335-356). New York: Kluwer.
de Villiers, P. A. (1988). Assessing English syntax in hearing-impaired children: Elicited production
in pragmatically motivated situations. Journal of the Academy of Rehabilitative Audiology,
21(Suppl.), 41-71.
de Villiers, J., de Villiers, P., & Hoban, E. (1994). The central problem of functional categories in
English syntax of oral deaf children. In H. Tager-Flusberg (Ed.), Constraints on language
acquisition: Studies of atypical children (pp. 9-47). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
de Villiers, J. G., Tager Flusberg, H. B., Hakuta, K., & Cohen, M. (1979). Children's comprehension
of relative clauses. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 8, 499-518.
Dickinson, D. K., & Tabors, P. O. (1991). Early literacy: Linkage between home, school and literacy
achievement at age five. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 6, 30-46.
Diessel, H., & Tomasello, M. (2000). The development of relative constructions in early child speech.
Cognitive Linguistics, 11, 131-152.
Dromi, E., & Berman, R. A. (1986). Language-specific and language-general in developing syntax.
Journal of Child Language, 13, 371-381.
Fattal, I., Friedmann, N., & Fattal-Valevski, A. (in press). The crucial role of thiamine in the development of syntax and lexical retrieval: A study of infantile thiamine deficiency. Brain.
Ferreiro, E., Othenin-Girard, C., Chipman, H., & Sinclair, H. (1976). How do children handle relative
clauses? A study in comparative developmental psycholinguistics. Archives de Psychologie,
45, 229-266.
Friedemann, M. A., & Siloni, T. (1997). AGRobject is not AGRparticiple. Linguistic Review, 14,
69-96.
Friedmann, N., Belletti, A., & Rizzi, L. (2009). Relativized relatives: Types of intervention in the
acquisition of A-bar dependencies. Lingua, 119, 67-88.
Friedmann, N., Belletti, A., Tuller, L., Costa, J., Guasti, M.-T., Lobo, M., et al. (2010). The production
of relative clauses by 5 year olds across 16 languages: They prefer to be the children who do not
produce object relatives. Paper presented at European COST Action A33: A European-Wide
Initiative on Language Acquisition and Language Impairment, London.
Friedmann, N., & Costa, J. (2010). The child heard a coordinated sentence and wondered: On children's difficulty in understanding coordination and relative clauses with crossing dependencies.
Lingua, 120, 1502-1515.
Friedmann, N., & Costa, J. (2011). Last resort and no resort: Resumptive pronouns in Hebrew and
Palestinian Arabic hearing impairment. In A. Rouveret (Ed.), Resumptive pronouns at the
interfaces. Language faculty and beyond series. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Friedmann, N., & Novogrodsky, R. (2004). The acquisition of relative clause comprehension in
Hebrew: A study of SLI and normal development. Journal of Child Language, 31, 661-681.
Friedmann, N., Novogrodsky, R., Szterman, R., & Preminger, O. (2008). Resumptive pronouns as
last resort when movement is impaired: Relative clauses in hearing impairment. In S. ArmonLotem, G. Danon, & S. Rothstein (Eds.), Current issues in generative Hebrew linguistics: Vol.
134. Linguistics today series (pp. 276-290). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Friedmann, N., Reznick, J., & Lavi, H. (in press). On the order of acquisition of various types of
syntactic movement in Hebrew. Language and Brain, 10.
Friedmann, N., & Szterman, R. (2006). Syntactic movement in orally-trained children with hearing
impairment. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 11, 56-75.
Geis, J. E. (1973). Creative errors in the writing of deaf children. Ohio State University Working Papers
in Linguistics, 15, 55-66.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

709

Guasti, M. T., & Cardinaletti, A. (2003). Relative clause formation in Romance child's production.
Probus, 15, 47-88.
Guasti, M. T., & Shlonsky, U. (1995). The acquisition of French relative clauses reconsidered. Language
Acquisition, 4, 257-276.
Gunzberg-Kerbel, N., Shvimer, L., & Friedmann, N. (2008). "Take the hen that the cow kissed the
hen": The acquisition of comprehension and production of various relative clauses in Hebrew
[in Hebrew]. Language and Brain, 7, 23-43.
Haegeman, L. (1994). Introduction to government and binding theory (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hakansson, G., & Hansson, K. (2000). Comprehension and production of relative clauses: A comparison between Swedish impaired and unimpaired children. Journal of Child Language, 27,
313-333.
Kayne, R. S. (1994). The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kidd, E., & Bavin, L. E. (2002). English-speaking children's comprehension of relative clauses:
Evidence for general-cognitive and language-specific constraints on development. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 31, 599-617.
Labelle, M. (1990). Predication, Wh-movement, and the development of relative clauses. Language
Acquisition, 1, 95-119.
Labelle, M. (1996). The acquisition of relative clauses: Movement or no movement? Language Acquisition, 5, 65-82.
Litowitz, B. (1977). Learning to make definitions. Journal of Child Language, 4, 289-304.
Markowitz, J., & Franz, S. K. (1988). The development of defining style. International Journal of
Lexicography, 1, 253-267.
Maschler, Y., & Shaer, S. (2011). On the emergence of adverbial connectives from Hebrew relative
clause constructions. In P. Auer & S. Pfander (Eds.), Constructions: Emerging and emergent.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
McKee, C., & McDaniel, D. (2001). Resumptive pronouns in English relative clauses. Language
Acquisition, 9, 113-156.
McKee, C., McDaniel, D., & Snedeker, J. (1998). Relative children say. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 27, 573-596.
Novogrodsky, R., & Friedmann, N. (2006). The production of relative clauses in SLI: A window to
the nature of the impairment. Advances in Speech-Language Pathology, 8, 364-375.
Perez-Leroux, A. T. (1995). Resumptives in the acquisition of relative clauses. Language Acquisition,
4, 105-138.
Rom, A., & Dgani, R. (1985). Acquiring case-marked pronouns in Hebrew: The interaction of linguistic
factors. Journal of Child Language, 12, 61-77.
Sauerland, U. (2000). Two structures for English restrictive relative clauses. In M. Saito, Y. Abe,
H. Aoyagi, J. Arimoto, K. Murasugi, & T. Suzuki (Eds.), Proceedings of the Nanzan GLOW
(pp. 351-366). Nagoya, Japan: Nanzan University.
Sheldon, A. (1974). The role of parallel function in the acquisition of relative clauses in English.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 272-281.
Shlonsky, U. (1992). Resumptive pronouns as a last resort. Linguistic Inquiry, 23, 443-468.
Shlonsky, U. (1997). Clause structure and word order in Hebrew and Arabic. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Siloni, T. (1994). Noun phrases and nominalizations. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Geneva.
Siloni, T. (1997). Studies in natural language and linguistic theory: Vol. 40. Noun phrases and
nominalizations: The syntax of DPs. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Slobin, D. I. (1971). Developmental psycholinguistics, In W. O. Dingwall (Ed.), A survey of linguistic
science. College Park, MD: University of Maryland, Linguistics Program.
Snow, C. E. (1990). The development of definitional skill. Journal of Child Language, 17, 697-710.
Snow, C. E. (1993). Families as social contexts for literacy development. In C. Daiute (Ed.), The
development of literacy through social interaction (pp. 11-24). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass.
Snow, C., Cancino, H., Gonzalez, P., & Shriberg, E. (1989). Giving formal definitions: An oral
language correlate of school literacy. In D. Bloome (Ed.), Classrooms and literacy (pp. 233-
249). Norwood, NJ: Albex.
Suner, M. (1998). Resumptive restrictive relatives: A crosslinguistic perspective. Language, 74, 335-
364.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Friedmann et al.: Relative clauses in definitions

710

Tavakolian, S. L. (1981). The conjoined-clause analysis of relative clauses. In S. L. Tavakolian (Ed.),
Language acquisition and linguistic theory (pp. 167-187). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Varlokosta, S., & Armon-Lotem, S. (1998). Resumptives and Wh-movement in the acquisition of relative clauses in Modern Greek and Hebrew. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development (pp. 737-746). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Varlokosta, S., & Crain, S. (1997, April). The acquisition of relative clauses in Modern Greek: Evidence
for movement. Poster presented at GALA: Language Acquisition: Knowledge Representation
and Processing, Edinburgh.
Vergnaud, J. R. (1974). French relative clauses. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Wechsler, D. (1974). The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (rev.). New York: Psychological
Corporation.
Wehren, A., De Lisi, R., & Arnold, M. (1981). The development of noun definition. Journal of Child
Language, 8, 165-175.
Wolman, R. N., & Barker, E. N. (1965). A developmental study of word definitions. Journal of Genetic
Psychology, 107, 159-166.

