JSLHR

Article

Reducing the Effects of Background Noise
During Auditory Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging of Speech Processing: Qualitative and
Quantitative Comparisons Between Two Image
Acquisition Schemes and Noise Cancellation
Graham A. Blackmana and Deborah A. Hall a,b

Purpose: The intense sound generated during functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) complicates studies of
speech and hearing. This experiment evaluated the benefits
of using active noise cancellation (ANC), which attenuates the
level of the scanner sound at the participant's ear by up to
35 dB around the peak at 600 Hz.
Method: Speech and narrowband noise were presented at a low
sound level to 8 listeners during fMRI using 2 common scanning
protocols: short ("continuous") and long ("sparse") temporal
schemes. Three outcome measures were acquired simultaneously
during fMRI: ratings of listening quality, discrimination performance,
and brain activity.
Results: Subjective ratings and discrimination performance were
significantly improved by ANC and sparse acquisition. Sparse

D

espite its widespread use in studies of speech and
hearing, functional magnetic resonance imaging
(f MRI) is still hampered by the intense acoustic
sound produced during the operation of the magnetic resonance (MR) scanner (Foster, Hall, Summerfield, Palmer,
& Bowtell, 2000; Hedeen & Edelstein 1997; Shellock,
a

MRC Institute of Hearing Research, Nottingham,
United Kingdom
b
NIHR National Biomedical Research Unit in Hearing,
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Correspondence to Deborah A. Hall:
deb.hall@nottingham.ac.uk
Editor: Robert Schlauch
Associate Editor: Jennifer Melcher
Received May 28, 2010
Accepted September 9, 2010
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2010/10-0143)

acquisition was the more robust method for detecting auditory
cortical activity. ANC reduced some of the "extra-auditory"
activity that might be associated with the effort required for
perceptual discrimination in a noisy environment and also offered
small improvements for detecting activity within Heschl's gyrus
and planum polare.
Conclusions: For the scanning protocols evaluated here, the
sparse temporal scheme was the more preferable for detecting
sound-evoked activity. In addition, ANC ensures that listening
difficulty is determined more by the chosen stimulus parameters
and less by the adverse testing environment.
Key Words: neuroimaging, active noise cancellation, audibility,
intelligibility, frequency discrimination

Ziarati, Atkinson, & Chen, 1998). The echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequences used for f MRI generate a particularly
loud scanner sound and, although passive attenuation
is provided to participants by way of circumaural ear
defenders, this method alone is insufficient for quiet listening conditions. As an example, measurements at the
center of the bore during the current experiment showed
that the peak level of the scanner sound was 99 dB SPL,
with the ear defenders providing 25 dB of attenuation at
600 Hz, rising to 40 dB at 4 kHz. The spectral characteristics of the scanner sound are primarily determined
by the rapidly switching gradient during readout of the
brain image. For EPI, the readout gradient switches at
a rate that is typically below 1 kHz, generating a series
of low-frequency, harmonically related peaks that rise
from a background of broadband noise. In contrast, the
temporal characteristics of the scanner sound are under
experimenter control. Many auditory f MRI studies favor

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

693

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

a clustered-acquisition protocol in which all slices are acquired in rapid succession at the end of the scan period,
rather than at equal intervals within it, because the
former protocol provides a period of quiet for stimulus
presentation (Edmister, Talavage, Ledden, & Weisskoff,
1999). Because the loudest portion of the scanner sound
corresponds to the "ping" of an individual slice acquisition, the envelope of the scanner sound is highly modulated over time.
At the physiological level, the scanner sound generates responses in the central auditory pathway, reducing
the dynamic range of the additional response to experimental sounds presented through headphones. This is
particularly noticeable in primary auditory cortex (e.g.,
Bandettini, Jesmanowicz, Van Kylen, Birn, & Hyde, 1998;
Talavage, Edmister, Ledden, & Weisskoff, 1999), but it has
also been measured in surrounding nonprimary regions
(Hall et al., 2000; Hu et al., 2010). Quantitative assessment indicates that it should be possible to exploit the
latency of the Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent (BOLD)
response and to use a clustered train of EPI "pings" of up
to 2-s duration to prevent an auditory response from being induced by the scan acquisition itself (Edmister et al.,
1999). This assumption that short acquisition times reduce intrascan interference is the principle underlying the
use of clustered acquisition. Additionally, scans acquired
using a long interscan interval (at least 9 s) limit the integration of auditory cortical responses across successive
scan acquisitions (i.e., reduce interscan interference; Hall
et al., 2000). The use of clustered acquisition combined
with a long interscan interval is the basis of "sparse" temporal acquisition (Hall et al., 1999), which is commonly
used for the spatiotopic mapping of auditory cortical responses (e.g., Paltoglou, Sumner, & Hall, 2009).
The detrimental effect of the intense background
scanner sound on auditory perception is widely appreciated. For EPI, the greatest amount of masking occurs
when the stimulus is presented at the same time as the
slice acquisition and when the spectrum of the stimulus
falls mostly below 1 kHz. Systematic reductions of the
ratio of the stimulus to the background noise have been
shown to reliably impair listening performance for simple sounds (fundamental frequency discrimination) as
well as for speech sounds (minimal-pair syllable discrimination, lexical decision, and judgments about sentence
plausibility; Healy, Moser, Morrow, Hall, & Fridriksson,
2007). The most straightforward way to reduce the effect
of energetic masking is to present stimuli at moderate to
high sound levels (e.g., 98 dB SPL [Hall et al., 2000] and
92 dB SPL [Paltoglou et al., 2009]). However, the tuning
of many auditory cortical neurons is known to broaden
as a function of sound level (Phillips, Semple, Calford, &
Kitzes, 1994), and so this is likely to reduce the spatial
specificity of the resulting stimulus-related activity.

694

A number of neuroimaging studies have investigated
the brain regions involved in segregating a speech signal from background noise. Several studies used positron emission tomography for quiet scanning conditions
(Salvi et al., 2002; Scott, Rosen, Wickham, & Wise, 2004),
whereas another implemented a sparse temporal scheme
in f MRI (Wong, Uppunda, Parrish, & Dhar, 2008). Detrimental signal-to-noise ratios increase the demands on
selective attention and working memory as listeners
segregate the signal from the noise, relying more on the
temporal and spectral dips in the noise or top-down
knowledge about sentential context to "fill in the gaps."
Results have generally revealed extra-auditory activity
associated with the demands for acoustic segregation. For
example, as the ratio of the speech signal to the steadystate noise decreased, and hence the listening task became
progressively harder, activity in left inferior prefrontal
cortex increased (Scott et al., 2004). At the time, Scott
et al. speculated that this reflected a top-down effort to
support speech comprehension, and this suggestion was
later confirmed in an f MRI study that demonstrated the
involvement of left prefrontal cortex in effortful yet successful speech comprehension for spectrally degraded
sentences with a high semantic predictability (Obleser,
Wise, Dresner, & Scott, 2007). In contrast to the unmodulated background noise used by Scott et al. (2004),
the other studies (Salvi et al., 2002; Wong et al., 2008)
evaluated the effect of a modulated noise (multitalker
babble) masker on spoken-word identification. Both of
these studies reported activations in prefrontal cortex
for speech in noise compared with speech in quiet. However the precise localization of extra-auditory responses
differed somewhat: right medial frontal gyrus, near the
anterior cingulate, and right cerebellum (Salvi et al.,
2002) versus bilateral inferior and middle frontal gyri
and left inferior parietal cortex (Wong et al., 2008), a difference that may be attributed to the requirement to listen to sentences or single words, respectively.
One of the main limitations of the sparse temporal
acquisition scheme for avoiding acoustic contamination
is that it dramatically increases the scanning time required to obtain the same number of scans that could be
acquired using a short interscan interval (henceforth referred to as "continuous" temporal acquisition). A hybrid
temporal scheme has been recently described in which a
set of three to five scans are acquired in rapid succession
(i.e., every 1 s) after each sound stimulus presentation
(Schmidt et al., 2008), but this requires specialized pulse
programming, especially if the longitudinal magnetization
is to be maintained at a steady state (see Schwarzbauer,
Davis, Rodd, & Johnsrude, 2006). The hybrid scheme also
introduces some acoustic contamination as the later scans
in the sequence are likely to detect auditory responses to
the background sound generated during the first scan. The
sparse temporal scheme therefore remains ubiquitous in

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

auditory f MRI. In our laboratory, we have been examining a different approach that does not require the modification of any pulse sequence. Instead, the new approach
acoustically reduces the level of the background sound
reaching the participant's ears using active noise cancellation (ANC; Chambers, Akeroyd, Summerfield, & Palmer,
2001; Hall et al., 2009). The ANC system reduces the level
of the background noise by producing an output ("cancellation") signal that destructively interferes with the
scanner sound (i.e., the incident sound wave) at each ear.
Precise control over the frequency and phase of acoustic
signals presented to participants is achieved through a
digital-signal processing system that delivers sound stimuli via a high-fidelity electrostatic headset. The electrostatic transducer performs an experimental and a noise
cancellation role by delivering the sound stimuli and the
cancellation signal. For passive attenuation, the transducers are incorporated into circumaural ear defenders.
A recent acoustical evaluation of the ANC system using
microphone measurements at the ear demonstrated that
at the 600-Hz peak in the spectrum of the scanner "ping,"
cancellation attenuated the background sound by up to
35 dB (from 93 to 58 dB SPL; Hall et al., 2009).
The present study used a novel repeated-measures
factorial design to assess the effects of the temporal acquisition scheme and ANC on listening to simple sounds
(narrowband noise [NBN]) and complex sounds (speech).
Moreover, by obtaining subjective ratings, discrimination performance, and brain activity measures simultaneously in the MR scanner, this study was able to link
patterns of neural activity directly to listening performance. On the basis of previous literature, a number of
effects were expected. The most obvious prediction was
that the sound would be more audible if steps were taken
to reduce the level of the background scanner sound.
Hence, both sparse acquisition and cancellation should
significantly improve listening performance, as well as
the amount of sound-evoked activity in the auditory cortex. Because these noise-reduction methods largely increase the audibility of sounds, sparse acquisition and
cancellation were expected to provide substantial benefit for sound-related activity in primary auditory cortex
(cf. Bandettini et al., 1998; Talavage et al., 1999). Noisereduction methods also enhance the intelligibility of
speech, and so particular benefit in this condition might
involve nonprimary auditory regions (Davis & Johnsrude,
2003; Scott, Blank, Rosen, & Wise, 2000). According to the
previous neuroimaging studies of speech perception under adverse listening conditions, both continuous acquisition and lack of cancellation might be expected to increase
activity in fronto-parietal regions associated with the increased demands on selective attention and sound-source
segregation and a greater reliance on semantic context
(Obleser et al., 2007; Salvi et al., 2002; Scott et al., 2004;
Wong et al., 2008).

Implementation of Active Noise
Cancellation (ANC)
More detailed reports of the technical specifications
of ANC can be found in Chambers et al. (2001) and Hall
et al. (2009). A summary is provided in Figure 1. The
ANC system uses a recording of the scanner sound as
the starting estimate for the cancellation signal. This
recording is taken during one of the initialization scans,
before cancellation is started, from a microphone positioned inside the ear defender. The recording cannot be
used directly as the cancellation signal because it is affected by the transfer function of the ANC system. This
transfer function is compensated for by a digital filter,
which is again calculated before the start of cancellation
by presenting a maximum-length sequence (MLS) through
the system and receiving it on the microphone. The residual sound is monitored by the microphone during ANC
operation and is used to continually fine-tune the coefficients of the digital filter, thus maximizing the acoustic
noise reduction. During the first four scans, the rate of
adaptation is fast in order to rapidly train the system.
Thereafter, the rate of adaptation is slower in order to
track the slow changes in the characteristics of the scanner sound and in the phase of the incident noise caused
by head movements of the participant. This two-step process improves the immunity of the adaptive filter from
the acoustic stimuli being presented and hence helps to
maximize the acoustic noise reduction during MR scanning. Previously, we have demonstrated that continually updating the filter coefficients for the cancellation
signal provides reasonably stable amounts of cancellation over time (typically in the order of 5 dB; Hall et al.,
2009).
The ANC system is fully integrated with a PC-based
system that presents sound stimuli in synchrony with
scanning, thus making it easy to operate. The digitalsignal processing system and the ANC processing steps,
such as determining the transfer function for the participant, recording the scanner sound, and optimizing the adaptive filter coefficients, are all automatically
controlled within the PC software. The software is such
that any experiment can be specified by a few parameters. Stimulus presentation is delayed until the training scans are completed. Another parameter controls
whether the ANC system is either operative ("cancelled") or not ("noncancelled"). This feature was crucial in the present experiment because it enabled direct
comparison of sound conditions during cancelled and
noncancelled states. To ensure that the ANC was always operating optimally, new recordings of the scanner sound, transfer functions, and training scans were
obtained at the start of each scanning run for each
participant.

Blackman & Hall: Acquisition Scheme and Noise Cancellation for Auditory fMRI

695

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 1. Diagram showing the key components of the active noise cancellation (ANC) system during two stages of its operation: the acquisition of
the transfer function (panel A) and cancellation (panel B). The ANC system comprises three main sections (the headset, the plant, and the digitalsignal processing [DSP] system), and these are each highlighted by separate gray-shaded boxes. Within each section, the various hardware
and software components are defined, and the arrows between them represent the directional flow of information. Note that the components of the
DSP system differ between panels A and B because each panel defines only what is pertinent to that particular stage of processing. Some of
the functional labels also differ across panels because they refer to different functions achieved by the same hardware at different points in time.
EPI = echo-planar imaging; MLS = maximum-length sequence; MR = magnetic resonance.

Pilot Study to Determine the Choice
of Sound Level for the Spoken Sentences
The f MRI experiment required spoken sentences to
be largely unintelligible during the noncancelled scanning condition yet reasonably intelligible during cancellation. To choose an appropriate sound level that met
this criterion, a pilot study first measured speech intelligibility for sets of sentences presented at four sound
levels (51, 54, 57, and 60 dB SPL) during continuous
temporal acquisition in the noncancelled state. Level was
controlled by applying digital attenuation before the acoustic signal was converted to an analog signal. The pilot session lasted about 40 min, including four scanning runs of
just under 6 min each. Six native English-speaking participants took part. Because speech intelligibility scores
were remarkably consistent, only one participant completed a second session in which speech intelligibility was
measured for sentences presented at one sound level while
the ANC system was operative (cancelled condition).
A total of 160 sentences were selected from the
ABC Sentence Lists (Boyle, Nunn, Vickers, Foster, &
Fitzgerald O'Connor, 2006). Sentences contained six to
10 words, each with five key words (e.g., A large size in
shoes is hard to sell.). Each sentence was spoken by a
male talker and a female talker and was sampled at
44100 Hz. The root-mean-square (RMS) A-weighted sound
level was equated for each sentence for both talkers.
Each of the four conditions contained 40 sentences, half
spoken by the male talker and half by the female talker.
Conditions were counterbalanced for sound presentation level across participants. Scanning was conducted
using a Philips 3 Tesla Intera MR scanner, equipped

696

with an 8-channel receiver head coil. In the present experiment, the chosen scanning protocol was one that has
been used in several recent auditory f MRI studies by the
second author (e.g., Hall et al., 2009; Hall & Plack, 2009).
The scanner sound was exploited as a noise masker. The
parameters of the sequence were as follows: flip angle =
90 degrees, matrix = 64 x 64, voxel size = 3 x 3 x 3 mm,
32 oblique axial slices, Sof Tone = factor 2, SENSE =
factor 2, TE = 36 ms. The spectral peak of the resulting
scanner noise is equal to the inverse of the period of the
strong, trapezoidal read-out gradient. Here, both Sof Tone
and SENSE parallel imaging determined the amplitude
and spectrum of the scanner noise because they affect
the gradient switching (see Figure 2).
Within each scan, the 32 slices were acquired in rapid
succession lasting 1,971 ms. The interval between scans
was 2,700 ms, and so this gave brief, regular periods of
quiet after each set of 32 "pings." The noise source during the quiet interval was primarily the low-frequency
(< 100 Hz) hum of the air-conditioning system. Measurements made under the earcup demonstrated it to be very
low level (51 dB SPL, 28 dB A-weighted) and not affected
by cancellation. The onset of each sentence was synchronized to the beginning of a scan. The scanner sound
masked slightly more than the first half of each sentence because the mean duration of the sentences was
2,388 ms (SD = 340 ms). Participants were instructed to
report back each sentence by speaking clearly into a freefield microphone held close to their mouths, and verbal
responses were digitally recorded for offline analysis.
Participants were encouraged to guess when they were
uncertain. A sentence was presented every third scan (i.e.,
8,100 ms), enabling sufficient response time prior to the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Spectral characteristics of the background scanner noise in the present fMRI study, plotted from 0 to
3500 Hz on a logarithmic scale. The black line (noncancelled) indicates the spectrum of the background noise
recorded under normal scanning conditions, with a peak at 600 Hz and two other prominent peaks, 5-10 dB lower in
level, at 150 and 300 Hz. The dotted line (cancelled) shows the effect of ANC on the scanner sound at the listener's
ear, with the greatest attenuation at 600 Hz. The inset (bottom left) shows the temporal characteristics of the noise
generated during one scan.

next sentence. An automated post hoc noise cancellation
algorithm was applied to the digital recording so that
the verbal response could be separated from the scanner
sound (Cusack, Cumming, Bor, Norris, & Lyzenga, 2005).
The measure of intelligibility was the proportion of key
words correctly reported. Although brain images were
collected in the pilot, the image data sets were not analyzed, as large head movements associated with making
overt verbal responses during scanning were expected.
Figure 3 (left panel) shows the proportion of key
words correctly recalled as a function of stimulus level. A
Friedman's analysis of variance (ANOVA) demonstrated
a significant effect of sound level, c2(3) = 8.6, p < .05.
Speech intelligibility steadily increased from 17% to 44%
as the spoken sentences were amplified.
Performance was reconsidered according to whether
each of the key words was masked or not by the scanner
sound (see Figure 3, right panel). A Friedman's ANOVA
revealed speech intelligibility was marginally impaired
for words that were masked by the scanner sound level
compared to those that were not masked, c2(3) = 7.4,
p = .056. In contrast, the report of key words that were
not masked by the scanner noise was not influenced by
sound level, c2(3) = 2.2, p = .57.

Next, 80 sentences were presented to one of the participants at 57 dB SPL, with the ANC system operating.
The participant's performance improved from 36% to
69% (i.e., 33%), indicating a substantial benefit of ANC
on speech intelligibility for sentences presented at this
sound level (see Figure 3, left panel).

Method
Participants
Eight right-handed participants aged 20 to 37 took
part in the f MRI experiment, including two participants
from the pilot. All participants had normal hearing as assessed using standard pure-tone audiometry (< 20 dB HL
over octave frequencies between 250 and 8000 Hz). Participants gave informed written consent, and the study
was approved by the Nottingham University Medical
School Ethical Committee.

Stimuli
Three stimulus conditions (speech, NBN, and silence)
were created. The silent condition served as a baseline.

Blackman & Hall: Acquisition Scheme and Noise Cancellation for Auditory fMRI

697

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 3. Pilot data showing speech intelligibility as a function of stimulus level. In the left panel, data show the key word report accuracy.
The solid line denoted by the filled marker shows performance without the ANC operating. In the right panel, the same scores are shown split
according to whether or not the words were masked by the scanner sound. The unfilled marker in the left panel illustrates, for one participant,
the improvement in performance with the ANC operating. All error bars indicate the standard error of the mean.

Speech materials were 240 sentences, each less than
2,700 ms duration, taken from the ABC Sentence Lists.
This stimulus set was composed of 160 items used in the
pilot, plus an additional 80 sentences (120 sentences
were spoken by the male talker and 120 by the female
talker). The NBN stimuli corresponded in frequency
to the prominent peak in the spectrum of the scanner
sound (i.e., around 600 Hz). These NBN signals were
centered on 570, 600, or 630 Hz, with a bandwidth of
50 Hz, 450 ms duration (including 50-ms raised-cosine
gates at the onset and offset), and a sampling rate of
44100 Hz. Stimulus pairs consisted of 60 same-frequency
pairs (20 of each combination of 570/570 Hz, 600/600 Hz,
and 630/630 Hz) and 60 different-frequency pairs (15 of
each combination of 570/600 Hz, 600/570 Hz, 600/630 Hz,
and 630/600 Hz). The two sounds in each pair were separated by a 50-ms silent gap. The total RMS power was
equated across stimulus pairs, and the order of the two
stimuli in the different-frequency pairs was counterbalanced across participants. The speech condition contained six sentences occurring at 3-s intervals, and the
NBN condition contained six NBN pairs, again occurring at 3-s intervals. Each stimulus condition was 18 s
in duration.
Listening performance for the speech and NBN conditions was dependent on the ANC state and the temporal
acquisition scheme. Spoken sentences were presented at
57 dB SPL, according to the pilot results. NBN were presented at 71 dB SPL, which corresponds to 3 dB below
the average detection threshold when masked by the noncancelled scanner sound, according to our previous study
(Hall et al., 2009).

698

Procedure
A 2 x 2 x 3 factorial design was used in which the
temporal acquisition scheme (sparse and continuous)
was crossed with the operation of the ANC system (cancelled and noncancelled) and the sound stimulus (speech,
NBN, and silence). The experiment contained 10 presentations of each experimental condition. Presentation
order was carefully arranged to ensure a balanced distribution both within and across participants. Sparse
and continuous scanning was carried out in separate
runs in an ABBA design. Within each run, the operation
of the ANC system cycled after every triplet of stimulus
conditions, whereas the order of the stimulus conditions
themselves was pseudorandomized. The experiment used
the same MR scanner and scanning sequence as reported
in the pilot study. Scans were positioned to cover most of
the brain except the top and bottom of the brain, including the brainstem. The interscan interval for continuous
acquisition was 3,000 ms, and for sparse acquisition it
was 9,000 ms. Again, the scanner sound coincided with
the start of a sound stimulus. This meant that for continuous scanning, the onset of every sentence or NBN
pair was synchronized to the beginning of a scan and, for
sparse scanning, every third stimulus was synchronized to
the beginning of a scan. In total, 190 functional scans were
acquired in a continuous acquisition run and 68 functional scans in a sparse acquisition run, each lasting
about 10 min.
Three subjective ratings were obtained to tell us
about the clarity of the sound stimulus, the intrusiveness
of the background scanner noise, and listening effort. We

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

followed a methodology recommended by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU-T Recommendation P.835, 2003) for evaluating noise suppression
algorithms, which uses three separate five-point rating
scales. The scale for stimulus clarity ranged from 1 (very
unclear) to 5 (very clear), for noise intrusiveness from 1
(very quiet) to 5 (very loud), and for listening effort from 1
(no effort) to 5 (very effortful). During the experiment,
visual prompts were presented on a screen positioned at
the end of the scanner bed to remind participants about
the listening instruction for each condition. For the sentence condition, the prompt was "Clarity? Effort? Background?" and for the silent baseline, it was a fixation cross.
To avoid undue head motion, participants did not respond
during the condition, but at the end of each scanning run,
participants were asked to give a verbal rating (1-5) for
each scale. Separate ratings were obtained for four listening conditions (speech and NBN split by cancelled and
noncancelled).
The participants' ability to hear the NBN pairs was
also measured by instructing participants to discriminate between same and different frequency pairs using
the visual prompt "Same or Different?" Responses were
made by pressing one of two buttons with the index finger of their left or right hand, respectively. Participants
were encouraged to guess when they were uncertain, and
responses were logged by a computer for offline analysis.
At the end of the functional scanning, a highresolution (1 x 1 x 1 mm) T1-weighted anatomical scan
was acquired in 4.5 min using a Magnetization-Prepared
Rapid Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) sequence. The full
scanning session lasted about 70 min.

Image Analysis
Image analysis was conducted separately for each
participant using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5)
software (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) running on MATLAB
Version 6.5.0. First, the images were spatially transformed
using a number of standard procedures. To minimize minor head movements, the ABBA time series was realigned
by applying rigid-body transformations and using the first
scan of the third run as the reference scan. Within runs,
the amount of movement was shifted by less than 3 mm
and rotated by less than 3 degrees, suggesting participants succeeded in lying as still as possible. To enable
group analyses and to facilitate the localization of functional activity, functional scans were normalized to a standard brain space. This was achieved by computing the
most appropriate linear and nonlinear transformation parameters to match the anatomical scan to a T1-weighted
template using a least-squares algorithm. These parameters were then applied to the functional scans, upsampling the transformed images to a voxel resolution
of 2 x 2 x 2 mm. To improve the signal-to-noise ratio of

the data, functional time series was smoothed using a
Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full width at half maximum.
First-level analyses estimated how well the time
course of an individual's BOLD response could be described by the experimental paradigm. At the first level,
the sparse and continuous runs were analyzed separately using a general linear model that specified each
stimulus condition as a vector of numbers (one value
corresponding to the estimated contribution of that condition to the signal measured in each scan). For the sparse
temporal acquisition scheme, each condition was specified as a vector of zeroes and ones. For the continuous
temporal acquisition scheme, each condition was specified as a vector of onsets that were subsequently convolved
with the canonical haemodynamic response function. Once
the two models had been estimated, t contrasts were specified for speech versus silence and for NBN versus silence
for both cancelled and noncancelled conditions. To determine the statistical reliability of these effects separately for NBN and speech, the relevant contrasts were
input to a 2 x 2 (Temporal Acquisition Scheme x ANC)
repeated-measures ANOVA (Friston, Stephan, Lund,
Morcom, & Kiebel, 2005). Statistical sensitivity was maximized by using cluster-level statistical inference ( p < .05;
Friston, Holmes, Poline, Price, & Frith, 1996), corrected
for multiple comparisons.

Results
Subjective Ratings
Preliminary analyses showed no significant difference between NBN and speech in terms of their subjective ratings, and so further analyses collapsed the data
across stimulus type. For each rating scale, a 2 x 2 (Temporal Acquisition Scheme x ANC) repeated-measures
ANOVA was performed (see Figure 4). Sparse acquisition was judged beneficial for listening effort, F(1, 7) =
13.81, p < .01, and background noise intrusion, F(1, 7) =
6.73, p < .05, but surprisingly not for stimulus clarity,
F(1, 7) = 3.61, p > .05. Cancellation was judged to be
preferable for listening effort, F(1, 7) = 51.21, p < .001;
background noise intrusion, F(1, 7) = 110.28, p < .001;
and stimulus clarity, F(1, 7) = 354.15, p < .001. Generally, the effect of ANC on listening quality was more
sizeable than the acquisition scheme, with no interactions between the two.

Frequency Discrimination Performance
Frequency discrimination also appeared more accurate with cancellation (81%) than without (56%), but to
avoid response bias, d measures of discrimination sensitivity were computed (see Figure 5). A two-way repeatedmeasures ANOVA confirmed a significant benefit of

Blackman & Hall: Acquisition Scheme and Noise Cancellation for Auditory fMRI

699

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 4. The effects of the temporal acquisition scheme and the operation of the ANC system on the subjective ratings for
the clarity of the stimulus presentation (left panel), the amount of listening effort (center panel), and the loudness of the
background noise (right panel) in the present study. Data are averaged across NBN and speech stimuli. Error bars depict
the standard error of the mean. Significant main effects are denoted by asterisks: *p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

ANC, F(1, 7) = 21.42, p < .01, and a significant benefit of
sparse temporal acquisition, F(1, 7) = 29.16, p < .001.
The interaction between ANC and temporal acquisition scheme was marginally significant, F(1, 7) = 5.45,
p = .054, indicating a tendency for cancellation to be
most beneficial for frequency discrimination during the
continuous scanning protocol.
In summary, subjective ratings and discrimination
performance demonstrated that sparse acquisition and
ANC significantly improved listening ability.
Figure 5. The effects of the temporal acquisition scheme and the
operation of the ANC system on frequency discrimination performance
in Experiment 1. Error bars depict the standard error of the mean.
Significant main effects are denoted by asterisks: **p < .01. ***p < .001.

Auditory Cortical Activity
Analysis of the f MRI data tested the prediction that
improved ratings of listening quality and more accurate
frequency discrimination would provide significant gains
for detecting sound-evoked activity. In support of this expectation, sparse acquisition provided a substantial benefit for detecting stimulus-related activity in superior
temporal gyrus when compared to continuous acquisition. For both NBN and speech, activity was greatest in
primary auditory cortex (the central portion of Heschl's
gyrus) but also extended beyond Heschl's gyrus, anteriorly into planum polare and posteriorly into planum
temporale. The extent of this stimulus-related benefit
is displayed in the upper row of Figure 6 (green clusters
of activity). Contrary to our expectation, cancellation
appeared to offer no significant advantage for detecting
clusters of sound-related activity because auditory cortical activity for cancelled and noncancelled conditions
was equivalent. This null result is evidenced by the absence of any green clusters of activity in the lower row of
Figure 6.
Statistical inferences about brain activity at the cluster level trades increased sensitivity for reduced localizing power across small spatial scales (Friston et al., 1996).
We therefore reasoned that combining voxel-level thresholding ( p < .001) with a region-of-interest analysis might
more appropriately differentiate responses across different subdivisions within auditory cortex. Three planned
comparisons examined the regionally specific predictions
concerning the benefits of noise reduction for speech- and
NBN-related activity in nonprimary and primary auditory regions, respectively. Specifically, we computed the
percentage of suprathreshold voxels for the t contrasts
speech versus silence and NBN versus silence within
three major auditory cortical subdivisions: (a) primary

700

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 6. Right- and left-hemisphere views of the group-averaged patterns of cortical activation showing the differential effects of the temporal
acquisition scheme and the operation of the ANC system on the response to the narrowband noise (NBN) and speech stimuli. Activity exceeded the
cluster-level statistical threshold (p < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons). All voxels within those clusters also exceeded p < .005, uncorrected.

region (Heschl's gyrus), (b) anterior nonprimary region
(planum polare), and (c) posterior nonprimary region
(planum temporale). Regions were based on anatomical
criteria, without overlap, and were defined in the same
brain space as the functional data. The primary region
was defined by a combination of three auditory fields
(Morosan et al., 2001). The border of planum polare was
drawn manually using a canonical anatomical scan.
Planum temporale was defined by those boundaries
measured by Westbury, Zatorre, and Evans (1999). A
total of 48 measures of percentage extent were computed
for each participant (two stimuli, two temporal acquisition schemes, two ANC states, three regions, and two
hemispheres). Data were analyzed using repeatedmeasures ANOVAs.

The proportion of sound-related activity in Heschl's
gyrus was significantly greater for sparse acquisition
(33%) than for continuous acquisition (6%), F(1, 7) =
42.33, p < .001 (see Figure 7). The cancelled condition
was also more beneficial for detecting sound-related activation (21%) than the noncancelled condition (18%),
F(1, 7) = 3.69, p < .05, one-tailed. Similar main effects
were obtained in the anterior nonprimary auditory region,
albeit the proportion of planum polare activated by the
sound stimuli was much reduced (see Figure 7). Again,
using sparse acquisition, there was greater sound-related
activity (9%) than continuous acquisition (5%), F(1, 7) =
67.48, p < .001. In the cancelled condition, 9% of planum
polare was activated compared with only 5% during the
noncancelled condition, F(1, 7) = 12.42, p < .01. Although

Figure 7. The effect of temporal acquisition scheme, ANC, and stimulus on the extent of auditory cortical activity in three regions. Errors bars
represent the standard error of the mean. Regions vary in size from 1,086 voxels in Heschl's gyrus to 3,991 voxels in planum temporale and
1,889 voxels in planum polare, but these differences are normalized by computing the extent of activity as a percentage. Refer to the text
for a detailed description of the significant differences between conditions. contin = continuous.

Blackman & Hall: Acquisition Scheme and Noise Cancellation for Auditory fMRI

701

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

ANC was rated as most advantageous for general stimulus clarity, a significant two-way interaction between
stimulus and temporal acquisition scheme highlighted
that the most widespread activity occurred for speech
presented during sparse scanning. This pattern was
true in Heschl's gyrus (49%), F(1, 7) = 31.68, p < .001, and
in planum polare (12%), F(1, 7) = 3.87, p < .05, one-tailed.
In planum temporale, sparse acquisition was significantly better for detecting sound-related activity than
continuous acquisition (25% vs. 11%), F(1, 7) = 41.88,
p < .001. ANC exerted no significant effect in this brain
region.

Extra-Auditory Cortical Activity
Compared to sparse acquisition, continuous acquisition was associated with significant activity in a number
of extra-auditory regions (see Figure 6, red clusters of activity). In this noisier environment, frequency discrimination and speech listening engaged medial portions of
the middle and superior frontal gyri (henceforth denoted
as prefrontal cortex), postcentral gyrus, superior parietal region, and posterior middle temporal gyrus on the
right side. Left prefrontal cortex was also involved during frequency discrimination. The absence of ANC also
represents a relatively noisy environment, and it is interesting to note that the noncancelled condition was
again associated with greater activity in right prefrontal
cortex, for both NBN and speech contrasts.
If these extra-auditory regions play a key role in performance, then we might predict a significant relationship between cortical activity and ratings of the listening
experience. Such relationships were confirmed using
(Pearson) correlation analyses of the individual subjective ratings and measures of standardized activity for
three of the right-hemisphere regions described above
(prefrontal cortex, superior parietal cortex, and middle
temporal gyrus, all coactivated by NBN and speech).
Brain activity in prefrontal cortex and superior parietal
lobe significantly increased with listening effort, r = .39,
p < .01, and r = -.37, p < .01, respectively, and background
noise intrusion, r = .36, p < .01, and r = -.43, p < .01,
respectively. Conversely, brain activity in these regions
decreased with stimulus clarity, r = -.28, p < .05, and
r = -.27, p < .05, respectively.
For those specifically interested in the effect of ANC
during sparse acquisition, we looked at a subset of the
f MRI data to address this issue. From two null findings,
we are unable to infer any differential effect of ANC across
the sparse and continuous acquisition schemes. First, no
cluster anywhere in the brain showed a significant interaction between temporal acquisition scheme and ANC.
Second, the region-of-interest approach failed to reveal
any systematic of difference in the pattern of correlations

702

between activity and subjective ratings (in part due to
reduced statistical power).

Discussion
For the scanning protocols evaluated here, listeners
reported considerable additive benefits of ANC and sparse
temporal acquisition for the overall quality of their listening experience during f MRI. ANC was rated higher
in terms of stimulus clarity (and presumably better for
speech intelligibility; see Figure 3). ANC and sparse
temporal acquisition were also associated with improved
frequency-discrimination performance. Thus, our findings demonstrate the advantages of ANC for listening
comfort and discrimination performance.
In terms of the effects on the patterns of brain activity, sparse acquisition provided a substantial and reliable improvement in detecting sound-evoked activity in
auditory cortex. Hence, sparse temporal sampling remains
optimal for mapping the functional anatomy of auditory
cortex. ANC and sparse acquisition both influenced the
pattern of (task-related) activity in prefrontal cortex. We
therefore infer that the two noise reduction methods
succeeded in reducing the effort required for frequency
discrimination, sound source segregation, and speech
perception. The general pattern of association between
subjective ratings and the magnitude of activity within
prefrontal and superior parietal cortices support the
role of a right-hemisphere fronto-parietal network in the
listening task. This network differs from the left lateralization established during certain higher-order speech
perception tasks under degraded listening conditions and
is more likely associated with the involvement of general
attentional processing than with word-based cognitivesupporting mechanisms, such as verbal working memory
(e.g., Obleser et al., 2007). Although the exact nature of
such a strongly right-lateralized attentional process is
uncertain, one option is that these regions play a role in
monitoring performance to effectively maintain a vigilant
state and to sustain vigilant responding (Robertson &
Garavan, 2004). We also note that engaging supplementary attentional resources for listening is likely to exert
subtle effects on the neural coding of the sound stimuli
within auditory cortex, mediated via known reciprocal
interactions between higher-level cognitive and lowerlevel acoustic centers. For example, electrophysiological
recordings in awake-behaving animals demonstrate that
attention can shift or expand the shape of the tuning
curve for primary-like neurons with sharp frequency tuning, resulting in the recruitment of neurons not previously responsive to the target (e.g., Fritz, Elhilali, David,
& Shamma, 2007).
A final issue for discussion concerns the apparent
discrepancy between the benefits of noise reduction for

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

perception and for measuring the extent of stimulusrelated activity in auditory cortex. First, sparse and continuous acquisition protocols were judged to be equivalent
in determining stimulus clarity, and yet sparse scanning
provided the most effective method for measuring soundevoked activity in auditory cortex. One contributing factor to this result could be the degree to which listeners
were able to separate clarity from other qualitative aspects of the listening experience. For example, individual ratings of clarity could have been weighted toward
the periods when the scanner was operating. This could
(relatively speaking) deflate ratings for sparse acquisition, despite scans occurring one-third less often than
during continuous acquisition. Indeed, consistent with
the f MRI results, the objective measure of frequency discrimination confirmed that sparse scanning was more
beneficial for listening. Second, although cancellation
was judged to improve stimulus clarity, it proffered no
specific advantage for detecting sound-evoked activity.
There is no doubt that ANC provides worthwhile benefits for listening during f MRI. Our results showed that
ANC improved speech intelligibility by about 40% and
provided a gain in d of at least 1 for frequency discrimination. However, such behavioral gains were not translated so straightforwardly into activity as measured by
f MRI. It is well known that the f MRI response to stimulus energy does not behave according to predictions
based on a linear system. If there are any nonlinearities
in the relationship between f MRI activity and sound
level, then the absolute levels of the background noise
become more important for determining the overall
stimulus-related activity than the relative size of the
noise reduction. If we consider the linearity of the response to sound level in different subdivisions of human
auditory cortex, then there is tentative evidence that
anterior and posterior nonprimary areas can show a
flatter increase in f MRI activity from 72 to 96 dB SPL
than from 48 to 72 dB SPL (see Figure 3 in Brechmann,
Baumgart, & Scheich, 2001). From previous microphone
measurements at the ear of the listener, we estimate
that the level of background scanner noise is about
58 dB SPL with ANC and about 93 dB SPL without
ANC (Hall et al., 2009), at least around 600 Hz, which
corresponds to the reference frequency of the NBN pairs.
Thus, for the NBN condition, it is reasonable to speculate that the perceptual gains from cancellation of the
background noise just so happen to fall within the lesssensitive part of the input-output response curve in the
600-Hz frequency region. It is not easy to test this prediction empirically because it may not be possible to reduce the perceived level of the scanner noise below
58 dB SPL. Even if further reductions of the airborne
sound energy reaching the tympanic membrane were
achieved (e.g., by using an earplug), the perceptual
benefits from cancellation are probably limited by bone

conduction (Hall et al., 2009). Of course, the wideband
reduction in sound level due to ANC is much less than
35 dB, and so this might also account for the small effects
of ANC seen in auditory cortical activity, especially in response to the speech stimulus.
In final conclusion, in the present study, sparse acquisition significantly improved the detection of auditory
cortical activity, whereas both sparse acquisition and
ANC improved subjective ratings of listening quality and
performance on frequency discrimination. We suggest that
the most tangible benefit of ANC for auditory f MRI concerns the confidence that listening difficulty is determined
more by the chosen stimulus parameters and less by the
adverse ambient testing environment.

References
Bandettini, P. A., Jesmanowicz, A., Van Kylen, J., Birn,
R. M., & Hyde, J. S. (1998). Functional MRI of brain activation induced by scanner acoustic noise. Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine, 39, 410-416.
Boyle, P., Nunn, T., Vickers, D., Foster, J., & Fitzgerald
O'Connor, A. (2006, September). The ABC Sentence Test:
Evaluating real-life performance. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the XXVIIIth International Congress of
Audiology, Innsbruck, Austria.
Brechmann, A., Baumgart, F., & Scheich, H. (2001).
Sound-level-dependent representation of frequency modulations in human auditory cortex: A low-noise f MRI study.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 87, 423-433.
Chambers, J., Akeroyd, M. A., Summerfield, A. Q., &
Palmer, A. R. (2001). Active control of the volume acquisition noise in functional magnetic resonance imaging:
Method and psychoacoustical evaluation. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 110, 3041-3054.
Cusack, R., Cumming, N., Bor, D., Norris, D., & Lyzenga,
J. (2005). An automated post-hoc noise cancellation tool
for audio recordings acquired in an MRI scanner. Human
Brain Mapping, 24, 299-304.
Davis, M. H., & Johnsrude, I. S. (2003). Hierarchical processing in spoken language comprehension. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 23(8), 3423-3431.
Edmister, W. B., Talavage, T. M., Ledden, P. J., & Weisskoff,
R. M. (1999). Improved auditory cortex imaging using
clustered volume acquisitions. Human Brain Mapping,
7, 89-97.
Foster, J. R., Hall, D. A., Summerfield, A. Q., Palmer,
A. R., & Bowtell, R. W. (2000). Sound-level measurements
and calculations of safe noise dosage during EPI at 3T.
Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 12, 157-163.
Friston, K. J., Holmes, A., Poline, J.-B., Price, C. J., &
Frith, C. D. (1996). Detecting activations in PET and f MRI:
Levels of inference and power. NeuroImage, 40, 223-235.
Friston, K. J., Stephan, K. E., Lund, T. E., Morcom, A., &
Kiebel, S. (2005). Mixed-effects and f MRI studies. NeuroImage, 24, 244-252.
Fritz, J. B., Elhilali, M., David, S. V., & Shamma, S. A.
(2007). Does attention play a role in dynamic receptive field

Blackman & Hall: Acquisition Scheme and Noise Cancellation for Auditory fMRI

703

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

adaptation to changing acoustic salience in A1? Hearing
Research, 229, 186-203.
Hall, D. A., Chambers, J., Akeroyd, M. A., Foster, J. R.,
Coxon, R., & Palmer, A. R. (2009). Acoustic, psychophysical and neuroimaging measurements of the effectiveness of
active cancellation during auditory functional magnetic
resonance imaging. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 125, 347-359.
Hall, D. A., Haggard, M. P., Akeroyd, M. A., Palmer, A. R.,
Summerfield, A. Q., Elliott, M. R., . . . Bowtell, R. W.
(1999). Sparse temporal sampling in auditory f MRI. Human
Brain Mapping, 7, 213-223.
Hall, D. A., & Plack, C. J. (2009). Pitch processing sites in
human auditory cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 19(3), 543-553.
Hall, D. A., Summerfield, A. Q., Goncalves, M. S., Foster,
J. R., Palmer, A. R., & Bowtell, R. W. (2000). Time-course
of the auditory BOLD response to scanner noise. Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine, 43, 601-606.
Healy, E. W., Moser, D. C., Morrow, L., Hall, D. A., &
Fridriksson, J. (2007). Speech perception in MRI scanner
noise by persons with aphasia. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 50, 323-334.
Hedeen, R. A., & Edelstein, W. A. (1997). Characteristics
and prediction of gradient acoustic noise in MR imagers.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 37, 7-10.
Hu, S., Olulade, O., Gonzales Castillo, J., Santos, J., Kim,
S., Tamer, G. G., . . . Talavage, T. M. (2010). Modeling
hemodynamic responses in auditory cortex at 1.5T using
variable duration imaging acoustic noise. NeuroImage,
49, 3027-3038.

Phillips, D. P., Semple, M. N., Calford, M. B., & Kitzes,
L. M. (1994). Level-dependent representation of stimulus
frequency in cat primary auditory cortex. Experimental
Brain Research, 102, 210-226.
Robertson, I. H., & Garavan, H. (2004). Vigilant attention.
In M. S. Gazzaniga & E. Bizzi (Eds.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 631-640). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Salvi, R. J., Lockwood, A. H., Frisina, R. D., Coad, M. L.,
Wack, D. S., & Frisina, D. R. (2002). PET imaging of the
normal human auditory system: Responses to speech in
quiet and in background noise. Hearing Research, 170(1-2),
96-106.
Schmidt, C. F., Zaehle, T., Meyer, M., Geiser, E., Boesiger,
P., & Jancke, L. (2008). Silent and continuous f MRI
scanning differentially modulate activation in an auditory
language comprehension task. Human Brain Mapping,
29, 46-56.
Schwarzbauer, C., Davis, M. H., Rodd, J. M., & Johnsrude, I.
(2006). Interleaved silent steady state (ISSS) imaging: A
new sparse imaging method applied to auditory f MRI.
NeuroImage, 29, 774-782.
Scott, S. K., Blank, S. C., Rosen, S., & Wise, R. J. S. (2000).
Identification of a pathway for intelligible speech in the left
temporal lobe. Brain, 123, 2400-2406.
Scott, S. K., Rosen, S., Wickham, L., & Wise, R. J. S. (2004).
A positron emission tomography study of the neural basis
of informational and energetic masking effects in speech
perception. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
115, 813-821.

International Telecommunications Union. (2003). Telephone installations, local line networks. Methods for objective
and subjective assessment of quality [ITU-T Recommendation P.835]. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

Shellock, F. G., Ziarati, M., Atkinson, D., & Chen, D.-Y.
(1998). Determination of gradient magnetic field-induced
acoustic noise associated with the use of echo planar and
three-dimensional fast spin echo techniques. Journal of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 8, 1154-1157.

Morosan, P., Rademacher, J., Schleicher, A., Amunts, K.,
Schormann, T., & Zilles, K. (2001). Human primary auditory cortex: Cytoarchitectonic subdivisions and mapping
into a spatial reference system. NeuroImage, 13, 684-701.

Talavage, T. M., Edmister, W. B., Ledden, P. J., & Weisskoff,
R. M. (1999). Quantitative assessment of auditory cortex
responses induced by imager acoustic noise. Human Brain
Mapping, 7, 79-88.

Obleser, J., Wise, R. J. S., Dresner, M. A., & Scott, S. K.
(2007). Functional integration across brain regions improves
speech perception under adverse listening conditions.
Journal of Neuroscience, 27(9), 2283-2289.

Westbury, C. F., Zatorre, R. J., & Evans, A. C. (1999). Quantifying variability in the planum temporale: A probability
map. Cerebral Cortex, 9, 392-405.

Paltoglou, A., Sumner, C. J., & Hall, D. A. (2009). Examining the role of frequency specificity in the enhancement
and suppression of human auditory cortical activity by auditory selective attention. Hearing Research, 257, 106-118.

704

Wong, P. C. M., Uppunda, A. K., Parrish, T. B., & Dhar, S.
(2008). Cortical mechanisms of speech perception in noise.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 51,
1026-1041.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 54 * 693-704 * April 2011

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

