Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Benefits and costs of lexical decomposition and semantic integration
during the processing of transparent and opaque English compounds
Hongbo Ji, Christina L. Gagne , Thomas L. Spalding
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 22 November 2010
revision received 30 June 2011
Available online 2 August 2011
Keywords:
Compound
Decomposition
Complex structure
Semantic transparency
Lexical processing
Morphological structure

a b s t r a c t
Six lexical decision experiments were conducted to examine the influence of complex
structure on the processing speed of English compounds. All experiments revealed that
semantically transparent compounds (e.g., rosebud) were processed more quickly than
matched monomorphemic words (e.g., giraffe). Opaque compounds (e.g., hogwash) were
also processed more quickly than monomorphemic words. However, when the experimental materials and/or procedure encouraged decomposition/integration, this advantage disappeared. This research suggests that morphological decomposition initiated by the
existence of complex structure results in the availability of both the lexical and semantic
representations of compound constituents, regardless of whether the compounds are
transparent or opaque, and that meaning composition is attempted. This meaning composition further speeds up transparent compound processing beyond lexical facilitation but
slows down opaque compound processing because the computed meaning for opaque
compounds conflicts with the retrieved meaning.
O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
How do people recognize morphologically complex
words such as snowball and successor? One possibility is
that complex words are represented in the mental lexicon
as whole word units, as are monomorphemic words such
as giraffe (e.g., Butterworth, 1983). However, in the past
three decades, ample evidence has shown that complex
words can also be accessed via their constituents (Andrews,
1986; Andrews, Miller, & Rayner, 2004; Hyona & Pollatsek,
1998; Juhasz, Starr, Inhoff, & Placke, 2003; Libben, 1998;
Marslen-Wilson, Tyler, Waksler, & Older, 1994; Pollatsek
& Hyona, 2005; Pollatsek, Hyona, & Bertram, 2000; Taft,
1979, 1994; Taft & Forster, 1975, 1976; Zwitserlood,
1994). A fundamental underlying assumption behind most
theories of complex word processing is that there is a pro Corresponding author. Address: Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, P-217 Biological Sciences Building, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada T6G 2E9. Fax: +1 780 492 1768.
E-mail address: cgagne@ualberta.ca (C.L. Gagne).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2011.07.003

cessing cost associated with using a decomposition-based
route; consequently, direct access is assumed to be the faster and more efficient processing option. The current research examines the validity of this assumption in the
context of compound words. Our particular aim is to evaluate the relative costs and benefits associated with the
decomposition of a compound into its constituents and
with the subsequent integration of those constituents.
A guiding principle behind the architectures proposed
for the processing of complex words has been the balance
of lexical storage vs. morphological computation. Many papers in the literature on complex word processing have
been explicitly concerned with establishing how the balance of storage and computation affects lexical processing
(e.g., Baayen, 2007; Bertram, Laine, Baayen, Schreuder, &
Hyona, 2000; Kuperman, Bertram, & Baayen, 2010;
Kuperman, Schrueder, Bertram, & Baayen, 2009; Libben,
2005). A wide range of theories of complex word processing
have emerged as the various theories have sought to balance the demands associated with storage vs. computation,
and these theories differ substantially in terms of the extent

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

to which the morphological structure plays a role in the
processing (i.e., the comprehension or production) of complex words. Some theories take a full-listing stance, in
which all words are stored, and posit that morphological
structure plays no (or a minimal) role (Lukatela, Carello, &
Turvey, 1987; Manelis & Tharp, 1977). Other theories posit
that morphological structure is involved (Chialant &
Caramazza, 1995; Dell, 1986; Frauenfelder & Schreuder,
1991; Laudanna & Burani, 1985, 1995; Schreuder & Baayen,
1995; Taft & Forster, 1975, 1976). The latter theories vary in
terms of the point at which the constituents' representations become available (see Kuperman et al. (2010) for an
excellent overview).
The literature on the processing of complex words contains an interesting paradox. Two common assumptions
underlying the discussion of the balance of storage and
computation is that morphological parsing is time-consuming and that direct access of full-form representations
is a way of reducing computational load (see, e.g., Bertram,
Laine, & Karvinen, 1999). Therefore, of the two routes (direct access and decomposition), the direct access route is
generally thought to be the preferable route (e.g., ``As
decomposition is assumed to be slower and more errorprone than full-form processing, it is economical to represent words that are used often as full forms since that
guarantees effective access to them'', Lehtonen et al.,
2007, p. 124). Yet, despite the cost associated with decomposition, there are numerous findings which suggest that
morphological decomposition routinely occurs during the
processing of complex words (Andrews, 1986; Andrews
et al., 2004; Hyona & Pollatsek, 1998; Juhasz et al., 2003;
Libben, 1998; Marslen-Wilson et al., 1994; Pollatsek &
Hyona, 2005; Pollatsek et al., 2000; Taft, 1979, 1994; Taft
& Forster, 1975, 1976; Zwitserlood, 1994).
Given that morphological decomposition is both costly
and yet commonly used, it is essential to consider both
the costs and benefits associated with decomposition. To
do so, it is helpful to examine the extent to which morphological decomposition influences the processing time of
complex words because it is not obvious a priori whether
decomposition helps or hinders processing overall. Some
theories predict that the decomposition route races with
a direct access route and that response time on any given
trial is determined by the route with the faster completion
time (Baayen, Dijkstra, & Schreuder, 1997; Bertram et al.,
1999; Frauenfelder & Schreuder, 1991; Schreuder &
Baayen, 1995). Consequently, response times should be
faster for complex words than for frequency-matched
monomorphemic words. Other theories suggest that the
decomposition and direct-access routes compete for cognitive resources which increases the time required to process
complex words (Laine, Vainio, & Hyona, 1999).
For the most part, research addressing this issue has
used either inflected or derived words. Some studies have
found that complex words exhibit processing difficulties
relative to comparable monomorphemic words (Bertram
et al., 1999; Hyona, Vainio, & Laine, 2002; Laine et al.,
1999; Lehtonen et al., 2007). Other studies have found a
processing advantage for complex words relative to monomorphemic words (Bertram et al., 1999; Burani & Thornton, 2003; Hudson & Buijs, 1995). Thus, it does not

407

appear to be the case that complex words (which can be
accessed via either route) are necessarily more difficult to
process relative to monomorphemic words (which can
only be accessed via the presumably faster direct-access
route).
The focus of our investigation will be on compound
words because they provide an especially useful test case
for evaluating questions about the costs and benefits associated with decomposition. First, compound words are
especially likely to be decomposed because they tend to
be low frequency (e.g., 58% of noun-noun compounds in
the English CELEX have written frequencies of less than
one in a million, Libben, 2005). Indeed, there are several
studies showing that the constituents of a compound are
available, at least at the lexical level (e.g., Andrews, 1986;
Andrews et al., 2004; Fiorentino & Poeppel, 2007; Giraudo
& Grainger, 2001; Hyona & Pollatsek, 1998; Juhasz et al.,
2003; Pollatsek & Hyona, 2005; Pollatsek et al., 2000; Sandra, 1990; Zwitserlood, 1994). Second, relative to inflected
and derived words, compound words are likely to have increased costs associated with decomposition. Inflections
and derivations consist of one independent meaning unit
plus an affix. Because affixes are a closed-class set, parsing
can be accomplished by stripping affixes from stems (Taft
& Forster, 1975). In contrast, the constituents of compounds are an open-class set and, consequently, there is
no reliable heuristic for parsing. Moreover, all possible
parses of a compound appear to be attempted; for example, clamprod is parsed as both clam-prod and clamp-rod
(Libben, 1994; Libben, Derwing, & Almeida, 1999). Thus,
``compound words present a much greater challenge to online morphological parsing than do affixed words'' (Libben,
2005, p. 270).
Studies comparing the processing speed of compound
and monomorphemic words have found mixed results.
Inhoff, Briihl, and Schwartz (1996) presented compound
words (e.g., blueberry), suffixed words (e.g., ceaseless), and
monomorphemic controls (e.g., arthritis) in neutral sentence contexts and found that compound words received
longer first fixation durations than suffixed and monomorphemic words. In an online naming task, however, naming
latencies were shorter for compounds than for suffixed and
monomorphemic words. Using a sentence-reading paradigm, Juhasz (2006) found that compound words with a
high frequency first constituent had shorter first fixation
times and gaze durations than did frequency and length
matched monomorphemic words. However, compound
words with a low frequency first constituent did not differ
from monomorphemic words. In addition, whereas Juhasz,
White, Liversedge, and Rayner (2008) found no processing
differences between compound and monomorphemic
words, Drieghe, Pollatsek, Juhasz, and Rayner (2010) found
an advantage for compound words. Finally, Fiorentino and
Poeppel (2007) found an advantage for compound words
in both lexical decision times and in their ERP data.
Overall, the existing data suggest that despite the additional cost associated with morphological decomposition,
the availability of the constituents can, in some cases, yield
processing advantages. These advantages have been attributed to the lexical access of the constituent representations facilitating access of the whole word representation

408

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

(see for example, Fiorentino & Poeppel, 2007). For example,
blue and berry are both higher frequency than blueberry
and therefore the lexical representations for these items
are likely to be activated more quickly than the representation for the whole compound. This interpretation is consistent with several theories of complex word processing
that posit that the constituent representations are connected to the whole-word representation and, therefore,
can be used to activate the whole-word representation
(e.g., Libben, 1998; Schreuder & Baayen, 1995, 1997; Taft,
2003; Taft and Kougious, 2004; Zwitserlood, 1994; Zwitserlood, Bolwiender, & Drews, 2005).
However, can the processing advantage for compound
words relative to matched monomorphemic words be uniquely attributed to facilitation at the lexical level? In addition, why is the processing advantage not always
observed? To address these questions, it is important to
consider the impact of constituent integration on ease of
processing. That is, the decomposition route involves not
only the decomposition at the word-form level, but also requires the integration of those constituents (e.g., Caramazza, Laudanna, & Romani, 1988; Fiorentino & Poeppel, 2007;
Frauenfelder & Schreuder, 1991; Juhasz, Inhoff, & Rayner,
2005; Koester, Gunter, & Wagner, 2007; Laine, Niemi,
Koivuselka-Sallinen, Ahlsen, & Hyona, 1994; Niemi, Laine,
& Tuominen, 1994; Schreuder & Baayen, 1995). There is
emerging evidence that compound processing is affected
by the ease with which the compound's constituents can
be integrated. For example, Inhoff, Radach, and Heller
(2000) examined the effect of inter-word spacing on eyefixations for German compounds and found longer final
fixation times for compounds with inter-word spacing.
They concluded that the interpretation of compounds involves two processes: One process involves accessing the
constituent word forms and the other process involves
integrating the constituents. Juhasz et al. (2005) found that
these results extend to English compounds.
More recent work has suggested that integration involves semantic composition (i.e., the construction of a
meaning representation for a compound based on the
semantic/conceptual representations of the constituents).
For example, Koester et al. (2007) found that the size of a
negative shift in the ERP signal was larger for transparent
compounds than for opaque compounds, and was also correlated with post hoc judgements of difficulty of integration. Gagne and Spalding (2009) found that increasing
the availability of the appropriate relational structure, by
preceding the target compound (e.g., snowman) with a
compound that had the same relation (e.g., snowball,
noun-MADE OF-modifier), led to faster response times
than when the target was preceded with a different relation compound (e.g., snowshovel, noun-FOR-modifier).
The specific impact of integration on ease of processing
for compound words is an important theoretical question
because research with inflected words indicates that integration at this level is associated with additional processing costs. For example, Hyona et al. (2002) suggested that
the processing difficulty associated with inflected words
(as seen in longer RT's and higher error rates than for
monomorphemic words) stemmed from syntactic and/or
semantic assignment (during which word meaning is con-

structed) rather than from decomposition at the lexical level. This conclusion is consistent with ERP data reported by
Hyona et al. (2002) and with fMRI results reported by
Lehtonen, Vorobyev, Hugdahl, Tuokkola, and Laine
(2006). Although integration costs have been observed
for inflected words, it is not yet known whether a similar
cost occurs during the processing of compound words.
The question of whether integration costs occur for
compound words is directly relevant for evaluating current
approaches to compound processing. If constituent integration involves the co-activation of compounds' lexical
representation via the constituents' lexical representations
(Libben, 2005; Zwitserlood, 1994), then facilitating decomposition should yield a processing benefit for both semantically transparent and opaque compounds. However, if
constituent integration involves semantic composition
(and some of the same underlying processing as novel
compounds and noun phrases, Gagne & Spalding, 2004,
2006, 2009, 2010; see also Fiorentino & Poeppel, 2007;
Taft, 2003), then facilitating decomposition should lead
to processing benefits for transparent compounds, but
processing costs for the opaque compounds due to a conflict within the conceptual system between possible
meanings.
Purpose and overview of the current experiments
The purpose of the current studies is to expand previous
research by exploring the influence of morphological
decomposition and integration on the processing time of
compound words. Although most current models of word
processing assume the existence of decomposed representations of morphologically complex words and allow for
decomposition in word processing, it is not yet clear what
the benefit/cost is of morphological decomposition. Therefore, unlike previous research that has been focused primarily on whether morphological decomposition occurs
in compound word processing or on the temporal order
of the activation of full-forms and constituents (e.g., Kuperman et al., 2009), the current studies investigate the impact of decomposition and subsequent integration on
ease of processing. In all of the experiments, we compare
the processing of English two-constituent compounds with
monomorphemic words that are matched in terms of
whole word frequency and word length.
The aim of Experiments 1-3 is to determine whether
complex word structure yields a processing advantage relative to monomorphemic words. In Experiments 1 and 2,
we establish whether compound words are processed
more quickly than monomorphemic words and, then, in
Experiment 3, we directly examine the influence of semantic transparency on ease of processing. In the final set of
experiments (Experiments 4-6), we determine whether
there are any processing costs associated with integration.
Experiment 1
We evaluate the impact of a complex structure on ease
of processing (as measured in a lexical decision task). In
the current experiment, we match compounds (e.g.,

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

rosebud) with monomorphemic words (e.g., giraffe) in
terms of whole-word frequency because whole-word frequency is used as an indicator of whether a word is likely
to be accessed via decomposition or full-form processing
(see Juhasz & Berkowitz, 2011; Kuperman et al., 2010). By
controlling the whole-word frequency, we can evaluate
the contribution of the constituents to the processing time
for compound words.
Theories that posit that complex words are accessed via
their whole-word representations (Butterworth, 1983),
rather than via constituent representations, predict no processing differences between the compound and monomorphemic words because our items are matched in terms of
whole-word frequency. In contrast, theories that posit that
words are decomposed make different predictions about
whether decomposition will yield an overall advantage or
disadvantage in terms of processing time. Some decomposition-based theories (such as Taft and Forster's (1975,
1976) automatic decomposition model) propose there
should be a computational cost for compounds at the
semantic level. The cost arises because these theories posit
that the storage of whole-word meaning is redundant and
thus, when possible, semantically transparent words (such
as reheat, which can be derived from the two morphemes
re, meaning ``again'', and heat, meaning, ``make hot'') are
processed solely via morphological decomposition which
is assumed to be a slower processing route than direct access. In the later version of this theory (Taft, 1994) morphological decomposition was assumed to occur
simultaneously with the direct access at the lexical level
but not at the semantic level.
However, other decomposition-based theories, such as
the dual-route theory (Baayen et al., 1997; Frauenfelder
& Schreuder, 1991; Schreuder & Baayen, 1995) and Libben's theory (1998), predict an advantage of complex
words over monomorphemic words. According to the
dual-route race model, statistical facilitation (Raab, 1962)
yields a processing advantage for complex words. Statistical facilitation arises due to the simultaneous but independent involvement of the decomposition and the direct
retrieval routes during the processing of complex words.
The route that wins the race determines the word recognition time. When the distributions of response times for the
two routes overlap, mean response time to a particular
item should be less than following either access route
alone because the faster end of the distribution of the slow
route wins over and replaces the slower end of the distribution of the faster route. Thus, if one assumes that the distributions of the two access routes overlap in compound
processing, then compounds should be processed more
quickly than monomorphemic words which can only be
recognized by the direct access route. Libben's (1998, see
also Zwitserlood, 1994) theory predicts that compound
words should be processed more quickly than monomorphemic words due to within-level facilitative links at the
lexical level which connect compound words (e.g., blueberry) and their constituents (e.g., blue and berry). Consequently, lexical units that are activated via the two
access routes boost each other's activation and increase
the ease of compound processing relative to monomorphemic word processing.

409

Method
Materials
Sixty pairs of English compounds and monomorphemic
words were selected from the CELEX corpus (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993). Each pair was matched on
lemma frequency, surface frequency, number of letters,
and number of syllables. Bigram frequencies were determined using the MCWord database (Medler and Binder,
2005); in this experiment and all subsequent experiments,
the conditions did not differ in terms of bigram frequency.
No constraints were placed on the semantic transparency
of the compounds: 44 were fully transparent, 6 were fully
opaque, and 10 were partially opaque. See Table 1 for a
summary of the descriptive statistics concerning the stimulus characteristics for Experiments 1-6, and Appendix A
for a list of materials and stimulus characteristics.
One-hundred and twenty nonword filler items were
constructed. Sixty mimicked a compound format: For half
of these items, the first constituent was a nonword (e.g.,
rostpepper) and for the other half, the second constituent
was a nonword (e.g., chivesonse). In addition, 60 monomorphemic-like nonwords (e.g., arithmutia) were constructed
by changing one or two letters in monomorphemic words
(e.g., arithmetic).
Procedure
Participants performed a lexical decision task. Each participant saw the items in a different random order. Each
trial began with the message ``Ready?'' on the computer
screen and participants initiated the trial by pressing the
space bar. The stimulus item then appeared and participants indicated whether the item was a word by pressing
either the F or J key.
Participants
Twenty-five undergraduates participated in the study
for partial course credit. The data from two participants
were excluded due to low accuracy (less than 60%) or slow
responses (mean response time greater than 1.5 s). All participants in Experiments 1-6 spoke English as a first
language.
Results and discussion
Reaction times more than 2.5 standard deviations from
the condition means were removed (3.1% of correct responses). Descriptive statistics for the experimental items
are shown in Table 2. The by-item RT and accuracy are
shown in Appendix A. Accuracy for the filler conditions
was high: 93% (SE = 1), 92% (SE = 2), and 88% (SE = 2) for
the nonword-word, word-nonword, and noncompound
filler conditions.
We fit linear mixed-effect regression models using
either log response time or accuracy as a dependent variable, word-type as a predictor variable, and subject and
item as random effects (see Baayen, 2008; Bates, 2005;
Pinheiro & Bates, 2000). Number of letters, number of syllables, log lemma frequency, and log surface frequency
were included as co-variates. The primary variable of interest was word-type and we report tests conducted on the

410

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Table 1
Stimuli characteristics (means and standard derivations) as a function of word type for Experiments 1-6.
Experiment and condition

C1 Lemma

C2 Lemma

Fam

M

Letter
SD

M

Syl
SD

M

Surf
SD

M

Lemma
SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Expts. 1 and 2
Monomorpheme
Transparent

7.9
7.9

1.1
1.1

2.3
2.3

0.5
0.5

1.6
1.6

1.2
1.2

1.9
1.9

1.4
1.4

-
165

-
240

-
333

-
703

4.8
5.9

0.9
1.5

Experiment 3
Monomorpheme
Transparent
Opaque

7.9
7.9
7.9

1.2
1.2
1.2

2.3
2.2
2.3

0.5
0.4
0.5

1.1
1.0
1.0

0.6
0.6
0.7

1.2
1.2
1.2

0.6
0.6
0.7

-
126
174

-
156
286

-
164
447

-
210
918

5.5
5.8
4.9

1.1
1.1
1.2

Expts. 4-6
Monomorpheme
Transparent
Opaque

7.9
7.9
7.9

1.2
1.2
1.2

2.3
2.3
2.3

0.5
0.4
0.5

1.2
1.2
1.2

1.1
1.3
1.1

1.3
1.4
1.3

1.1
1.3
1.1

-
180
174

-
309
290

-
188
184

-
267
425

5.5
5.9
5.0

1.1
0.8
1.2

Note. Letter = number of letters; Syl = number of syllables; Surf = surface frequency; Lemma = lemma frequency; C1 Lemma = lemma frequency for first
constituent; C2 Lemma = lemma frequency for second constituent; Fam = subjective familiarity rating.

Table 2
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%)
with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 1.
Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

Compound
Monomorpheme

6.57 (.02)
6.75 (.03)

742 (19)
908 (32)

93 (1)
72 (2)

Note. Descriptive statistics reported in all Tables hereafter were calculated
by averaging data over subjects, standard errors of means were calculated
for each condition.

estimate of the fixed effect for this variable. Analyses of
accuracy used a binomial distribution. Confidence intervals
are based on a Monte Carlo Markov chain (MCMC) random-walk method using 1000 simulations and refer to
the lower and upper boundaries of the highest posterior
density intervals. The p-values for the response time analyses are also derived via the MCMC method.
The LME analyses revealed that relative to monomorphemic words, compounds were responded to more
quickly, 95% confidence interval (.15, .23), t = 9.16,
SE = .02, p < .001, and more accurately, z = 6.59,
p < .0001.1
In addition to examining the influence of word-type, we
also examined the impact of whole-word frequency. Both
log lemma frequency (r = .08, p < .005) and log surface
frequency (r = .07, p < .01) were correlated with log response time to the compound words. A common claim in
the literature is that low-frequency complex words are

1
Thirteen of the monomorphic words (e.g., stratagem, ordinance, treacle,
and fresco) had low accuracy (less than 50%). This was most likely due to
the fact that they were not part of the vocabulary of some of our
participants. However, it is worth noting that the frequency of these words
was matched to the compound words and participants did not have
difficulty with the compound items. To determine whether our results were
due to the inclusion of these difficult monomorphemic items, we reanalyzed the data without the 13 pairs of items. The results of the reanalysis demonstrated that the advantage of compounds was not due to the
low accuracy items. Compounds (M = 6.58, raw RT = 747 ms) were
responded to more quickly than were monomorphemic words (M = 6.73,
raw RT = 880 ms), t(1892) = 6.57, SE = .02, p < .0001. The accuracy data
indicate that compounds were easier to interpret than were monomorphemic words, t(2156) = 5.22, SE = .28, p < .0001.

more likely to be recognized via the decomposition route,
whereas high-frequency complex words are more likely
to be recognized via direct-access of the full-form (e.g., Alegre & Gordon, 1999; Baayen et al., 1997; Frauenfelder &
Schreuder, 1991; Lehtonen & Laine, 2003; Lehtonen, Niska,
Wande, Niemi, & Laine, 2006; Schreuder & Baayen, 1995).
Consequently, one might wonder whether the observed
advantage for compounds (which we attribute to the availability of the constituent representations) is restricted to
low frequency words. If so, then whole word frequency
and word-type should interact. Contrary to this prediction,
log lemma frequency did not interact with word-type in
either the RT analysis, F(1, 2267) = 2.25, MSE = .06, p = .13,
or the accuracy analysis, F < 1. Similarly, log surface frequency did not interact with word-type in either the RT
analysis, F(1, 2267) = 2.96, MSE = .06, p = .09, or the accuracy analysis, F(1, 2749) = 1.06, MSE = .66, p = .30.
The processing advantage for compound words over
monomorphemic words is incompatible with a wholeword access only framework (e.g., Butterworth, 1983) as
well as with the predictions based on the automatic
decomposition model (Taft, 1994; Taft & Forster, 1975,
1976) which predicts that transparent compounds should
take longer to process than monomorphemic words. Instead, our results suggest that the processing costs associated with morphological decomposition are offset by
advantages due to the resulting availability of the compound's constituents. In this regard, the results are consistent with the dual-route (Schreuder & Baayen, 1995) and
Libben's (1998) theories. According to Libben's (1998) theory, the advantage for compound words is the result of
facilitation at the lexical level due to early activation of
the constituent representations, whereas according to the
dual-route model the advantage for complex words is
attributed to statistical facilitation due to the decomposition route completing prior to the direct-access route.
Although both theories can account for the processing
advantage for compounds, the finding that whole word frequency did not interact with word-type is not compatible
with either theory. According to the dual-route theory,
the processing advantage should have been greater for
low-frequency compounds, for which the decomposition

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

route is likely to complete prior to the whole-word access
route, than for high-frequency compounds, for which direct activation via the whole-word representation is more
likely. According to Libben's theory, the benefit of activation spreading from constituents' lexical representations
to the whole-word lexical representation should have been
greater for low-frequency compounds than for high-frequency compounds.
Experiment 2
The data from Experiment 1 is most compatible with
theories of complex word processing that posit that constituent representations become available and that the
availability of these representations is beneficial. However,
because the nonword compound fillers were constructed
by pairing a nonword and a word, recognition of individual
constituents might have been sufficient for participants to
distinguish compounds from nonword compounds. That is,
they might have been responding based on whether one of
the constituents was a nonword. To eliminate this possibility in the current experiment, filler items are constructed
from two words.
Method
Materials
The materials were identical to the materials in Experiment 1, except that the 60 compound-like nonword fillers
were constructed from two words (e.g., restpepper).
Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure used in
Experiment 1.
Participants
Twenty-five undergraduates participated in the study
for partial course credit.
Results and Discussion
Reaction times more than 2.5 standard deviations away
from the condition means were regarded as outliers and
removed (3.2% of correct responses). The descriptive statistics for the experimental items are shown in Table 3 and
the by-item RT and accuracy are shown in Appendix A.
Accuracy for the compound-like nonwords and monomorphemic-like nonwords was 90% (SE = 2) and 85% (SE = 2),
respectively.
LME models were fit by using either log response time
or accuracy as a dependent variable, word-type as predictor variable, and subject and item as random effects. Num-

Table 3
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%)
with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 2.
Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

Compound
Monomorpheme

6.65 (.02)
6.76 (.03)

805 (19)
902 (25)

88 (2)
75 (1)

411

ber of letters, number of syllables, log lemma frequency,
and log surface frequency were included as co-variates.
This analysis revealed that compounds were responded
to more quickly, 95% confidence interval (.08, .16),
t = 5.34, SE = .02, p < .001, and more accurately, z = 3.79,
p < .001 than were monomorphemic words.2
As in Experiment 1, both log lemma frequency (r = .08,
p < .005) and log surface frequency (r = .07, p < .01) were
correlated with log response time to the compound words.
Log lemma frequency did not interact with word-type in
either the RT analysis, F(1, 2447) = 1.02, MSE = .06, p = .31,
or the accuracy analysis, F < 1. Similarly, log surface frequency did not interact with word-type in either the RT
analysis, F(1, 2447) = 2.12, MSE = .06, p = .15, or in the accuracy analysis, F < 1. The lack of interaction between word
frequency and word type suggests that the advantage of
compound processing is not restricted to low frequency
words.
In sum, these data demonstrate that compounds are
processed more quickly than frequency-matched monomorphemic words regardless of the type of fillers being
used, and suggest that the advantage for compounds observed in Experiment 1 was not due to participants relying
on properties of the constituents (i.e., whether one constituent was a nonword).
Experiment 3
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 are consistent with
the proposal that lexical access to compound constituents
facilitates the processing of compounds due to the involvement of facilitative links between the lexical representations of the constituents and the compound (e.g., Libben,
1998; Zwitserlood, 1994). However, given that the majority of the compounds were semantically transparent, these
results could be due to pure lexical facilitation from
compound constituents or due to a combination of lexical
facilitation and semantic facilitation from compound
constituents.
In the current study, we examine whether the locus of
the effect is solely at the lexical level or whether the
semantic level is also involved. To do so, we compare the
processing of opaque compounds with that of transparent
compounds and monomorphemic words. If the advantage
for compound processing observed in Experiments 1 and
2 is solely due to lexical access to compound constituents,
then response times to transparent and opaque compounds should be equivalent to each other, but faster than
monomorphemic words, because the constituents are predicted to be linked to the whole-word representation at
2
We re-analyzed the data without 12 pairs of items that showed low
accuracy. Among the deleted 12 pairs, 10 were deleted due to the low
accuracy of the monomorphemic words (less than 50%) and two were
deleted due to the low accuracy of the compound words (less than 50%).
This re-analysis was to rule out the alternative interpretation that the
advantage for compound processing was due to these low accuracy items.
As observed with the full set of items, compounds (M = 6.64, raw RT = 794
ms) were responded to more quickly than were monomorphemic words
(M = 6.74, raw RT = 885 ms), t(2101) = 4.95, SE = .02, p < .0001. The accuracy
data also indicated that compounds were easier to interpret than were
monomorphemic words, t(2392) = 3.65, SE = .27, p < .0003.

412

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

the lexical level for both transparent and opaque compounds. For transparent compounds, activating the lexical
representation of the constituents leads to increased activation of the lexical representation of the compound
(e.g., blueberry) due to facilitatory links between blue and
blueberry and berry and blueberry. The same is true of opaque compounds such as strawberry; activating the lexical
representation of the constituents produces increased activation of the lexical representation strawberry due to facilitatory links at the lexical level between straw and
strawberry and berry and strawberry.
In contrast, if both the lexical and semantic levels were
involved, then opaque compound processing might still exhibit an advantage over monomorphemic word processing
(due to activation at the lexical level), but to a lesser degree
than the advantage for transparent compound processing
(due to differences in activation at the semantic level).
For transparent compounds, the semantic representations
of both constituents of a transparent compound are associated with the semantic representation of the compound.
For example, both blue and berry are linked to the semantic
representation of blueberry. In contrast, only the transparent constituent of an opaque compound is linked to the
compound at the semantic level (see Grainger, Cole, and
Segui (1991), Libben (1998), and Zwitserlood (1994) for
similar proposals). For example, for the compound strawberry, only berry (the transparent constituent) is linked to
the strawberry at the semantic level. In addition, in Libben's
framework, the absence of links between the opaque constituent and the compound (e.g., between straw and berry)
is assumed to result in inhibition of non-target units, and
this inhibition at the semantic level prevents activation
of the lexical representation of that constituent after the
processing of the compound, and also prevents the meaning of the opaque constituent from interfering with the
interpretation of the compound (e.g., the meaning of straw
is inhibited; see, Libben, 1998, p. 39, 2006). As a result,
transparent compounds should receive more activation
from their constituents (both at the lexical and semantic
level) than would opaque compounds.
Another way to evaluate these different viewpoints is to
consider the influence of constituent frequency on ease of
processing. If the processing advantage of compounds relative to monomorphemic words is due to the activation of
lexical representations of the constituents aiding in the
activation of the lexical representation of the whole word,
then constituent frequency should be negatively correlated
with response time; higher frequency constituents should
be accessed more readily than low frequency ones, and
thus should speed up access of the whole-word representation. However, if the semantic representations also become available and are used to compose a meaning, then
high frequency constituents might be beneficial for transparent compounds, but problematic for opaque compounds. Furthermore, given that past research has
revealed that the first constituent is most actively involved
in the initial suggestion of potential relational information
that is used to link the constituents into a unified representation (e.g., Gagne & Shoben, 1997; Gagne, Spalding, Figueredo, & Mullaly, 2009; Spalding, Gagne, Mullaly, & Ji, 2010),
it is likely that the frequency of the first constituent might

exert more influence than the frequency of the second
constituent.
Method
Materials
Thirty triples of items were selected from the CELEX
database (Baayen et al., 1993) and consisted of a monomorphemic word, transparent compound, and opaque
compound. Classification of compounds as opaque or
transparent were based on the first author's judgment
and was guided by linguistic criteria. For example, pullover
was classified as opaque because it is a type of sweater,
rather than a type of over. Each triple was matched on lemma frequency, surface frequency, number of letters, and
number of syllables. Constituent frequency of both constituents did not differ for the opaque and transparent
compounds.
Post hoc ratings of semantic transparency for the compounds were collected from nine undergraduate participants to assess whether the set of opaque items were, on
average, viewed as being more opaque than the set of
transparent items. The scale ranged from 1 (``totally opaque'') to 7 (``totally transparent''). The mean rating for the
transparent compound condition was 5.97 and the mean
rating for the opaque compound condition was 3.73. We
did not manipulate opacity-type: Of the 30 opaque compounds, half were fully opaque and half were partially opaque (8 items were TO and 7 were OT). See Appendix B for a
list of materials and stimulus characteristics.
In addition, a set of 90 nonword filler items was constructed. Sixty mimicked a compound format: for half,
the first constituent was a nonword and for the other half,
the second constituent was a nonword. The remaining 30
nonwords (e.g., cracodule) were constructed by changing
one or two letters in monomorphemic words.
Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure used in
Experiments 1 and 2.
Participants
Thirty-one undergraduates participated in the study for
partial course credit. The data from four participants were
excluded due to low accuracy rates (less than 60%) or due
to slow response times (mean response time greater than
2 s).
Results and discussion
Reaction times greater than 2.5 standard deviations
away from the condition mean, as well as 14 trials with
reaction times greater than 3 s were removed (3.7% of correct responses). The descriptive statistics for the experimental items are shown in Table 4. The by-item RT and
accuracy are shown in Appendix B. The accuracy for the
nonword-word, word-nonword and noncompound conditions was 93% (SE = 2), 94% (SE = 2), and 87% (SE = 2).
As in Experiments 1 and 2, LME models were fit by
using either log response time or accuracy as a dependent
variable, word type as a predictor variable, and subject and

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

413

Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

ment most strongly reflect processing associated with the
lexical level. Experiments 4-6 explore the nature of the
processing associated with the semantic and conceptual
levels.

Transparent compound
Opaque compound
Monomorpheme

6.61 (.02)
6.66 (.02)
6.71 (.03)

774 (18)
812 (21)
869 (27)

90 (2)
85 (2)
82 (1)

Experiment 4

Table 4
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%)
with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 3.

item as random effects. Number of letters, number of syllables, log lemma frequency, and log surface frequency were
included as co-variates. Transparent compounds were responded to more quickly than were monomorphemic
words, 95% confidence interval ( .15, .04), t = 2.97,
p < .001. Similarly, opaque compounds were responded to
more quickly than were monomorphemic words, 95% confidence interval ( .12, .004), t = 1.85, p < .05. Transparent compounds received more correct responses than did
monomorphemic words, z = 1.92, p < .05, but opaque
compounds and monomorphemic words did not differ.
Also, transparent and opaque compounds did not differ
in either response time or accuracy.
Collapsing transparent and opaque compounds, log response time was negatively correlated with log lemma frequency, r = .10, p < .0001, and with log surface frequency
of compounds, r = .08, p < .003. There was no interaction
between semantic transparency (i.e., opaque vs. transparent) and whole word frequency (F's < 1) which indicates
that our results are not restricted to low frequency items.
In addition, we examined the influence of constituent
frequency on response time. High frequency first constituents (based on log lemma measures) were associated with
faster response times for the compound items, r = .12,
p < .0001, and the LME analysis indicated that that first
constituent frequency did not interact with compound
type, t = 1.15, p = .26. A separate set of analyses failed to
find an influence of the frequency of the second
constituent.
In sum, the current experiment demonstrates that both
transparent compounds and opaque compounds take less
time to process than frequency-matched monomorphemic
words, and, in the accuracy data, there is an advantage for
transparent compounds over monomorphemic words. The
experiment also revealed an influence of constituent frequency. These findings suggest that decomposition not
only occurs in the processing of transparent compounds
but also occurs to a certain extent in the processing of opaque compounds.
Finally, the observation that having a high frequency
first constituent was beneficial for both opaque and transparent compounds suggests that responses in this experiment most strongly reflect activation at the lexical level.
If responses were reflecting processing at the semantic
and conceptual levels, then high frequency constituents
should have been problematic for opaque compounds. In
this experiment, one constituent of the compound-like fillers was a non-word and, thus, evaluating the word-status
of the constituents would have been sufficient for distinguishing words from nonwords. That is, even though both
morphological decomposition and semantic composition
might have been occurring, the responses in this experi-

Experiments 1-3 have shown a processing advantage
for compound words over frequency-matched monomorphemic words in terms of response time for both opaque
and transparent compounds and in terms of accuracy for
transparent compounds. Although morphological parsing
has been assumed to be time-consuming, our results indicate that other aspects of the processing can compensate
for these costs. One explanation that we have proposed is
that decomposition can be beneficial because the availability of the constituents can aid in the activation of the
whole-word representation. This activation comes not only
from associations among representations at the lexical level, but also from associations among representations at
the semantic level. This explanation is based on the
Libben's framework (1998), as well as Zwitserlood's
(1994), which focuses on decomposition and the use of
constituents to co-activate the compound's representation.
However, there is another explanation for the results of
Experiments 1-3 and the focus of Experiments 4-6 will be
to evaluate the feasibility of this explanation. The theoretical approaches considered thus far have taken a psycholinguistic perspective. Another approach takes a cognitive
psychological perspective in that it is based on the theoretical claim that conceptual combination is involved in compound processing. In particular, constructing a meaning for
novel compounds via the process of conceptual combination is obligatory because the compound is not yet part
of the lexicon. We (Gagne & Spalding, 2004, 2006, 2009,
2010; Spalding et al., 2010) have argued that this process
of conceptual combination is also obligatory for lexicalized
compounds. When a compound is decomposed into its
constituents at the lexical level, semantic and conceptual
information will also become available, and the processing
system will attempt to compute a meaning based on this
information (see also Kuperman et al., 2010; Libben,
2010). Whether the computed meaning is maintained depends on a process that evaluates the various meanings
available to the system and selects the meaning that is
most appropriate for the current context (Spalding et al.,
2010, see also Gagne, Marchak, and Spalding (2010), Gagne, Spalding, and Gorrie (2005), and Stekauer (2005) for
further discussion about the availability of competing
meanings during compound processing).
According to this framework, although decomposition
can be beneficial, there might be processing costs associated with semantic composition. In particular, the processing costs should be affected by whether the computed
meaning is compatible with the conventional meaning of
the compound. In particular, opaque compounds should
yield increased integration costs relative to transparent
compounds because the computed meaning for opaque
compounds would always be inconsistent with the conventional meaning. For example, people might attempt to

414

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

interpret jailbird as ``a bird that lives in jail'' and this interpretation conflicts with the conventional meaning (``a prisoner''). As a result, additional time would be needed to
resolve the discrepancy.
The aim of the current experiment is to test the feasibility of this explanation by making the constituents more
readily available and, thereby, accelerating semantic composition. We do so by inserting spaces into the compounds.
Juhasz et al. (2005) found that inserting a space into normally concatenated English compounds increases the ease
of word recognition using lexical decision task and concluded that the processing benefit arose due to the spaces
aiding in decomposition by making it easier to detect the
constituents. However, if the majority of the stimuli were
transparent compounds, then the processing benefit for
these items might have masked any processing deficits
(due to interference between the computed and lexicalized
meanings) that might have occurred for opaque compounds. The outcome of subsequent work on the role of
semantic transparency is inconclusive. Whereas Juhasz
(2007) found an effect of semantic transparency on gaze
duration, Frisson, Niswander-Klement, and Pollatsek
(2008) only found this effect when the constituents were
separated by a space.
In the current experiment, if the processing advantage
for compounds observed in Experiments 1-3 was due to
facilitatory links among the lexical representations of compounds and their constituents, then both opaque and transparent compounds should show a processing advantage
relative to monomorphemic words, and this advantage
should be larger than that observed in Experiments 1-3.
According to the meaning construction explanation, however, the advantage for opaque compounds over monomorphemic words should be reduced or removed because the
spaces should speed up access of the constituents and,
thereby, make the constructed meaning more readily available. For opaque compounds, the availability of the computed meaning(s) would cause increased interference
with the lexicalized meaning. Due to the use of inter-word
spacing, which will allow the semantic composition process to be more readily initiated, responses in this experiment should be more reflective of the integration process
(which has associated costs) than of the lexical activation
process (which is beneficial to activating the compound's
meaning). Thus, the processing advantage for opaque compounds relative to monomorphemic words should disappear or even turn into a disadvantage.
As in Experiment 3, we examined the influence of constituent frequency on ease of processing. If the processing
advantage of compounds relative to monomorphemic
words is due to the activation of lexical representations
of the constituents aiding in the activation of the lexical
representation of the whole-word, then constituent frequency should be negatively correlated with response
time; higher frequency constituents should be accessed
more readily than low frequency ones, and thus should
speed up access of the whole-word representation. However, if the semantic representations also become available
and are used to compose a meaning, then high frequency
constituents should be beneficial for transparent compounds, but problematic for opaque compounds.

Method
Materials
During a pre-test, 37 participants provided semantic
transparency ratings for 135 compounds from the CELEX
database. The scale ranged from 1 (``totally opaque'') to 7
(``totally transparent''). Based on these ratings, 36 pairs of
transparent and opaque compounds were selected for
inclusion in the current experiment and in Experiments 5
and 6. The mean rating for the transparent compounds
was 5.57 and the mean rating for the opaque compounds
was 3.09. Of the 36 opaque compounds, 17 were fully opaque, and 19 were partially opaque (10 items were TO and 9
were OT).
As in Experiment 3, the compounds were matched with
monomorphemic words and, thus, the experimental items
consisted of 72 compounds and 36 monomorphemic
words. Each triple was matched on lemma frequency, surface frequency, number of letters, and number of syllables.
The two compound conditions did not differ in first and
second constituent frequency. A space was inserted into
the two types of compounds to separate the constituents
(e.g., rose bud). A space was also inserted into monomorphemic word stimuli (e.g., ecli pse, sopho more, plank ton)
to avoid strategic responses based on the appearance of
spaces. See Appendix C for a list of materials and stimulus
characteristics.
A set of 108 nonword filler items was also constructed
so that the number of yes and no responses was balanced
in the experiment. These items were constructed to mimic
the format of the experimental items. Therefore, 72 nonwords used compound formats and were constructed by
randomly pairing two real words (e.g, word wine); a space
was inserted between the two constituents of the compound nonwords. The remaining 36 nonwords were constructed to match the monomorphemic experimental
items in terms of the lexical status of the two parts of
the word that resulted from inserting a space into these
items. To illustrate, inserting a space into the monomorphemic words produced either two words (e.g., plankton
was presented as plank ton), two nonwords (e.g., broccoli
was presented as bro ccoli), or a nonword and a word
(e.g., jasmine was presented as jas mine). The nonword fillers were constructed to match these three patterns. Thus,
18 filler items consisted of a nonword and word (e.g., aru
hike and map rotun) because 18 of the monomorphemic
words took this format (e.g., sopho more and man dolin).
Likewise, 13 filler items consisted of two nonwords (e.g.,
kan fidole) because 13 monomorphemic words took this
format (e.g., hibis cus), and 5 filler items consisted of two
words (e.g., flint pub), because 5 monomorphemic words
took this format (e.g., plank ton).

Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure used in
Experiments 1-3. In the instructions, participants were
told ``Your job is to decide whether a letter string (e.g.,
por trait, or steel worker) is a word. You will notice that
a space is inserted into each letter string. Please ignore
the space as if it does not exist.''

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Participants
Twenty-eight undergraduates participated in the study
for partial course credit. The data from nine participants
were excluded due to overall slow responses (mean response time greater than 1.5 s).

Results and discussion
Reaction times more than 2.5 standard deviations away
from the condition mean were removed (2.9% of correct responses). The descriptive statistics for the experimental
items are shown in Table 5 and the by-item RT and accuracy
are shown in Appendix C. Accuracy for the compound-like
nonwords and monomorphemic-like nonwords was 91%
(SE = 1) and 93% (SE = 1).
LME analyses were conducted on the RT and accuracy
data (see Experiment 3 for details). Relative to monomorphemic words, transparent compounds were responded
to more quickly, 95% confidence interval ( .13, .04),
t = 3.25, p < .001, and received more correct responses,
z = 2.27, p < .05. In contrast, there was no evidence for an
advantage for opaque compounds relative to monomorphemic words in either response time or accuracy. Transparent compounds were responded to more quickly than
were opaque compounds, 95% confidence interval ( .10,
.009), t = 2.20, p < .05, and received more correct responses, z = 2.41, p < .05.
As in Experiments 1-3, neither log lemma frequency,
nor log surface frequency interacted with word-type,
which indicates that our results are not restricted to items
in a particular frequency range. For the compounds, log response time was negatively correlated with log lemma frequency, r = .11, p < .0002, and with log surface frequency,
r = .07, p < .05.
To further test whether the semantic representations of
the constituents were involved in compound processing,
we examined whether the availability of the constituents
affected the ease with which the compound could be processed. First constituent log lemma frequency interacted
with semantic transparency, t = 3.84, p = .001, and thus
separate analyses were conducted for each compound
type. High frequency first constituents were associated
with faster response times for transparent compounds,
r = .14, p < .0003. In contrast, high frequency first constituents were associated with slower response times for opaque compounds, r = .14, p < .0009. A separate set of
analyses revealed that second constituent log lemma frequency did not interact with semantic transparency, t < 1,
and the correlation between the log lemma frequency of
the second constituent and log response time for the compounds was not significant, r = .03, p = .25.

Table 5
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%)
with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 4.
Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

Transparent compound
Opaque compound
Monomorpheme

6.66 (.03)
6.72 (.03)
6.75 (.03)

810 (25)
867 (25)
882 (29)

92 (1)
84 (2)
87 (2)

415

To conclude, inserting spaces into compound words
facilitates morphological parsing which would make the
lexical representations of the constituents more readily
available and, thereby, boost activation to the whole-word
representation due to facilitative links among the constituents and the whole-word. This activation should have been
beneficial for both transparent and opaque compounds
(Libben, 1998; Zwitserlood, 1994), but, contrary to this
prediction, we found that this manipulation removed the
processing advantage that was previously observed in the
RT data from Experiment 3 for opaque compounds. Moreover, the correlation analyses indicated that constituent
frequencies played different roles in transparent and
opaque compound processing; high-frequency first
constituents were associated with faster responses to
transparent compounds but slower responses to opaque
compounds.
Taken together, the data indicate that there is a processing cost associated with semantic composition for the opaque compounds. These findings are best accounted for by a
meaning-construction framework, such as the one proposed in Gagne and Spalding (2004, 2006, 2009, 2010), that
considers the impact of composition on ease of processing.
In the case of opaque compound processing, the meaning
computed by the decomposition route conflicts with the
meaning retrieved by direct access, and this appears to offset facilitation due to increased activation at the lexical
level.

Experiment 5
In the current experiment, we promote decomposition
by presenting the two constituents of compounds in different colors (red and black). The color contrast of the two
constituents should make morphological parsing easier
and, thereby, accelerate meaning construction. The
predictions concerning the influence of word-type and of
constituent word frequency mirror those made for
Experiment 4.
Method
Materials
The experimental and filler items (108 of each) were
identical to those used in Experiment 4 except that color,
rather than a space, was used to visually divide the word
into two parts. Half of the participants saw the first part
of the stimulus in red and the second part of the stimulus
in black, and half saw the reverse. Word-type (i.e., monomorphemic word, transparent compound, and opaque
compound) was a within-subject factor. The filler items
were presented in a similar way as their corresponding
experimental items in terms of constituent colors. See
Appendix C for a list of materials and stimulus
characteristics.
Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure used in
Experiments 1-4.

416

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Participants
Forty undergraduates participated in the study for partial course credit. The data from four participants were excluded due to low accuracy (less than 60%) or slow
responses (mean response times greater than 1.5 s). In
terms of the between-subjects variable (i.e., color contrast),
there were 17 participants in each group for the analyses.

Results and discussion
Reaction times more than 2.5 standard deviations away
from the condition mean as well as six additional trials
(three with response times greater than 4 s, and three with
responses less than 200 ms) were removed (2.9% of correct
responses). The descriptive statistics for the experimental
items are shown in Table 6. The by-item RT and accuracy
are shown in Appendix C. Accuracy for the compound-like
nonwords and monomorphemic-like nonwords was 90%
(SE = 2) and 95% (SE = 2) respectively when the first constituent was presented in black, and were 92% (SE = 2)
and 94% (SE = 2) respectively when the first constituent
was presented in red.
LME analyses found no main effect of the factor of color
contrast; for response times, F < 1, and for accuracy, F < 1.
Also, color contrast and word-type did not interact in
either the response time or accuracy analyses. Therefore,
the remaining analyses did not include color contrast as
variable.
LME analyses were conducted on the RT and accuracy
data (see Experiment 3 for details). Transparent compounds were responded to more quickly than were monomorphemic words, 95% confidence interval ( .09, .002),
t = 1.86, p < .05. In contrast, log response times to opaque
compounds and monomorphemic words did not differ. The
accuracy analyses showed no differences between either
compound type and monomorphemic words (p's > .10).
Relative to opaque compounds, transparent compounds
were responded to more quickly, 95% confidence interval
( .12, .02), t = 2.84, p < .001, and received more correct
responses, z = 2.69, p < .001.
A separate set of analyses revealed that neither log lemma frequency nor log surface frequency interacted with
word-type. Log response time was negatively correlated
with log lemma frequency, r = .15, p < .0001, and log surface frequency of the compounds, r = .13, p < .0001.
To evaluate whether the semantic representations of
the constituents were involved, we examined whether
the availability of the constituents affected the ease with
which the compound could be processed. First constituent

log lemma frequency interacted with semantic transparency, t = 2.58, p < .001, and thus separate analyses were
conducted for each compound type. For transparent compounds, log response time was negatively correlated with
log lemma frequency of the first constituent, r = .12,
p < .0001. In contrast, for opaque compounds, log response
time was positively correlated with log lemma frequency
of the first constituent, r = .12, p < .0001. A separate set of
analyses revealed that second constituent log lemma frequency did not interact with semantic transparency, t < 1,
and the correlation between the log lemma frequency of
the second constituent and log response time for the compounds was not significant, r = .02, p = .36.
In sum, using color to aid in morphological decomposition produced the same pattern of results as had been observed in Experiment 4. In particular, opaque compounds
no longer showed an advantage relative to monomorphemic words, and were processed more slowly than were
transparent compounds. In addition, the correlational analyses revealed that the processing of transparent compounds
was helped by the presence of a high frequency first constituent, but that opaque compounds were hindered by having
a high frequency first constituent. The overall pattern is
consistent with the view that semantic composition occurs
for both opaque and transparent compounds, but that for
opaque compounds this process produces a meaning that
conflicts with the conventional meaning.

Experiment 6
Experiments 4 and 5 used spacing and color to aid in the
morphological decomposition, and, in these experiments,
the processing advantage for opaque compounds relative
to monomorphemic words that was observed in Experiment 3 no longer occurred. Experiments 4 and 5 also revealed a processing disadvantage for opaque compounds
relative to transparent compounds. Thus, unlike Experiment 3, which more strongly reflects processing associated
with the lexical level, Experiments 4 and 5 reflect processing associated with the semantic and conceptual levels.
Are the visual manipulations used in Experiments 4 and
5 solely responsible for these results? The nonword compound fillers in Experiments 4 and 5 were constructed
from two real words and the use of these fillers might have
been sufficient to emphasize processing at the semantic
and conceptual level and, thus, for detecting processing
differences between transparent and opaque compounds.
To examine this possibility, the current experiment uses
nonword compound fillers constructed from two words

Table 6
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%) with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 5.
Color

Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

First constituent black
Second constituent red

Transparent compound
Opaque compound
Monomorpheme

6.61 (.02)
6.67 (.02)
6.67 (.02)

769 (16)
817 (21)
809 (16)

90 (1)
80 (2)
85 (2)

First constituent red
Second constituent black

Transparent compound
Opaque compound
Monomorpheme

6.61 (.02)
6.68 (.03)
6.64 (.02)

766 (16)
833 (21)
790 (16)

91 (1)
79 (2)
86 (2)

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

as the only method of encouraging decomposition and subsequent semantic composition. The predictions correspond
to those made in Experiment 4.
Method
Materials
The experimental and filler items were identical to
those used in Experiments 4 and 5 but, unlike Experiment
4, were presented without any spaces.
Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure used in
Experiments 1-5.
Participants
Thirty-two undergraduates participated in the study for
partial course credit. The data from one participant were
excluded due to overall slow responses (mean response
time more than 1.5 s).

417

thus separate analyses were conducted for each compound
type. For transparent compounds, log response time was
negatively correlated with log lemma frequency of the first
constituent, r = .11, p < .0003. In contrast, for opaque compounds, log response time was positively correlated with
log lemma frequency of the first constituent, r = .08,
p < .02. Unlike in the previous experiments, we found a correlation between the log lemma frequency of the second
constituent and log response time for the transparent compounds, r = .10, p < .001. However, this correlation was
not significant for the opaque compounds, r = .04, p = .18.
In sum, the results replicate the findings observed in
Experiments 4 and 5 and indicate that the processing costs
associated with semantic composition is greater for opaque compounds than for transparent compounds. In addition, the current findings suggest that the inclusion of
nonword fillers constructed from two real words is sufficient for removing the advantage of opaque compounds
relative to frequency-matched monomorphemic words.

Post hoc analyses
Results and discussion
Cross-experiment analyses
Reaction times more than 2.5 standard deviations away
from the condition mean as well as three trials with response time greater than 5 s were removed (3% of correct
responses). The descriptive statistics for the experimental
items are shown in Table 7. The by-item RT and accuracy
are shown in Appendix C. Accuracy rate for the compound-like nonwords and the monomorphemic-like nonwords was 90% (SE = 1) and 89% (SE = 1), respectively.
LME analyses were conducted on the RT and accuracy
data (see Experiment 3 for details). Transparent compounds were responded to more quickly than were monomorphemic words, 95% confidence interval ( .11, .01),
t = 2.08, SE = .03, p < .03. In contrast, there was no evidence
for an advantage in opaque compound processing relative
to monomorphemic words. The accuracy analyses revealed
no differences between monomorphemic words and either
compound type (p's > .05). Relative to opaque compounds,
transparent compounds were responded to more quickly,
95% confidence interval ( .10, .01), t = 1.98, p < .05, and
received more correct responses, z = 3.40, p < .0001.
A separate set of analyses revealed that neither log lemma frequency, nor log surface frequency interacted with
word-type. Log response time was negatively correlated
with log lemma frequency, r = .10, p < .0001, and log surface frequency of compounds, r = .08, p < .0006.
We also examined whether the availability of the constituents affected the ease with which the compound could
be processed. First constituent log lemma frequency interacted with semantic transparency, t = 2.28, p < .02, and
Table 7
Mean log response times, response times (in ms) and accuracy rates (%)
with standard errors for word stimuli of Experiment 6.
Condition

Log RT (SE)

RT (SE)

Accuracy (SE)

Transparent compound
Opaque compound
Monomorpheme

6.63 (.02)
6.67 (.02)
6.68 (.02)

782 (16)
818 (15)
825 (16)

92 (2)
81 (2)
87 (1)

Experiments 1 and 2 used the same set of experimental
materials but different fillers. Likewise, Experiments 4-6
used the same set of experimental materials but differed
in terms of procedure and/or fillers. An inspection of the
mean response times for these two sets of studies suggests
that cross-experimental differences might have differentially affected performance on particular conditions.3 To
examine this possibility, we examined whether Experiment
interacted with Word-type.
For Experiments 1 and 2, we found that the interaction
between Experiment and Word-type was statistically significant, t = 5.20, p < .001. Compound words were processed more quickly in Experiment 1 than in Experiment
2, t = 2.26, p < .01, but monomorphemic words did not differ across the two experiments, t < 1. These results confirm
that our manipulation of filler-type was successful in influencing the relative benefits and costs associated with
decomposition and semantic composition. It appears that
the use of nonword fillers that are constructed from two
real words (in Experiment 2) placed a greater emphasis
on the evaluation of the compound's meaning, which slowed responses due to additional processing requirements
associated with this evaluation.
For Experiments 4-6, we found an interaction between
Experiment and Word-type, F = 2.84, p < .05, but unlike in
Experiments 1 and 2, this interaction was due to the monomorphemic words. Monomorphemic words were processed more slowly in Experiment 4 (in which spaces
were inserted into the experimental items) than in either
Experiment 5 (t = 2.76, p < .002) or Experiment 6
(t = 2.05, p < .05). The various methods of encouraging
decomposition/composition used in Experiments 4-6 did
not differentially affect the two types of compounds; analyses conducted on the compound words (i.e., the transpar3

We thank Raymond Bertram for pointing out this possibility.

418

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

ent and opaque words) did not reveal any cross-experimental differences.
Influence of subjective familiarity
Ratings of subjective familiarity for the experimental
items used in Experiments 1-6 were obtained (see Gernsbacher (1984) and Juhasz and Rayner (2003) for a discussion
of subjective familiarity). The items were presented one at
a time, in a randomize order, on a computer screen and 58
participants rated the familiarity of the word on a scale
that ranged from 1 (``very unfamiliar) to 7 (``very familiar'').
See Table 1 for the descriptive statistics.
The conditions did not differ in terms of objective frequency, but they did differ in subjective ratings of familiarity in that the opaque compounds were rated as being the
least familiar whereas transparent compounds were rated
as being the most familiar. Why might this be? Past research has shown that ease of processing (sometimes
called ``fluency'') affects many measures of memory (Johnston, Dark, & Jacoby, 1985; Johnston, Hawley, & Elliot,
1991; Kelley, Jacoby, & Hollingshead, 1989). The judgment
of familiarity is precisely the kind of memory measure that
should be sensitive to fluency. Consider the task of the participants. They must judge whether they have seen this
particular word. How are they to make this judgment?
One possibility is that the word is familiar due to having
a high frequency in the language. But, for words that are
not highly frequent (as is the case for our items), the perceived ease with which one can process the word might
be used as an index of familiarity. If so, then familiarity ratings would be affected by factors that ease processing. Indeed, subjective familiarity has been shown to be affected
by some of the same variables that influence response
time. For example, it is affected by family size (Baayen,
Tweedie, & Schreuder, 2002; de Jong, Feldman, Schreuder,
Pastizzo, & Baayen, 2002). We found that familiarity rating
for our materials was predicted by number of letters, log
lemma frequency, and log surface frequency, and number
of letters interacted with log lemma frequency. Adding
word-type (e.g., compound and monomorphemic for
Experiments 1 and 2, and transparent, opaque, or monomorphemic for Experiments 3-6), further improved the
fit of a model predicting familiarity ratings. These results
are consistent with what one would expect given that subjective familiarity is a dependent variable.
Nonetheless it is possible to examine whether there is
an influence of word-type when familiarity has been added
to the LME model. However, as noted, word-type is one
predictor of familiarity; there is a strong correlation between the variables. Therefore, we used residualization to
remove the portion of variability in familiarity that is accounted for by word-type, and then used the residualized
familiarity rating as a predictor variable in our LME model.
For all experiments, residualized familiarity was a valid
predictor of log RT; item and subject were included as random factors. Next, we added word-type. For all experiments, a test conducted on the log-likelihood ratios
indicated that word-type improved the fit of the model
(all p's < .01). More importantly, tests conducted on the
estimates for the comparisons of interest (i.e., compound

vs. monomorphemic words for Experiments 1 and 2; transparent compounds vs. monomorphemic words, and opaque compounds vs. monomorphemic words for
Experiments 3-6) were consistent with those reported in
the results section of Experiments 1-6.
The same procedure was applied to the accuracy data
and, again, for all experiments, including word-type improved the fit of the model (all p's < .01). Tests conducted
on the estimates for the comparisons of interest were consistent with those reported in the results section of Experiments 1-6 with three exceptions. Including familiarity in
the model allowed us to detect a processing disadvantage
for opaque compounds in Experiments 5 and 6. For Experiment 5, the new analyses revealed that opaque compounds received fewer correct responses than did
monomorphemic words, z = 2.06, p < .05, whereas our
original analysis did not detect this difference. For Experiment 6, opaque compounds received fewer correct responses than did monomorphemic words, z = 2.07,
p < .05, whereas transparent compounds received more
correct responses than did monomorphemic words,
z = 2.06, p < .05; in the original analysis, the significance
of both tests was marginal. Thus, these analyses suggest
that when emphasis is placed on semantic/conceptual processing, transparent compounds show processing advantages relative to monomorphemic words, while opaque
compounds not only fail to show processing advantages,
but show processing deficits relative to monomorphemic
words in terms of accuracy.

General discussion
Although most current theories of word processing assume that morphologically complex words are decomposed into their constituents, the relative costs and
benefits associated with morphological decomposition/
composition are not yet clear. Therefore, the aim of the
current set of experiments was to examine the impact of
decomposition and subsequent integration on ease of processing. Experiments 1 and 2 revealed that compounds
were processed more quickly and accurately than were frequency matched monomorphemic words. Experiment 3
demonstrated that both types of compounds were processed more quickly than monomorphemic words. Experiments 4-6 found that experimental manipulations that
aided morphological decomposition removed the processing advantage previously observed for opaque compounds,
but did not alter the processing advantage for transparent
compounds. Unlike Experiment 3, Experiments 4-6 revealed that transparent compounds were processed more
readily than were opaque compounds. Experiments 4-6
also revealed that high frequency first constituents were
beneficial for transparent compounds, but problematic
for opaque compounds. These results point to the involvement of both lexical and semantic representations of constituents during the processing of complex words.
Furthermore, the availability of these representations can
either help or hinder processing depending on the relative
availability of the conventional (i.e., stored) and computed
meanings of the compound.

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

In terms of the access of the constituent's lexical representations, our data not only suggest that such representations are accessed but also that access to compound
constituents can facilitate compound processing relative
to monomorphemic word processing. In all experiments,
transparent compounds were processed more quickly than
monomorphemic words, which suggests that the availability of morphological decomposition due to the compound's
complex structure aids rather than hinders transparent
compound processing. In addition, Experiment 3 found
that opaque compounds were processed more quickly than
monomorphemic words. These results are consistent with
previous findings that indicate that lexical entries of constituents are accessed in compound processing regardless
of semantic transparency (see for example, Fiorentino &
Fund-Reznicek, 2009; Jarema, Busson, Nikolova, Tsapkini,
& Libben, 1999; Libben, Gibson, Yoon, & Sandra, 2003;
Monsell, 1985; Zwitserlood, 1994). This property of English
compounds might account for why decomposition contributes to an overall processing benefit for compounds relative to monomorphemic words.
Our findings also suggest that semantic transparency
influences the speed of compound processing and are compatible with previous results that show effects of semantic
transparency. The overall pattern of findings concerning
semantic transparency is contrary to what one would expect from a race-type framework in which response time
is determined by whichever route finishes first. Although
a dual-route framework provides an explanation for the
advantage for transparent compound processing with the
assumption of statistical facilitation, it is not readily compatible with the advantage for opaque compound processing over monomorphemic word processing that was
observed in Experiment 3. According to this model, no statistical facilitation should occur during the processing of
opaque compounds because opaque compounds can only
be recognized via direct access (Schreuder & Baayen,
1995).
A second explanation for the influence of semantic
transparency is that opaque and transparent compounds
differ in terms of whether the semantic representations
of their constituents are linked to the semantic representation for the compound such that only transparent constituents are linked to the semantic representation of the
compound (see, for example, Libben, 1998; Zwitserlood,
1994). At the lexical level, however, both opaque and
transparent compounds are represented as morphologically complex in that representations of the constituents
are linked to the lexical representation of the compound.
The assumption that there are facilitative links between
compound words and their constituents at the lexical level
can account for why both transparent and opaque compounds showed a processing advantage relative to monomorphemic words (Experiment 3). However, assumptions
made by this framework with regard to the semantic level
do not readily account for Experiments 4-6. When the presentation of the materials (Experiments 4 and 5) aids morphological decomposition (and, thereby, indirectly
encourages composition) or when the nature of the stimuli
encourages composition (Experiments 4-6), there is no
longer a processing advantage for the opaque compounds

419

relative to monomorphemic words. That is, when the
experimental setting is favorable to composition, then
the processing of opaque compounds becomes more difficult. Another problem for this explanation is that it is not
consistent with the finding that higher first constituent frequency was associated with slower response times for opaque compounds. Both findings are contrary to what would
be predicted if the processing advantage is due solely to
spreading activation among lexical representations, because the more quickly the constituents can be activated,
the greater benefit they should have in terms of boosting
the activation of the whole-word representation.
Thus, although some aspects of our results are consistent with some aspects of previous work on compound
processing (especially Libben, 1998; Sandra, 1990;
Zwitserlood, 1994) in that our results highlight the importance of distinguishing between lexical and semantic levels
of representation, these findings also emphasize the
importance of considering the impact of semantic integration and meaning composition on ease of processing. In
this regard, our data point to a third explanation, one that
departs from the previous theories in that it more heavily
emphasizes the role of semantic/conceptual information
and the process of semantic composition. In particular,
we suggest that our results are most compatible with the
theoretical framework initially outlined by Gagne and
Spalding (2004; see also Gagne & Spalding, 2009, 2010).
According to this framework, the language system will always attempt to compute a meaning based on a word's
constituents. That is, if conceptual information about the
constituents is available to the system, then the system
will attempt to use that information to construct a unified
representation (i.e., it constructs meaning). This assumption aligns with Schreuder and Baayen's (1995, 1997)
statement that the primary function of morphological processing is to compute meaning. Whether the computed
meaning is maintained depends on an evaluation process
that evaluates the various meanings available to the system and selects the meaning that is most appropriate for
the current context (Spalding et al., 2010).
This meaning-composition framework differs from previous approaches to compound processing in that it makes
more use of potential processing differences in terms of
explaining the data, rather than explaining the data in
terms of representational differences. To illustrate, previous approaches to compound processing, such as Zwitserlood (1994), propose that there are no links between the
lexical representation of opaque constituent(s) and
the corresponding semantic representation. For example,
the lexical representation of the constituent straw is not
linked to the semantic representation of STRAW for the
compound strawberry. However, this view is problematic
in that the processing system would need to know whether
a compound is opaque or transparent in order to prevent
the activation of the semantic representation (e.g., STRAW)
from the lexical representation of the constituent (e.g.,
straw) in the context of an opaque compound (e.g., strawberry) but allow the activation in the context of a transparent compound (e.g. straw hat) and in the context of other
words containing this constituent (e.g., straw or straws).
Therefore, in our framework, presentation of a stimulus

420

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

leads to the activation of the conventional (i.e., lexicalized)
meaning for that word, as well as to the activation of the
lexical and semantic representations of constituent morphemes. These representations are then used in a meaning
construction process.
In our framework, unlike other theories of compound
processing, the activation of the semantic representation
corresponding to an activated lexical representation occurs
regardless of whether the constituent is transparent.
Rather than explaining the role of semantic transparency
in terms of facilitation and inhibition among the various
levels of representations, we ascribe the influence of
semantic transparency to differences in the nature of the
processing that is afforded by transparent and opaque
compounds. In particular, the influence of the semantic
representations can be obscured due to conflict resulting
from the computed meanings based on these representations. If the lexicalized meaning and the computed meaning (or meanings, if more than one is possible) become
available within the same time frame, then the system
must evaluate which meaning is most likely. Previous research indicates that competition among potential meanings slows processing of novel compounds (Gagne &
Spalding, 2010; Gagne et al., 2005, 2010; Spalding & Gagne,
in press) and we assert that, in the case of lexicalized compounds, the conventional meaning might become one of
the competing meanings depending on the point at which
it is accessed (see Gagne et al. (2005, 2010) for evidence of
meaning competition during the processing lexicalized
compounds). On average, there should be less competition
between the lexicalized meaning and computed meaning
for transparent compounds than for opaque compounds
because there should be more consistency among these
meanings for transparent compounds.
Our framework, with its emphasis on meaning computation and on the retrieval of all available sources of information, is compatible with recent literature that
emphasizes the role of computation, rather than strictly
representation. In particular, it is consistent with two recent streams of evidence. There has been an increased
emphasis on computation and on the principle of maximization of opportunity (Kuperman et al., 2010; Libben, 2006,
2010). Libben (2006, p. 12), for example, argues in favor of
``. . . a mental architecture in which all representations that
can be activated will be activated''. Although the availability of multiple representations can introduce competition
among the various representations, there is often a net gain
to the system in that the availability of representations allows the system to be highly productive (Libben, 2010).
Similarly, Kuperman et al. (2010) argue for a multiple-route
model in which the language processing system attempts
to use all information that is available to it and suggest that
this information can lead to an overall processing advantage for complex words over monomorphemic words.
Other emerging evidence in the literature places an increased emphasis on the potential role of semantic information, and there has been suggestion that some of the
effects for complex words that were originally assumed to
originate from the lexical level might actually derive from
the level of syntactic and/or semantic assignment (e.g.,
Hyona et al., 2002; Lehtonen, Vorobyev, et al., 2006).

We should clarify that the competition between meanings is not due to interference between two competing
routes (i.e., between a direct access route and a meaningconstruction route) as is the case for some versions of
dual-route models, but rather is due to competition among
the potential meanings. That is, meanings compete with
each other regardless of how those meanings arise (e.g.,
whether accessed directly or computed) because the evaluation of potential meanings occurs in the conceptual system. This aspect of the framework is consistent with
existing literature which suggests that multiple meanings
are considered. For example, Gerrig (1989) compared the
time required to interpret familiar compounds (e.g., foot
race) when they were encountered in discourse contexts
in which the phrase used either the conventional reading
(e.g., ``a race on foot''), or an innovative reading (e.g., ``a
race the length of King Louis' foot''). The accessibility of
the conventional reading affected the readers' ability to
construct a new meaning; phrases that were more readily
interpreted with their conventional reading were more difficult to interpret with the innovative reading. Gagne et al.
(2005) found that the reverse is also true; recent exposure
to an innovative reading (e.g., ``a worm made of silk'') for a
familiar compound (e.g., silkworm) decreased the ability of
participants to view the conventional reading (e.g., ``a
worm that produces silk'') as being acceptable.
The meaning-construction framework is compatible
with the current data. It predicts that there will be processing costs when the constructed meaning conflicts with the
conventional meaning because this conflict must be resolved as the system attempts to settle on one meaning.
Most notably, in the case of opaque compounds constructed meanings must be suppressed in favor of the conventional meaning. Thus, even though the semantic and
conceptual representations of the constituents of opaque
compounds are activated during the processing of compound words, they might not be as helpful as the constituents of transparent compounds due to other aspects of
processing (such as integration/composition). Consequently, as observed in our data, it takes longer to process
opaque compounds than to process transparent compounds. This proposal also accounts for other aspects of
our data. In Experiment 3 access to the constituents benefited the processing of both transparent and opaque compounds relative to monomorphemic words, whereas,
encouraging the decomposition and integration process
(Experiments 4-6) led to processing difficulty for the opaque compounds. We suggest that in these experiments
promoting access to the constituents allowed for the early
construction of an innovative meaning (e.g., a literal meaning of jailbird) and, in doing so, made this meaning more
difficult to suppress in favor of the conventional meaning
(e.g., ``a prisoner''). In contrast, the processing of transparent compounds was not hindered (relative to monomorphemic words and opaque compounds) by this
manipulation.
Two main aspects of our framework are consistent with
other findings in the literature. First, the outcome of several studies point to a processing system in which multiple
interpretations are constructed and evaluated. For
example, Gagne et al. (2005) examined the processing of

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

transparent novel compounds and found that as dominance of a particular meaning (as measured by the percentage of people preferring that meaning) increased, the
time required to select the best definition for the compound (e.g., wool basket could be a basket for wool or a basket made of wool) decreased (see also, Gagne et al., 2010).
Libben et al. (1999) report that parsing choice for ambiguous compounds (e.g., clamprod could be parsed as clam +
prod or as clamp + rod) is driven by the relative semantic
plausibility of the parses. More recently, Koester, Holle,
and Gunter (2009) found that German three-word compounds with plausible constituents were easier to interpret
than were compounds with less plausible constituents.
Second, the outcomes of several studies suggest that multiple interpretations compete during the interpretation of
compound words. For example, in the aphasiological literature, there is evidence that processing compound words is
more difficult than processing monomorphemic words
(e.g., Makisalo, Niemi, & Laine, 1999), and Libben's (1998)
report of a patient with aphasia contains examples in
which the patient failed to suppress the literal meanings
of opaque compounds (e.g., blueprint was interpreted as
``a print that is blue'' and bellybutton was interpreted as
``a button in your stomach''). In addition, recent usage of
an innovative meaning for a familiar open-compound
(e.g. ``Kim decided it would be fun to make a silk worm
out of the fabric she had bought.'') interfered with the
use of the conventional meaning (e.g., ``a silk worm is
worm that produces silk'') in a subsequent trial (Gagne
et al., 2005). We posit that the data from these previous
studies might reflect a difficulty in terms of inhibiting the
innovative meaning.
In addition to accounting for the current findings, our
proposed framework provides an alternative perspective
on existing results concerning compound processing.
Empirical evidence about whether semantic information
about the constituents of opaque compounds becomes
available during compound processing has been mixed.
Sandra (1990) found semantic priming for transparent
Dutch compounds (e.g., brood, ``bread'' as a prime for boterpot, ``butter-dish''), but not for opaque Dutch compounds
(e.g., brood, ``bread'' as a prime for boterbloem, ``buttercup''). In contrast, Zwitserlood (1994) found a semantic
priming effect not only for transparent Dutch compounds
(e.g., kerkorgel, ``church organ'' as a prime for orgel, ``organ'') but also for opaque Dutch compounds (e.g., klokhuis,
``clockhouse'', meaning, ``core of an apple'' as a prime for.
huis, ``house''). However, she did not observe semantic
priming for completely opaque compounds. Both sets of
results were interpreted in the context of whether the
semantic representations are available during compound
processing. Sandra's results suggested that semantic representations of opaque constituents are not available
whereas Zwitserlood's results suggest that they are available. However, if one considers the role of integration, a
new interpretation of these apparently discrepant results
emerges. In Sandra's experiment, constituents served as
the primes and participants responded to both the primes
and targets. Recent exposure to bread might facilitate access to the semantic representation of butter and this
would speed the composition route which for opaque com-

421

pounds would yield an innovative meaning (such as ``cup
for butter'' and ``a cup the color of butter''). Conflict between the innovative meaning and conventional meeting
would (on average) slow response time to the target (e.g.,
buttercup) and obscure evidence of the semantic activation
of the opaque constituent. This conflict is not as evident in
Zwitserlood's experiments. In her study, compounds
served as the primes and the constituents served as the
targets. Conflicting meanings for the compound appears
to not affect the increased availability of the semantic representations of the constituents. Note also, in these previous experiments, the conflict did not have to be resolved
because the prime did not require a response.
This alternative explanation for these conflicting findings is derived from our claim that the greater emphasis
that is placed on processing at the semantic/conceptual
levels (by the experimental manipulation or by details of
the materials, as in Experiments 4-6, for example) the
more likely constituent availability is to cause processing
difficulty for opaque compounds. However, there are some
situations in which opaque compounds might not be disadvantaged by this emphasis. When placed in context,
for example, other cues from the context might reduce
competition from potential innovative meanings and opaque compounds might regain their advantage over monomorphemic words. Indeed, eye-tracking data conducted
with Finnish compounds indicate that opaque compounds
were not disadvantaged relative to transparent compounds
during sentence reading (Pollatsek & Hyona, 2005).
Although Pollatsek and Hyona interpret the lack of transparency effect as evidence that composition of meaning
is not an important part of a compositional mechanism
and that composition involves only the use of the lexical
entries of the constituent to access the entry for the compound, it is also possible that cues from the sentential context might have reduced the availability of an innovative
meaning and boosted access to the conventional meaning.
If so, then the increased processing costs associated with
the opaque compounds due to the construction of the
incompatible meaning would be reduced and would not
offset the processing benefits obtained due to the activation of the lexical representations of the constituents.
In sum, we suggest that the lack of transparency effects
obtained in Pollatsek and Hyona (2005) is due to the context
reducing the conflict between the opaque compound's constructed and conventional meanings. In contrast, the lack of
transparency effect in our Experiment 3 is likely due to the
fillers, which had a nonword constituent, placing more focus on processing at the lexical levels relative to processing
at the semantic and conceptual levels. This greater reliance
on lexical-based processing is another way in which the impact of semantic composition can be reduced. This explanation is compatible with the post hoc analyses of
Experiments 1 and 2 which indicated that responses to
the compound words were slower when the compound-like
fillers were constructed from two real words.
Two final issues warrant brief discussion. The first issue
concerns the extent to which our results are specific to low
frequency words because, in English, compound words are
generally low-frequency (see Andrews et al., 2004). Libben
(2005) reports that over half of the 1437 compounds in the

422

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

CELEX database have a written frequency of less than 1 per
million and that only 35 have a frequency greater than 10
per million. The frequencies of the items in our experiments range from 0.11 to 7.43 per million and, thus, span
the range of possible values for compound words. Moreover, in our experiments, whole-word frequency did not
interact with word-type. Therefore, the effects reported
in the current set of experiments extend across the full
range of frequencies for English compounds.
Second, opaque compounds differ in the nature of their
opacity: Some (e.g., dumbbell) are fully opaque, whereas
others (e.g., strawberry and shoehorn) are partially opaque.
The constructed meaning for compounds with transparent heads will tend to belong to the same semantic category as the concept denoted by the conventional
meaning. In contrast, the constructed meanings for compounds with opaque heads will correspond to a different
category than the conventional meaning; for example, a
computed meaning for turtleneck might be ``the neck of
a turtle'' and refers to a body part, not to a type of sweater. Whether the discrepancy in terms of category membership makes competition among meanings more
difficult to resolve is an empirical question. On one hand,
rejecting the incorrect meaning might be easy because
the two meanings are very different, especially when
the item is presented in context. On the other hand,
rejecting the incorrect meaning might be more difficult
because the various meanings are not easily alignable
with each other.
Concluding remarks
If compound word processing starts with morphological decomposition, then it seems likely that the process

ends with morphological composition and semantic integration. Our data indicate that the availability of constituent representations and the semantic integration of
those representations play an important role in ease of
processing. The theoretical aim of the current work was
to consider the consequences of this composition process
and to examine the balance of storage and computation
in compound word processing. Although it is commonly
assumed that morphological decomposition takes time,
the advantage for compound processing over monomorphemic word processing indicates that even if morphological decomposition per se is time consuming, the
overall processing time for complex words is not necessarily longer than for frequency matched monomorphemic words. In particular, access to lexical entries of the
constituents (which are generally higher frequency than
the compound) might facilitate processing. However, in
some situations, the composed meaning that results as
a consequence of having the semantic and conceptual
representations of the constituents available to the
system might compete with the meaning retrieved from
the stored representation and slow down word
processing.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a Queen Elizabeth II Doctoral Scholarship to the first author and by
NSERC Discovery Grants to the second and third
authors. We would like to thank Rachel J.J.K. Kemps
for useful discussions during the beginning stages of
this project and for her assistance with using the CELEX
database.

Appendix A
Word frequencies, response times and accuracy for word stimuli in Experiments 1 and 2. Note. RT = response time;
Acc = accuracy; Letter = number of letters; Syl = number of syllables; Surf = surface frequency; Lemma = lemma frequency;
Tran = transparency rating; Mono = monomorphemic word.
Cond

compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound

Word

eyewitness
newsletter
stepladder
goalkeeper
bandwagon
bartender
fairyland
handiwork
northwest
oversight
paperback
racehorse
riverside
shipowner

Expt. 1

Expt. 2

RT

Acc

RT

Acc

734
698
879
853
802
682
744
861
730
694
723
745
804
965

96
91
87
100
96
100
100
61
100
91
96
100
96
87

829
781
900
932
918
721
838
1084
825
841
786
813
770
1303

96
96
84
96
100
100
88
60
100
96
100
96
96
36

Letter

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

10
10
10
10
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3

0.95
2.79
0.73
1.40
0.89
2.29
0.73
1.90
0.73
1.06
3.63
1.06
0.78
0.73

1.12
3.41
0.78
1.51
0.89
2.40
0.78
1.90
0.73
1.12
5.53
1.68
0.78
1.01

4
5.5
6.1
4.7
2.9
6
5
4.4
6.5
4.2
3.8
6
5.9
5.7

423

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix A (continued)
Cond

Word

Expt. 1

Expt. 2

RT

Acc

RT

Acc

compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
compound
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono

sunflower
tightrope
waterhole
anteater
baseball
billfold
bookshop
campfire
charcoal
darkroom
eggshell
flagpole
folklore
footwear
goatskin
haystack
hometown
madhouse
password
pussycat
showdown
starfish
daydream
archway
bathtub
bulldog
coconut
doormat
earring
gearbox
hearsay
oatmeal
pancake
pickaxe
plywood
popcorn
rosebud
skyline
teargas
topsoil
cobweb
jigsaw
layman
seabed
teacup
pinup
guillotine
silhouette
tourniquet
thermostat
sophomore
badminton
persimmon
tarpaulin

613
849
667
851
693
805
696
621
729
700
689
688
770
711
762
644
700
726
635
721
717
636
693
811
693
674
688
729
758
757
875
709
672
1048
734
649
717
660
935
820
781
733
741
805
705
832
1032
878
1165
800
1044
761
1061
931

100
100
100
52
96
70
100
100
91
100
96
96
96
100
87
96
96
91
100
91
96
96
96
91
100
96
96
100
91
96
87
96
100
52
96
96
96
91
78
100
91
100
83
100
100
87
74
96
57
96
91
96
35
39

745
1073
787
1109
721
967
740
701
784
739
722
846
828
728
931
958
653
807
697
758
862
791
832
832
678
728
832
740
928
1113
1018
669
679
1131
804
663
812
808
958
849
1035
735
1084
1005
791
1025
1060
780
1093
932
759
696
1246
1168

100
92
100
92
100
40
92
92
100
88
100
100
92
100
76
92
100
92
100
92
100
100
96
96
100
100
96
92
96
68
88
100
100
60
92
100
96
100
84
92
88
100
72
80
96
84
92
100
60
96
92
100
36
24

Letter

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

9
9
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
5
10
10
10
10
9
9
9
9

3
2
3
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

1.12
1.23
0.73
0.61
6.15
0.84
3.97
1.23
5.36
1.01
1.45
0.89
2.46
1.51
0.78
0.95
0.95
1.12
1.28
0.61
2.29
0.89
1.28
2.23
1.73
0.95
2.23
0.84
0.89
0.61
1.17
2.07
1.34
0.73
1.68
0.78
1.23
3.18
1.12
1.79
1.06
2.46
5.87
1.34
1.17
0.73
1.17
2.57
0.61
1.40
0.67
2.51
0.61
1.62

1.73
1.34
1.01
1.01
6.15
0.84
5.81
1.40
5.36
1.01
1.73
1.06
2.46
1.51
1.01
1.17
1.06
1.28
1.40
0.61
2.29
0.89
2.74
2.68
1.90
0.95
2.85
0.84
3.30
0.84
1.17
2.07
2.57
0.84
1.68
0.78
1.73
3.35
1.12
1.79
2.18
2.74
6.87
1.34
1.79
1.06
1.23
3.63
0.61
1.62
0.78
2.51
0.73
2.18

3.7
5.9
5.8
4.5
3.8
3.6
6
5.4
3.9
5.8
6.5
5.8
2
5.8
5.9
6
6.7
3.4
5.6
3.5
1.7
4.9
5.3
3.9
6.3
3.1
2.5
5.8
6.5
4.8
3.3
5.5
3.5
4.6
3.8
4.6
5.3
3.9
4.6
5.8
3.3
2.1
2.7
3
6.3
3.6

(continued on next page)

424

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix A (continued)
Cond

Word

Expt. 1

Expt. 2

RT

Acc

RT

Acc

mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono
mono

turquoise
narcissus
crocodile
scoundrel
albatross
porcupine
stratagem
sphincter
mannequin
sentinel
mackerel
mongoose
tortoise
carousel
porridge
cashmere
throttle
plankton
billiard
ordnance
trombone
parlance
scaffold
jaundice
couscous
hibiscus
shrapnel
rickshaw
skirmish
treacle
syringe
sputnik
panacea
gristle
bailiff
gentian
satchel
console
liqueur
parquet
gazelle
sucrose
giraffe
compost
chinook
hatchet
fresco
anthem
guitar
herpes
falcon
bugle

733
1131
776
946
916
776
1237
1055
900
959
910
828
782
843
936
877
711
877
805
931
744
1445
845
955
1090
1048
1010
991
924
897
831
1121
1067
1140
1302
1787
1056
810
984
1176
803
969
787
787
841
796
995
920
681
859
792
957

74
48
96
83
83
96
26
57
61
83
78
100
74
96
74
87
96
91
100
22
87
26
83
74
48
65
57
70
83
22
100
43
22
70
17
4
74
96
74
52
83
96
100
91
91
96
48
87
96
91
96
65

994
1173
743
882
1058
842
1301
981
993
1094
1118
817
863
806
1013
941
730
947
786
983
915
1110
862
898
1144
1119
952
1043
948
1577
824
1240
1314
1010
1361
1522
1063
969
981
1169
876
880
869
888
849
876
1165
817
698
824
780
1278

100
56
96
100
84
96
24
68
80
72
72
92
92
100
92
96
96
92
100
44
88
28
96
84
44
76
76
76
88
12
100
72
8
72
56
16
72
92
56
44
100
96
96
100
100
100
52
92
100
100
100
72

Letter

Syl

Surf

Lemma

9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
5

2
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0.73
0.89
3.91
1.23
0.78
0.73
1.12
0.95
0.50
0.61
6.26
0.78
3.97
1.23
5.31
1.17
1.68
1.06
2.57
1.40
0.61
1.12
1.17
1.34
1.40
0.61
2.18
0.61
1.51
2.51
1.62
0.84
2.07
0.89
0.78
0.67
1.06
1.90
1.40
0.78
1.45
0.78
1.23
3.24
0.89
1.56
0.95
2.46
5.70
1.34
1.23
0.67

0.78
1.12
5.59
1.68
0.78
1.01
1.68
1.12
0.78
1.17
6.26
0.89
5.64
1.34
5.31
1.17
1.84
1.06
2.57
1.40
0.78
1.12
1.28
1.34
1.40
0.61
2.18
0.78
2.46
2.51
2.12
1.01
2.57
0.89
3.13
0.78
1.17
2.23
2.51
0.78
1.90
0.78
1.56
3.24
1.06
1.79
2.35
2.74
6.65
1.34
1.73
1.12

Tran

425

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix B
Word frequencies, response times and accuracy for word stimuli in Experiment 3. Note. Cond = condition; Transp = transparent compounds; Mono = monomorphemic words; RT = response time; Acc = accuracy; Letter = number of letters;
Syl = number of syllables; Surf = surface frequency; Lemma = lemma frequency; Tran = transparency rating.
Cond

Word

RT

Acc

Letter

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp

magpie
mayfly
linseed
backlog
cockpit
headway
lawsuit
pigtail
wedlock
alderman
wormwood
ironwork
namesake
pullover
smallpox
trapdoor
undertow
honeycomb
quicksand
scarecrow
peppermint
turtleneck
honeysuckle
hollyhock
dumbbell
hogwash
ragtime
jailbird
heatwave
hearsay
payday
airbed
teargas
keyhole
sunrise
oatmeal
rosebud
soybean
hairpin
eggshell
starfish
newsroom
inkstand
bathrobe
footwear
wildfowl
flagpole
notepaper
riverside
shipwreck
pocketbook
goalkeeper

901
972
1001
941
756
800
735
749
892
1006
922
756
779
707
768
764
869
747
756
797
717
775
787
992
830
889
892
847
732
952
682
846
1006
695
763
726
742
716
715
679
722
696
1046
701
726
888
705
702
822
734
774
824

81
78
33
48
93
93
100
100
81
81
81
93
70
93
100
96
81
100
100
96
96
93
96
41
93
85
78
100
85
78
96
81
81
96
96
100
100
93
100
93
100
96
70
100
100
63
93
89
96
96
100
93

6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
11
9
8
7
7
8
8
7
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
10
10

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
3

0.73
0.67
1.06
1.01
3.30
1.90
1.06
0.78
1.40
1.62
0.67
1.23
0.61
2.23
1.51
0.89
0.84
0.84
0.61
0.78
1.06
1.34
1.62
0.39
0.34
0.11
0.50
0.17
0.34
1.17
0.89
1.06
1.12
0.78
2.85
2.07
1.23
1.12
1.12
1.45
0.89
1.28
0.67
2.23
1.51
1.06
0.89
1.12
0.78
0.61
1.01
1.40

1.06
0.78
1.06
1.01
3.30
1.90
1.56
1.90
1.40
2.01
0.67
1.23
0.61
2.57
1.51
1.01
0.84
1.01
0.78
1.01
1.28
1.51
1.62
0.73
0.50
0.11
0.50
0.17
0.45
1.17
0.89
1.06
1.12
1.12
2.91
2.07
1.73
1.96
1.34
1.73
0.89
1.34
0.67
2.40
1.51
1.06
1.06
1.12
0.78
0.73
1.01
1.51

1.56
3.00
3.11
3.22
2.00
3.33
3.56
3.44
3.89
3.56
3.00
6.22
3.11
5.67
4.00
5.00
4.67
4.33
5.22
5.22
4.22
3.78
3.33
3.11
2.33
3.00
2.56
3.22
6.22
2.89
6.44
5.67
6.33
6.67
6.78
6.67
6.33
5.56
5.44
6.44
5.33
6.67
4.67
6.00
6.56
4.11
7.00
6.78
6.11
6.22
5.67
6.11

(continued on next page)

426

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix B (continued)
Cond

Word

RT

Acc

Letter

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono

stomachache
innkeeper
dunghill
handgun
dustpan
meatball
gatepost
seagull
poodle
larynx
sputnik
gristle
tempest
phoenix
giraffe
scallop
jasmine
throttle
mongoose
charisma
trombone
graffiti
pantheon
scaffold
broccoli
porcupine
sophomore
turquoise
guillotine
thermostat
cholesterol
mannequin
dandruff
raccoon
cheetah
nocturne
vermouth
lozenge

952
905
1175
721
724
707
931
737
677
1023
1309
1044
869
770
780
770
858
657
951
940
1027
924
913
907
700
798
980
832
1060
897
829
1092
738
779
824
1014
1019
1024

52
93
48
96
81
100
89
100
100
85
44
56
89
100
96
96
89
89
89
74
70
96
26
93
96
96
93
100
81
96
96
85
100
100
96
44
59
37

11
9
8
7
7
8
8
7
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
11
9
8
7
7
8
8
7

3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
2
2
2
2
2
2

1.40
0.39
0.34
0.11
0.45
0.17
0.34
1.01
0.73
0.78
0.84
0.89
3.07
1.90
1.23
0.95
1.40
1.68
0.78
1.34
0.61
2.46
1.62
1.17
0.89
0.73
0.67
0.73
1.17
1.40
1.40
0.50
0.34
0.28
0.56
0.28
0.56
0.78

1.79
0.50
0.34
0.22
0.50
0.28
0.61
1.51
1.12
0.78
1.01
0.89
3.30
1.96
1.56
1.84
1.40
1.84
0.89
1.34
0.78
2.46
1.62
1.28
0.89
1.01
0.78
0.78
1.23
1.62
1.40
0.78
0.34
0.34
0.67
0.39
0.56
1.28

6.56
5.78
3.78
6.00
6.44
6.78
6.22
4.11

Appendix C
Word frequencies, response times and accuracy for word stimuli in Experiments 4-6. Note. Word stimuli were given the
way they were presented in Experiment 4 when spaces were inserted; Transp = transparent compounds; Mono = monomorphemic words; for Experiments 4 and 6: RT = response time and Acc = accuracy; for Experiment 5: RT_B = response time of
words whose first constituents were presented in black color and second constituents were presented in red color;
Acc_B = accuracy of words whose first constituents were presented in black color and second constituents were presented
in red color; RT_R = response time of words whose first constituents were presented in red color and second constituents
were presented in black color; Acc_R = accuracy of words whose first constituents were presented in red color and second
constituents were presented in black color, Let = number of letters; Syl = number of syllables; Surf = surface frequency; Lemma = lemma frequency; Tran = transparency rating.
Cond

Opaque
Opaque

Word

bill fold
pussy cat

Expt. 4

Expt. 5

Expt. 6

RT

Acc

RT_B

Acc_B

RT_R

Acc_R

RT

Acc

933
768

63
100

792
682

47
100

996
757

35
100

883
783

48
97

Let

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

8
8

2
3

0.84
0.61

0.84
0.61

3.68
3.76

427

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix C (continued)
Cond

Word

Expt. 4

Expt. 5

Expt. 6

RT

Acc

RT_B

Acc_B

RT_R

Acc_R

RT

Acc

Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Opaque
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp

ear shot
base ball
coco nut
folk lore
cob web
band wagon
show down
pawn broker
moon shine
life buoy
fork lift
pan handle
flesh pot
foot fall
god son
may fly
back log
cock pit
head way
law suit
pig tail
wed lock
worm wood
name sake
small pox
under tow
honey comb
pepper mint
turtle neck
honey suckle
dumb bell
hog wash
rag time
jail bird
home town
ant eater
arch way
man power
hair cut
eye sight
tea cup
fairy land
farm yard
hover craft
north west
bear skin
barn yard
ferry boat
fox hound
wind pipe
pay day
air bed
key hole
sun rise

847
707
871
764
787
856
974
851
828
1265
890
871
790
868
1005
1008
1049
767
952
787
828
923
920
958
833
1020
750
728
818
793
827
975
863
787
772
879
882
807
675
777
642
905
748
875
786
871
746
961
792
830
808
837
821
758

95
95
100
89
79
89
100
53
100
32
95
95
26
74
79
63
84
100
100
95
95
84
89
79
100
79
95
100
95
89
89
79
63
95
95
100
100
95
95
89
95
84
100
95
95
84
100
95
74
95
100
68
95
89

768
610
697
817
866
785
881
977
778
1057
837
882
956
623
841
821
1071
723
914
802
811
894
912
980
798
991
773
654
699
754
847
1010
871
820
676
825
940
757
644
757
613
779
735
821
814
745
669
1066
798
859
666
871
773
687

82
100
100
71
88
94
100
53
94
35
94
88
12
35
76
35
53
100
88
100
100
76
47
82
100
76
100
100
100
88
94
82
71
100
100
100
76
88
100
100
100
76
94
88
94
100
94
65
71
94
100
65
100
100

827
692
650
778
868
806
872
871
751
1038
838
798
1293
773
989
1102
856
833
814
747
818
959
1056
970
720
1092
713
670
728
708
885
950
924
802
677
762
927
743
634
704
725
809
806
823
775
820
797
865
796
762
719
857
712
692

88
88
100
100
94
100
94
24
100
47
82
71
24
41
82
71
47
100
88
100
100
71
41
71
100
71
100
100
100
82
88
76
53
100
94
88
82
94
94
100
100
82
100
100
82
82
88
76
76
100
94
71
100
94

695
671
724
823
846
862
848
1050
776
1184
752
844
903
736
890
958
1001
786
842
707
786
908
845
925
763
847
688
711
729
826
845
874
802
766
8
8
7
8
7
8
6
9
8
10
9
8
8
9
8
8
6
6
7
7

84
97
97
97
90
100
97
48
100
39
90
90
19
61
58
58
65
97
94
100
94
77
71
84
94
74
100
100
97
90
94
71
65
90
100
77
90
94
97
97
100
90
87
87
97
87
100
81
77
100
97
81
100
97

Let

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

7
8
7
8
6
9
8
10
9
8
8
9
8
8
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
10
10
11
8
7
7
8
8
8
7
8
7
8
6
9
8
10
9
8
8
9
8
8
6
6
7
7

2
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2

2.63
6.15
2.23
2.46
1.06
0.89
2.29
0.61
0.95
0.17
0.28
0.50
0.06
0.22
1.28
0.67
1.01
3.30
1.90
1.06
0.78
1.40
0.67
0.61
1.51
0.84
0.84
1.06
1.34
1.62
0.34
0.11
0.50
0.17
0.95
0.61
2.23
7.43
2.35
2.74
1.17
0.73
2.29
0.78
0.73
0.22
0.45
0.56
0.11
0.45
0.89
1.06
0.78
2.85

2.63
6.15
2.85
2.46
2.18
0.89
2.29
1.12
0.95
0.17
0.39
0.50
0.39
0.56
1.28
0.78
1.01
3.30
1.90
1.56
1.90
1.40
0.67
0.61
1.51
0.84
1.01
1.28
1.51
1.62
0.50
0.11
0.50
0.17
1.06
1.01
2.68
7.43
3.07
2.74
1.79
0.78
2.51
0.78
0.73
0.34
0.61
0.61
0.56
0.45
0.89
1.06
1.12
2.91

2.73
3.86
2.70
3.49
2.59
2.62
2.59
3.81
3.27
3.89
3.86
3.32
2.54
3.19
2.65
3.16
2.65
2.00
3.03
2.92
2.76
3.70
2.84
2.78
3.16
3.89
3.54
3.84
2.97
2.70
1.70
2.08
1.86
2.97
6.35
5.76
4.84
5.43
6.24
6.35
6.22
5.16
6.14
4.78
6.51
5.68
5.35
5.03
4.11
4.51
6.24
5.14
6.03
6.46

(continued on next page)

428

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Appendix C (continued)
Cond

Word

Expt. 4

Expt. 5

Expt. 6

RT

Acc

RT_B

Acc_B

RT_R

Acc_R

RT

Acc

Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Transp
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono
Mono

oat meal
rose bud
soy bean
hair pin
star fish
ink stand
foot wear
flag pole
note paper
pocket book
goal keeper
stomach ache
gate post
hand gun
dust pan
meat ball
plank ton
hibis cus
ecli pse
mac kerel
cri pple
bil liard
buc kle
sopho more
shrap nel
tourni quet
tur quoise
tung sten
man dolin
manne quin
lime rick
pan creas
poo dle
la rynx
scar let
tem pest
phoe nix
gira ffe
sca llop
jas mine
mon goose
trom bone
cash mere
bro ccoli
porcu pine
guillo tine
thermo stat
chole sterol
dan druff
rac coon
chee tah
chip munk

852
776
790
720
741
1156
725
785
822
892
778
908
914
757
835
728
1045
1138
770
1145
736
859
714
826
977
958
802
1130
1105
898
1263
859
767
925
819
1050
869
813
826
766
882
919
945
787
751
990
860
832
812
759
770
884

100
100
100
95
89
47
95
100
95
100
89
100
74
95
95
100
89
68
100
74
100
95
95
95
63
63
100
68
79
79
47
84
100
68
95
63
95
100
100
95
89
84
89
95
100
79
95
84
95
100
95
95

663
755
748
720
713
1017
699
774
767
866
883
793
911
745
817
721
776
1096
745
936
735
737
784
912
856
984
782
920
1033
781
943
790
715
813
744
805
785
730
724
803
833
963
917
669
714
936
823
770
807
686
732
720

100
100
94
100
94
41
100
100
88
100
100
71
47
100
100
100
88
71
88
76
94
94
88
88
47
53
100
82
65
47
82
94
100
88
94
88
94
100
94
100
65
76
94
94
100
47
94
94
94
94
94
100

708
763
697
775
700
967
666
709
776
801
822
985
833
738
738
698
847
976
767
913
736
779
730
788
1033
1102
755
968
854
813
869
810
669
812
787
833
780
660
740
723
870
854
772
682
693
1021
843
760
730
679
768
710

100
100
94
100
100
59
100
100
82
100
94
94
41
100
94
100
88
53
100
59
100
100
94
88
47
29
100
53
82
76
71
100
94
100
100
88
100
100
100
94
82
82
88
100
100
53
100
94
94
94
100
100

7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
10
10
11
8
7
7
8
8
8
7
8
7
8
6
9
8
10
9
8
8
9
8
8
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
10
10
11
8
7
7
8

97
100
100
97
100
71
100
97
90
97
90
71
65
100
100
94
84
68
97
68
97
94
94
97
58
48
90
58
74
81
90
100
100
81
90
81
97
100
94
97
74
81
87
97
97
77
97
100
97
100
90
97

Let

Syl

Surf

Lemma

Tran

7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
10
10
11
8
7
7
8
8
8
7
8
7
8
6
9
8
10
9
8
8
9
8
8
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
10
10
11
8
7
7
8

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
2
2
2
2

2.07
1.23
1.12
1.12
0.89
0.67
1.51
0.89
1.12
1.01
1.40
1.40
0.34
0.11
0.45
0.17
1.06
0.61
2.46
6.26
2.07
2.57
1.01
0.67
2.18
0.61
0.73
0.39
0.56
0.50
0.39
0.50
0.73
0.78
0.56
3.07
1.90
1.23
0.95
1.40
0.78
0.61
1.17
0.89
0.73
1.17
1.40
1.40
0.34
0.28
0.56
0.00

2.07
1.73
1.96
1.34
0.89
0.67
1.51
1.06
1.12
1.01
1.51
1.79
0.61
0.22
0.50
0.28
1.06
0.61
2.74
6.26
2.79
2.57
1.90
0.78
2.18
0.61
0.78
0.39
0.61
0.78
0.39
0.50
1.12
0.78
0.84
3.30
1.96
1.56
1.84
1.40
0.89
0.78
1.17
0.89
1.01
1.23
1.62
1.40
0.34
0.34
0.67
0.11

5.59
5.22
5.68
5.97
4.97
4.11
6.11
6.24
5.81
5.62
5.43
6.41
5.68
5.59
5.51
6.46

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

References
Alegre, M., & Gordon, P. (1999). Frequency effects and the
representational status of regular inflections. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40, 41-61.
Andrews, S. (1986). Morphological influences on lexical access: Lexical or
nonlexical effects? Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 726-740.
Andrews, S., Miller, B., & Rayner, K. (2004). Eye movements and
morphological segmentation of compound words: There is a mouse
in mousetrap. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16, 285-311.
Baayen, R. H. (2007). Storage and computation in the mental lexicon. In G.
Jarema & G. Libben (Eds.), The mental lexicon: Core perspectives
(pp. 81-104). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to
statistics using R. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baayen, R. H., Dijkstra, T., & Schreuder, R. (1997). Singulars and plurals in
Dutch: Evidence for a parallel dual-route model. Journal of Memory
and Language, 37, 94-117.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The CELEX lexical
database (CD-ROM). University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium.
Baayen, R. H., Tweedie, F. J., & Schreuder, R. (2002). The subjects as a
simple random effect fallacy: Subject variability and morphological
family effects in the mental lexicon. Brain and Language, 81, 55-65.
Bates, D. M. (2005). Fitting linear mixed models in R. R News, 5, 27-30.
Bertram, R., Laine, M., Baayen, R. H., Schreuder, R., & Hyona, J. (2000).
Affixal homonymy triggers full-form storage, even with inflected
words, even in a morphologically rich language. Cognition, 74,
B13-B25.
Bertram, R., Laine, M., & Karvinen, K. (1999). The interplay of word
formation type, affixal homonymy, and productivity in lexical
processing: Evidence from a morphologically rich language. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 213-226.
Burani, C., & Thornton, A. M. (2003). The interplay of root, suffix and
whole-word frequency in processing derived words. In H. Baayen & R.
Schreuder (Eds.), Morphological structure in language processing
(pp. 157-208). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Butterworth, B. (1983). Lexical representation. In B. Butterworth (Ed.),
Language production (pp. 257-294). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Caramazza, A., Laudanna, A., & Romani, C. (1988). Lexical access and
inflectional morphology. Cognition, 28, 297-332.
Chialant, D., & Caramazza, A. (1995). Where is morphology and how is it
processed? The case of written word recognition. In L. B. Feldman
(Ed.), Morphological aspects of language processing (pp. 55-76).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
de Jong, N. H., Feldman, L. B., Schreuder, R., Pastizzo, M., & Baayen, R. H.
(2002). The processing and representation of Dutch and English
compounds: Peripheral morphological and central orthographic
effects. Brain and Language, 81, 555-567.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence
production. Psychological Review, 93, 283-321.
Drieghe, D., Pollatsek, A., Juhasz, B. J., & Rayner, K. (2010). Parafoveal
processing during reading is reduced across a morphological
boundary. Cognition, 116, 136-142.
Fiorentino, R., & Fund-Reznicek, E. (2009). Masked morphological priming
of compound constituents. The Mental Lexicon, 4, 159-193.
Fiorentino, R., & Poeppel, D. (2007). Compound words and structure in the
lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 22, 953-1000.
Frauenfelder, U. H., & Schreuder, R. (1991). Constraining psycholinguistic
models of morphological processing and representation: The role of
productivity. In G. Booji & J. van Marle (Eds.), Yearbook of morphology
(pp. 165-183). Kluwer: Dordrecht.
Frisson, S., Niswander-Klement, E., & Pollatsek, A. (2008). The role of
semantic transparency in the processing of English compound words.
British Journal of Psychology, 99, 87-107.
Gagne, C. L., Marchak, K. A., & Spalding, T. L. (2010). Meaning
predictability and compound interpretation: A psycholinguistic
investigation. Word Structure, 3, 234-251.
Gagne, C. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic relations on the
comprehension of modifier-noun combinations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Gagne, C. L., & Spalding, T. L. (2004). Effect of relation availability on the
interpretation and access of familiar noun-noun compounds. Brain
and Language, 90, 478-486.
Gagne, C. L., & Spalding, T. L. (2006). Using conceptual combination
research to better understand novel compound words. SKASE Journal
of Theoretical Linguistics, 3, 9-16.

429

Gagne, C. L., & Spalding, T. L. (2009). Constituent integration during the
processing of compound words: Does it involve the use of relational
structures? Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 20-35.
Gagne, C. L., & Spalding, T. L. (2010). Relational competition during
compound interpretation. In S. Scalise & I. Vogel (Eds.), Crossdisciplinary issues in compounding (pp. 287-300). Amsterdam/
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gagne, C. L., Spalding, T. L., Figueredo, L., & Mullaly, A. C. (2009). Does
snow man prime plastic snow? The effect of constituent position in
using relational information during the interpretation of modifier-
noun phrases. The Mental Lexicon, 4, 41-76.
Gagne, C. L., Spalding, T. L., & Gorrie, M. C. (2005). Sentential context and
the interpretation of familiar open-compounds and novel modifier-
noun phrases. Language and Speech, 48, 203-221.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1984). Resolving 20 years of inconsistent interactions
between lexical familiarity and orthography, concreteness, and
polysemy. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 256-281.
Gerrig, R. J. (1989). The time-course of sense creation. Memory &
Cognition, 17, 194-207.
Giraudo, H., & Grainger, J. (2001). Priming complex words: Evidence for
supralexical representation of morphology. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 127-131.
Grainger, J., Cole, P., & Segui, J. (1991). Masked morphological priming in
visual word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 30,
370-384.
Hudson, P. T. W., & Buijs, D. (1995). Left-To-Right processing of
derivational morphology. In L. B. Feldman (Ed.), Morphological
aspects of language processing (pp. 383-396). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Hyona, J., & Pollatsek, A. (1998). Reading Finnish compound words: Eye
fixations are affected by component morphemes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24,
1612-1627.
Hyona, J., Vainio, S., & Laine, M. (2002). A morphological effect obtains for
isolated words but not for words in sentence context. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 14, 417-433.
Inhoff, A. W., Briihl, D., & Schwartz, J. (1996). Compound word effects
differ in reading, on-line naming, and delayed naming tasks. Memory
& Cognition, 24, 466-476.
Inhoff, A. W., Radach, R., & Heller, D. (2000). Complex compounds in
German: Interword spaces facilitate segmentation but hinder
assignment of meaning. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 23-50.
Jarema, G., Busson, C., Nikolova, R., Tsapkini, K., & Libben, G. (1999).
Processing compounds: A cross-linguistic study. Brain and Language,
68, 362-369.
Johnston, W. A., Dark, V. J., & Jacoby, L. L. (1985). Perceptual fluency and
recognition judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 11, 3-11.
Johnston, W. A., Hawley, K. J., & Elliot, J. M. G. (1991). Contribution of
perceptual fluency to recognition judgments. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 210-223.
Juhasz, B. J. (2006). Effects of word length and sentence context on
compound word recognition: An eye movement investigation.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 67(4-B), 2252B. (UMI No.
3215917).
Juhasz, B. J. (2007). The influence of semantic transparency on eye
movements during English compound word recognition. In R. P. G.
Van Gompel, M. H. Fischer, W. S. Murray, & R. L. Hill (Eds.), Eye
movements: A window on mind and brain (pp. 373-390). Oxford, UK:
Elsevier.
Juhasz, B. J., & Berkowitz, R. N. (2011). Effects of morphological families on
English compound word recognition: A multi-task investigation.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 26, 653-682.
Juhasz, B. J., Inhoff, A. W., & Rayner, K. (2005). The role of interword spaces
in the processing of English compound words. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 20, 291-316.
Juhasz, B. J., & Rayner, K. (2003). Investigating the effects of a set of
intercorrelated variables on eye fixation durations in reading. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29,
1312-1318.
Juhasz, B. J., Starr, M. S., Inhoff, A. W., & Placke, L. (2003). The effects of
morphology on the processing of compound words: Evidence from
naming, lexical decisions and eye fixations. British Journal of
Psychology, 94, 223-244.
Juhasz, B. J., White, S. J., Liversedge, S. P., & Rayner, K. (2008). Eye
movements and the use of parafoveal word length information in
reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and
Performance, 34, 1560-1579.

430

H. Ji et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 65 (2011) 406-430

Kelley, C. M., Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1989). Direct versus indirect
tests of memory for source: Judgments of modality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,
1101-1108.
Koester, D., Gunter, T. C., & Wagner, S. (2007). The morphosyntactic
decomposition and semantic composition of German compound
words investigated by ERPs. Brain and Language, 203, 64-79.
Koester, D., Holle, H., & Gunter, T. C. (2009). Electrophysiological evidence
for incremental lexical-semantic integration in auditory compound
comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 47, 1854-1864.
Kuperman, V., Bertram, R., & Baayen, R. H. (2010). Processing trade-offs in
the reading of Dutch derived words. Journal of Memory and Language,
62, 83-97.
Kuperman, V., Schrueder, R., Bertram, R., & Baayen, R. H. (2009). Reading
polymorphemic Dutch compounds: Toward a multiple route model of
lexical processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 35, 876-895.
Laine, M., Niemi, J., Koivuselka-Sallinen, P., Ahlsen, E., & Hyona, J. (1994). A
neurolinguistic analysis of morphological deficits in a Finnish-
Swedish bilingual aphasic. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 8, 177-200.
Laine, M., Vainio, S., & Hyona, J. (1999). Lexical access routes to nouns in a
morphologically rich language. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
109-135.
Laudanna, A., & Burani, C. (1985). Address mechanisms to decomposed
lexical entries. Linguistics, 23, 775-792.
Laudanna, A., & Burani, C. (1995). Distributional properties of derivational
affixes: Implications for processing. In L. B. Feldman (Ed.),
Morphological aspects of language processing (pp. 345-364). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lehtonen, M., Cunillera, T., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Hulten, A., Tuomainen,
J., & Laine, M. (2007). Recognition of morphologically complex words
in Finnish: Evidence from event-related potentials. Brain Research,
1148, 123-137.
Lehtonen, M., & Laine, M. (2003). How word frequency affects
morphological processing in monolinguals and bilinguals.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 213-225.
Lehtonen, M., Niska, H., Wande, E., Niemi, J., & Laine, M. (2006).
Recognition of inflected words in a morphologically limited
language: Frequency effects in monolinguals and bilinguals. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 35, 121-146.
Lehtonen, M., Vorobyev, V. A., Hugdahl, K., Tuokkola, T., & Laine, M.
(2006). Neural correlates of morphological decomposition in a
morphologically rich language: An fMRI study. Brain and Language,
98, 182-193.
Libben, G. (1994). How is morphological decomposition achieved?
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 369-391.
Libben, G. (1998). Semantic transparency in the processing of
compounds: Consequences for representation, processing, and
impairment. Brain and Language, 61, 30-44.
Libben, G. (2005). Everything is psycholinguistics: Material and
methodological considerations in the study of compound
processing. Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 50, 267-283.
Libben, G. (2006). Why study compound processing: An overview of the
issues. In G. Libben & G. Jarema (Eds.), The representation and
processing of compound words (pp. 1-22). USA: Oxford University
Press.
Libben, G. (2010). Compound words, semantic transparency, and
morphological transcendence. Linguistische Berichte, Sonderheft, 17,
317-330.
Libben, G., Derwing, B. L., & Almeida, R. G. (1999). Ambiguous novel
compounds and models of morphological parsing. Brain and Language,
68, 378-386.
Libben, G., Gibson, M., Yoon, Y. B., & Sandra, D. (2003). Compound
fracture: The role of semantic transparency and morphological
headedness. Brain and Language, 84, 50-64.
Lukatela, G., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (1987). Lexical representation of
regular and irregular inflected nouns. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 2, 1-17.

Makisalo, J., Niemi, J., & Laine, M. (1999). Finnish compound structure:
Experiments with a morphologically impaired patient. Brain and
Language, 68, 249-253.
Manelis, L., & Tharp, D. A. (1977). The processing of affixed words. Memory
& Cognition, 5, 690-695.
Marslen-Wilson, W., Tyler, L. K., Waksler, R., & Older, L. (1994).
Morphology and meaning in the English mental lexicon.
Psychological Review, 101, 3-33.
Medler, D. A., & Binder J. R. (2005). MCWord: An on-line orthographic
database of the English language. <http://www.neuro.mcw.edu/
mcword/>.
Monsell, S. (1985). Repetition and the Lexicon. In A. W. Ellis (Ed.), Progress
in the psychology of language (pp. 147-195). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Niemi, J., Laine, M., & Tuominen, J. (1994). Cognitive morphology in
Finnish: Foundations of a new model. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 9, 423-446.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models in S and S-Plus.
New York, NY: Springer.
Pollatsek, A., & Hyona, J. (2005). The role of semantic transparency in the
processing of Finnish compound words. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 20, 261-290.
Pollatsek, A., Hyona, J., & Bertram, R. (2000). The role of morphological
constituents in reading Finnish compound words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 26,
820-833.
Raab, D. H. (1962). Statistical facilitation of simple reaction times.
Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 24, 574.
Sandra, D. (1990). On the representation and processing of compound
words: Automatic access to constituent morphemes does not occur.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42A, 529-567.
Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. H. (1995). Modeling morphological processing.
Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R. H. (1997). How complex simple words can be.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 118-139.
Spalding, T. L., & Gagne, C. L. (in press). Relation priming in established
compounds: Facilitation? Memory & Cognition. doi:10.3758/s13421011-0112.
Spalding, T. L., Gagne, C. L., Mullaly, A. C., & Ji, J. (2010). Relation-based
interpretation of noun-noun phrases: A new theoretical approach.
Linguistische Berichte, Sonderheft, 17, 283-315.
Stekauer, P. (2005). Meaning predictability in word formation: Novel,
context-free naming units. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Taft, M. (1979). Lexical access via an orthographic code: The basic
orthographic syllabic structure (BOSS). Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 18, 21-39.
Taft, M. (1994). Interactive-activation as a framework for understanding
morphological processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9,
271-294.
Taft, M. (2003). Morphological representation as a correlation between
form and meaning. In E. Assink & D. Sandra (Eds.), Reading complex
words: Cross-language studies (pp. 113-137). Amsterdam: Kluwer
Academic.
Taft, M., & Forster, K. I. (1975). Lexical storage and retrieval of prefixed
words. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 638-647.
Taft, M., & Forster, K. (1976). Lexical storage and retrieval of
polymorphemic and polysyllabic words. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 15, 607-620.
Taft, M., & Kougious, P. (2004). The processing of morpheme-like units in
monomorphemic words. Brain and Language, 90, 9-16.
Zwitserlood, P. (1994). The role of semantic transparency in the
processing and representation of Dutch compounds. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 9, 341-368.
Zwitserlood, P., Bolwiender, A., & Drews, E. (2005). Priming
morphologically complex verbs by sentence contexts: Effects of
semantic transparency and ambiguity. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 20, 395-415.

