Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Why do rereading lag effects depend on test delay?
Katherine A. Rawson
Kent State University, Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5190, Kent, OH 44242-0001, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 18 May 2011
revision received 7 March 2012
Available online 5 April 2012
Keywords:
Rereading
Lag effect
Spacing effect
Text comprehension theory
Retention interval

a b s t r a c t
In previous research, rereading after a long lag versus a short lag led to greater performance
on delayed tests but not on immediate tests. The current study tested two accounts of why
the effects of rereading lag depend on test delay. The levels of representation (LOR) hypothesis states that the effects reflect differential emphasis on encoding of higher-level versus
lower-level text information during long-lag versus short-lag rereading. The integration
hypothesis states that the effect reflects a greater degree of integration of encoded information during long-lag versus short-lag rereading. Across two experiments, 341 students read
a text either once, twice with a short lag, or twice with a long lag. Final free recall and cued
recall tests were administered either immediately or 2 days after study. Results disconfirmed the LOR hypothesis (neither the decreases in reading times across trials nor the
changes in free recall across timepoints differed as a function of information level in either
rereading group) and confirmed the integration hypothesis (performance on cued recall
measures of within-sentence and between-sentence integration was greater with
long-lag versus short-lag rereading).
O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Within the literature on spaced practice, research has
demonstrated that the effect of lag (i.e., the interval between presentations of a to-be-learned item) on subsequent performance often depends on the timing of the
final test. In particular, several studies using simple verbal
materials (e.g., word lists, paired associates) have shown
that performance on delayed tests is better after longer
versus shorter lags during practice, whereas performance
on immediate tests is no better or even poorer after longer
versus shorter lags during practice (e.g., Balota, Duchek, &
Paullin, 1989; Cepeda, Pashler, Vul, Wixted, & Rohrer,
2006; Glenberg & Lehmann, 1980; Karpicke & Roediger,
2007; Schmidt & Bjork, 1992; Spieler & Balota, 1996).
Rawson and Kintsch (2005) extended the finding that
the effect of presentation lag depends on test delay to
rereading effects with text material. In two experiments,
individuals read a lengthy text either twice in close succession within a single session (short lag) or once in each of
E-mail address: krawson1@kent.edu
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.03.004

two sessions separated by 1 week (long lag).1 Either immediately after the last study trial or 2 days later, final free recall and short answer tests were administered. In both
experiments, rereading after a long lag versus a short lag
improved performance on a delayed test but not on an
immediate test. Importantly, the difference was driven by
a sizeable drop in performance across the delay in the
short-lag group (55% in Experiment 1 and 56% in Experiment
2), whereas the long-lag group showed minimal or no loss in
performance across the delay.
Although no other rereading study has included the full
design needed to establish that the effects of rereading lag
depend on test delay, other rereading studies in which one
of the variables (either rereading lag or test delay) was

1
Rawson and Kintsch (2005) originally referred to these groups as
massed and spaced rereading, respectively. However, referring to consecutive readings of a lengthy text as massed is somewhat of a misnomer.
Given that the text was presented one section at a time, a functional lag of
several minutes intervened between presentations of a given section of
text. Accordingly, the differences in delays between presentations are more
appropriately described as short versus long lags, and this terminology is
adopted throughout the remainder of the paper.

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

manipulated provide partial replications of the basic pattern. For example, although Roediger and Karpicke (2006)
were primarily interested in testing effects, their control
groups involved short-lag rereading of short expository
text (their design did not include long-lag rereading
groups). Comparable to Rawson and Kintsch's (2005) results, short-lag rereading groups showed significant drops
in recall across delays of 2-7 days (33-52%). In a study by
Verkoeijen, Rikers, and Ozsoy (2008), participants read a
lengthy text one section at a time and then reread the text
either immediately, 4 days later, or 3.5 weeks later. On a
delayed recall test 2 days after restudy (their design did
not include an immediate test), performance was greater
in the long-lag groups than in the short-lag group. However, inconsistent with the basic pattern, two other studies
that manipulated rereading lag found that immediate free
recall was significantly greater after long-lag versus shortlag rereading (Glover & Corkill, 1987; Krug, Davis, & Glover,
1990). Thus, given that the full design of rereading lag and
test delay has only been included in one prior study and
that the results of partial replication studies are somewhat
mixed, one goal of the current research was to replicate the
finding that the effects of rereading lag depend on test
delay.
Most important, the primary purpose of the current
research was to address an important theoretical question:
Why do rereading lag effects depend on test delay?
Rawson and Kintsch (2005) tested one hypothesis
described below but failed to find empirical support for
the account, and no other research has directly investigated the theoretical basis for the interactive effects of
rereading lag and test delay. Accordingly, the primary goal
of the present work was to test two hypotheses for why
long-lag rereading is better than short-lag rereading on a
delayed test but not on an immediate test. Additionally,
each hypothesis provides an account of why short-lag
rereading leads to significant loss across a delay whereas
long-lag rereading does not.
According to the levels of representation (LOR) hypothesis
proposed by Rawson and Kintsch (2005), short-lag rereading involves greater emphasis on processing of lower-level
text content (e.g., details or peripheral elaborative information), whereas long-lag rereading involves greater
emphasis on processing of higher-level text content (e.g.,
main points). In brief, theories of text comprehension commonly assume a taxonomy of representational levels that
includes the surface level (a representation of linguistic
information including the particular words and syntactic
structures used in a text), the textbase (a propositional
representation of the concepts and ideas expressed in a
text regardless of the particular words and syntactic structures used to express them), and the situation model
(which extends beyond explicit text information to also include prior knowledge). The textbase is further assumed to
include a macrolevel (which includes the main ideas or gist
of a text) and a microlevel (which includes more specific
details or elaborative information contained in the text).
The LOR hypothesis conceptualized here is most closely
aligned with the distinction between the macrolevel and
the microlevel of the textbase. The LOR hypothesis was further motivated by earlier text comprehension research

871

showing that the memorability of text information across
a delay depends on the level of that information in the
hierarchical text representation. For example, Kintsch,
Welsch, Schmalhofer, and Zimny (1990) found that memory for higher-level information was relatively durable
across a 2-day interval, whereas lower-level information
was much less likely to be retained across the delay.
Based on levels effects of this sort shown in prior text
comprehension research, the LOR hypothesis assumes that
the relative preservation of recall across the delay after
long-lag rereading reflects primary emphasis on encoding
of more durable higher-level information. Furthermore,
the LOR hypothesis assumes that any advantage of shortlag rereading on the immediate test is due primarily to a
disproportionate increase in the encoding of lower-level
information, and that the sizeable drop in recall across
the delay after short-lag rereading reflects the loss of this
relatively fragile lower-level information. Concerning the
plausibility of readers attending to lower-level information, a text may include detail information that is peripheral with respect to establishing a central thesis or
supporting a main point but that is nonetheless interesting
or attention-grabbing for other reasons (e.g., the large literature on the effects of seductive details shows that readers
often pay unwarranted amounts of attention to interesting
but irrelevant details). Furthermore, Barnett and Seefeldt
(1989) proposed that students ``may plan to read once to
get an overview and a second time to fill in the details''
(p. 352).
To test the LOR hypothesis, Rawson and Kintsch (2005,
Experiment 2) used a text with target sentences constructed to contain primarily main points, important details, or unimportant details (further confirmed by ratings
in a norming study) and then examined recall for these target sentences immediately prior to rereading, immediately
after rereading, or 2 days after rereading. Several findings
weighed against the LOR hypothesis. In the short-lag
rereading group, the change in recall from immediately
prior to immediately after rereading was not due to a disproportionate increase in lower-level information (i.e.,
unimportant details), and loss across the delay was evident
at all three levels of information. In the long-lag rereading
group, the change in recall from immediately prior to
immediately after rereading was not due to a disproportionate increase in higher-level information (i.e., main
points), and preservation across the delay was evident at
all three LOR of information.
Although these outcomes provided initial evidence
against the LOR hypothesis, Rawson and Kintsch acknowledged that on-line measures of processing (e.g., reading
times) might be more sensitive to differences in level of
processing during rereading and that further work was
needed before the LOR hypothesis could be ruled out
definitively. Consistent with this possibility, outcomes of
regression analyses in several prior studies have shown
that various factors are differentially predictive of reading
times during initial reading versus rereading (e.g., Dunlosky
& Rawson, 2005; Millis, Simon, & tenBroek, 1998; Zwaan,
Magliano, & Graesser, 1995). For example, Millis et al.
(1998) found that normative ratings of sentence importance were a stronger predictor of sentence reading times

872

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

during rereading versus initial reading (but see Dunlosky &
Rawson, 2005, for a failure to replicate). Furthermore,
although Rawson and Kintsch (2005) is the only prior
study with the full design (i.e., both short and long lags
and immediate and delayed tests) that examined rereading
effects on retention as a function of information level, a
few of the earlier studies involving short-lag rereading
and immediate tests examined retention as a function of
information level but found mixed results. Amlund,
Kardash, and Kulhavy (1986) reported similar improvements in recall for main ideas and details, Bromage and
Mayer (1986) and Kiewra, Mayer, Christensen, Kim, and
Risch (1991) reported greater improvements in recall for
main ideas than for details, and Durgunoglu, Mir, and
Arino-Marti (1993) reported greater improvements in
memory for details than for main ideas. Thus, further
examination of recall as a function of level and additional
evidence from converging measures (e.g., reading times)
would be useful for more definitively ruling out the LOR
hypothesis.
Most important, although Rawson and Kintsch provided
some evidence weighing against one account of the key
pattern, their study did not propose or evaluate any viable
alternative. Thus, the primary theoretical goal of the current work was to propose and evaluate a new theoretical
account for why the effects of rereading lag depend on test
delay. Specifically, the interaction between rereading lag
and test delay may depend less on what level of information is processed and more on how the information is processed. According to the integration hypothesis, long-lag
versus short-lag rereading involves greater integration of
text information (regardless of level).
The integration hypothesis and the way in which it differs from the LOR hypothesis can best be understood in the
context of the construction-integration (CI) theory (Kintsch,
1988, 1998), the prevailing theoretical framework within
research on text comprehension. CI theory assumes that
because working memory has limited capacity, a text must
be processed in cycles involving the equivalent of roughly
one simple sentence at a time. Each processing cycle involves two phases. During the construction phase, a network is constructed that includes nodes representing the
ideas (i.e., propositions) explicitly stated in the text as well
as nodes for any related information that is activated from
long-term memory (including information from prior
knowledge or information from earlier in the text that
was encoded into long-term memory; activation of information in long-term memory is assumed to be based on
a promiscuous and dumb resonance-based process that
may activate both contextually-relevant and contextually-irrelevant information). The construction phase also
involves forming links between nodes that are related
along one or more dimensions (e.g., reference, causality).
The integration phase involves a spreading activation
process in which the strength of nodes and links are iteratively adjusted until the network settles; highly interconnected nodes accumulate activation and nodes with
fewer connections lose activation or are pruned from the
network altogether. At this point, the resulting network
is added to the text representation stored in long-term
memory. Working memory is then cleared, except for a

small subset of the most highly activated nodes that are
maintained to participate in the next processing cycle.
After a text has been processed, recall of any given proposition is assumed to be based on the cumulative activation
strength that its node accrued across the cycles in which it
participated. Additionally, any recalled proposition can act
as a cue to retrieve any other proposition with which it is
connected, with the likelihood of a given proposition
retrieving another based on the strength that the link accrued during the integration phase.
The CI theory provides the basis for the integration
hypothesis as well as a means for instantiating the contrasting theoretical assumptions of the LOR and integration
hypotheses. For simplicity, CI simulation models typically
start all nodes and links with the same baseline activation
value during the construction phase, and links between
nodes in simulations are typically based only on explicit referential connections (i.e., argument overlap, or the extent to
which two propositions share a common argument). However, CI theory allows for various factors to influence the
baseline activation of nodes, for links to be differentially
weighted, and/or for links to be formed based on other
dimensions of relatedness (e.g., causal, spatial, or temporal
connections between entities and events; see the eventindexing model, Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). Both hypotheses under consideration here assume that lag is one such factor, but each makes a different assumption about the locus of
the lag effect on the resulting representation.
According to the integration hypothesis, the representations formed during long-lag versus short-lag rereading
differ primarily in the quantity or strength of links formed
between nodes, with long-lag rereading yielding a more
highly interconnected network. By way of comparison,
Rawson and Kintsch (2004) simulated the effects of providing background information prior to reading on subsequent free recall by comparing models that included the
same nodes but with more versus fewer connections. In
contrast, the LOR hypothesis assumes that the representations formed during long-lag versus short-lag rereading
differ primarily in the quantity or strength of nodes representing information at different levels. By comparison, Otero and Kintsch (1992) simulated individual differences in
the detection of inconsistencies during reading by comparing models in which propositions were differentially
weighted for importance.
The integration hypothesis is further motivated by earlier text comprehension research showing that more highly
integrated or coherent representations are more memorable (e.g., Britton & Gulgoz, 1991; Dooling & Lachman,
1971; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996),
presumably because integrated representations provide a
retrieval structure to support greater accessibility of units
of information within that structure via the interconnections between propositions (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). Just
as the levels of representation effects shown in prior work
motivate the LOR hypothesis, these integration effects
shown in prior research motivate the assumption of the
integration hypothesis that any advantage of long-lag
rereading on a delayed test is due to greater integration of
encoded information, yielding a structure that would be
more supportive of recall particularly after a delay.

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

Although the integration hypothesis has not previously
been tested, its claims are consistent with recent findings
from a study using simpler verbal materials. Litman and
Davachi (2008) had learners study word pairs once, twice
with a short lag, or twice with a 24-h lag. Either immediately or 1 day after study, learners completed an associative recognition test including intact pairs and rearranged
pairs (i.e., both words had been presented during study
but paired with different words). Learners judged each pair
as intact, rearranged, one word new, or both words new.
Judging intact pairs as intact (II) indicated relational memory, whereas judging an intact pair as rearranged (IR) indicated item but not relational memory. On the immediate
test, II and IR response rates were similar for the short
and long lag conditions (and both were better than after
a single study trial). However, on the delayed test, II
response rates were greater for the long lag condition than
the other two conditions. Furthermore, the decrease in II
responses across the delay was more pronounced for the
short-lag condition than for the long-lag condition. Using
a cued recall format for the final test, Experiment 2 conceptually replicated the pattern suggesting greater relational
processing in the long-lag versus short-lag condition.
To summarize, the goals of the current research were
(a) to replicate the finding that the effects of rereading
lag depend on test delay, given that the full design has
been included in only one prior rereading study, (b) to provide further evaluation of the LOR hypothesis proposed by
Rawson and Kintsch (2005), and most important, (c) to
introduce and evaluate the integration hypothesis for
why rereading lag effects depend on test delay. To these
ends, learners reread a lengthy text either with a short
lag between readings or with 2 days between readings.
Half of the readers were tested immediately after the final
study trial, and half of the readers were tested after a 2 day
delay. The test consisted of free recall (Experiment 1) and
cued recall measures (Experiments 1 and 2).
To further evaluate the LOR hypothesis, the text was
presented one sentence at a time to allow examination of
reading times for target sentences containing three different levels of information (main points, important details,
and unimportant details). Given that reading times tend
to decrease overall from the first to the second study trial,
the predictions of the LOR hypothesis are most appropriately stated in terms of relative decrease across trials.
According to this hypothesis, the magnitude of the decrease will be smaller for lower-level versus higher-level
information in the short lag group, whereas the decrease
will be smaller for higher-level versus lower-level information in the long lag group. Recall of target sentences was
also examined, as in Rawson and Kintsch (2005).
To test the integration hypothesis, two cued recall measures assessed the integration of ideas both within and between sentences in the text, given that forming a coherent
representation requires integration of ideas within a sentence and also the integration of related ideas across sentences. Each intra-sentence cued recall item presented one
idea from a sentence and prompted recall for related information from that same sentence. Similarly, each inter-sentence cued recall item presented one text sentence as a cue
and prompted recall of related information from sentences

873

elsewhere in the text. The use of these measures is based
on the same logic that underlies the use of cued recall as
a measure of associative memory in basic research with
paired associates; to the extent that a connection between
a cue word and a target word is formed during encoding,
presentation of the cue word at test will facilitate retrieval
of the target word. Likewise, to the extent that a connection is formed between two propositions during encoding,
presenting one proposition as a cue at test will facilitate retrieval of the other proposition to which it has been linked
(for further justification and examples of prior research in
which cued recall measures have been used to evaluate
links between text propositions, see Black & Bern, 1981;
Myers, Shinjo, & Duffy, 1987; Singer, Andrusiak, Reisdorf,
& Black, 1992). These measures are also theoretically motivated by the CI theory described above, according to which
any proposition can act as a cue to retrieve any other proposition in the text representation with which it is connected, with likelihood of retrieval based on connection
strength. The key prediction of the integration hypothesis
is that cued recall performance should be greater in the
long-lag group than in the short-lag group, particularly
on the delayed test (when accessibility of information in
the text representation depends more heavily on the
degree of integration).
Experiment 1
Method
Participants and design
Participants included 187 undergraduates who participated for course credit in Introductory Psychology. Participants were randomly assigned to one of six experimental
groups, defined by the factorial combination of two independent variables: Study (single reading, short-lag rereading, or long-lag rereading) and Test (immediate or
delayed). Each group included between 29-34 participants.
Materials and procedure
The text (from Rawson & Kintsch, 2005, Experiment 2)
contained 79 sentences and 1541 total words, with a
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of 11.5. It discussed how Hollywood films often inaccurately portray history, explained
why, and then illustrated these points by comparing the
actual historical events of the Crimean War to those portrayed in the film Charge of the Light Brigade. Through
norming studies, Rawson and Kintsch (2005) identified five
sentences that expressed a main idea (e.g., ``Much of the
`history' that is portrayed on screen is fiction, not fact''),
ten sentences that expressed an important detail (more
specific information that further expanded or supported a
main idea, e.g., ``One important way in which history is fictionalized is by leaving out important historical events
altogether''), and ten that expressed an unimportant detail
(specific information that was not relevant to understanding the main ideas, e.g., ``The scene of the cavalry charge
was one of the most expensive scenes ever filmed at the
time'').
A desktop computer presented all experimental instructions and materials and recorded all data. All participants

874

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

were instructed that they would be reading a text entitled
``Charge of the Light Brigade: History or Hollywood?'' one
sentence at a time. They were informed that they could
read each sentence at their own pace but could not return
to a sentence once they had advanced. They were also told
that they would be given a free recall test (``you will be
asked to type in as much of the text as you can remember'')
and short answer questions over the material and were
encouraged to study the text carefully. Participants in the
short-lag group were told that they would receive a second
study trial immediately after the first, and participants in
the long-lag group were told that they would receive a second study trial 2 days later. All participants were informed
whether they would take the final test immediately after
study or 2 days later.2
Before reading the text, all participants completed a
brief prior knowledge assessment by responding to the following prompts: ``(1) What do you know about the Crimean War? (2) Have you ever seen the movie `Charge of
the Light Brigade?' If so, what do you remember from the
movie?'' No participant reported having seen the movie,
and almost all participants reported knowing nothing
about the Crimean War. Many said they had never even
heard of the war, and the three participants who reported
any information about the war were incorrect (i.e., they
stated that the war was in the 20th century, that it was
in Korea, or that it was in Greece in the 1500s). Accordingly, the results of the prior knowledge assessment will
not be discussed further.
Next, all participants read the text one sentence at a
time at their own pace. Each sentence remained on the
screen until the participant indicated s/he was done studying with a key press, at which point the sentence was replaced with the next one, and so on. Participants were
not permitted to return to previously read sentences once
they had advanced. After reading through the text once,
participants in the short-lag group immediately reread
the text in the same manner as initial study. Participants
in the long-lag group were dismissed and asked to return
2 days later, at which time they reread the text in the same
manner as initial study.
Participants assigned to the immediate test group completed the test immediately after the final reading trial (i.e.,
the first trial for the single group and the second trial for
the two rereading groups). Participants in the delayed test
group were dismissed after their final reading trial and
asked to return 2 days later to complete the test. All parts
of the test were self-paced. First, participants were first given the title of the text and asked to recall all of the information they could remember from the text. Next, they

2
Notifying participants in advance about when they would be tested
raises the possibility that students may have differentially processed the
texts when anticipating an immediate versus delayed test. Inconsistent
with this possibility, none of the reading time measures for initial study
differed significantly for participants expecting an immediate versus
delayed test in any of the study groups (including mean reading times
across all sentences, mean intraindividual standard deviation in reading
times across all sentences, and mean reading times for each of the three
kinds of target sentence, all ts < 0.96). Furthermore, participants in
Experiment 2 were not notified about when they would be tested and
qualitative outcomes are consistent across experiments.

were asked to complete the two cued recall measures. Participants first answered eight inter-sentence cued recall
questions. For this measure, participants were given the
following instructions:
For each of these test questions, you will be presented
with a sentence from the text. You should read the sentence and then type in whatever information from the
text it brings to mind. Unlike the previous free recall
test in which you were asked to type everything you
could remember from the text, here you should focus
on typing what the particular sentence shown to you
brings to mind.
For each question, participants were presented with one
sentence from the text as a retrieval cue.
After completing the inter-sentence questions, participants were then presented with 20 intra-sentence cued recall questions. For each of these questions, a sentence from
the text was presented with a phrase or clause missing,
and participants were asked to provide the missing information (e.g., for the prompt, ``Vickers nobly leads the cavalry charge, the Light Brigade, and succeeds in ________'',
the remainder of the sentence includes ``killing Surat Khan
amid the Russian troops with a cast of his lance, but falls
mortally wounded by the Khan's pistol shot''). Selection
of the 20 text sentences used for the intra-sentence questions was based on selecting sentences that were different
than those used for the inter-sentence prompts and on
selecting sentences that contained at least two major
phrases or clauses, to permit the use of one as a cue for recall of the other(s).
Scoring
In both experiments, all recall responses were scored
blind with respect to experimental group. Two raters independently scored approximately 10% of the protocols.
Agreement between the two raters was high (r = .91). The
remaining protocols were then scored by one rater. Scores
on the free recall test were based on the number of idea
units recalled (verbatim or paraphrase), with an idea unit
roughly corresponding to the central content of a clause.
For example, the text sentence ``Movies have a tremendous
power to shape what we know about history'' was coded as
containing one idea unit (movies can shape knowledge of
history), whereas the text sentence ``The British surrender
on the Khan's promise that they shall be treated humanely'' was coded as containing two idea units (British surrender to Khan, because promise of humane treatment).
The number of idea units per sentence ranged from 1 to
4 (overall, the 79 text sentences included 125 idea units).
For the target sentences, three free recall scores were computed, one for each kind of sentence. For each kind, the
number of idea units recalled from those sentences was
computed and then converted to a percentage of the total
number of idea units of that kind. For each intra-sentence
cued recall question, responses were scored as the number
of idea units from the missing part of the sentence correctly recalled. For the inter-sentence cued recall questions, each response was scored as the number of idea
units recalled from any sentence in the text other than
the one contained in the prompt.

875

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

Results
Comparisons of performance in the short lag versus
long lag reading groups are of greatest theoretical interest.
In contrast, performance in the single reading group is of
lesser interest for theoretical purposes (the primary purpose of including this group was to provide a baseline for
the conditional analyses of free recall as a function of kind
of target sentence, reported below). Nonetheless, analyses
of the full design are reported below for completeness, followed by the more important planned comparisons (Judd
& McClelland, 1989; Tabachnik & Fidell, 2001) of the short
lag versus long lag reading groups.

Number of Idea Units Recalled

Free recall
Data for one participant were excluded from analysis
because recall was more than three SDs above the group
mean. Mean free recall as a function of study group and
test delay is displayed in Fig. 1. A 3 (study group)  2 (test
delay) analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed significant
main effects [study group, F(2, 171) = 6.72, MSe = 175.17,
p = .002, g2p 1/4 :07; test delay, F(1, 171) = 10.91, p = .001,
g2p 1/4 :06]; the interaction approached significance
[F(2, 171) = 2.51, p = .084, g2p 1/4 :03]. Free recall was lower
after a single reading than after short-lag or long-lag
rereading on the immediate test [t(56) = 2.01, p = .025,
d = 0.53, and t(57) = 1.67, p = .050, d = 0.44, respectively]
and on the delayed test [t(59) = 2.05, p = .022, d = 0.53,
and t(56) = 3.89, p < .001, d = 1.02].
More important, planned comparisons of the short-lag
and long-lag rereading groups revealed that immediate
free recall for the two groups did not significantly differ
[t(57) = 0.81, d = 0.21], with the numerical trend favoring
the short-lag rereading group. In contrast, on the delayed
test, free recall in the long-lag rereading group was greater
than in the short-lag rereading group, t(56) = 2.15, p = .018,
d = 0.56. As reported by Rawson and Kintsch (2005), the
advantage that emerged for long-lag rereading on the delayed test was primarily due to substantial forgetting in
the short-lag group. Free recall was significantly lower on
the delayed test than on the immediate test for the
short-lag rereading group (a 49% decline), t(58) = 2.82,

p = .003, d = 0.73. In contrast, free recall did not significantly differ on the immediate versus delayed test in the
long-lag rereading group (a 3% decline), t(56) = 0.19,
d = 0.05.
In sum, the overall pattern replicated the basic findings
of Rawson and Kintsch (2005), in which rereading after a
long lag versus a short lag improved performance on a delayed test but not on an immediate test. Furthermore, performance in the short-lag group declined drastically across
the 2-day retention interval, whereas performance in the
long-lag group was relatively preserved. We now turn to
examination of secondary measures that test predictions
of the two hypotheses for why rereading lag effects depended on test delay.
Evaluating the LOR hypothesis: Recall of target sentences
Recall of target sentences containing main ideas, important details, and unimportant details are plotted in Fig. 2 as a
function of rereading condition. The leftmost data points in
each panel plot baseline recall for the single reading group
on the immediate test (left panel) and delayed test (right panel), to serve as an estimate of the relative accessibility of
information prior to rereading in the short-lag and longlag groups, respectively. In each panel, the middle data
points represent recall on the immediate test in the respective rereading group, and the rightmost data points represent recall on the delayed test in each rereading group.
To revisit, the LOR hypothesis assumes that short-lag
rereading leads to greater performance on the immediate
test primarily due to a disproportionate increase in the
encoding of lower-level information during rereading.
Inconsistent with this account, the gains in recall from before Trial 2 to after Trial 2 were not larger for unimportant
details than for main ideas or important details, with the
numerical trend in the opposite direction. A 3 (kind of sentence)  2 (recall before or after Trial 2) mixed-factor ANOVA yielded only a significant main effect of kind of
sentence
[F(2, 114) = 3.70,
MSe = 123.65,
p = .028,
g2p 1/4 :06] and a marginal effect of time of recall
[F(1, 57) = 3.16, MSe = 561.54, p = .081, g2p 1/4 :05]. Not only
was the predicted interaction not significant (F < 1), paired
comparisons revealed significant gains for main ideas and

Delayed Test

Immediate Test

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Study Group
Fig. 1. Mean number of idea units recalled on the free recall test in Experiment 1, as a function of study group (single reading, short lag rereading, or long
lag rereading) and time of test (immediately after study or after a 2-day retention interval). Error bars represent SEMs.

876

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

main ideas
important details
unimportant details

% of Target Idea Units Recalled

30
Short Lag

Long Lag

25
20
15
10
5
0
Before
Trial 2

After
Trial 2

After
2 days

Before
Trial 2

After
Trial 2

After
2 days

Time of Recall
Fig. 2. Mean percentage of idea units recalled from target sentences on the free recall test in Experiment 1, as a function of rereading group (short lag or
long lag), kind of target sentence (main idea, important detail, unimportant detail), and time of recall (immediately prior to the second study trial,
immediately after the second study trial, or 2 days after the second study trial).

important details [t(57) = 1.82, p = .037, d = 0.47, and
t(57) = 1.97, p = .027, d = 0.51, respectively] but not for
unimportant details, t(57) = 0.72, d = 0.19.
The LOR hypothesis further assumes that forgetting
across the delay in the short-lag rereading group primarily
reflects disproportionate loss of lower-level information in
memory. However, a 3 (kind of sentence)  2 (recall after
Trial 2 or 2 days later) mixed-factor ANOVA yielded significant main effects of kind of sentence [F(2, 116) = 5.59,
MSe = 107.07, p = .005, g2p 1/4 :09] and time of recall
[F(1, 58) = 5.21, MSe = 480.88, p = .026, g2p 1/4 :08] but no
interaction (F < 1). Not only was the predicted interaction
not significant, paired comparisons revealed significant
losses for main ideas and important details [t(58) = 2.56,
p = .007, d = 0.66, and t(58) = 1.93, p = .029, d = 0.50,
respectively] but not for unimportant details, t(58) = 1.33,
p = .095, d = 0.34.
Regarding the effects of long-lag rereading, the LOR
hypothesis assumes that the overall advantage in recall
on the delayed test for the long-lag rereading group is primarily due to an emphasis on encoding of higher-level
information during rereading. Inconsistent with this
assumption, recall gains from before Trial 2 to after Trial
2 were highly similar for all three kinds of information. A
3 (kind of sentence)  2 (recall before versus after Trial
2) mixed-factor ANOVA yielded significant main effects
[kind of sentence, F(2, 116) = 20.04, MSe = 82.74, p < .001,
g2p 1/4 :26; time of recall, F(1, 58) = 12.25, MSe = 244.28,
p = .001, g2p 1/4 :17], but the interaction was not significant
(F < 1). Significant gains were observed for main ideas
[t(58) = 2.85, p = .003, d = 0.74], important details
[t(58) = 2.15, p = .018, d = 0.55], and unimportant details
[t(58) = 3.42, p < .001, d = 0.88].
The LOR hypothesis further assumes that the relative
preservation of recall across the delay in the long-lag
rereading group primarily reflects maintenance of more

durable higher-level information. However, a 3 (kind of
sentence)  2 (recall after Trial 2 or 2 days later) mixedfactor ANOVA yielded only a significant main effect of kind
of sentence [F(2, 112) = 19.41, MSe = 108.86, p < .001,
g2p 1/4 :26]. None of the three kinds of information showed
significant loss across the delay, all ts < 0.58.
Whereas this latter finding is inconsistent with the predictions of the LOR hypothesis, the integration hypothesis
provides a plausible explanation for the preservation of
information at all three levels across the delay. By this account, rereading after a long lag involved greater integrative processing, which could include relating detailed
information to main ideas in the text. If so, subsequent recall of those main ideas on the delayed test would then
provide links to related detail information, facilitating recall of those details (cf. Murray & McGlone, 1997).
One final analysis provides converging evidence against
the LOR hypothesis. Namely, another pattern that would
reasonably be expected based on this hypothesis is that recall of lower-level information in the short lag group
would be disproportionately high (relative to the long lag
group) on the immediate test and disproportionately low
on the delayed test, whereas recall of higher-level information in the long lag group would be disproportionately high
on both tests (i.e., a three-way interaction between sentence level, lag, and test delay). However, a 3 (sentence
level)  2 (lag)  2 (test delay) ANOVA revealed that neither of the two-way interactions involving sentence level
nor the 3-way interaction was significant (Fs < 1.97 and
F < 1, respectively). The only interaction term that approached significance was the interaction of lag and test
delay [F(1, 114) = 3.00, MSe = 428.38, p = .086, g2p 1/4 :03],
which as described above reflects the relatively good preservation of information at all levels across the delay in the
long lag group versus relatively poor preservation at all
levels in the short lag group.

877

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

main ideas
important details

Sentence Reading Time (in seconds)

unimportant details

12

10
8
6

4
2
First
Study Trial

Second
Study Trial

Short Lag Rereading

First
Study Trial

Second
Study Trial

Long Lag Rereading

Fig. 3. Mean reading times (in s) for target sentences as a function of rereading group (short lag or long lag), kind of target sentence (main idea, important
detail, unimportant detail), and study trial in Experiment 1.

Evaluating the LOR hypothesis: Reading times for target
sentences
Examination of reading times for the target sentences
provides further evidence weighing against the LOR hypothesis. For each individual, mean reading time was computed
for each of the three kinds of target sentence. The mean
across individual means in each rereading group are presented in Fig. 3 (in both experiments, parallel analyses were
also conducted based on means of individual medians and
all qualitative outcomes were the same). To revisit, the
LOR hypothesis predicts that the magnitude of the decrease
in reading times from Trial 1 to Trial 2 will be smaller for
lower-level versus higher-level information in the short
lag group, whereas the decrease will be smaller for higherlevel versus lower-level information in the long lag group.
However, in the short-lag rereading group, a 3 (kind of
sentence)  2 (study trial) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant main effects [kind of sentence,
F(2, 114) = 14.42, MSe = 5.71, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :20; study trial,
F(1, 57) = 19.12, MSe = 48.60, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :25] but no
interaction (F < 1). As is clear from inspection of the left panel of Fig. 3, the decrease in reading times from the first to
the second study trial was highly similar for all three kinds
of target sentence (all ts > 3.65, ds > 0.55). Likewise, in the
long-lag rereading group, a 3 (kind of sentence)  2 (study
trial) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant main
effects [kind of sentence, F(2, 112) = 16.25, MSe = 4.93,
p < .001,
g2p 1/4 :23;
study
trial,
F(1, 56) = 15.27,
MSe = 12.74, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :21] but no interaction (F < 1).
As is clear from inspection of the right panel of Fig. 3, the
decrease in reading times from the first to the second study
trial was highly similar for all three kinds of target sentence in this group as well (all ts > 2.23, ds > .29).
Evaluating the integration hypothesis: Intra-sentence cued
recall
To revisit, the key prediction of the integration hypothesis is that cued recall performance will be greater in the

long-lag group than in the short-lag group on the delayed
test. Concerning the degree of within-sentence integration,
mean intra-sentence cued recall as a function of study group
and test delay is reported in Fig. 4. A 3 (study group)  2 (test
delay) ANOVA revealed significant main effects of study
group [F(2, 173) = 5.54, MSe = 28.52, p = .005, g2p 1/4 :06]
and test delay [F(1, 173) = 9.86, p = .002, g2p 1/4 :05]; the
interaction was not significant [F(2, 173) = 1.60, p = .205,
g2p 1/4 :02]. Intra-sentence cued recall on the immediate test
did not differ for single reading versus short-lag or longlag rereading (ts < 0.97, ds < 0.27); performance on the
delayed test was lower for single reading than for short-lag
or long-lag rereading [t(59) = 1.54, p = .065, d = 0.39, and
t(57) = 4.38, p < .001, d = 1.14].
More important, planned comparisons of the short-lag
and long-lag rereading groups revealed that on the delayed
test, intra-sentence cued recall was greater in the long-lag
rereading group than in the short-lag rereading group,
t(58) = 2.65, p = .005, d = 0.69. The two groups did not significantly differ on the immediate test, t(57) = 0.23,
d = 0.06. Thus, as predicted by the integration hypothesis,
the advantage for the long-lag rereading group over the
short-lag group was particularly pronounced on the delayed test. Also supporting the integration hypothesis, performance in the short-lag rereading group was
significantly lower on the delayed test than on the immediate test, t(58) = 2.74, p = .004, d = 0.71. In contrast, performance in the long-lag rereading group did not
significantly differ on the immediate versus delayed test,
t(57) = 0.75, d = 0.08.
Evaluating the integration hypothesis: Inter-sentence cued
recall
Concerning the degree of between-sentence integration, mean inter-sentence cued recall as a function of study
group and test delay is reported in Fig. 5. A 3 (study
group)  2 (test delay) ANOVA revealed significant main
effects of study group [F(2, 173) = 5.33, MSe = 13.63,

878

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

Number of Idea Units Recalled

Delayed Test

Immediate Test

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Study Group
Fig. 4. Mean number of idea units recalled on the intra-sentence cued recall test in Experiment 1, as a function of study group (single reading, short lag
rereading, or long lag rereading) and time of test (immediately after study or after a 2-day retention interval). Error bars represent SEMs.

p = .006, g2p 1/4 :06] and test delay [F(1, 173) = 15.33,
p < .001, g2p 1/4 :08]; the interaction was not significant
(F < 1). Inter-sentence cued recall on the immediate test
for single reading did not differ from short-lag rereading
and was marginally lower than for long-lag rereading
[t(57) = 1.01, d = 0.26, and t(58) = 1.51, p = .069, d = 0.39];
performance on the delayed test for single reading did
not differ from short-lag rereading and was significantly
lower than for long-lag rereading [t(59) = 0.99, d = 0.25,
and t(57) = 3.15, p = .002, d = 0.82].
More informative, immediate inter-sentence cued recall
for the short-lag and long-lag rereading groups did not significantly differ, t(57) = 0.70, d = 0.18. In contrast, on the
delayed test, performance was significantly greater after
long-lag rereading than after short-lag rereading, t(58)
= 2.08, p = .021, d = 0.54. Again consistent with the integration hypothesis, the advantage for long-lag rereading over
short-lag rereading manifested on the delayed test. Also
supporting the integration hypothesis, performance was
significantly lower on the delayed test than on the immediate test for the short-lag rereading group, t(58) = 3.04,
p = .002, d = 0.78. In contrast, performance in the long-lag
rereading group did not significantly differ on the immediate versus delayed test, t(57) = 1.28, p > .10, d = 0.33.

Although the integration hypothesis makes no a priori
predictions regarding the distance over which enhanced
integrative processing occurred in the long-lag rereading
group, post-hoc analyses were conducted to examine inter-sentence cued recall as a function of the distance within
the text between the cue sentence and the recalled information. Near recall included information recalled from
the same paragraph in the text that contained the cue sentence. Distant recall included information recalled from any
paragraph other than the one containing the cue sentence.
Results are reported in Table 1. For near recall, a 2 (rereading lag)  2 (test delay) ANOVA revealed a significant main
effect of test delay [F(1, 115) = 9.83, MSE = 5.07, p = .002,
g2p 1/4 :08] and a marginal interaction [F(1, 115) = 3.76,
p = .055, g2p 1/4 :03]. Follow-up tests showed that the decline
across the delay was significant in the short-lag group
[t(58) = 4.02, p < .001, d = 1.04] but not in the long-lag
group [t(57) = 0.77, d = 0.20). For distant recall, a 2  2
ANOVA revealed only a marginal effect of rereading lag
[F(1, 115) = 3.40, MSE = 6.57, p = .068, g2p 1/4 :03]. Although
post-hoc, these results suggest that long-lag rereading
markedly enhanced local integration (protecting against
loss of near information across the delay) and to a lesser

Immediate Test

Delayed Test

Number of Idea Units Recalled

10
8

6

4

2

0

Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Single

Short Lag

Long Lag

Study Group
Fig. 5. Mean number of idea units recalled on the inter-sentence cued recall test in Experiment 1, as a function of study group (single reading, short lag
rereading, or long lag rereading) and time of test (immediately after study or after a 2-day retention interval). Error bars represent SEMs.

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884
Table 1
Inter-sentence cued recall as a function of distance in the text between cue
sentence and recalled information.
Immediate test

Delayed test

M

SE

M

SE

Experiment 1
Near information recalled:
Short-lag rereading
Long-lag rereading

4.0
3.7

0.4
0.5

1.9
3.2

0.4
0.5

Distant information recalled:
Short-lag rereading
Long-lag rereading

3.4
4.5

0.5
0.6

2.9
3.5

0.4
0.4

Experiment 2
Near information recalled:
Short-lag rereading
Long-lag rereading

5.4
4.2

0.6
0.5

3.0
4.4

0.3
0.5

Distant information recalled:
Short-lag rereading
Long-lag rereading

6.7
6.7

0.7
0.8

6.1
7.5

0.7
0.8

Note. Mean values reflect number of idea units recalled. SE = standard
error of the mean. Near refers to recall of information from the same
paragraph in the text that contained the cue sentence. Distant refers to
recall of information from a paragraph other than the one containing the
cue sentence.

extent enhanced global integration (increasing recall of
distant information overall).
Experiment 2
Whereas the results of Experiment 1 weighed against
the LOR hypothesis, performance on the intra-sentence
and inter-sentence cued recall measures provided evidence for the integration hypothesis. However, in Experiment 1, the free recall test preceded the cued recall tests.
To ensure that free recall did not affect the qualitative pattern of cued recall, the free recall test was removed from
Experiment 2 and only the cued recall tests were
administered.
Method
Participants and design
Participants included 151 undergraduates who participated for course credit in Introductory Psychology. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental groups, defined by the factorial combination
of two independent variables: Lag (short-lag rereading or
long-lag rereading) and Test (immediate or delayed). Each
group included between 35 and 40 participants.
Materials and procedure
The materials and procedures were the same as in
Experiment 1, except that participants were not informed
prior to reading about when the final test would take place
(all participants were told they would be tested ``some
time later'', to minimize any test expectancy effects on performance), and the free recall test was not administered. As
in Experiment 1, prior knowledge about the Light Brigade
movie or the Crimean War was minimal, and thus prior
knowledge is not discussed further.

879

Results
To parallel Experiment 1, measures relevant to evaluating the LOR hypothesis are reported first, followed by the
measures relevant to evaluating the integration hypothesis.
Evaluating the LOR hypothesis: Reading times for target
sentences
For each individual, mean reading time was computed
for each of the three kinds of target sentence. Means across
individuals in each rereading group are presented in Fig. 6.
To revisit, the LOR hypothesis predicts that the magnitude
of the decrease in reading times from Trial 1 to Trial 2 will
be smaller for lower-level versus higher-level information
in the short lag group, whereas the decrease will be smaller
for higher-level versus lower-level information in the long
lag group. As in Experiment 1, results disconfirmed these
predictions. In the short-lag rereading group, a 3 (kind of
sentence)  2 (study trial) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant main effects [kind of sentence,
F(2, 144) = 16.00, MSe = 2.26, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :18; study trial,
F(1, 72) = 103.50, MSe = 7.42, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :59] but no
interaction (F < 1). Likewise, in the long-lag rereading
group, a 3  2 repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant main effects [kind of sentence, F(2, 124) = 24.19,
MSe = 2.15, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :28; study trial, F(1, 62) = 41.09,
MSe = 4.61, p < .001, g2p 1/4 :40] but no interaction (F < 1).
Thus, the decrease in reading times from the first to the
second study trial was highly similar for all three kinds
of target sentence in both rereading groups.
Evaluating the integration hypothesis: Intra-sentence cued
recall
To revisit, the integration hypothesis predicts that cued
recall performance will be greater in the long-lag group
than in the short-lag group on the delayed test. Concerning
within-sentence integration, mean intra-sentence cued recall is reported in Fig. 7. As predicted, performance on the
delayed test was greater in the long-lag rereading group
than in the short-lag rereading group, t(73) = 2.01,
p = .024, d = 0.46. The two groups did not significantly differ on immediate test performance, t(74) = 0.88, d = 0.20.
Also supporting the integration hypothesis, performance
in the short-lag rereading group was significantly lower
on the delayed test than on the immediate test,
t(78) = 3.35, p < .001, d = 0.75. In contrast, performance in
the long-lag rereading group did not significantly differ
on the immediate versus delayed test, t(69) = 0.40, d = .10.
Evaluating the integration hypothesis: Inter-sentence cued
recall
Concerning the between-sentence integration, mean inter-sentence cued recall is reported in Fig. 8. As predicted,
performance on the delayed test was greater in the longlag rereading group than in the short-lag rereading group,
t(73) = 2.07, p = .021, d = 0.48. The two groups did not significantly differ on immediate test performance,
t(74) = 0.88, d = 0.20. Also supporting the integration
hypothesis, performance in the short-lag rereading group
was significantly lower on the delayed test than on the
immediate test, t(78) = 2.21, p = .015, d = 0.49. In contrast,

880

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

main ideas
important details

Sentence Reading Time (in seconds)

unimportant details
12

10

8
6

4
2
First
Study Trial

Second
Study Trial

First
Study Trial

Short Lag Rereading

Second
Study Trial

Long Lag Rereading

Fig. 6. Mean reading times (in s) for target sentences as a function of rereading group (short lag or long lag), kind of target sentence (main idea, important
detail, unimportant detail), and study trial in Experiment 2.

short lag

long lag

short lag

long lag

14

14

Number of Idea Units Recalled

Number of Idea Units Recalled

16

12
10
8
6
4
2

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

0
immediate test

delayed test

Fig. 7. Mean number of idea units recalled on the intra-sentence cued
recall test in Experiment 2, as a function of rereading group (short lag or
long lag) and time of test (immediately after study or after a 2-day
retention interval). Error bars represent SEMs.

performance in the long-lag rereading group did not significantly differ on the immediate versus delayed test,
t(69) = 0.75, d = 0.18.
As in Experiment 1, post-hoc analyses were conducted
to examine inter-sentence cued recall as a function of the
distance within the text between the cue sentence and
the recalled information. Results are reported in Table 1.
For near recall, a 2 (rereading lag)  2 (test delay) ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of test delay
[F(1, 147) = 5.32, MSE = 8.91, p = .022, g2p 1/4 :04] and a significant interaction [F(1, 147) = 7.44, p = .007, g2p 1/4 :05].
Follow-up tests showed that the decline across the delay
was significant in the short-lag group [t(78) = 3.58,
p < .001, d = 0.80] but not in the long-lag group
[t(69) = 0.30, d = 0.07]. For distant recall, neither main

immediate test

delayed test

Fig. 8. Mean number of idea units recalled on the inter-sentence cued
recall test in Experiment 2, as a function of rereading group (short lag or
long lag) and time of test (immediately after study or after a 2-day
retention interval). Error bars represent SEMs.

effect nor the interaction was significant (Fs < 1). Thus, as
in Experiment 1, long-lag rereading appears to markedly
enhanced local integration in particular (protecting against
loss of near information across the delay).
General discussion
The contribution of the present research to the literature on rereading effects is twofold. First, the current work
replicated the finding that rereading lag effects depend on
test delay. Long-lag rereading outperformed short-lag
rereading on a delayed free recall test but not on an immediate test, with the trend in the opposite direction. Furthermore, performance in the short-lag group declined
drastically across the 2-day retention interval, whereas

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

performance in the long-lag group was largely preserved.
Second and most important, the current work evaluated
theoretical accounts for why rereading lag effects depend
on test delay. Results did not support the predictions of
the LOR hypothesis, according to which short-lag rereading
involves greater encoding of lower-level information
whereas long-lag rereading involves greater encoding of
higher-level information. Neither gains in recall with
rereading, losses in recall across the delay, nor changes in
reading times across trials differed as a function of information level for target sentences in either group. These
outcomes supplement those from Rawson and Kintsch
(2005) to support more definitive conclusions about the
inadequacy of this account. Most important, results confirmed the predictions of the integration hypothesis,
according to which long-lag rereading involves more
extensive integration of encoded information than does
short-lag rereading. In support of this hypothesis, performance on measures tapping within-sentence and between-sentence integration was greater in the long-lag
versus short-lag rereading group on the delayed test.
The current pattern of results is consistent with those
reported in the one earlier study that manipulated both
rereading lag and test delay (Rawson & Kintsch, 2005),
one study that manipulated test delay (Roediger &
Karpicke, 2006), and one study that manipulated rereading
lag (Verkoeijen et al., 2008). However, the results of two
earlier studies in which rereading lag was manipulated
are apparently inconsistent with these more recent findings. Glover and Corkill (1987) had participants read a
99-word text twice with minimal delay versus a 30-min
delay between trials, and Krug et al. (1990) had participants read a 600-word text twice with minimal delay versus a week delay between trials. In both studies,
performance on an immediate free recall test was greater
after long-lag rereading than after short-lag rereading. In
contrast, Rawson and Kintsch (2005) and the current study
found no advantage for long-lag rereading on an immediate test, with trends in the opposite direction.
Rawson and Kintsch (2005) suggested that a key factor
in reconciling these apparent differences was the extent to
which readers fully processed the text during short-lag
rereading. Indeed, Krug et al. (1990) proposed a full processing hypothesis to explain the advantage of long-lag
versus short-lag rereading on an immediate test, according
to which readers only skim text when information is still
active in working memory. Krug et al. reported a 59% decrease in reading time from first to second study trial with
short-lag rereading (2.7 versus 1.1 min, respectively).
Based on the length of their text, reading rate during the
second study trial was thus 110 ms per word (mpw),
implausibly fast to assume full processing during rereading. In contrast, the full processing account cannot easily
explain the pattern of outcomes observed in Rawson and
Kintsch (2005) or in the current work. Rawson and Kintsch
(2005) reported only a 22% decrease in reading time from
the first to second study trial with short-lag rereading
(10.4 versus 8.1 min, across experiments), resulting in a
reading rate of 297 mpw during the second study trial.
Similarly, across the two experiments reported here,
short-lag reading times declined 31% (in min, Trial 1

881

M = 12.0, SE = 0.4, Trial 2 M = 8.3, SE = 0.3), resulting in a
reading rate of 323 mpw during the second study trial
(302 mpw for main ideas, 334 mpw for important details,
and 324 mpw for unimportant details), which is much
slower than would be expected if readers were skimming
or reading superficially.3 For purposes of comparison,
long-lag reading times here were 11.8, SE = 0.3 on Trial 1
and 10.2, SE = 0.3 on Trial 2, a 14% decline, with a reading
rate of 395 ms per word during the second study trial
(385 mpw for main ideas, 398 mpw for important details,
and 385 mpw for unimportant details).
Although the full processing hypothesis cannot easily
account for the current results, comparison of results
across studies suggests that the interaction of rereading
lag with test delay would only be expected under conditions in which short-lag rereading involves full processing
of the text material. Otherwise, short-lag rereading will
likely be disadvantaged even on immediate tests. This account also provides an explanation for findings recently reported by Callender and McDaniel (2009). In four
experiments, participants read a text either once or twice
with a short lag. Although performance on immediate tests
tended to favor short-lag rereading over single reading, the
numerical differences were seldom significant. However,
the estimated decrease in reading times from first to second study trial across experiments was 48% (range 29-
57%), and the estimated reading rate during the second
study trial was 143 ms per word (range 119-172 ms per
word). Identifying the motivational and/or cognitive factors that influence the extent to which readers fully process text during rereading will be an important direction
for future research.
Just as short-lag rereading may not always be superior
to single reading on an immediate test, long-lag rereading
may not always be superior to short-lag rereading on delayed tests. Verkoeijen et al. (2008) proposed a two-factor
account of rereading lag effects, involving encoding variability and study-phase retrieval. According to this account, information is variably encoded across first and
second encounters, which provides additional retrieval
cues for later access of that information. However, this account further assumes that encoding variability will enhance the representation of repeated information only if
the initial memory trace is retrieved from long-term memory during the second encounter. As lag increases, encoding variability increases, but at the same time
accessibility of the initial memory trace decreases. With
long enough lags, these two factors offset one another
and the advantage of long-lag rereading is diminished. To
revisit, participants in their study reread text either immediately, 4 days, or 3.5 weeks after initial study. Although
delayed test performance was numerically greater in both
long-lag groups than in the short-lag group, the difference
3
The somewhat larger decrease in reading times in the current research
versus in the original work by Rawson and Kintsch (2005) is likely due to
differences in the mode of presentation (sentence-by-sentence presentation here versus section-by-section presentation in Rawson and Kintsch
(2005)). Note that the locus of the difference is due to elevated reading
times on Trial 1 (Trial 2 reading times are highly similar across studies),
which likely reflects task-level adjustment on the part of readers to the
sentence-by-sentence presentation mode.

882

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

was only significant in the 4-day group. Additionally, performance in the 4-day group was numerically greater than
in the 3.5-week group. Of potential relevance is recent research on testing effects showing that the optimal lag between practice sessions depends on the retention
interval, with highest LOR of memory observed when lag
is about 10-30% of the retention interval (Cepeda, Vul,
Rohrer, Wixted, & Pashler, 2008). Whether the optimal ratio for retrieval practice extends to rereading is an outstanding question that awaits further research.
In addition to further establishing that rereading lag effects depend on test delay, the current study provides an
important theoretical step toward diagnosing why longlag rereading promotes memory across a delay. Results
suggest that the advantage for long-lag rereading that
emerges on a delayed test is not due to increased processing of higher-level text content. Rather, long-lag rereading
promotes the integration of encoded ideas both within and
between sentences, regardless of the informational level of
those ideas. One prediction that follows from this account
is that manipulations directed at enhancing integrative
processing during short-lag rereading (e.g., instructions
or orienting task manipulations) will minimize differences
in delayed test performance for short-lag and long-lag
rereading groups. To the extent that the integrative processing encouraged by such manipulations is redundant
with the spontaneous integrative processing involved during long-lag rereading, these manipulations would be predicted to have greater effects in short-lag versus long-lag
rereading condition. Another prediction that follows from
this account is that rereading lag effects will not depend
on test delay for outcome measures that do not rely on
integration. For example, basic memory research has
shown that recognition primarily reflects item-specific
processing rather than organizational processing (e.g.,
Hunt, 2003; Hunt & Einstein, 1981; Hunt & Rawson,
2011; Rawson & Van Overschelde, 2008). Thus, the integration hypothesis would predict that a recognition test in
which readers had to identify ideas that were versus were
not in the text would presumably not show the key pattern. Thus, in addition to the predictions evaluated here,
the integration hypothesis also supports other testable
predictions that can guide further research on the theoretical basis for rereading lag effects.
Note that the integration hypothesis is compatible with
Verkoeijen et al.'s (2008) two-factor model of rereading lag
effects described above. Indeed, the integration hypothesis
provides further specification of a key way in which the
encoding of information may be variably represented during a second encounter. That is, encoding may be variable
along several different dimensions (e.g., in the encoding
of propositions from the text, in the propositions that are
recruited from prior knowledge to elaborate the text information, in the number or kind of inferences made), and the
degree of integration is one component of a text representation in which encoding may vary across trials. Integration can vary in the number of links formed and/or in the
dimensions along which links are formed. For example,
links formed during an initial study trial may primarily reflect explicit referential connections between propositions,
whereas rereading may involve additional links based on

implicit referential connections and/or based on causal,
temporal, or spatial connections between propositions
(cf. Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998).
Of course, integration is likely not the only factor underlying these effects. Encoding along other representational
dimensions besides integration may also vary across trials.
For example, encoding variability may also involve activation of different semantic features of concepts (McFarland,
Rhodes, & Frey, 1979) or contextual fluctuation (for discussion, see Pavlik & Anderson, 2005). These accounts assume
that increasing the number of semantic features or amount
of contextual information encoded with target information
provides additional retrieval routes that can later be used
to access the target information, particularly when externally-provided cues are minimal (e.g., free recall). However,
it is less clear how these forms of encoding variability would
produce the key patterns in cued recall performance observed here via a mechanism other than one that involves
elaborating or strengthening the connection between a cue
proposition and the target propositions it retrieves. In contrast, the integration hypothesis provides a straightforward
explanation for the patterns of cued recall.
The integration hypothesis is not only a viable account
of why rereading lag effects depend on test delay, it may
also provide plausible explanations for previous findings
in the rereading literature. For example, Barnett and
Seefeldt (1989) had higher-ability and lower-ability readers study a 1000-word text either once or twice with a
minimal lag, followed by an immediate test including both
factual questions and transfer problems. Both higher- and
lower-ability readers showed a rereading effect on the factual questions, but only higher-ability readers showed a
rereading effect for the transfer problems. Assuming that
performance for transfer problems was more dependent
than fact questions on an integrated representation of the
ideas in the text, the integration hypothesis would suggest
that only higher-ability readers spontaneously engaged in
sufficient integrative processing during rereading.
By confirming the predictions of the integration
hypothesis, the current study makes a significant theoretical contribution to the literature that heretofore offered no
tenable account of why rereading lag effects depend on
test delay. Providing positive evidence that long-lag
rereading enhances integration lays an important foundation for further theoretical work to explore why long-lag
rereading enhances integration. One possibility is that
the enhanced integration during long-lag rereading involves a strategic adjustment to the standard for coherence
adopted by readers (cf. van den Broek, Risden, & HusebyeHartmann, 1995). By comparison, readers have been
shown to differentially process text based on factors such
as task instructions (e.g., read for entertainment versus
read for memory; Zwaan et al., 1995) and text genre (e.g.,
readers are given the same text but told it is an excerpt
from a novel versus a news article; Zwaan, 1994). Likewise,
rereading lag may also encourage readers to adopt a higher
standard for coherence.
This possibility is consistent with an account of spacing
effects proposed by Bahrick and Hall (2005; Pyc & Rawson,
in press), the strategy shift hypothesis. According to this
account, the accessibility of information in memory

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

following initial learning provides learners with evidence
about the effectiveness of the encoding strategies they
used during initial learning. When information is difficult
to access, learners are more likely to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy they used initially and to shift from
using a less effective encoding strategy to using a more
effective strategy during subsequent restudy. With respect
to spacing effects, because information from initial learning is less accessible after a longer versus shorter lag, learners are more likely to shift to effective strategies with
distributed versus massed practice. Likewise, the same logic can be applied here. During initial learning, readers
may engage in relatively minimal processing of the semantic relations between ideas in a text (cf. the minimalist
hypothesis of McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992, according to which
readers engage only in the minimal amount of inferencing
needed to maintain local coherence ``in the absence of
specific, goal-directed strategic processes,'' p. 440). During
short-lag rereading, access to text information stored during initial study is relatively easy and thus readers may not
shift their strategy to involve more integrative processing.
In contrast, access to text information stored during initial
study is much less accessible during long-lag rereading,
which may compel readers to engage in more integrative
processing of the semantic relations between ideas.
Of course, evaluation of this and other possible accounts
must await further research, but the current provides an
important foundation for future work by providing positive
evidence for a role of integration in explaining why rereading lag effects depend on test delay.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Mike Appleman, Alison Kane, John Kozlik,
Caitlin Metelko, Dan Molnar, Deesha Patel, Ericka Schmitt,
and Katie Wissman for assistance with data collection and
data scoring.
Completion of the research reported here was supported in part by a James S. McDonnell Foundation 21st
Century Science Initiative in Bridging Brain, Mind and
Behavior Collaborative Award, and by funding from the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education, through Grant #R305H050038 to Kent State
University. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S.
Department of Education.
References
Amlund, J. T., Kardash, C. A. M., & Kulhavy, R. W. (1986). Repetitive
reading and recall of expository text. Reading Research Quarterly, 21,
49-58.
Bahrick, H. P., & Hall, L. K. (2005). The importance of retrieval failures to
long-term retention: A metacognitive explanation of the spacing
effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 52, 566-577.
Balota, D. A., Duchek, J. M., & Paullin, R. (1989). Age-related differences in
the impact of spacing, lag, and retention interval. Psychology and
Aging, 4, 3-9.
Barnett, J. E., & Seefeldt, R. W. (1989). Read something once, why read it
again? Repetitive reading and recall. Journal of Reading Behavior, 21,
351-360.
Black, J. B., & Bern, H. (1981). Causal coherence and memory for events in
narratives. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 267-275.

883

Britton, B. K., & Gulgoz, S. (1991). Using Kintsch's computational model to
improve instructional text: Effects of repairing inference calls on
recall and cognitive structures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83,
329-345.
Bromage, B. K., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). Quantitative and qualitative effects
of repetition on learning from technical text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 78, 271-278.
Callender, A. A., & McDaniel, M. A. (2009). The limited benefits of rereading
educational texts. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 34, 30-41.
Cepeda, N. J., Pashler, H., Vul, E., Wixted, J. T., & Rohrer, D. (2006).
Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review and quantitative
synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 354-380.
Cepeda, N. J., Vul, E., Rohrer, D., Wixted, J. T., & Pashler, H. (2008). Spacing
effects in learning: A temporal ridgeline of optimal retention.
Psychological Science, 19, 1095-1102.
Dooling, D. J., & Lachman, R. (1971). Effects of comprehension on
retention of prose. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 88, 216-222.
Dunlosky, J., & Rawson, K. A. (2005). Why does rereading improve
metacomprehension accuracy? Evaluating the Levels-of-Disruption
Hypothesis for the rereading effect. Discourse Processes, 40, 37-56.
Durgunoglu, A. Y., Mir, M., & Arino-Marti, S. (1993). Effects of repeated
readings on bilingual and monolingual memory for text.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 18, 294-317.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory.
Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Glenberg, A. M., & Lehmann, T. S. (1980). Spacing repetitions over one
week. Memory & Cognition, 8, 528-538.
Glover, J. A., & Corkill, A. J. (1987). Influence of paraphrased repetitions on
the spacing effect. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 198-199.
Hunt, R. R. (2003). Two contributions of distinctive processing to accurate
memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 811-825.
Hunt, R. R., & Einstein, G. O. (1981). Relational and item-specific
information in memory. Journal of Verbal learning and Verbal
Behavior, 19, 497-514.
Hunt, R. R., & Rawson, K. A. (2011). Knowledge affords distinctive
processing in memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 65, 30-405.
Judd, C. M., & McClelland, G. H. (1989). Data analysis: A model comparison
approach. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Karpicke, J. D., & Roediger, H. L. I. I. I. (2007). Expanding retrieval practice
promotes short-term retention, but equally spaced retrieval enhances
long-term retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33, 704-719.
Kiewra, K. A., Mayer, R. E., Christensen, M., Kim, S.-I., & Risch, N. (1991).
Effects of repetition on recall and note-taking: Strategies for learning
from lectures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 120-123.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse processing: A
construction-integration model. Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W., Welsch, D., Schmalhofer, F., & Zimny, S. (1990). Sentence
memory: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 29,
133-159.
Krug, D., Davis, B., & Glover, J. A. (1990). Massed versus distributed
repeated reading: A case of forgetting helping recall? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82, 366-371.
Litman, L., & Davachi, L. (2008). Distributed learning enhances relational
memory consolidation. Learning & Memory, 15, 711-716.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Inference during reading. Psychological
Review, 99, 440-466.
McFarland, C. E., Rhodes, D. D., & Frey, T. J. (1979). Semantic-feature
variability and the spacing effect. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 18, 163-172.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good
texts always better? Interactions of text coherence, background
knowledge, and LOR of understanding in learning from text.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Millis, K. K., Simon, S., & tenBroek, N. S. (1998). Resource allocation during
the rereading of scientific texts. Memory & Cognition, 26, 232-246.
Murray, J. D., & McGlone, C. (1997). Topic overviews and the processing of
topic structure. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 251-261.
Myers, J. L., Shinjo, M., & Duffy, S. A. (1987). Degree of causal relatedness
and memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 26, 453-465.
Otero, J., & Kintsch, W. (1992). Failures to detect contradictions in a text: What
readers believe versus what they read. Psychological Science, 3, 229-235.
Pavlik, P. I., Jr., & Anderson, J. R. (2005). Practice and forgetting effects on
vocabulary memory: An activation-based model of the spacing effect.
Cognitive Science, 29, 559-586.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (in press). Why is test-restudy practice
beneficial for memory? An evaluation of the mediator shift

884

K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 66 (2012) 870-884

hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition.
Rawson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (2004). Exploring encoding and retrieval
effects of background information on text memory. Discourse
Processes, 38, 323-344.
Rawson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (2005). Rereading effects depend upon time
of test. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 70-80.
Rawson, K. A., & Van Overschelde, J. P. (2008). How does knowledge
promote memory? The distinctiveness theory of skilled memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 646-658.
Roediger, H. L. I. I. I., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). Test-enhanced learning:
Taking memory tests improves long-term retention. Psychological
Science, 17, 249-255.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice.
Common principles in three paradigms suggest new concepts for
training. Psychological Science, 3, 207-217.
Singer, M., Andrusiak, P., Reisdorf, P., & Black, N. L. (1992). Individual
differences in bridging inference processes. Memory & Cognition, 20,
539-548.
Spieler, D. H., & Balota, D. A. (1996). Characteristics of associative learning
in younger and older adults: Evidence from an episodic priming
paradigm. Psychology and Aging, 11, 607-620.

Tabachnik, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics (4th ed.).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
van den Broek, P., Risden, K., & Husebye-Hartmann, E. (1995). The role of
readers' standards for coherence in the generation of inferences
during reading. In R. F. Lorch & E. J. O'Brien (Eds.), Sources of coherence
in reading (pp. 353-373). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., Rikers, R. M. J. P., & Ozsoy, B. (2008). Distributed
rereading can hurt the spacing effect in text memory. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 685-695.
Zwaan, R. A. (1994). Effect of genre expectations on text comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20, 920-933.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Dimensions of
situation model construction in narrative comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21,
386-397.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models in language
comprehension and memory. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

