Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 2012, 34, 627-658.
doi:10.1017/S0272263112000368

TASK COMPLEXITY,
LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES,
AND KOREAN EFL LEARNERS'
QUESTION DEVELOPMENT

YouJin Kim
Georgia State University

Building on the cognitive and interactive perspectives of task research,
the cognition hypothesis states that increasing task complexity promotes greater interaction and feedback and thus facilitates second
language (L2) development (Robinson, 2001b, 2007a). To date, very
little research has explored this claim during learner-learner interactions in English as a foreign language (EFL) classroom contexts in
which a task-based syllabus is implemented. The purpose of this study
was to examine the effects of task complexity on the occurrence of
interaction-driven learning opportunities and question development
in such a classroom context. Korean university students (N = 191)
from four intact English classes were randomly assigned to one comparison group and three experimental groups with various task-complexity levels (i.e., simple, +complex, and ++complex) based on
Robinson's framework. Their interactions were audiorecorded, and
occurrences of learning opportunities, operationalized as languagerelated episodes (LREs), were identified. Question development was
identified between pretest and posttests on the basis of the learners'
This research grew out of my PhD dissertation. I would like to thank my advisor,
Kim McDonough, and dissertation committee members, Joan Jamieson, Mary McGroarty,
and Joseph Collentine, for their constant guidance and support throughout the development
of the project. I am also very grateful to Peter Robinson and to anonymous SSLA reviewers
for their insightful comments and suggestions. Special thanks go to Nicole Tracy-Ventura,
Heidi Vellenga, Bethany Grey, and Diana Trebing for their helpful comments at different
stages of this article. The project was supported by the Language Learning dissertation
grant and TESOL's Ruth Crymes Fellowship for Graduate Study. My sincere thanks also
go to ETS for providing the TOEIC Bridge. Finally, I would like to thank all the learners
who participated in the study. Any remaining errors, of course, are my own.
Address correspondence to YouJin Kim, Department of Applied Linguistics and
ESL, Georgia State University, 34 Peachtree Street, Suite 1200, Atlanta, GA 30303;
e-mail: ykim39@gsu.edu.
(c) Cambridge University Press 2012

627

628

YouJin Kim
stage advancement using Pienemann and Johnston's (1987) developmental sequence. Results indicated that more complex tasks promoted a greater number of LREs and particularly led to LREs targeting
developmentally advanced question structures, which result in
question development.

Over the past few decades tasks have been seen as a primary unit of
second language (L2) instruction and have provided a fruitful common
ground between L2 pedagogy and research (Bygate, Skehan, & Swain,
2001; Ellis, 2003; Robinson, 2011). Tasks can offer sufficient means
for the authentic presentation of appropriate target language input to
learners and can generate ample opportunities for language use in
meaningful contexts while also promoting learners' attention to linguistic forms (Bygate et al., 2001). Although task-based instruction arose
out of pedagogical proposals for greater emphasis on communicative
activities in language teaching, SLA research has increasingly informed
task-based instruction (Robinson, 2011). In particular, SLA researchers
have made various predictions about different task design and implementation factors that affect L2 development in task-based instruction.
For example, two competing accounts of how attention is deployed
during task performance (i.e., the single-resource model vs. the multipleresource model) have provided implications for task design, specifically in relation to task complexity.
With a multiple-resource view of attention, Robinson proposed the
cognition hypothesis, stating that task complexity would promote the
frequency of interactional features such as feedback and negotiation
of meaning during task performance and thus facilitate L2 learning
(Robinson, 2001b, 2003, 2005, 2007a). Although Robinson (2009) makes
claims about how to design syllabi on the basis of the cognition hypothesis, very little research has been carried out testing his predictions
in classroom contexts in which a task-based syllabus has been implemented. Thus, the purpose of the present study is to fill this gap by
examining the role of task complexity in the occurrence of interactiondriven learning opportunities and L2 development in task-based English
as a foreign language (EFL) classroom settings.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The Limited Capacity Hypothesis versus the Cognition Hypothesis
The two influential claims regarding the extent to which task characteristics can affect the allocation of the learners' attention during task

Task Complexity and Question Development

629

performance are Skehan's (1998) limited capacity hypothesis and
Robinson's (2001b) cognition hypothesis. A theoretical construct of
importance for these two hypotheses is the "notion of attention as
capacity," and both hypotheses are interested in how increasing the
attentional demands of tasks affects language production (Robinson,
2011, p. 17). On the basis of a single pool of attentional resources for
L2 learners, the limited capacity hypothesis states that learners'
attentional resources are limited and that increasing task complexity
reduces a pool of attentional capacity during task performance. On the
basis of the limited capacity hypothesis, Skehan (1998) and Skehan and
Foster (1999, 2001) argued that a trade-off exists between attention to
form and attention to meaning during task performance. As a result,
more complex tasks will demand more attention to content and, correspondingly, will allow less attention to language. Furthermore, in Skehan's
(1998) view, due to limitations in attentional resources, learners cannot
attend to all aspects of language production at the same time (e.g., complexity, fluency, accuracy). Thus, tasks can promote either increased
complexity or accuracy, but not both.
Whereas Skehan's (1998) limited capacity hypothesis argues for
the single-resource model of attention, Robinson's (2001a, 2001b,
2003, 2005) cognition hypothesis predicts that learners are able to
access multiple and noncompetitive pools of attention. According to
Robinson, there is not a trade-off between attention to accuracy and
attention to complexity of language production. Rather, he claims that
increasing task complexity promotes more accurate and more complex
language.
In his task-complexity framework, Robinson (2001a, 2001b, 2003) includes a series of predictions regarding the role of task complexity on
L2 performance and development in which he classifies task complexity
into two dimensions: cognitive-conceptual (i.e., resource-directing) and
performative-procedural (i.e., resource-dispersing) demands. Robinson
(2001b) argued that the two task-complexity categories identify an
important difference in the way these dimensions affect resource allocation during L2 task performance. He thus claimed that the effects of
task complexity in the two kinds of dimensions (i.e., resource-directing
and resource-dispersing) are very different.
According to Robinson (2001b), resource-directing variables of task
complexity make greater demands on attention and working memory in
a way that redirects them to linguistic resources during task performance. Therefore, increasing task complexity along resource-directing
dimensions--for example, by requiring learners to use reasoning skills
[+reasoning demands] to consider many elements [-few elements]
or to narrate events that are displaced in time and space [-here and
now]--can direct learners' attention to specific, task-relevant linguistic
features.

630

YouJin Kim

On the contrary, resource-dispersing variables are those that make
increased performative-procedural demands on participants' attentional
and memory resources but do not direct them to any element of the
linguistic system (Robinson, 2001b, 2005). Making tasks more complex
along resource-dispersing dimensions--for instance, by requiring learners
to perform more than one task simultaneously [-single task] or by providing no prior knowledge support [-prior knowledge] or planning time
[-planning time]--leads learners to disperse attention over many nonlinguistic areas during task performance.
Whereas Skehan's limited capacity hypothesis (1998) predicts that
increasing the cognitive demands of tasks would negatively affect both
accuracy and linguistic complexity of learner production, Robinson's
cognition hypothesis claims that making tasks more complex in the
resource-directing dimensions will increase linguistic accuracy and
complexity (e.g., Robinson, 2001b, 2005, 2007b). Robinson also predicts
that increasing task complexity would encourage learners to look for
more assistance in the input and attend to linguistic codes that are
required for task completion (Robinson, 2001a; Robinson & Gilabert,
2007). With regard to L2 development, Robinson has claimed that
increasing the task complexity of oral interactive tasks leads to L2
development, especially with developmentally more advanced forms
(Robinson, 2007a, 2007b; Robinson & Ellis, 2008). In task-based learnerlearner interaction contexts, increasing complexity along resourcedirecting dimensions has the potential to direct learners' attentional and
memory resources to L2 structures, providing "learning opportunities"
and thus ultimately leading to interlanguage development (Robinson,
2007b, p. 23).
To date, a variety of predictions about the effects of task complexity
in Robinson's (2001b) framework have been tested, focusing mainly
on L2 linguistic performance (i.e., complexity, accuracy, and fluency)
during either oral or written tasks (Gilabert, 2007; Ishikawa, 2007;
Kuiken, Mos, & Vedder, 2005; Kuiken & Vedder, 2007; Michel, Kuiken, &
Vedder, 2007; Robinson, 2001a, 2007b). However, the findings of these
studies have not been conclusive; they suggest that more complex tasks
positively impact linguistic performance in general, yet more specific
findings related to both accuracy and syntactic complexity only partially
supported the cognition hypothesis (e.g., promoting either complexity
or accuracy). Although language learning requires that learners increase
the complexity, accuracy, and fluency of their language production,
these measures do not capture all of the processes of L2 acquisition;
particularly, they miss those related to development of specific linguistic
forms in meaning-oriented language production. To address such concerns, a growing number of studies examined the relationship between
task complexity, learners' attention to linguistic forms during interaction,
and subsequent development of those structures.

Task Complexity and Question Development

631

Task Complexity, Interaction, and L2 Learning
The construct of cognitive complexity has received growing attention
in SLA studies that aim to explore how increases in the cognitive complexity of tasks differentially affect interaction and learning outcomes
(Baralt, 2010; Gilabert, Baron, & Llanes, 2009; Kim, 2009a, 2009b; Nuevo,
2006; Revesz, 2009, 2011; Robinson, 2001a, 2007b). Some studies were
conducted in laboratory settings in which learners met with a researcher
or a native speaker (e.g., Baralt, 2010; Revesz, 2009) or in classrooms
where learners were paired with other learners during task performance
(e.g., Kim, 2009a, 2009b; Revesz, 2011). Because the present study
focuses on learner-learner interaction, studies examining interaction
between learners will be discussed in this section.
Previous task-complexity studies operationalized interactional features in various ways, including the occurrence of specific feedback
types such as recasts and clarification requests and the number of language-related episodes (LREs). These included both one-way (Robinson,
2001b, 2007a) and two-way (Kim, 2009a; Nuevo, 2006; Revesz, 2011) tasks
in either EFL or English as a second language (ESL) settings. The first
study exploring task complexity and interaction was Robinson (2001b),
in which he manipulated [+/-prior knowledge] and [+/-few elements]
variables to create different levels of task complexity with map tasks.
A simple version of the task used a small map of an area known to the
Japanese learners, whereas a complex version used an authentic street
map of a much larger area likely to be unknown to the learners. A total
of 44 Japanese university students participated in two versions of these
map tasks (simple and complex). In pairs, one participant (speaker) was
asked to give directions from point A to point B to a partner (hearer)
who had only point A on his or her map. The hearer was then required
to draw the routes between points A and B described by the speaker.
The findings showed significantly greater amounts of interaction with
more confirmation checks on the complex version of the task.
Robinson (2007b) examined the effects of task complexity on L2 speech
production, interaction, uptake, and perceptions of task difficulty with
42 Japanese EFL learners. He used a [+/-reasoning demands] variable
to manipulate three degrees of task complexity. During learner-learner
interaction, the speaker decided on the correct sequence of a series
of pictures and then narrated this story to the listener, who had to
sequence the pictures on the basis of the order of narration. To assess
the relationship between the task complexity of the narration tasks
and the extent of interaction and learning opportunities, Robinson analyzed the number of turns taken, clarification requests, and confirmation checks for the listener-sequencer on each task version. Findings
indicated that task complexity, along the resource-directing dimension,

632

YouJin Kim

significantly promoted the amount of interaction (i.e., more turns,
which consisted of greater numbers of clarification requests and confirmation checks). Overall, Robinson's previous studies in which
learners carried out one-way tasks in pairs suggested that task complexity along resource-directing dimensions positively promoted interaction-driven learning opportunities, and that it particularly
resulted in significantly more confirmation checks with complex tasks
in both experiments (Robinson, 2001b, 2007b).
Because previous interaction studies suggested that two-way tasks
are more effective in promoting interaction (Ellis, 2003), two-way
tasks during learner-learner interaction have been increasingly used.
Additionally, a growing number of studies operationalized interaction in various ways and explored how other task and learner factors
mediate the relationship between task complexity and interaction.
For instance, Kim (2009a) explored to what extent learner proficiency
mediates the relationship between task complexity and the occurrence
of interaction-driven learning opportunities during two different task
types (i.e., picture-difference tasks and narration tasks). She examined
the impact of task complexity along resource-directing dimensions on
the occurrence of LREs with ESL learners (n = 34) from two different
proficiency levels. In pairs, learners carried out a picture-difference
task and a narration task in which task complexity was manipulated
using two variables: [+/-few elements] for the picture-difference task
and [+/-reasoning demands] for the narration task. The results suggested that the effects of task complexity on the occurrence of learning
opportunities--operationalized as the occurrence of LREs--differed
depending on task type and learner proficiency. More specifically, the
complex narration task elicited more LREs by the higher-proficiency
learners than the simple narration task, whereas the opposite findings
were obtained with the lower-proficiency learners. For the picturedifference task, the lower-proficiency learners produced significantly
more LREs, particularly lexical LREs, during the complex task than the
simple task. From a methodological point of view, such findings suggest
that in addition to learner variables, task variables other than complexity
should be taken into consideration when designing task-complexity
studies.
Gilabert and colleagues (2009) also explored how the impact of task
complexity on interaction can be mediated by other factors by examining increases in cognitive complexity across three different types of
tasks. In pairs, a total of 54 EFL learners carried out two complex versions
of three tasks (i.e., a narrative task, an instruction-giving task, and a
decision-making task), which were manipulated by [+/-here-and-now],
[+/-few elements], and [+/-causal reasoning]. During task-based interaction, interactional features such as confirmation checks, clarification
requests, comprehension checks, recasts, LREs, and repairs were

Task Complexity and Question Development

633

identified. The findings showed that in general the more complex
versions of tasks resulted in more interactional moves and opportunities for negotiation of meaning. Similar to Kim (2009a), however, they
found that predictions of the cognition hypothesis did not hold for all
task types. For example, the complex version of the narrative task
resulted in significantly more clarification requests but significantly
fewer comprehension checks. There were significantly more LREs and
repairs (but not recasts) during the complex version of the narrative
task. These same findings held for the map task as well. The complex
version of a map task yielded significantly more confirmation and comprehension checks, whereas the decision-making task only showed an
effect for task complexity in terms of number of repairs. Such findings
suggested that task complexity tended to promote more interactional
features, particularly during the narrative task and the map task, but
not during the decision-making task.
In a recent classroom-based study, Revesz (2011) tested Robinson's
cognition hypothesis with 43 ESL learners by manipulating a [+/-reasoning
demands] variable. Each participant carried out two versions (simple
vs. complex) of the same argumentative task in groups. To identify
interaction-driven learning opportunities, Revesz analyzed LREs, confirmation checks, clarification requests, recasts, and metalinguistic talk.
Results showed that the complex task led to a significantly higher
number of LREs and metalinguistic talk. However, other measures
(i.e., clarification requests, confirmation checks, and recasts) also
increased in number descriptively but not statistically. In general, her
findings supported the cognition hypothesis, in that students who carried out more complex tasks produced more interactional features,
which indicated a larger amount of attention to linguistic forms during
task performance.
These studies predominantly examined the amount of interaction;
however, the direct relationship among task complexity, the amount of
interactional features during learner-learner interaction and L2 development has not been widely investigated. Nuevo (2006) took a first step
to examine such a relationship by researching the role of task
complexity manipulated by [+/-reasoning demands] on L2 learning
opportunities and development, and focused on past tense and locative
prepositions. The study used a pretest-posttest-delayed posttest
research design, and three groups (n = 113) of learners participated in
two different tasks with different levels of complexity--that is, narration
tasks and decision-making tasks. She analyzed nine different interactional processes, and findings showed that the simple task version led
to greater uptake of recasts, more comprehension checks, and more
other repetitions than the complex version. Additionally, the simple
version of the decision-making task resulted in a greater amount of
metalinguistic talk, whereas the complex version of the tasks led to

634

YouJin Kim

more confirmation checks. These findings indicated that different
task-complexity conditions promoted different sources of learning
opportunities. In terms of L2 development, results showed no association between task complexity and L2 learning, counter to the prediction
of the cognition hypothesis.
Overall, the existing studies suggest that task complexity can impact
the amount of interaction-driven learning opportunities and L2 learning
during task-based interaction. However, previous studies have provided
inconclusive findings regarding the nature of the relationship between
the three constructs. For instance, although Nuevo (2006) found contradictory evidence for the cognition hypothesis--especially with regard
to the role of task complexity and L2 development--other studies
supported the hypothesis in terms of complex tasks leading to more
interaction, with some variations among different interactional features
(Gilabert et al., 2009; Revesz, 2011; Robinson, 2001b, 2007b).
These mixed findings may be due to some methodological issues in
the previous literature. With regard to learning opportunities, previous
studies (Kim, 2009a; Nuevo, 2006; Revesz, 2011; Robinson, 2001a, 2007b)
either did not specify the different types of linguistic forms to which
learners paid attention or presented very broad categories for linguistic
structures that were discussed during task-based interaction (e.g., lexis
vs. grammar). Thus, the previous literature reviewed here has not
been able to address the issue of the areas in which the L2 learners
tended to notice gaps in their interlanguage during task-based interaction. To address this issue, the present study defined learning opportunities more narrowly with a specific linguistic feature (i.e., question
formation).
When interpreting the results of studies focusing on learning opportunities, it should be noted that learning opportunities are not necessarily
a direct indicator of subsequent L2 linguistic development. Thus, separate measures for L2 learning should be provided to determine L2
development (Philp, Oliver, & Mackey, 2006). To date, only one study
(Nuevo, 2006) investigated the role of task complexity in L2 linguistic
development as an outcome of task performance during learner-learner
interaction. Because Nuevo did not support Robinson's claim that more
complex tasks promote L2 development, there is no positive evidence
for the hypothesis in learner-learner interaction contexts. Furthermore,
Nuevo's study analyzed two grammatical structures (i.e., past tense and
locative prepositions) in terms of accuracy and did not consider the
developmental sequences of the structures. Consequently, Robinson's
claim that task complexity encourages learners to use developmentally
advanced forms during task performance and facilitates their subsequent L2 learning has not been directly tested so far. Additionally,
according to Robinson (2007a), functional demands created by a task
with different levels of task complexity should be related to linguistic

Task Complexity and Question Development

635

demands imposed on the learners; thus, the target structures should be
carefully chosen considering the demands of different task complexities.
Studies that focus on such methodological issues are much needed to
examine the relationships between task complexity, learning opportunities for developmentally advanced forms, and L2 development.
In terms of the operationalization of task complexity, the majority of
previous studies, except Robinson (2007b) and Lee (2002), operationalized task complexity dichotomously (i.e., simple vs. complex) by manipulating the presence and absence of each variable (e.g., +/-reasoning,
+/-few elements). Because the concept of task complexity can be
determined along a continuum, it is important to include multiple
degrees of task complexity in the research design to provide solid
evidence for or against the cognition hypothesis. Previous studies,
which did not find full support for the cognition hypothesis, have
also suggested that the lack of empirical support for the hypothesis
could have been due to the lack of task-complexity distinctiveness
among tasks (e.g., Kuiken et al., 2005; Nuevo, 2006). As a result, by
including multiple degrees of task complexity (simple, +complex,
and ++complex), the current study addresses both methodological
concerns regarding distinctive task-complexity levels and theoretical issues related to the construct of task complexity. With regard
to contexts of research, previous task complexity studies often draw
pedagogical implications from either lab-based or classroom-based
studies in which tasks were provided outside course curricula. However, as Robinson (2011) argued, there is a clear need to examine the
generalizability of pedagogical implications drawn from such research
to actual classroom settings in which tasks are implemented following
task-based syllabi.
In sum, the purpose of the current study is to contribute to this line
of research by examining whether the manipulation of multiple levels of
task complexity during task-based instruction has the potential to impact
the occurrence of interaction-driven learning opportunities for question
formation as well as subsequent question development. Additionally,
by implementing tasks in task-based L2 classrooms, the current study
attempts to serve as a bridge addressing both the theoretical and pedagogical implications of the cognition hypothesis. The study is guided
by the following research questions and hypotheses:
1. How does task complexity impact the occurrence of learning opportunities
for questions during task-based learner-learner interaction?
Following Robinson's cognition hypothesis (2001b, 2007a) and some of the
previous classroom-based studies, which provided at least partial support
for the hypothesis (Revesz, 2011), it was hypothesized that increasing task
complexity would encourage learners to produce more learning opportunities
for question formation during learner-learner interaction.

636

YouJin Kim

2. What effect does task complexity have on the extent to which task-based
instruction promotes question development in comparison to traditional
instruction?
Following previous literature that focuses on the benefits of pedagogical
tasks (e.g., Ellis, 2003), it was hypothesized that task-based instruction would
be more beneficial for question development compared to traditional instruction. Furthermore, based on the cognition hypothesis, it was predicted that
more complex tasks would promote learners' question development. This
prediction can also be supported by previous interaction studies that have
demonstrated the benefits of interactional features (e.g., feedback, LREs)
during learner-learner interaction on subsequent L2 development (e.g., Kim,
2008; McDonough & Sunitham, 2009).

METHOD
Participants
The participants were 191 (females, n = 99; males, n = 92) adult EFL students at a large private university in South Korea who were enrolled in
a two-credit freshman English course required for their bachelor's
degree. The learners' ages ranged from 18 to 26 years (M = 18.83;
SD = 1.08), and the length of their previous English study ranged from
6 to 15 years (M = 9.5; SD = 1.88). The learners had taken at least 6 years
of mandatory English classes at junior high and high schools before
enrolling at this university. Approximately 30% of the learners (n = 56)
reported having basic knowledge of another language besides Korean
or English, including Japanese, Chinese, French, and German. Only
2 learners reported studying English in another country (the Philippines
and the United States), with their lengths of stay in those countries
ranging from 1 to 3 months. Based on the Test of English for International
Communication (TOEIC) Bridge scores, the participants' proficiency
ranged from beginners to intermediates (see the Results section for
more information). They were majoring in various undergraduate degree
programs, including education, mass communication, Korean literature,
Chinese, law, social work, agricultural science, and computer science.
Four sections of the same course were selected for the current
study, three of which were randomly assigned to experimental groups
(i.e., task groups) with three levels of task complexity (n = 45 for the
simple group, n = 47 for the +complex group, and n = 51 for the
++complex group), and one of which was assigned to a comparison
group (i.e., no task group; n = 48). Task-based instruction was provided to the three experimental groups, whereas the comparison
group was provided with instructional treatments similar to those
provided by the four instructors who taught the other seven sections of

Task Complexity and Question Development

637

the same course.1 The class met once a week for 2 hr over a 16-week
semester.

Target Linguistic Form
Because the cognition hypothesis claims that increasing the cognitive
demands of tasks results in the learning of developmentally more
advanced forms, a structure with an empirically proven developmental
sequence was considered appropriate for the study (Robinson, 2007a,
2007b; Robinson & Ellis, 2008). Additionally, given that increasing task
complexity is related to increasing the functional demands of using a
particular linguistic feature, it was important to investigate a linguistic
feature that is related to the functional demands of the different task
complexity levels used in the current study (see the Treatment Tasks
section). Although the participants in the current study were expected
to be familiar with the target structure because it was introduced in
their junior high school textbooks, their oral production opportunities
for questions were very limited. Thus, learners' knowledge and use of
English questions were investigated in the current study.
The development of English questions has been widely studied in
previous L2 interaction research (Adams, 2007; Loewen & Nabei,
2007; Mackey, 1999, 2006; Mackey & Philp, 1998; McDonough, 2005;
McDonough & Mackey, 2006; Philp, 2003). The majority of these studies
examined learners' question development by building on the developmental model by Pienemann and Johnston (1987). Following the previous literature, the present study used this question-development
model, which is based on emergence criteria rather than accuracy.2
Pienemann and Johnston's (1987) developmental stages are governed
by processing mechanisms that constrain the movement from one stage to
the next. As learners develop questions through the sequence (i.e., Stage 1
through Stage 6), they progressively start to include question words
and auxiliary verbs, to invert subjects and auxiliary verbs, to avoid
unnecessary auxiliary verbs, and to omit subject auxiliary inversion in
embedded questions (see Appendix for examples). Learners often produce questions from multiple stages in addition to their highest stage.

Instructional Materials
Treatment Tasks. Throughout one semester, the three experimental
groups were provided with task-based instruction. They participated in
a total of 12 tasks, which were organized according to three thematic

638

YouJin Kim

topics of tasks throughout one semester: The World of Work, Travel, and
University Life Events. This study includes learners' task performance
during four tasks in The World of Work unit: (a) finding a part-time job,
(b) working as a matchmaker, (c) discussing promotion opportunities,
and (d) hiring employees. Each topic was chosen on the basis of learners'
needs and interests in both Korean and English.
Based on Robinson's (2001b, 2003, 2005) task-complexity framework, the
complexity variable--[+/-reasoning demands] along resource-directing
dimensions--was operationalized using three different levels: simple task
[-reasoning], +complex task [+reasoning], and ++complex task [++reasoning]. To manipulate different degrees of task complexity between the
+complex task and the ++complex tasks, the [+/-few elements] variable
was used for controlling the number of factors learners needed to make a
decision (see Kuiken & Vedder, 2002, 2007). Other than the task-complexity
factor, task features in all task-based groups were held constant following
Ellis's (2003) positive task characteristics for promoting interaction to
minimize other task variable effects: (a) tasks that are relevant to learners'
current or future needs either in Korean or English and (b) tasks that would
naturally require information exchange as two-way tasks, which have been
found to elicit significantly more conversational adjustments than one-way
tasks (e.g., Gass & Varonis, 1985; Long, 1981; Pica, Young, & Doughty, 1987).
Furthermore, these four tasks were designed as convergent tasks, which
have been found to elicit more interactive features (e.g., more turns per
task, more questions, and more confirmation checks) than divergent tasks
(Duff, 1986; Pica & Doughty, 1985).
Table 1 provides more details of a sample treatment task manipulated along the dimension of task complexity. For instance, learners
were provided with the same task input across the three groups. For
simple tasks, learners were required to exchange necessary information.
For +complex tasks and ++complex tasks, they were asked to make a
decision. Between +complex tasks and ++complex tasks, the number of
considerations for making a decision was the main factor in manipulating
the degree of task complexity.
Tasks were piloted several times with different populations to ensure
that the target learners would carry out the tasks as they were designed in
the given time. All four tasks followed a similar pattern of task design, as
illustrated in Table 1, to minimize the effects of any other task variables.
Traditional Instruction Materials. The syllabus of the comparison group
(i.e., traditional instruction) was designed based on the information
provided by the four instructors of the course. The same themes as
in the experimental groups were used in the comparison group, and
all activities were adapted from the syllabi used by the four instructors. For instance, listening and reading materials dealing with the
characteristics of The World of Work were adapted from commercialized

Procedure

Profile cards and students'
part-time job descriptions
Prepare for a report on
university students'
part-time jobs
1. Both learners had profiles of
four different university
students, including their
part-time jobs.
2. Both learners were missing
some information about
each student's background.
3. In order to complete a report
of university students'
part-time jobs, both learners
collected information from
their partners.

Simple [-reasoning]

Profile cards and available
part-time job descriptions
Decide appropriate
part-time jobs
for students
1. Both learners had profiles of
four different university
students, including their
part-time jobs.
2. Both learners were missing
some information about
each student's background.
3. Based on each learner's
background, learners were
asked to suggest appropriate
part-time jobs for each student.
[-few elements]
Four considerations should
be met for their decision.

[+few elements]
Two considerations should
be met for their decision.

++Complex [++reasoning]

Profile cards and available
part-time job descriptions
Decide appropriate
part-time jobs
for students
1. Both learners had profiles of
four different university
students, including their
part-time jobs.
2. Both learners were missing
some information about
each student's background.
3. Based on each learner's
background, learners were
asked to suggest appropriate
part-time jobs for each student.

+Complex [+reasoning]

Descriptions of a treatment task ("University Students' Part-Time Job") by task complexity

Task outcome

Task input

Table 1.

Task Complexity and Question Development
639

640

YouJin Kim

textbooks (e.g., Schoenberg, 2006). Different types of listening and
reading comprehension questions such as fill-in-the-blanks, true-false
questions, and vocabulary practice questions were used in the comparison group. Furthermore, one main difference between the task-based
and comparison groups was related to learner-learner interaction. The
members of the comparison group were not provided with any type of
learner-learner interaction activities during their regular instruction. In
addition to their regular instruction, the comparison group members
participated in all of the pretests, posttests, and delayed posttests.

Testing Materials
Measure of General English Proficiency. To assess learners' general
English proficiency, the TOEIC Bridge was administered on the second
day of the course. The TOEIC Bridge is a short version of the TOEIC,
which is an English proficiency test for nonnative speakers of English. The
TOEIC Bridge was developed by the Educational Testing Service (ETS) for
beginning- to high-intermediate-level learners of English. It measures the
emerging receptive skills (i.e., listening and reading comprehension) of
early learners in an international environment. The TOEIC Bridge is
a paper-and-pencil, multiple-choice test that includes 50 questions in each
of two sections: listening and reading. The test took about 1 hr to complete
(25 min for the listening section and 35 min for the reading section). Test
results were used to determine learners' general proficiency level and to
ensure that the participants in the experimental and comparison groups
were comparable at the start of data collection.
Measures of Question Development. To measure the use of question
forms in a variety of communicative settings, three tests--two individual
oral production tests and one paired oral production test--were designed.
Three different versions of each test were designed for the pretest,
posttest 1, and posttest 2. The first individual oral test provided six
different cartoons with short descriptions and asked learners to create
questions or make conversation on the basis of prompts (e.g., picture:
Tom talking to a secretary at a gym; scenario given: Tom wants to
join a fitness center. Tom is asking several questions about the gym.) Different scenarios were provided for three versions of the tests. The second individual oral test asked the learners to make at least five interview
questions for four interview situations (e.g., an interview for a potential
scholarship recipient to come to the United States). Different interview
descriptions were provided for three versions of the tests (pretest,
posttest 1, and posttest 2). For the paired oral production tasks, the
learners were asked to select various topics (e.g., e-mail, school) and

Task Complexity and Question Development

641

interview one another in a natural communication setting. The learners
were given 20 min for the two individual oral tests and 20 min for
the paired tests. The three versions of the oral production tests were
different from the treatment tasks to avoid problems associated with
the use of identical treatment and testing materials.

Procedure
The present study was carried out over 6 weeks, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In Week 1, the learners took the TOEIC Bridge and filled out a background questionnaire. The pretest was given during the second week,
and interaction tasks were provided to task groups (i.e., simple, +complex,
and ++complex) during Weeks 3 and 4, whereas the traditional group
followed the regular syllabus adapted from other instructors. During
task performance, learners were asked to choose their own partners
and keep the same partners while carrying out the four tasks to avoid
any interlocutor factors. Each task was carried out in 40-45 min.
The first posttest was conducted during Week 5, and the second posttest
was carried out during Week 6, which was 2 weeks after instruction.
Each posttest was composed of three test tasks (two individual test
tasks and one paired test task) and took 40 min to complete.

Data Coding
Treatment Task Performance. Learners' recordings during treatment
sessions were transcribed by the researcher and four research assistants.

Figure 1. Procedure of the study.

642

YouJin Kim

To identify the occurrence of learning opportunities during taskbased learner-learner interaction, the number of LREs involving the
target structures during the four tasks were identified and summed.
In the current study, LREs are defined following Swain and Lapkin
(1998) as "any part of a dialogue where the students talk about the
language they are producing, question their language use, or correct
themselves or others" (p. 326). Language-related episodes involving
questions were defined as any instance of dialogue in which learners
provided explicit and implicit feedback or asked explicit questions
about question formation using either Korean or English. Depending
on the target question form, more than one linguistic issue regarding
question formation (e.g., wh-word, auxiliary choice) addressed
during several turns could be included within one LRE, as illustrated
in example (1). In example (1), Learner 1 asked a question regarding
the wh-word choice (line 1). In line 4, Learner 2 provided feedback
(i.e., a recast on Learner 1's wrong question formation). Then, Learner
2 also suggested the object of the verb read in a question. Overall,
these two learners in example (1) took several turns to create one
question, and these turns were counted as one LRE focusing on one
target question.
(1)

LRE involving questions
1 Learner 1: Does he read . . . how long?
asking for time length, do we use "how long"?)
2 Learner 2: (Yes).
3 Learner 1: How long read?
4 Learner 2: How long does he read?
5 Learner 1: How long does he read?
6 Learner 2: Read book?
7 Learner 1: Yes. How long does he read book?
8 Learner 2: He reads books for two hours.

how long

? (When

Stage 5

Once LREs involving questions were determined, the question that
the learners had discussed in each LRE was coded for its developmental stage (see Appendix for question development stages). Although the
total number of LREs involving questions provides useful information
regarding the extent to which learners paid attention to form, not all
LREs would necessarily trigger L2 development. For instance, when a
learner's question stage was identified as Stage 3 on the pretest, producing LREs involving Stage 3 questions might not be as beneficial for
L2 learning as those targeting developmentally advanced forms (e.g.,
Stage 4 or Stage 5). Therefore, producing Stage 4 and Stage 5 question
types during LREs generates learning opportunities for developmentally advanced forms.3 To provide further insight into learning opportunities for such forms, a subset of LREs involving Stage 4 and Stage 5 was
considered separately for further analysis.

Task Complexity and Question Development

643

When assigning stages, the last utterance in the LRE was considered.
For instance, in example (1), after several turns, the last question form
produced by Learner 1 was How long does he read book, and Stage 5
was assigned to this LRE. However, not all LREs involving questions were
relevant to the question-stage assignment in the study (e.g., when learners
asked for explicit questions regarding question formation without producing actual questions, or when there was no resolution of questionrelated LREs). The researcher coded all data, and a second rater coded
data from 25% of the participants. The Cohen's kappa for the interrater
reliability was .84 for identifying LREs involving questions.
Oral Production Tests. To assess performance, individual questions
produced during each test task (i.e., pretest, posttest 1, and posttest 2)
were coded according to the question development stages discussed
previously. When identifying learners' developmental stages on each
test, a conservative emergence criterion was used: Each learner was
assigned to the highest level on the scale for which the learner produced
two questions with unique lexical items for at least two out of three test
tasks. This was similar to the criterion used in other SLA studies involving question development (e.g., Mackey & Philp, 1998; McDonough,
2005; McDonough & Mackey, 2006; Philp, 2003; Spada & Lightbown,
1993). The test data from 30% of the participants were coded by the
second coder, and the Cohen's kappa for interrater reliability was
.91 for question-stage assignment, and .96 for identifying stage increase
or no stage increase from pretest to posttests.

Analysis
Task Performance. For research question 1, once the question-related
LREs were coded, the number of LREs from the four treatment tasks
was added, and the three task groups' total numbers were compared.
To identify to what extent task complexity mediated the occurrence of
developmentally advanced target features, LREs involving developmentally advanced questions were further analyzed in addition to LREs
involving questions in general. For the occurrence of LREs, thus, two
separate one-way ANOVAs were computed for research question 1
with LREs involving all stages of questions and with LREs involving
developmentally advanced question forms (i.e., Stage 4 and Stage 5).
Oral Production Tests. After determining each learner's question
stage in each of the tests (pretest, posttest 1, and posttest 2), learners were
classified as either developed or not developed. Following previous interaction studies (e.g., McDonough, 2005), development was operationalized as

644

YouJin Kim

a learner's movement to a higher stage in the developmental sequence
on both posttests.4 Learners who did not advance to a higher stage on
either posttest or advanced to a higher stage on only one posttest were
classified as no development. To examine whether there was a main
effect for task complexity, a chi-square test was conducted. In terms of
identifying statistical significance, alpha was set at .05 for all statistical
tests. Furthermore, for all statistically significant results, the effect size
using partial 2 was used.
RESULTS
Results of the Proficiency Test: TOEIC Bridge
To ensure the four groups were comparable in their general English
proficiency, the TOEIC Bridge was administered. The maximum score
on the TOEIC Bridge is 180: 90 for each of the two sections (listening
and reading). Descriptive statistics for the TOEIC Bridge for each of the
four classes participating are provided in Table 2.
Overall, the total TOEIC Bridge scores ranged from 64 to 164 (M = 115.66,
SD = 19.26), which is comparable to the range of a paper-based TOEFL
between 331 to 489, indicating that the participants' proficiency ranged
from that of beginners to that of high intermediates. A one-way ANOVA
was carried out to compare learners' English proficiency in the four
groups. Results showed that there was no significant difference between
the four classes, F(3, 187) = 2.69, p > .05, which suggested that the
English proficiency level of each class was comparable.
Task Complexity and Learning Opportunities for Questions
Research question 1 investigated the role of task complexity in the
occurrence of learning opportunities for question formations. Because
Table 2. Descriptive statistics for TOEIC Bridge
Simple
(n = 45)

Listening
Reading
Total

+Complex
(n = 47)

++Complex
(n = 51)

Traditional
(n = 48)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

61.91
58.31
120.22

11.65
11.47
21.86

57.15
53.87
111.02

9.65
9.52
17.48

59.96
58.78
118.82

10.71
9.15
19.09

58.38
54.29
112.58

9.02
10.74
18.52

Note. M = mean, SD = standard deviation.

645

Task Complexity and Question Development

the comparison group did not participate in any interactive tasks, only
results from the three experimental groups (i.e., task groups) are
considered for this question. Two dependent variables were included.
First, the total number of LREs involving questions during each of the
four tasks was examined. Additionally, to gain further insight into the
learning opportunities for developmentally advanced questions, LREs
involving Stage 4 and Stage 5 were analyzed separately. Table 3 shows
the descriptive statistics for the number of LREs.
Descriptive statistics for the occurrence of LREs indicated that the
++complex group (M = 57.55) generated the greatest number of questionrelated LREs. The +complex group (M = 50.09) produced more LREs
involving questions compared to the simple group (M = 42.58). In terms
of LREs involving developmentally advanced questions, as shown in
Table 3, the ++complex group (M = 32.41) produced a larger number of
LREs involving Stage 4 and Stage 5 than the simple group (M = 24.80)
and the +complex group (M = 27. 21).
To answer the first research question, which focuses on the relationship
between task complexity and the occurrence of learning opportunities,
two separate one-way ANOVAs were conducted after checking the
assumptions for using the ANOVAs. The results demonstrated that task
complexity significantly affected the occurrence of LREs involving questions, F(2, 140) = 14.35, p < .05, partial 2 = .17. The Bonferroni post hoc
comparisons indicated that the ++complex group (M = 57.55) produced
significantly more LREs involving questions than both the +complex
(M = 50.09) and the simple (M = 42.85) groups, and the +complex group
produced significantly more LREs than the simple group. Therefore, the
findings of the post hoc analysis showed that the significant main effect
for task complexity was due to the differences among all three levels of
task complexity.
With regard to LREs involving developmentally advanced questions,
the results of the one-way ANOVA revealed that there was a significant
main effect for task complexity F(2, 140) = 4.56, p < .05, partial 2 = .06.
Table 3.

Descriptive statistics for LREs involving questions
Simple
(n = 45)

All LREs involving
questions
LREs involving
advanced questions

+Complex
(n = 47)

++Complex
(n = 51)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

42.58

17.25

50.09

9.51

57.55

13.36

24.80

14.73

27.21

9.21

32.41

13.48

Note. M = mean, SD = standard deviation.

646

YouJin Kim

The Bonferroni post hoc comparisons pinpointed a significant difference
between the ++complex (M = 32.41) group and the simple (M = 24.80)
group, indicating the ++complex group had significantly more learning
opportunities for developmentally advanced questions than the simple
group. However, no difference was found between the +complex
(M = 27.21) and the ++complex groups on the number of LREs with
developmentally advanced question stages. Also, no significant difference was found between the simple group and the +complex group in
the number of LREs involving Stage 4 and Stage 5 questions.
To summarize, results of research question 1 indicated that there was
a significant main effect for task complexity on the learning opportunities for questions as measured by the number of LREs, with the
++complex group producing the greatest amount of LREs involving
questions. Additionally, the +complex group had a greater number of
LREs than the simple group. A similar pattern was found when focusing
on the LREs that involved developmentally advanced questions. However,
a significant difference was found between the ++complex and the
simple groups only.

Benefits of Task-Based Instruction and the Role of Task Complexity
in Question Development
The second research question investigated the relationship between
instruction types and Korean EFL learners' question development.
Additionally, the relationship between task complexity and question
development among task-based groups was explored. To ensure
there were no preexisting differences among groups in terms of
learners' question developmental stage on the oral production test,
learners' initial developmental stage as observed on the pretest was
identified. As shown in Table 4, 131 of 191 students were determined
as initially being in Stage 3, whereas 60 students were in Stage 4.
Results of a chi-square test suggested that there was no significant
relationship between the number of learners in each stage and
task-complexity group, suggesting that the groups were comparable
(2 = 1.39, p > .05).
Table 4. Learners' initial question stages on the pretest

Stage 3
Stage 4

Traditional
(n = 48)

Simple
(n = 45)

+Complex
(n = 47)

++Complex
(n = 51)

31 (65%)
17 (35%)

29 (64%)
16 (36%)

34 (72%)
13 (28%)

37 (73%)
14 (27%)

647

Task Complexity and Question Development

Table 5. Summary of question development by groups

No development
Development

Traditional
(n = 48)

Simple
(n = 45)

+Complex
(n = 47)

++Complex
(n = 51)

26 (54%)
22 (46%)

15 (33%)
30 (67%)

13 (28%)
34 (72%)

9 (18%)
42 (82%)

Note. 2 = 15.78, df = (2, 191), p < .05.

Table 5 displays the number of learners in the traditional group and
the three task groups who advanced to a higher stage or who failed to
advance to a higher stage. As described previously, after determining
each learner's question stages on each of the tests (pretest, posttest 1,
and posttest 2), the learners were classified as either developed or not
developed. Among the task-based groups, 30 (67%) out of 45 learners
from the simple group, 34 (72%) out of 47 learners from the +complex
group, and 42 (82%) out of 51 learners from the ++complex group
advanced to a higher stage of question development. In contrast, only
22 (46%) out of 48 learners in the comparison group (i.e., traditional
instruction group) advanced to a higher stage of question development.
The assumptions for using the chi-square test were met, and the
results indicated that the relationship between the classes and English
question development was significant (2 = 15.78, p < .05). Analysis of
the adjusted standardized residual (Haberman, 1973) located the
significance with the performance of the ++complex group (2.7) and
the comparison group (3.5). Overall, the results of research question 2
revealed that task-based language teaching, which provides ++complex
tasks, promoted question development in comparison to traditional
instruction.
DISCUSSION
The cognition hypothesis claims that increasing the complexity of tasks,
which requires more cognitive-conceptual demands, induces more
interaction, uptake of linguistic forms, and subsequent L2 development
(Robinson, 2007b). The current study tested this claim by operationalizing learning opportunities as the number of LREs involving questions
and operationalizing question development as question-stage advances
based on Pienemann and Johnston (1987).5 In terms of learning opportunities, the findings of the current study were in line with Robinson's
claims that complex tasks induced significantly more LREs than less
cognitively complex tasks. These findings echo those of previous classroom-based learner-learner interaction studies (e.g., Revesz, 2011;

648

YouJin Kim

Robinson, 2007b), which showed that more complex tasks promoted
the occurrence of beneficial interactional features such as LREs,
clarification requests, and confirmation checks. One important methodological issue when examining the role of task complexity was to
ensure that the target structure is related to the task demands of different levels of task complexity. Overall, question forms were appropriate target structures in that they were related to linguistic demands
imposed on the learners who participated in more complex tasks in
the current study (i.e., requiring learners to compare information
while making a decision).
The simple group had the fewest learning opportunities involving
questions, which was perhaps due to the fact that the nature of the
interaction is different in simple versus complex tasks. Learners in the
simple group took shorter turns and exchanged phrases by asking
questions on the basis of information they were provided in their task
input, rarely discussing issues on the task input further. To illustrate
this observation, example (2) is taken from two learners in the simple
group. In this example, two learners were exchanging information
regarding university student profiles to complete a simple version of
the task "University Students' Part-Time Job." Because the simple task
only required students to exchange information without reasoning to
complete the task, their question formations seemed to be limited to
the amount of missing information.
(2) Two learners in the simple group during "University students' part-time job"
1 Learner 1: What is her dream job in ten years?
2 Learner 2: She want to open her own hair salon.
Stage 3
3 Learner 1: Where she want to place?
4 Learner 2: He want in Pusan.
5 Learner 1: When she move?

As shown in example (2), these two learners basically asked questions
to complete the task without any LREs. For instance, when Learner 1
asked about a student's dream place to open a hair salon, she produced
a Stage 3 question (line 3) without inversion. Neither Learner 1 nor
Learner 2 paid attention to the question form at that time, and Learner
2 answered the question with the name of the location. It appeared that,
because of the nature of the task (e.g., information gap), if there were no
communication breakdowns, the learners in the simple group tended to
pay less attention to question forms. Additionally, the question types
and structures were rather limited to the information that they needed
to collect to complete the task.
In contrast, as Robinson (2007b) claimed, more complex tasks generated more turns and consisted of a greater amount of negotiation and
LREs. Furthermore, increasing the cognitive and conceptual demands

Task Complexity and Question Development

649

of the tasks led the learner to produce pushed output to meet those
demands, causing reanalysis and restructuring of current linguistic
resources. Example (3) illustrates two learners' interaction in the ++complex
group during the same task. These two learners were discussing the same
part of the task as the students in (2). For the decision-making requirement of the ++complex tasks, learners were asked to suggest an appropriate part-time job for the university students on the basis of their
profiles provided in the task input.
(3)

Two learners in the ++complex group during "University Students' PartTime Job"
1 Learner 1: What is her dream job?
2 Learner 2: She wants to have her hair salon.
Stage 3
3 Learner 1: What she wants?
4 Learner 2: What? Where . . Where she . . . no . . . Where does she want to
open?
5 Learner 1: Yes. Where . . . Where . . . Where does she want?
Stage 5
6 Learner 2: In Pusan. Have you been Pusan?
7 Learner 1: Of course, I love Kwanghali. Let's go. (laugh) ------------------------------------------------------------------------ (several turns later)
Stage 3 (without a
8 Learner 2: What part-time job for her?
verb phrase)
(What do you mean?)
9 Learner 1:
Stage 4
10 Learner 2: What job is good for her major?
11 Learner 1: Work at a hair salon. Her major is Beauty Design. What do you
think?
12 Learner 2: I agree.

When Learner 1 asked the question, What she wants (line 3), Learner
2 tried to clarify the question by questioning the wh-word choice (line 4).
After receiving Learner 2's feedback, Learner 1 restated her question
with an inverted question (line 5). Also, the target question that triggered the LRE in line 4 was a Stage 5 question. It was interesting to see
how both the learners in (2) and those in (3) commonly had difficulty
in producing a developmentally advanced question form at the same
point. The nature of the ++complex tasks entailed greater communicative demands because while suggesting an appropriate part-time job
for students, learners were also required to ask more questions to
compare information and get their partner's opinion, thus leading to
increased comprehension and production difficulty and a correspondingly larger amount of noticing target structures. By resolving this LRE
with a Stage 5 question, two learners in the ++complex group had the
opportunity to construct a developmentally advanced question. Additionally, as they were trying to make a decision, they created original
questions to review the task input, and those questions were often

650

YouJin Kim

developmentally advanced due to the nature of decision making (lines
10-11). Furthermore, learners who were in the +complex and ++complex
groups used the task input to expand their conversation (e.g., asking
personal experiences), which naturally generated more questions
during their interactions (lines 6-7).
Overall, as Robinson (2007a) argued, the findings of the study suggested that complex task features manipulated by reasoning demands
promoted learners' analysis of their current interlanguage system of
the target features (line 4 in example [3]). Learners attempted to draw
attention only to task-relevant constructions and those whose use would
be affected by different degrees of task complexity. For instance, results
of the current study indicate that reasoning demands provide more
learning opportunities for asking questions during decision-making processes through language output and interaction (Long, 1996; Swain,
1995).6 In particular, as shown in example (4), complex versions of tasks
required learners to compare the information (line 3) and to make a
decision (line 8). Such features of the complex versions of the tasks
instigated more interaction-driven language learning opportunities
because they created more communication breakdowns between
learners due to the need to ask for more specific information (lines 5
and 9) (Gass, Mackey, & Ross-Feldman, 2005; Revesz, 2011).
(4)

Two learners in the ++complex group during "Working as a matchmaker"
1 Learner 1: Minho Seo, what is his hobby?
2 Learner 2: Go swimming and watch movie.
3 Learner 1: Who who enjoy enjoys similar hobbies?
4 Learner 2: Similar hobby? Suha. What she like?
5 Learner 1: What?
6 Learner 2: What is Suha like?
7 Learner 1: Read book.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (several turns later)
8 Learner 1:
(Let's decide.) You think Suha want man who?
Stage 2
9 Learner 2:
who
. (What? [That sounds] strange.
You should start with "who." )
10 Learner 1:
(How can I ask "what
kind of man does she want?" )
11 Learner 2: What did she want?
Is this right?
Stage 5
12 Learner 1: Oh . . . Baesuk Jang.

Furthermore, while justifying and explaining their reasons for making
different decisions, learners were pushed to produce more complex
language to meet the greater functional and conceptual communicative
demands. Although learners' pushed output may not necessarily lead
to more accurate language use (see lines 6 and 11 in example [4]), it
allowed learners to encounter linguistic problems, which, in turn, led

Task Complexity and Question Development

651

them to notice the gaps in their own interlanguage (Doughty & Williams,
1998; Swain, 1995).
The cognition hypothesis was generally confirmed for question
development in that there was a significant relationship between task
complexity and question development identified dichotomously following
previous oral interaction studies: stage increase (i.e., developed) versus
no stage increase (i.e., not developed) (e.g., Mackey, 2006; McDonough,
2005; McDonough & Mackey, 2006). The more complex tasks pushed
learners to use more advanced forms because cognitively complex tasks
may require the learners to ask various types of questions (Robinson,
personal communication, March 22, 2009). For instance, as shown previously in (3) (lines 8-10) and (4) (lines 8-12), it was found that learners
often attempted to ask more advanced questions when asking their
partner to make a decision.
Results suggest that linguistic forms that were relevant to the cognitiveconceptual demands of the tasks received more attention during
complex tasks than during simple tasks, which in turn led to linguistic
development. Such pushed output with a target structure during task
performance should contribute to L2 development, especially as
measured by oral production (Swain, 1995, 1998).
Research question 2 investigated to what extent tasks with different
degrees of task complexity promote Korean EFL learners' question development compared to the traditional instruction. Descriptive results
demonstrated a clear trend that task groups outperformed the traditional
instruction group in terms of question development. However, the statistical analysis indicated that a significant relationship was seen in the
traditional instruction group and the ++complex group only. In other
words, the results suggested that +complex and simple tasks did not
significantly drive learners' question-stage increase.
It is important to notice that the current study was different from
previous ones in that this investigation chose target structures (i.e.,
question formations) that are acquired by L2 learners following their
developmental sequence proposed by Pienemann and Johnston (1987).
This allowed more specific evidence of the relationship between task
complexity, learning opportunities for developmentally advanced L2
structures, and subsequent L2 learning. For instance, as noted previously, although the +complex group produced significantly more LREs
involving all question forms than the simple group, there was no difference
in the number of LREs targeting developmentally advanced question
forms (i.e., Stage 4 and Stage 5 questions) between the simple and the
+complex groups. Based on these findings, it can be inferred that producing LREs involving developmentally advanced forms would directly
drive L2 development, whereas LREs involving a lower stage than or the
same stage as the learners' current stage may not have the same positive
impact on L2 development.

652

YouJin Kim

To date, very little research has investigated the direct relationship
between task complexity and L2 development of specific linguistic
constructions during learner-learner interaction. One example is
Nuevo (2006), a study focusing on two linguistic features: past tense
and locative pronouns. Her findings were not in line with Robinson's
claims in that no differences were found between simple and complex
task versions on learners' oral production test scores. As interaction
researchers have addressed (Jeon, 2007; Williams & Evans, 1998),
learner-learner interaction may be differentially effective in terms of
the development of different areas of language. It may be, as Mackey
(2006) suggests, that learners notice their interlanguage gaps with certain structures more than others. Therefore, the effects of tasks with
various degrees of complexity may not be the same for different target
structures. Perceptually salient linguistic structures for completing
tasks--such as the questions in the current study--are likely to result
in communication breakdowns and thus are more sensitively influenced by different levels of task complexity.
From a methodological perspective, the current study has provided
information regarding the importance of treating task complexity along
a continuum rather than as a dichotomous construct. This finding is
supported especially with the learning opportunity data. For instance,
although significant differences were found among the three groups
when comparing LREs involving questions in general, LREs involving
developmentally advanced questions were produced substantially
more often by the ++complex group than the other two groups. Such
findings suggest that only the ++complex tasks led to significantly more
learning opportunities for developmentally advanced constructions
during which learners actually produced the advanced question forms.
As a result, among task groups, only the ++complex tasks were positively associated with L2 development.
The current study addresses several pedagogical implications for
adapting task-based syllabi in large L2 classroom contexts. With higher
ecological validity than studies in laboratory contexts (Gass et al.,
2005), the findings suggest that task groups showed more positive
learning outcomes compared to the traditional instruction group.
A central concern for L2 language teachers is how to design tasks to
help the learning and teaching of particular aspects of language. Even
though some researchers argue that this should not be the principal
contribution of tasks (e.g., Long, 1996; Skehan, 1998), most L2 practitioners would agree that a primary challenge is to design tasks that
provide learners with opportunities both to engage in meaningful interaction and to direct their attention to linguistic forms (McDonough &
Mackey, 2000). The current study took the position of directing learners'
attention to linguistic forms. It also explored how task complexity would
impact the occurrence of meaningful interaction, which entails learning

Task Complexity and Question Development

653

opportunities for linguistic structures as well as the learners' linguistic
development.
The findings indicated that manipulating task complexity was found
to be an important factor in promoting a greater amount of interactional
features. As a result, findings suggest that task complexity is an important
variable that can impact the amount of meaningful interaction as well as
learners' attention to linguistic forms in task-based instruction contexts.
However, to design such pedagogic tasks, one must be certain about
functional and linguistic demands of tasks with different levels (e.g., what
kinds of tasks would meet the needs of target learners, what kinds of
task-complexity variables are appropriate, or what kinds of linguistic
demands are related to task demands?). Thus, the vexing question is
not just to determine what level of task complexity to create but to identify
what task demands and linguistic demands should be targeted to promote
L2 learning when designing tasks with various levels of complexity.7
More specifically, carefully designed pedagogic tasks can influence the
quantity and quality of learning opportunities for developmentally
advanced linguistic forms that occur in L2 classrooms, in terms of both
interaction and production practice.
There are several limitations to the current study that need to be
addressed in future research. The first limitation is related to external validity. The study included relatively homogeneous participants
in terms of their age, previous English instruction, and overseas
living experiences to control for possible intervening variables other
than the target variables of interest. However, due to the characteristics of participants included in the study, findings cannot be generalized to other populations or teaching contexts. Therefore, replication
studies in a variety of contexts with different language learners are
highly desirable. There is a need for more research to learn about
the role of task complexity with different age groups and various target languages as well as pedagogical topics targeting different aspects
of L2 learning.
The second limitation is related to the operationalization of learning
opportunities and data coding. The current study took a global approach
when determining learning opportunities by analyzing LREs as defined
by Swain and Lapkin (1998). Most previous studies have operationalized learning opportunities with more specific analysis units by
including different types of feedback, including clarification requests
(e.g., Revesz, 2011; Robinson, 2007b). Such studies found that task
complexity impacted the occurrence of certain feedback types more
than others. Because the current study focused on the resolution of
LREs (i.e., question stages), a global approach was more appropriate.
Due to the nature of the data analysis, these results cannot provide
insights into what types of feedback learners offered to one another
during LREs. Therefore, additional data analyses with more specific

654

YouJin Kim

feedback types would provide insightful information on the nature of
learning opportunities.
The current study operationalized task complexity on the basis of
one variable (i.e., +/-reasoning demands), and the validity of different
degrees in task complexity was not tested. Future studies would benefit
from validating different levels of task complexity, as proposed by
Revesz (2011). Additionally, this study manipulated only one taskcomplexity variable, with two types of tasks. To gain better insight and
more pertinent data for the cognition hypothesis, there is a need for more
experiments that test the hypothesis with a variety of task types that are
manipulated by other variables in Robinson's framework (Kim, 2009a).
Furthermore, as Skehan (2003) addressed, an obviously relevant set of
variables, which has received increasing attention in previous literature,
concerns learner variables such as task motivation (Dornyei & Tseng,
2009), anxiety, and working memory. What has been lacking in previous
studies is systematic research that probes just how learner variables
may impact the role of task complexity. Furthermore, as instructional
settings have expanded due to the benefits of technology, not only
face-to-face interaction but also other types of interaction settings such
as computer-mediated communication contexts need to be explored
further (Baralt, 2010). More research on this issue may be possible
to increase the sensitivity of research designs and pedagogical implications in task-based language teaching.
CONCLUSION
Building off of previous research testing the cognition hypothesis, the
inclusion of a specific target structure in the current study provided
further insight into how different levels of learning opportunities mediated by task complexity may result in different degrees of L2 learning
during meaning-oriented tasks. Results of this study suggest that, to
maximize learning opportunities and L2 development in task-based
language teaching contexts, variables that manipulate task complexity
in Robinson's triadic framework need to be considered by L2 practitioners when designing tasks. In particular, as highlighted previously,
when considering different levels of task complexity, the functional
demands--and not just the cognitive demands--created by tasks with
different task-complexity levels should be taken into consideration,
particularly those related to the linguistic demands imposed on the
learners. As Robinson (2011) suggests, more classroom-based research
is needed to demonstrate the generalizability of the findings of laboratory
studies for the role of task complexity on interaction-driven learning
in classroom contexts with learners from diverse backgrounds. The
current study tried to help fill this research gap, keeping in mind that

Task Complexity and Question Development

655

different task-complexity variables under Robinson's triadic components
should continue to be examined to implement optimal L2 learning environments in task-based language teaching contexts.
(Received 14 November 2011)
NOTES
1. The four instructors are university faculty members who hold PhDs in English.
Individual interviews were carried out to collect information about their courses. The
results showed that no unified textbook was chosen among the four instructors, and their
syllabi were designed based on topics and relevant vocabulary. The instructors mainly
used both reading and listening materials that focused on improving vocabulary, pronunciation, and grammar. They provided different reading and listening materials adapted
from newspapers, magazines, and movies and mainly focused on comprehension
skills. Because of the large class size (approximately 55-60 students in one section),
learner-learner interaction was not highlighted in their course plan.
2. See Gass and Selinker (2008) and Norris and Ortega (2003) for an extended discussion
on how to measure L2 acquisition.
3. An anonymous SSLA reviewer pointed out that identifying Stage 4 and Stage 5
questions as developmentally advanced structures for learners whose question stage
was assigned as Stage 4 on the pretest might not be appropriate. However, because the
study included learners at both Stages 3 and 4 on the pretest, and both types of learners
generated LREs in pairs, it was not possible to separate learners at Stage 3 and Stage 4 in
the analysis. When interpreting the results, these issues need to be considered.
4. In the current study, question development was identified within a two-week timeline. Thus, to be considered as developed, learners must demonstrate stage increases on
the immediate posttest and must maintain their stage increases on the delayed posttest.
5. An anonymous SSLA reviewer questioned whether task accomplishment was comparable in all three groups. Additionally, the reviewer suggested that how well each group
accomplished tasks should be taken into consideration. The current study controlled for
time on task in each group only. The actual quality or outcome of the task accomplishment, which is an important issue in task-based language teaching, needs to be addressed
in future studies.
6. As an anonymous SSLA reviewer noted, other linguistic forms can be addressed
due to reasoning demands (e.g., subordinate clauses, comparatives). The current study
only focused on question forms due to the existing developmental sequence for questions
to test Robinson's claim regarding promoting acquisition of developmentally advanced
forms by increasing task complexity.
7. I appreciate the comments made by an anonymous SSLA reviewer, who pinpointed
this issue.
REFERENCES
Adams, R. (2007). Do second language learners benefit from interacting with each other?
In A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second language acquisition (pp. 29-51).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baralt, M. (2010). Task complexity, the cognition hypothesis and interaction in CMC
and FTF environments. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.
Bygate, M., Skehan, P., & Swain, M. (Eds.) (2001). Researching pedagogic tasks, second
language learning, teaching and testing. London: Longman.
Dornyei, Z., & Tseng, W. (2009). Motivational processing in interactional tasks. In A. Mackey &
C. Polio (Eds.), Multiple perspectives on interaction: Second language research in honor
of Susan M. Gass (pp. 117-134). London: Routledge.

656

YouJin Kim

Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Eds.). (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language
acquisition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Duff, P. (1986). Another look at interlanguage talk: Taking task to task. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking
to learn (pp. 147-181). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gass, S. M., Mackey, A., & Ross-Feldman, L. (2005). Task-based interactions in classroom
and laboratory settings. Language Learning, 55, 575-611.
Gass, S., & Selinker, G. (2008). Second language acquisition: An introductory course (3rd ed.).
London: Routledge.
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. (1985). Task variation and non-native/non-native negotiation of
meaning. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp.149-161).
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Gilabert, R. (2007). Effects of manipulating task complexity on self-repairs during L2 oral
production. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 45,
215-240.
Gilabert, R., Baron, J., & Llanes, A. (2009). Manipulating cognitive complexity across task
types and its impact on learners' interaction during oral performance. International
Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 47, 367-395.
Haberman, S. (1973). The analysis of residuals in cross-classified tables. Biometrics, 29,
205-220.
Ishikawa, T. (2007). The effect of manipulating task complexity along the +/- dimension on
L2 written narrative discourse. In M. P. Garcia Mayo (Ed.), Investigating tasks in formal
language learning (pp. 157-176). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Jeon, K. S. (2007). Interaction-driven L2 learning: Characterizing linguistic development.
In A. Mackey (Ed.), Interactional feedback and second language acquisition (pp. 379-403).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kim, Y. (2008). The contribution of collaborative and individual tasks to the acquisition of
L2 vocabulary. Modern Language Journal, 92, 114-130.
Kim, Y. (2009a). The effects of task complexity on learner-learner interaction. System, 37,
254-268.
Kim, Y. (2009b). The role of task complexity and pair grouping on the occurrence of learning
opportunities and L2 development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Kuiken, F., Mos, M., & Vedder, I. (2005). Cognitive task complexity and second language
writing performance. In S. Foster-Cohen, M. P. Garcia-Mayo, & J. Cenoz (Eds.), Eurosla
Yearbook (Vol. 5, pp. 195-222). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kuiken, F., & Vedder, I. (2002). The effect of interaction in acquiring the grammar of a
second language. International Journal of Educational Research, 37, 343-358.
Kuiken, F., & Vedder, I. (2007). Cognitive task complexity and linguistic performance in
French L2 writing. In M. P. Garcia-Mayo (Ed.), Investigating tasks in formal language
settings (pp. 117-135). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Lee, Y. (2002). Effects of task complexity on the complexity and accuracy of oral production
in L2 Korean. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Hawai`i, Manoa.
Loewen, S., & Nabei, T. (2007). Measuring the effects of oral corrective feedback on L2
knowledge. In A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second language acquisition (pp. 361-378). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Long, M. (1981). Input, interaction and second language acquisition. In H. Winitz (Ed.),
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences conference on native and foreign language
acquisition (pp. 159-278). New York: New York Academy of Sciences.
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition.
In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on language acquisition
(pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development: An empirical
study of question formation in ESL. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21,
557-587.
Mackey, A. (2006). Feedback, noticing and second language development: An empirical
study of L2 classroom interaction. Applied Linguistics, 27, 379-394.
Mackey, A., & Philp, J. (1998). Conversational interaction and second language development: Recasts, responses, and red herrings? Modern Language Journal, 82, 338-356.

Task Complexity and Question Development

657

McDonough, K. (2005). Identifying the contributions of negative feedback and learners'
responses to L2 development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 79-103.
McDonough, K., & Mackey, A. (2000). Form and meaning: Designing communicative tasks
to target grammar in Thai classrooms. Foreign Language Annals, 33, 82-92.
McDonough, K., & Mackey, A. (2006). Responses to recasts: Repetitions, primed production,
and linguistic development. Language Learning, 56, 693-720.
McDonough, K., & Sunitham, W. (2009). Collaborative dialogue between Thai EFL learners
during self-access computer activities. TESOL Quarterly, 43, 231-254.
Michel, M., Kuiken, F., & Vedder, I. (2007). The influence of complexity in monologic versus
dialogic tasks in Dutch L2. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language
Teaching, 45, 241-259.
Norris, J., & Ortega, L. (2003). Defining and measuring SLA. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long
(Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 717-761). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Nuevo, A. (2006). Task complexity and interaction: L2 learning opportunities and development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Philp, J. (2003). Constraints on "noticing the gap": Nonnative speakers' noticing of recasts
in NS-NNS interaction. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 25, 99-126.
Philp, J., Oliver, R., & Mackey, A. (2006). The impact of planning time on children's taskbased interactions. System, 34, 547-565.
Pica, T., & Doughty, C. (1985). The role of group work in classroom second language
acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 7, 233-248.
Pica, T., Young, R., & Doughty, C. (1987). The impact of interaction on comprehension.
TESOL Quarterly, 21, 737-758.
Pienemann, M., & Johnston, M. (1987). Factors influencing the development of language
proficiency. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Applying second language acquisition research
(pp. 45-141). Adelaide, Australia: National Curriculum Resource Centre.
Revesz, A. (2009). Task complexity, focus on form, and second language development.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 31, 437-470.
Revesz, A. (2011). Task complexity, focus on L2 constructions, and individual differences:
A classroom-based study. Modern Language Journal, 95, 162-181.
Robinson, P. (2001a). Task complexity, cognitive resources and syllabus design: A triadic
framework for examining task influences on SLA. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and
second language instruction (pp. 287-318). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Robinson, P. (2001b). Task complexity, task difficulty, and task production: Exploring
interactions in a componential framework. Applied Linguistics, 22, 27-57.
Robinson, P. (2003). The cognition hypothesis, task design, and adult task-based language
learning. Second Language Studies, 21, 45-105.
Robinson, P. (2005). Cognitive complexity and task sequencing: Studies in a componential
framework for second language task design. International Review of Applied Linguistics
in Language Teaching, 43, 1-32.
Robinson, P. (2007a). Criteria for classifying and sequencing pedagogic tasks. In
M. P. Garcia-Mayo (Ed.), Investigating tasks in formal language settings (pp. 7-26).
Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Robinson, P. (2007b). Task complexity, theory of mind, and intentional reasoning: Effects
on L2 speech production, interaction, uptake and perceptions of task difficulty. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 45, 193-213.
Robinson, P. (2009). Syllabus design. In M. H. Long & C. J. Doughty (Eds.), Handbook of
second and foreign language teaching (pp. 294-310). Oxford: Blackwell.
Robinson, P. (2011). Task-based language learning: A review of issues. Language Learning,
61, 1-36.
Robinson, P., & Ellis, N. (2008). Conclusion: Cognitive linguistic, second language
acquisition and L2 instruction-issues for research. In P. Robinson & N. Ellis (Eds.),
Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition (pp. 489-545).
London: Routledge.
Robinson, P., & Gilabert, R. (2007). Task complexity, the cognition hypothesis and second
language learning and performance. International Review of Applied Linguistics in
Language Teaching, 45, 161-176.
Schoenberg, I. E. (2006). Focus on grammar: An integrated skills approach (3rd ed.). London:
Longman.

658

YouJin Kim

Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Skehan, P. (2003). Task-based language teaching. Language Teaching, 36, 1-14.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (1999). The influence of structure and processing conditions on
narrative retellings. Language Learning, 49, 93-120.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (2001). Cognition and tasks. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and
second language instruction (pp. 183-205). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Spada, N., & Lightbown, P. (1993). Instruction and the development of questions in L2
classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 205-224.
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook &
B. Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of
H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125-144). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams
(Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 64-81). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent
French immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82, 320-337.
Williams, J., & Evans, J. (1998). What kind of focus and on which forms? In C. Doughty &
J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 139-155).
New York: Cambridge University Press.

APPENDIX
DEVELOPMENTAL STAGES OF QUESTIONS
Developmental Stage

Examples

Stage 1: Single words, formulas, or
sentence fragments
Stage 2: Declarative word order, no
inversion, no fronting
Stage 3: Fronting (do-fronting,
wh-fronting, no inversion)
Stage 4: Wh+copular, yes-no questions
with other auxiliaries, yes-no copula
Stage 5: Inversion in wh-questions with
both an auxiliary and a main verb

Your major?

Stage 6: Complex questions: tag
questions, negative questions,
embedded questions

You have blue jeans?
Your cell phone what color?
Do you have other experience?
How much you drink?
What's your favorite movie star?
Can you give a hint?
What's she eating?
What degree do you have?
How long did you go here?
You like pizza, don't you?
Don't you have pet?
Can you tell me where she study?

