C Cambridge University Press 2012 doi:10.1017/S1366728912000193
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 15 (4), 2012, 896-904 

Digits vs. pictures: The
influence of stimulus type
on language switching

M AT H I E U D E C L E R C K
I R I N G KO C H
ANDREA M. PHILIPP
Institute of Psychology, RWTH Aachen University

(Received: October 6, 2011; final revision received: March 28, 2012; accepted: April 16, 2012; first published online 15 June 2012)

Stimuli used in cued language switching studies typically consist of digits or pictures. However, the comparability between
both stimulus types remains unclear. In the present study, we directly compared digit and picture naming in a
German-English language switching experiment. Because digits represent a semantic group and contain many cognates, the
experiment consisted of four conditions with different stimulus sets in each condition: digits, standard language switching
pictures, pictures depicting cognates, and semantically-related pictures. Digit naming caused smaller switch costs than
picture naming. The data suggest that this difference can be attributed to phonology. Both methodological and theoretical
implications are discussed.
Keywords: bilingualism, language control, language switching, digit naming, picture naming

Numerous factors influence bilingual speech production,
be it prior exposure to a syntactic structure (Loebell
& Bock, 2003), distracter-words (Ehri & Rayn, 1980)
or even the word type that is being produced, such as
cognates (words with a similar etymological background
in two or more languages, which often co-occur with
a large phonological overlap; Costa, Caramazza &
Sebastian-Galles, 2000; Hoshino & Kroll, 2008) or
homophones (words with a similar pronunciation, but
different meaning in two languages; Schulpen, Dijkstra,
Schriefers & Haspers, 2003). Thus, it appears very likely
that such factors as the word or stimulus type also
influence bilingual language production when subjects
switch between two languages. In the present study we
set out to investigate the influence of stimulus type on
bilingual speech production in language switching by
testing the distinctive influence of two stimulus types
during bilingual naming: digits and pictures. Exploring
the influence of stimulus types on language switching
is interesting at both empirical and theoretical levels.
Empirically, it might inform us about the comparability
of language switching studies that use different stimulus
materials. At a theoretical level, we believe that stimulus
effects on language switching times can indicate which
aspects of word production (e.g., semantics, phonology)
are critical in language switching.

* The authors would like to thank David W. Green, Susan C. Bobb and
one anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on an earlier version
of this article.

In language switching, the cognitive processes involved
during bilingual language production are investigated
by examining the performance difference between trials
in which the language was repeated with respect to
the previous trial (repetition trials) and trials in which
the language was switched with respect to the previous
trial (switch trials). Typically it is harder to switch to a
language than to repeat the same language ("switch costs";
e.g., Meuter & Allport, 1999; Philipp, Gade & Koch,
2007a). These switch costs are a marker for the cognitive
control needed to produce one of the two languages
(e.g., Christoffels, Firk & Schiller, 2007; Green, 1998).
Furthermore, switch costs are often asymmetric across
languages, with larger switch costs going to L1 than to
L2 (e.g., Meuter & Allport, 1999; see also Koch, Gade,
Schuch & Philipp, 2010, for a review of relevant task
switching studies).
The studies discussed above used different types of
stimuli: pictures (e.g., Costa, Santesteban & Ivanova,
2006; Hernandez & Kohnert, 1999; Verhoef, Roelofs &
Chwilla, 2010) and digits (e.g., Campbell, 2005; Meuter
& Allport, 1999; Philipp et al., 2007a). Irrespective
of the type of stimuli, all language switching studies
report switch costs. Importantly though, while the size
of these switch costs differs among studies, it is hard
to evaluate differences between previous digit naming
and picture naming language switching studies due to
the many methodological differences that go beyond the
stimulus differences. First, there is a large diversity in task
preparation time (e.g., manipulations of cue-to-stimulus
interval, CSI) across different language switching studies
(for a review of preparation effects in task switching,

Address for correspondence:
Mathieu Declerck, Institute of Psychology, RWTH Aachen University, Jagerstrasse 17-19, 52066 Aachen, Germany
Mathieu.Declerck@psych.rwth-aachen.de

Stimulus type influence on language switching
see Kiesel, Wendt, Jost, Steinhauser, Falkenstein, Philipp
& Koch, 2010). Furthermore, over previous language
switching studies there is an inconsistent effect of
preparation time. For example, Costa and Santesteban
(2004) tested highly proficient bilinguals in a language
switching setting and found a reduction of language
switch costs with a long CSI (see also Verhoef, Roelofs
& Chwilla, 2009). Philipp et al. (2007a), on the other
hand, found a reversed preparation effect in a study
that investigated L1/L2, L2/L3 and L1/L3 language
switching. These studies already illustrate two other
important differences between studies: the languages that
are used and the language proficiency of the participants.
Whereas the proficiency of the participants mainly seems
to influence the symmetry vs. asymmetry of language
switch costs (Costa & Santestaben, 2004), it was found
that language pairing can influence both the size of switch
costs (Philipp et al., 2007a) and the (a)symmetry of switch
costs (Costa et al., 2006). Due to all these differences
between studies, the direct comparison of individual
language switching studies is problematic. Therefore, in
the present study, we aimed at comparing the influence of
stimulus type (digits vs. pictures) within participants.
While there are similarities between pictures and digits,
for example both provide no cue on how to pronounce the
concept, they do differ on a variety of levels. First, digits
represent an abstract concept, namely quantity, whereas
pictures represent concrete objects. A consequence of
this difference is that the actual representation of digits
is arbitrarily mapped to their meaning, which is not the
case for pictures.
A second difference is that digits represent a
specific semantic group (e.g., Cappelletti, Warrington
& Butterworth, 1995; Herrera & Macizo, 2010, 2011),
which is not the case for all picture sets. Related to
this is the question of whether digit and picture naming
involves the activation of semantic information. While it
is generally agreed that picture naming involves activation
of semantic information (Glaser & Dungelhoff, 1984;
Smith & Magee, 1980), there is no conclusive evidence
as to whether digit naming requires activation of semantic
information. One finding in favor of semantic activation
during digit naming is the numerical distance effect, which
consists of a facilitation effect when the current digit
has a small numerical distance to the prior digit (e.g.,
Brysbaert, 1995). However, recent studies on semantic
blocking have shown that digit naming does not involve
semantic activation (Herrera & Macizo, 2010, 2011).
In the semantic blocking paradigm, pure blocks, which
contain items that are semantically-related to each other,
are contrasted against mixed blocks, which contain items
from different semantic groups that are presented in a
random order. The results showed that picture naming is
slower during pure blocks than during mixed blocks. The
interference effect found during pure blocks is assumed to

897

be caused by the continued activation in the same semantic
group, which produces co-activation of semanticallyrelated items and causes response competition among
these items. However, in contrast to picture naming, for
digit naming and number-word naming the data showed
a facilitation effect in the pure block condition. This
implies that digit naming does not require activation of
semantic information. Similar results have been found
with a Stroop-like paradigm (Roelofs, 2006).
Another difference between digit and picture naming
is that in languages from the same language family
(e.g., Romance languages or Germanic languages), as
in the present study (German-English), many digits are
cognates. Cognates are known to cause faster production
during picture naming (e.g., Costa et al., 2000; Hoshino
& Kroll, 2008). This effect has been used as an indication
of phonological cross-language activation, suggesting that
both languages are simultaneously activated. For example,
in the study of Hoshino and Kroll (2008) subjects
(Japanese-English) had to name pictures in their second
language. When the pictures depicted cognates, they were
named faster than when they depicted non-cognates. As
the facilitation effect was present across different scripts,
it can be concluded that there is phonological crosslanguage activation with languages that use different
scripts.
Finally, there is a methodological difference between
digit and picture naming language switching studies.
Generally language switching studies that employ pictures
use unique stimuli for each trial, while language switching
studies that implement digits typically use digits 1-9
throughout the experiment. Prior co-occurrence of a task,
and probably of a language, with a certain stimulus
influences the current trial (Allport & Wylie, 2000;
Arrington, Weaver & Pauker, 2010; Koch & Allport, 2006;
Waszak, Hommel & Allport, 2003; for a review see Kiesel
et al., 2010). For example, Waszak et al. (2003) used
picture-word Stroop stimuli to investigate stimulus-based
priming of tasks. Their results showed that item-specific
priming effects on switch trials occurred after a single
prior exposure of the stimulus with the task and with over
200 trials between prime and probe trials.
Given this background, the main goal of the present
study was to investigate if there are switch cost differences,
with respect to voice-onset time, due to different stimulus
types: pictures or digits. To this end, we used German-
English cued language switching and manipulated the
sets of to-be-named stimuli across blocks. That is,
we presented in "pure" blocks either a set of digits
or a set of pictures, which are typically used during
language switching studies (standard picture stimulus
set). Additionally, two other picture control stimulus
sets were implemented to investigate the influence of
certain digit characteristics. In this respect, we added a
control stimulus set during which the participants had to

898

Mathieu Declerck, Iring Koch and Andrea M. Philipp

name pictures that had a semantic relationship with each
other. By adding this characteristic to a picture set, the
items of this set should interfere with naming of one
another, as has been shown by the semantic blocking
paradigm (e.g., Herrera & Macizo, 2010, 2011; Kroll
& Stewart, 1994). Another digit characteristic was the
cognate status or large phonological overlap within digits
and between languages. To control for this, we added a
second picture control stimulus set, in which the pictures
depicted cognates with a large within-item phonological
overlap between languages. This characteristic should
impose co-activation of competing languages and result
in a within-item response-related influence. Finally, to
account for stimulus-based priming of the languages, each
condition contained an equal number of nine stimuli.
Since not all contrasts are within the scope of this
study, we investigated three pre-planned contrasts. First,
we planned to compare digit naming with standard
picture naming to establish the basic phenomenon. In
this contrast, we expected switch cost differences between
the stimulus sets owing to large differences between
them (we refer to the potential difference as the digit
effect). Additionally, we compared digit naming with both
control stimulus sets to explore the origin of the digit
effect during bilingual language switching. By exploring
whether the digit effect also occurs in the comparisons
between either digits and cognates, and/or between digits
and semantically-related items, we can further specify
whether the digit effect is influenced by digits being
cognates and/or a single semantic group.
Method
Participants
Twenty-four native speakers of German (18 female, mean
age = 23 years), who had at least seven years of formal
English education (mean = 8.3 years), participated. The
average self-rated score of English spoken production, out
of seven, was 4.9. Half of the participants were paid (4),
while the other half received partial course credit.
Material
During the present study nine unique items were presented
in each of the four stimulus sets. The four stimulus
sets were presented in pure stimulus set blocks and
consisted of a digit stimulus set (1-9), a standard picture
stimulus set (e.g., "Stadt"/"city"), a cognate control
stimulus set (e.g., "Ball"/"ball") and a control stimulus
set with semantically-related items (e.g., "Bein"/"leg")
(see Appendix for the entire list of stimuli). The semantic
control stimulus set comprised items principally related to
the human body. The overlap between picture stimulus sets
was kept to a minimum, as there were no cognates or items

with a large phonological overlap between languages in
the standard picture and semantic control stimulus set,
and there were no obvious semantic relations between the
items of the standard picture and cognate control stimulus
sets. Furthermore, to be as close to the digits as possible,
we controlled the four stimulus sets on frequency (Baayen,
Piepenbrock & Gulikers, 1995), the number of syllables
and physical size (300 x 300 pixels).
The relevant language in each trial was indicated by a
cue. The language cues consisted of colored squares (size
160 x 106 pixels) presented in either green or blue at the
center of the screen.
The trials were presented and the responses recorded
using E-prime version 1.1.4.1. The speech onset of the
vocal responses was recorded with a voice-key, while the
errors were marked by the experimenter in a subject file.

Procedure
The cued language switching experiment lasted
approximately 30 minutes and started with a brief
explanation of the task, during which speed and accuracy
were emphasized. In front of the participants was a
card indicating the color-cue to language assignment,
which was held constant throughout the experiment
and the color-cue to language assignment was also
counterbalanced across participants. Each cue was
presented for 1000 ms and was preceded by a fixation
point (+) for 400 ms. After the cue, the picture or digit
was presented and would not disappear before a response
was registered.
To get the participants acquainted with the task and
voice-key, they proceeded with a practice block that
consisted of 16 trials. After the practice trials, they had
a chance to ask questions, which was followed by the
experimental conditions.
There were four experimental blocks of 108 trials each,
one for each stimulus set condition. In each block, each of
the nine items was presented twelve times (six times for
each language). There were an equal number of language
switches and repetitions in each block. The order of the
four stimulus set conditions was counterbalanced across
participants.

Design
The within-subjects independent variables in the basic
contrast were stimulus set (digit vs. standard picture
stimulus set), language (German vs. English), and
language transition (switch vs. repetition). In further
pre-planned contrasts, performance in digit naming was
compared to that in two picture naming control conditions:
cognate control (digit vs. cognate control stimulus set)
and semantic control (digit vs. semantic control stimulus

Stimulus type influence on language switching

899

Table 1. Reaction time (RT) in ms (and error
percentage) as a function of language transition
(repetition vs. switch), language (L1 vs. L2) and
stimulus sets (digit, standard picture, cognate control,
and semantic control stimulus set).
L1

Digit
Standard picture
Cognate control
Semantic control

L2

Switch

Repetition Switch

Repetition

581 (1.7)
881 (1.6)
796 (1.5)
916 (1.9)

534 (0.4)
817 (0.8)
750 (0.8)
837 (0.9)

551 (0.3)
822 (0.3)
759 (0.5)
879 (0.5)

589 (1.4)
901 (1.5)
815 (1.1)
960 (1.5)

set). The dependent variables were reaction time (RT) and
errors.
Results
The first trial of each block (0.9% of the data) and the error
trials (7.4% of the data) were excluded from RT analyses.
Furthermore, RTs in all trials were z-transformed for each
stimulus set, and trials with a z-score of -4/+4 were
discarded as outliers (1.3% of the data).
Standard picture stimulus set vs. digit stimulus set
In this basic contrast, performance between standard
pictures and digits was compared. The RT data showed
significantly faster naming responses with the digit
stimulus set than with the standard picture stimulus set
(F(1,23) = 202.12, p < .001, p2 = .898; see Table 1), and
switch trials were significantly slower than repetition trials
(F(1,23) = 36.56, p < .001, p2 = .614). Importantly, the
interaction between stimulus set and language transition
was significant (F(1,23) = 5.06, p < .05, p2 = .180). This
interaction shows that switch costs were smaller during
digit naming (43 ms) than during picture naming (72 ms;
see Figure 1).
There was no significant main effect of language
(F(1,23) = 3.29, ns., p2 = .125), even though RT
was somewhat shorter for L1 (German) than for L2
(English; 703 ms vs. 716 ms). Likewise, the interactions
between language and stimulus set (F < 1), language and
language transition (F < 1), and the three-way interaction
(F(1,23) = 1.04, ns., p2 = .043) were not significant.
The error data showed no significant main effect of
stimulus set (F < 1). Switch trials were significantly
more erroneous than repetition trials (F(1,23) = 30.77,
p < .001, p2 = .572), and there were more errors in
German trials than in English trials (F(1,23) = 4.54,
p < .05, p2 = .165). (The higher error rate in German
than in English indicates a speed-accuracy trade-off with

Figure 1. Switch costs in ms as a function of stimulus set
(digit, standard picture, cognate control and semantic
control stimulus set).

respect to language, as subjects were both faster and
more erroneous in German than in English.) All two-way
interactions were not significant (Fs < 1), just like the
three-way interaction (F(1,23) = 2.00, ns., p2 = .080).
Cognate control stimulus set vs. digit stimulus set
Using the same ANOVA as in the previous analyses,
we examined the effect of within-item between-language
phonological overlap by investigating the performance
difference between the digit and the cognate control
stimulus set.1 The RT data showed significantly faster
naming responses in the digit stimulus set than in the
cognate control stimulus set (F(1,23) = 116.45, p <
.001, p2 = .898; see Table 1) and switch trials were
significantly slower than repetition trials (F(1,23) = 43.67,
p < .001, p2 = .655). Furthermore, German trials were
faster than English trials (F(1,23) = 5.77, p < .05, p2 =
.200). However, it is most important with respect to the
focus of this study that the interaction between stimulus
set and language transition was clearly not significant
(F < 1; see Figure 1), as were all other interactions
(all Fs < 1).
The error data showed no significant main effect of
stimulus set (F < 1). Switch trials were significantly more
erroneous than repetition trials (F(1,23) = 29.33, p <
.001, p2 = .560) and there were more errors in German
trials than in English trials (F(1,23) = 4.24, p < .05,
p2 = .156), again indicating a speed-accuracy tradeoff. The interaction between stimulus set and language

1

A paired t-test showed that the pictures depicting cognates were
named faster than the standard pictures (t(23) = 4.64, p < .001),
indicating that the manipulation of the cognate control stimulus set
was successful.

900

Mathieu Declerck, Iring Koch and Andrea M. Philipp

transition was not significant (F(1,23) = 2.79, ns., p2 =
.108), like the other interactions (Fs < 1).
Semantic control stimulus set vs. digit stimulus set
Using the same ANOVA as in the previous analyses,
we examined the effect of semantic relations between
items by investigating the performance difference between
digits and semantically-related items.2 The RT data
showed significantly faster naming responses with the
digit stimulus set than with the semantic control stimulus
set (F(1,23) = 235.73, p < .001, p2 = .911; see
Table 1), and switch trials were significantly slower than
repetition trials (F(1,23) = 21.91, p < .001, p2 = .488).
Naming in German was significantly faster than in English
(F(1,23) = 7.70, p < .05, p2 = .251).
Crucially, the interaction between stimulus set and
language transition was significant (F(1,23) = 4.59,
p < .05, p2 = .166), with smaller switch costs during digit
naming (43 ms) than picture naming (81 ms; see Figure 1).
This interaction thus replicates the effect found in the
comparison of the digit stimulus set and the standard
picture stimulus set. This suggests that semantic relations
between items (which are present both in the digit set
and the semantic control set) are not the main cause for
performance differences between digits and pictures.
The interactions between language and stimulus set
(F(1,23) = 3.99, ns., p2 = .148) and language and
language transition (F < 1) were not significant. The
three-way interaction was also not significant (F < 1).
The error data showed no significant main effect of
stimulus set (F(1,23) = 2.78, ns., p2 = .108). Switch
trials were significantly more erroneous than repetition
trials (F(1,23) = 26.82, p < .001, p2 = .538), and there
were more errors for German than for English (F(1,23) =
5.88, p < .05, p2 = .204), again indicating a speed-
accuracy trade-off. All interactions were not significant
(Fs < 1).
Discussion
In this study we investigated the effect of stimulus
type (digits/pictures) on switching between languages
(German-English) in order to establish the comparability
of effects. To match the characteristics of digits, we
added two picture control sets: a cognate control stimulus
2

A paired t-test showed that standard pictures were named faster
than the semantically-related pictures (t(23) = 2.15, p < .05),
indicating that the manipulation of the semantic control stimulus set
was successful, even though different pictures were used in both
stimulus sets, and the semantic control stimulus set consisted of
pictures depicting objects referring to only one single semantic group.
Generally, the same pictures are used during semantic blocking studies
and more than one semantic group is implemented.

set, which constituted of pictures depicting cognates,
and a semantic control stimulus set, which consisted
of semantically-related pictures. The voice-onset data
showed that digit naming was overall faster than all
three picture stimulus sets. Furthermore, switch costs
were smaller for digit naming when comparing the digit
stimulus set and the standard picture stimulus set and the
digit stimulus set and the semantic control stimulus set.
However, there was no switch cost difference between the
digit stimulus set and the cognate control stimulus set.
Finally, none of the analyses in the current study showed
asymmetrical switch costs.
In the following, we first discuss the influence of
stimulus type on language switch costs using naming
tasks. Then we discuss the issue of asymmetrical switch
costs.
Influence of stimulus type on language switch costs
Importantly, with respect to the focus of the present study,
the results showed smaller switch costs in digit naming
than in picture naming (i.e., the digit effect), which is a
novel finding in language switching. This finding should
encourage researchers to be cautious when comparing
across language switching studies that utilize different
stimulus types, as these could have a significant effect on
the outcome.
As we kept the number of stimuli constant in each
condition, the observed digit effect does not include
differential stimulus-based priming (e.g., Koch & Allport,
2006) that characterizes language switching studies
that implement either small/repeated stimulus sets vs.
large/unique stimulus sets. Furthermore, we are confident
that the digit effect was not caused by differential
preparation effects in digit vs. picture naming. Prior
studies using pictures have found that preparation leads to
smaller switch costs (Costa & Santesteban, 2004; Verhoef
et al., 2009), while preparing to name digits leads to
larger switch costs (Philipp et al., 2007a). However, this
difference with respect to preparation can certainly not
explain the smaller switch costs in digit naming than in
picture naming in the present study where there is a long
preparation time.
To account for the origin of this switch cost difference
between digit and picture stimuli, it is important to focus
on different targets of language control in the bilingual
language production process. Prior to articulation in the
intended language, concepts go from the activation of
semantic concepts via lexical selection to phonological
processing (see, e.g., Indefrey & Levelt, 2004; Levelt,
Roelofs & Meyer, 1999).
With regard to semantic information and lexical
selection, one could argue that picture naming resulted
in larger switch costs than digit naming because the latter
forms a specific semantic group. However, the difference

Stimulus type influence on language switching
in switch costs obtained between the standard picture
stimulus set and the digit stimulus set was also found
between the semantic control stimulus set and the digit
stimulus set. This suggests that the switch cost difference
obtained between the standard picture stimulus set and
the digit stimulus set is not caused by the digits' semantic
group characteristic.
In order to further examine the role of semantics
during bilingual digit naming, we re-analyzed the digit
data. This re-analysis was focused on a specific marker
for semantic influence on language control, namely the
numerical distance effect. This is a facilitation effect
that occurs when two consecutive numbers have a small
numerical distance (e.g., Brysbaert, 1995). With respect
to the present study, the numerical distance effect might
play a role for the difference between digit and picture
naming, since this effect only influences digit naming but
not picture naming.
To test the influence of this effect on language switch
costs we re-analyzed the digit data using a 2 (switch
vs. repetition) x 2 (small vs. large numerical distance)
analysis, with small numerical distance consisting of a
numerical difference of three or smaller between two
consecutive trials (Herrera & Macizo, 2011). The results
showed that a small numerical distance causes larger
switch costs than when the numerical distance is large
(71 ms vs. 23 ms; F(1,23) = 14.39, p < .001, p2 =
.385). The numerical distance effect in bilingual digit
naming provides evidence that priming of numerical
semantic information influences language control.
However, since a small numerical distance actually
enhances switch costs, it can be concluded that this effect
did not cause the smaller switch costs in digit than in
picture naming. This effect also implies that if numerical
distance had been kept to a maximum throughout the
experiment, an even larger switch cost difference would
have been found between digit and picture naming.
The influence of numerical distance on switch costs
provides evidence that digit naming is influenced by
semantic information in language switching. This is not
in line with the asemantic route during digit naming that
is postulated in several models (e.g., McCloskey, 1992)
and supported by several studies (e.g., Herrera & Macizo
2010, 2011; Roelofs, 2006). Similarly, during picture
naming, we know that semantic information is activated
(e.g., Glaser & Dungelhoff, 1984; Smith & Magee, 1980).
Thus, it seems unlikely that a difference in route, with
respect to semantic activation, would have led to the
difference that was observed in our data.
In fact, yet another characteristic of digits that served
as a possible target for the difference between bilingual
digit naming and bilingual picture naming referred to
cognate status. One of the characteristics of cognates
is that they have a large overlap in phonology between
languages. In the present study no switch cost difference

901

was found between the digit stimulus set and the cognate
control stimulus set, whereas we did find such a difference
between the digit stimulus set and the other two picture
sets. This data pattern provides evidence that the main
difference between bilingual digit naming and picture
naming is based on the cognate status of digits and thus
most likely on the phonological level. It is interesting to
note that in the task switching domain several studies
have provided evidence for the influence of similarly
"late" response-related processes, like response execution,
on switch costs (e.g., Koch & Philipp, 2005; Philipp,
Jolicoeur, Falkenstein & Koch, 2007b; Schuch & Koch,
2003; for a review see Kiesel, et al., 2010), so that
it appears likely that processes associated with vocal
response execution or articulation influence switch costs.
Both the results of the current study and previous task
switching studies leads us to believe that phonology might
play a considerable role during language switching.
At present we can only speculate about the nature of
this difference. One possibility is that the phonological coactivation of both languages, caused by the cognate status
(e.g., Costa et al., 2000; Hoshino & Kroll, 2008), might
have played a role. This phonological co-activation would
result in a higher activation of the non-target language
when using cognates than when using non-cognates,
which in turn would result in reduced performance costs in
language switch trials, while in the repetition trials the dual
phonological activation would cause a larger amount of
interference. Taken together, phonological co-activation
of both languages would decrease switch costs, which is
in line with the present data.
Our results indicate that language switching studies
using digits that implemented languages of the
same language family could be regarded as cognate
language switching studies. The finding that performance
differences between digit naming and picture naming
during language switching are primarily due to the
cognate status of many digits can be regarded as
evidence for this. However, some caution is needed
since Verhoef et al. (2009) found no difference in
switch costs between pictures depicting cognate and noncognates and Christoffels et al. (2007) even found that
pictures depicting cognates elicit larger switch costs than
non-cognates. Thus, digit naming language switching
studies should be regarded as distinctive cognate language
switching studies, since additional processes, like the
numerical distance effect, might come into play when
naming cognate digits and not cognate pictures.
We demonstrated that both stimulus types (i.e., digits
and pictures) have a divergent influence on switch costs.
While this effect renders it difficult to directly compare
studies that use different stimulus types, it should also
encourage researchers to think about what stimulus type to
use in future language switching studies. Whereas digits
represent a specific semantic group and are influenced

902

Mathieu Declerck, Iring Koch and Andrea M. Philipp

by the numerical distance to the previous trial, they do
allow for very comparable results over studies, since
generally the same nine stimuli are used in each study.
This is not the case during picture naming studies, which
do not only use different concepts, but utilize different
picture sets. Pictures do allow for more diverse research,
because they represent a much larger and varied set of
stimuli. This also entails that these stimuli would allow for
larger ecological validity. However, this variety can also
be problematic. For one, the name agreement of pictures
is not as optimized as for digits. Along the same lines, the
name in one language might refer to one or more concepts
in another language, whereas this is not the case when
using digits. Additionally, it is harder to control a picture
set, for example for semantic or phonological influences.
This switch cost difference between stimulus types
should also encourage language switching research with
stimuli other than digits and pictures depicting concrete
objects, since it is likely (and demonstrated in the
present study) that different stimuli generate differences
in language switch costs. This study should stimulate
research of other word categories in language switching,
for example verbs with action pictures, or the difference
between word categories, for example verbs and nouns,
with respect to language switching.
Switch cost asymmetry in language switching using
naming tasks
It is important to note that we found symmetrical switch
costs during bilingual digit naming. Previous studies using
digit naming consistently found asymmetrical switch
costs, with L1 showing larger switch costs than L2 (e.g.,
Meuter & Allport, 1999; Philipp et al., 2007a). While
we also found symmetrical switch costs for the picture
stimulus sets, there is a curious difference between the data
of these three picture stimulus sets and the digit stimulus
set.3 We found no significant difference in asymmetry
between the picture stimulus sets and the digit stimulus
set, whereas it appears that for the digit set the switch
costs are numerically larger for L1 than L2 (47 ms vs.
38 ms), this is numerically reversed for the picture sets
with larger switch costs for L2 than L1 (standard picture:
64 ms vs. 79 ms; cognate control: 46 ms vs. 56 ms;
semantic control: 79 ms vs. 81 ms). This numerical
difference in pattern between picture naming and digit
naming during language switching might tempt one to

3

A 2 (German vs. English) x 2 (switch vs. repetition) ANOVA of the
digit data showed that the interaction between language and language
sequence was not significant (F(1,23) = 0.82, ns., p2 = .034). As
was the data for the standard picture stimulus set (F(1,23) = 0.52, ns.,
p2 = .018), cognate control stimulus set (F(1,23) = 0.19, ns., p2 =
.008) and semantic control stimulus set (F(1,23) = 0.92, ns., p2 =
.000).

speculate that the type of stimulus has an influence on the
(a)symmetry of switch costs across languages.
The fact that we found symmetrical switch costs in all
the analyses led us to take a closer look at the influence
of preparation time and "decay" on the switch cost
asymmetry. There are two partially overlapping markers
when using a switching task to investigate decay. The first
is the response-to-stimulus interval (RSI), which lets us
investigate passive decay, and the second is the responseto-cue interval (RCI), which lets us investigate decay
without the influence of active preparation (for a review
on decay in task switching see, Kiesel et al., 2010).
That RSI would influence the asymmetry across
languages comes from the comparison of two studies,
Verhoef et al. (2009) and Philipp et al. (2007a). Verhoef
et al. (2009) found that switch costs were asymmetric with
a short CSI (500 ms), whereas with a long CSI (1250 ms)
they found symmetric switch costs. It needs to be taken
into account that in Verhoef et al.'s (2009) study the RSI
was not kept constant between the long and short CSI
conditions. In the short CSI condition, RSI was 750 ms
long, whereas in the long CSI condition the RSI was 1500
ms. In contrast, Philipp et al. (2007a) did not find any
switch cost difference across languages using a short CSI
(100 ms) and a long CSI (1000 ms) while keeping the
RSI constant (1100 ms). This could indicate that switch
cost asymmetry is perhaps not so much influenced by
the preparation time between cue and stimulus, but more
by the amount of time elapsed from the last response
(RSI), providing evidence that switch cost asymmetry
is also susceptible to passive decay. Consequently, the
symmetrical switch costs found in the present study
could be due to the large RSI, which was 1400 ms.
However, since Philipp et al. (2007a) implemented digits
and Verhoef et al. (2009) implemented pictures there
might be additional processes at work, which render it
difficult to compare the results of these two studies.
Furthermore, Verhoef et al. (2009) assumed that the
switch cost asymmetry across languages is due to a
larger L1-repetition benefit than L2-repetition benefit.
This hypothesis comes from the assumption that there
is no interference of L2 during L1 repetition trials, while
there is interference of L1 on L2 repetition trials. In a task
switching study, Horoufchin, Philipp and Koch (2011)
found that RCI has a large impact on the task-repetition
benefit. Thus, we assume that RCI also plays a crucial role
for the language switch cost asymmetry. Further research
is needed to confirm this hypothesis and to examine the
role of RSI and RCI on language switching.
Conclusion
The present study revealed smaller language switch costs
in digit naming than in picture naming, suggesting that
bilingual digit naming requires less language control than

Stimulus type influence on language switching
picture naming. However, this difference was abolished
when the pictures represented cognates, suggesting
that within-item phonological priming reduces language
switch costs and can explain differences between bilingual
digit naming and picture naming in most conditions.

Appendix. The stimuli, in English and German, of
each stimulus set

English

English
IPA

German

German
IPA

Digit stimulus set

one
two
three
four
five
six
seven
eight
nine

wOn
tu
(R)i
f...(R)
fav
sks
"sEv.n
et
nan

Eins
Zwei
Drei
Vier
Funf
Sechs
Sieben
Acht
Neun

a ns
va 
dra 
fi...a
fYnf
zEks
"zi...bm

at
n n

Standard picture
stimulus set

city
clock
doctor
tree
boy
car
horse
star
table

"sti
klAk
"dAk.t
t(R)i...
b
"kA...
h...(r)s
stA(R)
"tebl

Stadt
Uhr
Arzt
Baum
Junge
Auto
Pferd
Stern
Tisch

Stat
u...a
a...at
baUm
"jUN
"aUto
pfe...at
StEAn
tS

Cognate control
stimulus set

foot
man
sun
fish
house
ball
fire
boat
book

fUt
moen
sOn
"fS
haUs
bl
fa
boUt
bUk

Fu
Mann
Sonne
Fisch
Haus
Ball
Feuer
Boot
Buch

"fu...s
man
"zn
fS
haUs
bal
"f a
bo...t
bu...

Semantic control
stimulus set

ear
woman
head
neck
tooth
leg
girl
eye
nose

i
"wUmn
hEd
nEk
tu...
lEg
gl
a
noUz

Ohr
Frau
Kopf
Hals
Zahn
Bein
Madchen
Auge
Nase

o...a
fraU
kpf
hals
a...n
ba n
"mE...tcn
"aUg
"na...z

903

References
Allport, A., & Wylie, G. (2000). "Task switching", stimulus-
response bindings, and negative priming. In S. Monsell & J.
Driver (eds.), Control of cognitive processes: Attentionand
performance XVIII, pp. 35-70. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Arrington, C. M., Weaver, S. M., & Pauker, R. L. (2010).
Stimulus-based priming of task choice during voluntary
task switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 36, 1060-1067.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Brysbaert, M. (1995). Arabic number reading: On the nature of
the numerical scale and the origin of phonological recoding.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 434-
452.
Campbell, J. I. D. (2005). Asymmetrical language switching
costs in Chinese-English bilinguals' number naming and
simple arithmetic. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
8, 85-91.
Cappelletti, M., Warrington, E. K., & Butterworth, B. (1995).
Selective impairment in manipulating Arabic numerals.
Cortex, 31, 73-86.
Christoffels, I. K., Firk, C., & Schiller, N. O. (2007). Bilingual
language control: An event-related brain potential study.
Brain Research, 1147, 192-208.
Costa, A., Caramazza, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2000).
The cognate facilitation effect: Implications for models
of lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 1283-1296.
Costa, A., & Santesteban, M. (2004). Lexical access in bilingual
speech production: Evidencefrom language switching in
highly proficient bilinguals and L2 learners. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50, 491-511.
Costa, A., Santesteban, M., & Ivanova, I. (2006). How do highly
proficient bilinguals control their lexicalization process?
Inhibitory and language-specific selection mechanisms
are both functional. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 32, 1057-1074.
Ehri, L. C., & Rayn, E. B. (1980). Performance of bilinguals in a
picture-word interference task. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 9, 285-302.
Glaser, W. R., & Dungelhoff, F. J. (1984). The time course of
picture word interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 640-654.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexicosemantic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
1, 213-229.
Hernandez, A. E., & Kohnert, K. J. (1999). Aging and
language switching in bilinguals. Aging Neuropsychology
and Cognition, 6, 69-83.
Herrera, A., & Macizo, P. (2010). The production of
symbolic and non-symbolic numerals. Procedia Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 5, 926-934.
Herrera, A., & Macizo, P. (2011). Naming digits in a semantic
blocking paradigm. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 64, 328-338.
Horoufchin, H., Philipp, A. M., & Koch, I. (2011). The
dissipating task-repetition benefit in task switching:

904

Mathieu Declerck, Iring Koch and Andrea M. Philipp

Task-set decay or temporal distinctiveness? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 37, 455-472.
Hoshino, N., & Kroll, J. F. (2008). Cognate effects in picture
naming: Does cross-language activation survive a change
of script? Cognition, 106, 501-511.
Indefrey, P., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2004). The spatial and temporal
signatures of wordproduction components. Cognition, 92,
101-144.
Kiesel, A., Wendt, M., Jost, K., Steinhauser, M., Falkenstein, M.,
Philipp, A. M., & Koch, I. (2010). Control and interference
in task switching: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
849-874.
Koch, I., & Allport, A. (2006). Cue-based preparation and
stimulus-based priming of tasks in task switching. Memory
and Cognition, 34, 433-444.
Koch, I., Gade, M., Schuch, S., & Philipp, A. M. (2010). The
role of inhibition in task switching: A review. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 17, 1-14.
Koch, I., & Philipp, A. M. (2005). Effects of response selection
on the task repetition benefitin task switching. Memory &
Cognition, 33, 624-634.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of
lexical access in speech production. Behavioural and Brain
sciences, 22, 1-38.
Loebell, H., & Bock, K. (2003). Structural priming across
languages. Linguistics, 41, 791-824.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical processing: Evidence from acquired dyscalculia. Cognition,
44, 107-157.
Meuter, R. F. I., & Allport, A. (1999). Bilingual language
switching in naming: Asymmetrical costs of language
selection. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 25-40.

Philipp, A. M., Gade, M., & Koch, I. (2007a). Inhibitory
processes in language switching: Evidence from switching
language-defined response sets. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 19, 395-416.
Philipp, A. M., Jolicoeur, P., Falkenstein, M., & Koch, I.
(2007b). Response selection and response execution in
task switching: Evidence from a go-signal paradigm.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 33, 1062-1075.
Roelofs, A. (2006). Functional architecture of naming dice,
digits, and number words. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 21, 78-111.
Schuch, S., & Koch, I. (2003). The role of response selection
for inhibition of task sets in task shifting. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 92-105.
Schulpen, B., Dijkstra, T., Schriefers, H. J., & Haspers,
M. (2003). Recognition of interlingual homophones
in bilingual auditory word recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 1155-1178.
Smith, M. C., & Magee, L. E. (1980). Tracing the time course
of picture-word processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 109, 373-392.
Verhoef, K. M. W., Roelofs, A., & Chwilla, D. J. (2009). Role
of inhibition in language switching: Evidence from eventrelated brain potentials in overt picture naming. Cognition,
110, 84-99.
Verhoef, K. M. W., Roelofs, A., & Chwilla, D. J. (2010).
Electrophysiological evidence for endogenous control
of attention in switching between languages in overt
picturenaming. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22,
1832-1843.
Waszak, F., Hommel, B., & Allport, A. (2003). Task-switching
and long-term priming: Role of episodic stimulus - task
bindings in task-shift costs. Cognitive Psychology, 46, 361-
413.

