JSLHR

Article

Perception of Speech Features by
French-Speaking Children With Cochlear Implants
Sophie Bouton,a,b Willy Serniclaes,b Josiane Bertoncini,b and Pascale Colea

Purpose: The present study investigates the perception of
phonological features in French-speaking children with cochlear
implants (CIs) compared with normal-hearing ( NH) children
matched for listening age.
Method: Scores for discrimination and identification of minimal
pairs for all features defining consonants (e.g., place, voicing,
manner, nasality) and vowels (e.g., frontness, nasality, aperture)
were measured in each listener.
Results: The results indicated no differences in "categorical
perception," specified as a similar difference between discrimination
and identification between CI children and controls. However,
CI children demonstrated a lower level of "categorical precision,"
that is, lesser accuracy in both feature identification and discrimination,
than NH children, with the magnitude of the deficit depending
on the feature.

P

revious studies suggest that children with cochlear
implants (CIs) have less accurate perception of
speech sounds than do normal-hearing (NH) children
(Geers, Brenner, & Davidson, 2003; Medina & Serniclaes,
2009; Tye-Murray, Spencer, & Gilbert-Bedia, 1995).
There are two different possible reasons why CI users
have more difficulty perceiving speech sounds than
NH listeners do. First, CI children have experienced a
hearing deprivation period, which might correspond to
a sensitive period for language development (Knudsen,
2004), especially for the acquisition of categorical perception (Hoonhorst et al., in press; Medina, Hoonhorst,
Bogliotti, & Serniclaes, in press), and this might create
problems for the acquisition of "phonological," that is,
language-specific, features. However, if this period was
a

Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France
Paris-Descartes University, Paris, France
Correspondence to Sophie Bouton:
Sophie.Bouton@univ-provence.fr
Editor: Sid Bacon
Associate Editor: Emily Tobey
Received November 25, 2010
Accepted June 1, 2011
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0330)
b

Conclusions: If sensitive periods of language development extend
well beyond the moment of implantation, the consequences of
hearing deprivation for the acquisition of categorical perception
should be fairly important in comparison to categorical precision
because categorical precision develops more slowly than categorical
perception in NH children. These results do not support the idea
that the sensitive period for development of categorical perception
is restricted to the first 1-2 years of life. The sensitive period may
be significantly longer. Differences in precision may reflect the
acoustic limitations of the cochlear implant, such as coding for
temporal fine structure and frequency resolution.

Key Words: categorical perception, phonological features,
cochlear implant, speech development

flexible, and extended beyond the moment of implantation, it might have only reduced consequences for
speech perception. Second, there are many differences
between electrical and auditory stimulation (Dorman,
Loizou, Spahr, & Maloff, 2002; Shannon, Zeng, Kamath,
Wygonski, & Ekelid, 1995; Xu & Zheng, 2007), and these
differences might lead to less accurate feature perception. Thus, CIs and auditory deprivation give a unique
opportunity to further elucidate speech and language
development and give us a reason to revisit the classic
topic of categorical perception.

Perceptual Development of
Phonological Features
The perceptual development of phonological features is a long-lasting process, which starts before 1 year
of age and ends during adolescence. The prelinguistic
child is endowed with capacities to discriminate universal
features irrespective of the language environment. These
universal features are selected and combined after exposure to the sounds of a specific language between 6 and
12 months of age (Burns, Yoshida, Hill, & Werker, 2007;
Eilers, Gavin, & Wilson, 1979; Hoonhorst et al., 2009;
Rivera-Gaxiola, Silva-Pereyra, & Kuhl, 2005). At the

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

139

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

age of 1 year, the child has acquired the features that are
necessary for perceiving the contrasts between sounds
that are phonologically relevant in his or her linguistic
environment. However, as stated by Hoonhorst et al.
(2009), theoretical perspectives have changed considerably over the years, emphasizing learning in recent work
rather than the strong innate assumptions in early studies (Burns et al., 2007; Maye, Weiss, & Aslin, 2008;
Maye, Werker, & Gerken, 2002; for a review, see Kuhl
et al., 2008). Currently, there still remains a basic concern about the adaptation of the child's initial abilities
to discriminate all of the phonetic contrasts present in
the world languages (Werker & Tees, 1984) from the categories present in the child's native language. It is interesting to note that the perceptual development of
phonological features is far from complete at the age of
1 year. Various studies show that the features that play
a role in the linguistic environment are perceived with
progressively greater precision up to the end of childhood and even during adolescence (Burnham, Earnshaw,
& Clark, 1991; Elliott, Busse, Partridge, Rupert, &
de Graaf, 1986; Elliott, Longinotti, Meyer, Raz, & Zucker,
1981; Hazan & Barrett, 2000; Hoonhorst et al., in press;
Krause, 1982; Medina et al., in press; Simon & Fourcin,
1978; Zlatin & Koenigsknecht, 1975). This development
of perceptual accuracy is not restricted to auditory
speech features. Using different stimulus continua,
Hoonhorst et al. (in press) found that categorical precision increased with age for both voicing and facial
expressions, though not for colors. These results suggest
that the development of categorical precision arises from
a general cognitive maturation across different perceptual domains. It should be stressed that in all these studies, it is specifically categorical precision, in both the
discrimination and identification of features, that progresses during this period. For another property, namely,
categorical perception, previous researchers have shown
a different developmental pattern.
Whereas " categorical precision " is a matter of
accuracy--it corresponds to the extent to which stimuli
are correctly identified and discriminated--"categorical
perception" reflects the coherence between discrimination and identification. According to the original definition, perception is categorical when stimuli can be
discriminated only insofar as they are classified into different categories (Liberman, Harris, Hoffman, & Griffith,
1957). Despite the huge number of studies that refer
to categorical perception, the concept has proven to be
highly resistant to various criticisms and misunderstandings. One frequent misconception is to reduce
categorical perception to a sensory discontinuity or
"boundary." Although there is little doubt that sensory
discontinuities play an important role in the acquisition
of categorical perception (for a review, see Hoonhorst
et al., 2009), categorical perception cannot be reduced

140

to such discontinuities. Categorical perception is a
much broader property, which can take place "in the absence of a boundary effect since there need be no local
maximum in discriminability" (Macmillan, Kaplan, &
Creelman, 1977, p. 453) and can then result from topdown effects through which upper-level categories constrain sensory processing (for brain evidence, see, e.g.,
Dufor, Serniclaes, Sprenger-Charolles, & Demonet, 2007).
Categorical perception arises as a result either of sensory or of higher-level cognitive factors, but what remains essential for its definition is the coherence between
sensation and cognition, that is, the relationship between
discrimination and identification responses (the "acid
test" of categorical perception, in the words of Damper
& Harnad, 2000). The link between sensation and cognition does not necessarily need to be acquired, as evidenced by instances of categorical perception induced
by psychophysical discontinuities (for data with a risetime continuum, see Cutting & Rosner, 1974; for data
with monkeys, see Kuhl & Miller, 1975, 1978; for data
with colors, see Hoonhorst et al., in press). However,
when dealing with phonological features, such psychophysical discontinuities are not simply related to the
language categories; categorical perception is acquired
by combining different basic discontinuities through exposure to the sounds of the environmental language
during the 1st year of age (e.g., Hoonhorst et al., 2009).
None of the previous studies on this issue, as far as
we know, have evidenced a change in categorical perception after 2 years of age. However, many studies have
shown that categorical perception changes before
1 year of age (starting with Werker & Tees, 1984; for a
review, see Kuhl et al., 2008). Human infants are born
with predispositions for perceiving all the possible universal features, which are then activated or not as a
function of the presence or absence of the corresponding
features in the linguistic environment. For example,
Werker and Tees (1984) observed that infants ages 6
to 8 months discriminated nonnative ( Thompson and
Hindi) and native features ( English), whereas infants
ages 10 to 12 months discriminated only native features.
Different universal features can thus be combined whenever they contribute to the perception of the same phonological feature in the language. It is noteworthy that
these studies have assessed categorical perception without
collecting identification data, instead using differences
in discrimination between across- versus within-category
pairs. This is a simplification, which can be useful for
assessing categorical perception when identification
responses cannot be collected (typically in very young
children, since the seminal study of Eimas, Siqueland,
Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971; or in cross-linguistic studies,
as in Strange & Dittmann, 1984). Although the optimal
procedure is to collect identification responses, the location of the identification boundary can then be inferred

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

from studies with other subjects (from adults in studies
on children; from native speakers in cross-linguistic studies). However, it should never be forgotten that using the
boundary location for separating stimulus pairs into
within- and across-category groups is not the optimal
procedure; it is only a shortcut when no identification
responses are available. No boundary is needed with
the optimal procedure, only identification responses.

rapid. Hearing deprivation should have a lesser effect
on the development of categorical precision, which is
fairly slow, but the rate of development depends on the
flexibility of the periods during which these categorical
properties can be fully acquired. If these periods extend
well beyond the moment of implantation, the consequences of hearing deprivation for the acquisition of categorical perception capacities should be fairly limited.

Categorical perception is perfect when speech
sounds cannot be discriminated unless they are identified as members of different categories (Liberman
et al., 1957). Although categorical perception is almost
never perfect, the acquisition of adult-like categorical
perception of language-specific features seems to start
very early, before 1 year of age, but all existing evidence
on this point is indirect, as discussed above. There is only
evidence to suggest that the relationship between discrimination and identification does not improve after
some 6 years of age (Hoonhorst et al., in press; Medina
et al., in press). This does not mean that categorical perception is perfect in 6-year-old children, that is, that discrimination between speech sounds at this age depends
entirely on their classification into different categories,
but that their degree of categorical perception is not less
than that of adults with the same stimuli and more generally under the same conditions.

Although cochlear implantation in deaf infants has
become a promising tool for auditory rehabilitation, the
specific implications of the auditory deprivation period
preceding cochlear implantation on speech perception
remain to be elucidated. As explained above, categorical
perception tells us about the coherence of speech perception. The aim of the present article is to study the implications of auditory deprivation for the development of two
basically different properties of speech-sound categorization: categorical perception and categorical precision.

The abundant evidence on the long-lasting effect of
age on categorical precision, up to the beginning of adolescence, is in sharp contrast with the presence of adultlike categorical perception performances at 2 years of
age and perhaps even earlier. There is no doubt that categorical perception develops faster than does categorical
precision, although the precise age at which adult-like
categorical perception is acquired remains unknown.
The difference in the rate of development of these two
properties of categorical behavior might have implications for language development in CI children. However,
this depends on the flexibility of the sensitive periods
during which these properties can be acquired. We share
the views of several other authors that this is a concern for
the development of speech in general (Gervain & Mehler,
2010; Kuhl et al., 2008, p. 993; Werker & Tees, 2005) and
with a CI in particular (Kral & Eggermont, 2007). For
example, richer social environments extend the duration
of the sensitive period for learning in owls and songbirds
(Baptista & Petrinovich, 1986; Brainard & Knudsen,
1998). According to Werker and Tees (2005), biological
and experiential factors contribute to variations in
both the onset and offset of openness to speech perception experience. Although this indicates that sensitive
periods are fairly flexible, the sensory deprivation,
which precedes cochlear implantation in infants who
are congenitally deaf, might nevertheless affect the
development of speech perception, especially that of categorical perception whose development is relatively

Overview of Consonant and Vowel
Recognition in CI Children
In general, perception of speech sounds is less precise in CI children than in NH children. Geers et al.
(2003) administered a battery of speech perception
tests to CI children who were 8 and 9 years old and
had received a cochlear implant by age 5. The researchers found that the children achieved an average level of
about 50% speech perception skills through listening
alone, although their performance depended on the difficulty of the test. Indeed, on an early speech perception
test developed by the Central Institute for the Deaf
(St. Louis, Missouri), in which the child hears a word
and responds by pointing to one of 12 pictures on a single
plate following each stimulus presentation, CI children
obtained a correct response rate of about 79%. This task,
which uses words differing in all phonemes or with a
similar first consonant, is simpler than the Word Intelligibility by Picture Identification Test ( WIPI; Ross &
Lerman, 1971), which is also a word identification task
with picture pointing responses. In this test, only one auditory stimulus word is presented for each plate, where
there are six pictures corresponding to words with the
same or similar vowel sound but different consonants
(e.g., hair, pear, stair). In the WIPI task, CI children correctly recognized about 41% of the words (Geers et al.,
2003). Thus, tests that require fine auditory distinctions
among consonant sounds appear to be more difficult
than the early speech perception test where words are
more broadly distinguished.
Other results show that the magnitude of the perceptual deficit in CI children depends on the phonological feature. Tye-Murray et al. (1995) assessed the speech
perception skills of CI children via the Children's AudioVisual Feature Test (Tyler, Fryauf-Bertschy, & Kelsay,

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

141

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

1991). The test is composed of items that most 4- and
5-year-old children can recognize: seven letters of the alphabet and three common words. The stimuli are P, T, C,
B, D, V, Z, key, knee, and me. When testing perception
skills, an audiologist pronounced one word, and the subject pointed to an item on the response form that bore an
illustration of the test stimulus. They showed that children who were fitted with CIs at 7.3 years, with 34 months
of CI experience at time of testing, had a score of 25% correct consonants in the auditory-only condition. The children scored highest for the nasality and voicing features
(respectively 33% and 30% of correct responses on average) and lowest for the place and frication features (respectively 7% and 13% of correct responses on average).
Medina and Serniclaes (2009) showed that CI children from 5.9 to 11 years old who were fitted with CIs
at an average age of 3.3 years discriminated different
vowels and consonants less successfully than did NH
children matched for chronological age. For vowels, the
deficit was larger for nasality than for labiality, frontness, and aperture. For the consonants, the deficit was
larger for place than for nasality, manner, and voicing,
in agreement with the results of Tye-Murray et al. (1995).
The results of a previous study suggested that in
some instances, CI children do not have a deficit in either
categorical perception or categorical precision when compared with NH children of the same listening age (Medina
& Serniclaes, 2009). However, this depended on the phonological feature. Similar results between CI and NH
children were found only for the voicing feature (Medina
& Serniclaes, 2009) and not for place of articulation, for
which CI children showed a deficit in categorical precision ( Medina & Serniclaes, 2009). The absence of a
categorical perception deficit for the voicing feature suggests that early auditory deprivation does not affect the
development of phonological features. The fact that a
categorical precision deficit is present for the place feature but not for the voicing feature suggests that cochlear
implants' poor transmission of certain acoustic cues, such
as formant transitions, has developmental implications.
The fact that deficits in phonemic discrimination are
not equivalent for all the investigated features suggests
that the different acoustic cues are not transmitted with
the same fidelity by the CI device. These limitations may
be a problem because each phonemic feature depends on
specific acoustic cues.1 Studies on this issue started from
the dichotomy between two different dimensions of
1

Although it is evident that the perception of a single phonemic feature
depends on multiple acoustic cues (for a review, see Repp, 1982), it is also
true that some of these cues have major perceptual importance. The other
cues are secondary: They act only when the main cue is ambiguous (typically,
voice onset time for voicing; see Abramson & Lisker, 1985). This has been
shown even with naturally produced spontaneous speech (Saerens, Serniclaes,
& Beeckmans, 1989). Here we describe each feature that acts as a "major
cue," that is, those with the largest perceptual weight.

142

acoustic signals: temporal envelope and temporal fine
structure. For instance, envelope has decisive importance for the perception of voicing and manner, whereas
temporal fine structure is decisive for place and nasality
(Rosen, 1992; Stevens, 2000). If envelope was better
transmitted by the CI than temporal fine structure,
this might explain why CI children perceive manner
and voicing better than place and nasality. In general,
the capacity to identify speech signals relies on the perception of both temporal cues, the envelope (i.e., E, relatively
slow variations in amplitude over time, between 2 and
50 Hz), and the temporal fine structure, (i.e., TFS, the
rapid variations at a rate close to the center frequency
of the band, higher than 500 Hz). Thus, it is theoretically
and practically important to understand whether the perceptual resolution of temporal E and TFS are key factors
for speech perception in quiet for CI users. To our knowledge, no data are available concerning the acoustic cue
perception skills of children with CIs. All the research on
this issue discussed below concerns adult listener skills.
Most current CI prostheses seem to deliver adequate temporal E information but transmit TFS suboptimally. Existing types of CIs cannot provide TFS
information, as the modulated carrier in each channel
is a single train of pulses with fixed delay, and the ability of the CI to use frequency-place coding cues is limited (Faulkner, Rosen, & Moore, 1990). Indeed, large
amounts of channel interaction have been observed for
stimuli presented on adjacent electrodes, although the
overall effect is individually variable and dependent on
the stimulus parameters (Chatterjee & Shannon, 1998).
The device's discarding of TFS significantly decreases
speech perception performance, especially in tonal languages (Stickney, Zeng, Litovsky, & Assman, 2004; Xu
& Pfingst, 2008). Whereas some studies have shown
that CI users' TFS resolution is relatively poor compared
with that of NH listeners, their processing of temporal E
is less impaired (Chen & Zeng, 2004; Fu & Shannon,
2000; Stickney et al., 2004). Temporal E cues may, in
fact, be particularly important for CI users precisely because their perception of TFS cues is significantly worse
than that of listeners with normal hearing, and they may
be forced to rely more heavily on those acoustic cues that
are relatively well perceived with a CI (Qin & Oxenham,
2003; Zeng et al., 2005). Indeed, many studies have
shown that temporal E information contributes significantly to consonant recognition (Xu, Thompson, &
Pfingst, 2005). Nie, Barco, and Zeng (2006) performed
a study with CI adults and showed that the percentage
of correct scores for consonant recognition varies with
stimulation rate. Consonant recognition in quiet improved as the rate of stimulation increased.
The temporal E-TFS dichotomy does not seem to
be as useful for studying the discrimination of vowel
structure, which is mainly characterized by formants.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Vowel perception relies on spectral resolution to resolve
the formant pattern that distinguishes between vowels.
Frontness is mainly defined by F2 and F3, aperture by
F1 and F2, and nasality by a special low F1 formant,2
that is, a second low frequency resonance in the vicinity
of F1, and antiformants (Calliope, 1989). The reliance of
frontness on relatively high frequencies, in the F2 and
F3 regions, and of nasality on lower frequencies, in the
F1 region, could explain the differences in reception between these features. This possibility is supported by the
suggestion of Harnsberger et al. (2001) that vowel perception by CI users may be limited by the listener's formant frequency discrimination skills. Thus, differences
in the reception of the different vowel features seem to be
related to insufficient frequency resolution rather than
to differences in the balance between temporal E and
TFS cues.
In summary, CI devices' superior transmission of
temporal E cues as opposed to TFS cues might explain
the unequal reception of different consonant features,
namely, the better reception of manner and voicing as
opposed to nasality and place. However, differences between vowel features, namely, the better reception of
frontness than nasality, seem to be better explained by
insufficient frequency resolution.

The Present Study
In summary, previous studies provide some evidence that child CI users have a deficit in feature perception when compared with NH children. However, there
are no clear indications about the nature of this deficit.
Although previous studies suggest a deficit in the precision of the processes involved in feature discrimination
and identification, little is known about a possible deficit
in categorical perception, that is, a possible deficit in the
relationship between discrimination and identification.
Although previous results suggest that categorical perception of the voicing feature is not impaired in CI children
(Medina & Serniclaes, 2009), the question of whether
this finding can be generalized to the other vowel and
consonant features remains open. As previous results
also suggest a fairly general deficit in categorical precision in CI children, one might wonder whether their categorical perception of the different consonant and vowel
features is preserved. The present study addresses these
issues for the main phonological features in French
(place, voicing, nasality, and manner for consonants; nasality, aperture, and frontness for vowels). Finally, the
need to investigate and compare the ability to categorize
speech sounds in young CI users is reinforced by the repeated demonstration of the important role of categorical
perception in reading acquisition (Bogliotti, Serniclaes,
2

The French vocalic repertoire includes three to four nasal vowels depending
on the dialect (Malmberg, 1971).

Messaoud-Galusi, & Sprenger-Charolles, 2008; Godfrey,
Syrdal-Lasky, Millay, & Knox, 1981; Serniclaes, Van Heghe,
Mousty, Carre, & Sprenger-Charolles, 2004).
The aim of the present study is to obtain a comprehensive picture of the perception of different consonant
and vowel features by children with CIs. We questioned
whether the absence of categorical perception deficits
evidenced in a previous study (Medina & Serniclaes,
2009) with a limited set of features might be generalized
to the whole set of features present in a language. We
also aimed to determine whether the severity of categorical precision deficits varies between features, in order to
draw possible links with cochlear implants' transmission of different speech cues. Two different hypotheses
were tested:
Hypothesis 1. In accordance with previous results,
CI children will not exhibit a lesser degree of categorical
perception than NH children, in spite of a hearing deprivation period. We used the classical procedure for assessing categorical perception, which consists in converting
the identification scores into "expected" discrimination scores--that is the amount of discrimination that
would be expected from their classification into different
categories--before comparing them with the observed
discrimination scores.
Hypothesis 2. CI children will exhibit a lesser degree
of categorical precision than NH children, with the degree of categorical precision deficit depending on the
phonological feature. The assessment of categorical precision was based on the mean values of the discrimination and identification scores (whereas categorical
perception assessment was based on the difference between the discrimination and identification scores).

A Simplified Methodology for Assessing
Categorical Perception
Assessing the categorical perception of seven different features would be a formidable task with the usual
methodology. Instead of using stimulus continua, we
used minimal word pairs for assessing categorical perception. This simplified method is quite different from
the usual one but, we believe, is entirely appropriate
for measuring the degree of categorical perception.
As we have seen, what is essential for the definition
of categorical perception is the relationship between
identification and discrimination. With the classical definition of categorical perception (Liberman et al., 1957),
there is no need to separate within- and across-category
pairs of stimuli. In fact, within- and across-category
pairs are not entirely separable unless there is a stepwise identification function (i.e., there is a jump from
0% to 100% between two successive stimuli) along
some stimulus continuum. Without stepwise identification,

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

143

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

all the stimuli belong at various degrees to both categories,
and there is no clear-cut separation between within- and
across-category pairs. Each pair can be considered as
both an across- and within-category pair. Liberman
et al. (1957) argued that categorical perception assessment does not need to segregate the within-category
pairs from across-category ones: The classical method
for assessing the degree of categorical perception is to
compare the actual discrimination performance (observed
discrimination) with the one afforded by differences in
identification (expected discrimination) for each pair.
The expected discrimination afforded by each single pair
depends on the across- versus within-category balance inside the pair (i.e., when both stimuli in an AX pair 3 collect either 0% or 100% identification scores, there is 0%
expected discrimination, and the percentage of expected
discrimination increases with the difference between
the identification scores of the stimuli inside the pair).
With this classical definition, there is also no need
for a stimulus continuum to assess categorical perception. A single pair is sufficient to compare discrimination
and identification. Although categorical perception
experiments have always (as far as we know) used
pairs of stimuli varying along some continuum, this
was due to the reduction of categorical perception to
sensory discontinuities and is by no means compulsory.
Keeping in mind that each pair is a mixture of acrosscategory and within-category pair, a single pair can
already give sufficient information for comparing discrimination and identification performance. We do not need a
continuum and a boundary. All that is needed is an ambiguous pair to keep performance from being asymptotic
(ceiling effects). Therefore, to assess categorical perception with minimal pairs of natural speech stimuli, as we
did in the present study, is entirely coherent with the
definition of categorical perception, although as far as
we know this is a completely new procedure. By comparison with the usual "continuum" paradigm, this new "minimal pairs" paradigm is much simpler because it makes it
possible to considerably reduce the size of the experiment.
This is an important advantage for research studies of
broad scope like this one, and also for clinical studies.

stimuli were words and minimal pairs, comprising all
the vowel and consonant features of French.

Participants
Twenty-five children with unilateral cochlear implants (11 boys and 14 girls) were recruited from 15 French
institutes for the deaf located in different regions of
France. All the children were congenitally deaf, had
used a CI device for at least 5 years, and had been fitted
with an implant before the age of 3;6 (years;months).
The implant was either the Clarion (Advanced Bionics),5
the Nucleus (Cochlear Corporation),6 or the Digisonic
( Neurelec). 7 Children recruited ranged in age from
7;11 to 11;6 and from grades two to four. Age at implantation ranged in age from 1;10 to 3;6. Only one child had
deaf parents. Table 1 describes the characteristics of
each of the participants with CI. Before implantation,
all children used conventional hearing aids and were
still using them--even if only occasionally--in their
nonimplanted ear. During the speech perception tests,
the hearing aid was taken off in order to prevent any
sound from being perceived by the contralateral ear.
Before and after implantation, 9 out of 25 children
used cued speech (early and intensive practice), and
11 children out of the remaining participants used only
spoken language, that is, they exclusively used speech
and audition to communicate. Five children had used spoken language and cued speech starting in first grade. In
our study, 19 out of 25 children were enrolled in mainstream classes with hearing children. Six children were
in a spoken language classroom in a deaf school (special
education with spoken language instruction).
Each child with CI was matched with one NH child
with the same listening age to compare the performance
of the two groups. All the NH children met the following
criteria: (a) they were native speakers of French, and
(b) they had no history of auditory and language disorders. All families, both those of CI children and those
of NH children, were informed about the goals of the

5

Method
The present study was designed to investigate CI
children's capacity to discriminate and to identify meaningful minimal pairs. Their performance was compared
with that of NH children matched for listening age.4 The
3
In the AX design, AX is a pair of stimuli, and participants have to decide
whether X is the same as A or different.
4
The listening age was defined in terms of a child's "aging" or maturity
in listening once he or she has access to sound via a cochlear implant. A child
who is 6 years old and has had an implant for 3;6 years would be expected
to demonstrate auditory skills similar to a 3;6-year-old, not a 6-year-old.

144

The Clarion implant has 16 intracochlear electrodes. The implant uses
Continuous Interleaved Sampler (CIS) or Simultaneous Analog Stimulation
(SAS) strategy. The CIS strategy covers the frequency band 350-6800 Hz.
Each channel has an update rate of 833 pulses per second (pps). The
frequency range of SAS strategy is 250-6800 Hz, and a maximum of eight
channels are available. The update rate is approximately 13,000 pps.
6
The Nucleus 24 electrodes array contains 22 intracochlear electrodes
and two extracochlear ground electrodes that permit up to 20 channels of
information. The implant uses Spectral Peak (SPEAK), CIS, or Advanced
Combination Encoder (ACE) strategy. The update rate is approximately
14,400 pps. Just like the CIS, the ACE strategy has a higher rate of
stimulation as compared with SPEAK, ranging between 500 and 2400 Hz.
7
The Digisonic implant has 20 electrodes on an array of 25 mm, and all
20 electrodes can be activated. The default frequency distribution of the
implant is 195-8003 Hz. The stimulation rate may be set between 260
and 1,000 pps per electrode in the signal processor. The implant uses a
main-peak interleaved sampling strategy.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 1. Characteristics of children with cochlear implants (CI children).
Mean (SD )
chronological age
(years; months)

Mean (SD )
age at implantation
(years; months)

Mean (SD )
length of CI use
(years; months)

Type of device

9;1 (1;1)

2;7 (0;9)

6;6 (1;1)

17 Nucleus Freedom
5 Nucleus SPrint
1 Digisonic
2 Clarion

study and provided written consent before the participation of their child.
As indicated in Table 2, the chronological age of
the CI group was significantly higher than that of the
NH group, t(25) = 9.8, p < .001. The listening age of the
CI group and NH controls did not differ significantly,
t(25) < 1. Only children whose nonverbal cognitive development was considered to be within normal limits as
assessed on a nonverbal reasoning test from Progressive
Matrices (Raven, 1947) participated in the study. As indicated in Table 2, the scores of all children were within
the normal range.

Experimental Tasks
Two tasks were administered to assess subjects' discrimination and identification skills. Possible differences between groups in categorical perception must
be dissociated from differences in the precision of phonemic boundaries, the latter being assessed by the magnitude of identification scores (the better the d score, the
higher the precision). In order to assess categorical
perception while ruling out effects due to differences in
categorical precision, we used the classical criterion of
comparing the observed discrimination scores to those
predicted from the identification responses (Liberman
et al., 1957). Categorical perception is perfect when the
observed discrimination scores coincide exactly with
those expected from identification; the degree of categorical perception is assessed by the difference between the

Communication
mode

Education
placement

9 early and intensive
cued speech + oral
11 oral
5 late cued speech + oral

6 special education

19 mainstream

observed and expected discrimination data. The smaller
the difference between the observed and predicted
scores, the better the categorical perception would be.
According to the original definition (Liberman et al.,
1957), observed discrimination scores correspond to actual discrimination responses (e.g., the correct discrimination scores of d transforms of stimulus pairs in an AX
discrimination task), whereas expected discrimination
scores are derived from identification responses (e.g.,
the identification scores of the same stimuli presented
individually).
For all the tests, the children could potentially use
lipreading to understand instructions, but the items
were prerecorded to ensure that participants listened
to the stimuli without the help of lipreading. This precaution is important because lipreading has been
shown to have an effect on speech perception in both
deaf children (Bergeson, Pisoni, & Davis, 2003, 2005;
Lachs, Pisoni, & Kirk, 2001; Leybaert & Colin, 2007;
O'Donoghue, Nikolopoulos, & Archbold, 2000; Spencer
& Tomblin, 2009; Tyler et al., 1997) and NH children
(McGurk & MacDonald, 1976).
Discrimination task. Measures of speech feature
discrimination for both consonants and vowels were
obtained for both groups of subjects. This test used a
two-alternative forced-choice procedure. The stimuli
were presented in pairs (AX format), comprising either
different stimuli (e.g., for the /b/-/m/ contrast, "mouche"-
"bouche" or "bouche"-"mouche") or the same stimuli
presented twice (either "bouche" or "mouche" twice in a

Table 2. Chronological age, listening age, and nonverbal IQ level of CI participants and normal-hearing (NH) participants.
Chronological age

Group
CI
NH
Note.

Mean (SD )
years;months
9;1 (1;1)
6;4 (1;2)

Listening age

p
< .001

Mean (SD )
years;months
6;6 (1;1)
6;4 (1;2)

PM 47

p
> .20

Number of correct
responses (out of 36)

Percentiles

p

27
25

75
75

> .20

PM 47 = Coloured Progressive Matrices (Raven, 1947).

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

145

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

row). Pairs of stimuli were thus, for example, "mouche"-
"bouche," "mouche"-"mouche," "bouche"-"bouche," and
"bouche"-"mouche." The child heard the two words
spoken successively, with a 100-ms interval between
them. Participants had to indicate whether the stimuli
within each pair were the same (either "bouche" or
"mouche" twice) or different (e.g., "mouche"-"bouche"
or "bouche"--"mouche"). There were 140 different pairs
(70 Stimulus Conditions x 2 Orders) and 140 same
pairs.
We used one list of CVCV or CVC word pairs recorded by a female French speaker. This list assessed
all features defining consonants (e.g., place, voicing,
manner, nasality) and vowels (e.g., frontness, nasality,
aperture). The following are examples of pairs of stimuli:
*

voicing: "poule"-"boule"

*

consonant nasality: "bouche"-"mouche"

*

manner: "vol"-"bol"

*

place of articulation: "bouche"-"douche"

*

frontness: "pull"-"poule"

*

aperture: "cil"-"salle"

*

vowel nasality: "baton"-"bateau"

The words chosen were drawn from MANULEX (Lete,
Sprenger-Charolles, & Cole, 2004) and are very frequent, occurring one and a half times in every 100 words,
which corresponds to a standard frequency effect of
85 ( MANULEX; Lete et al., 2004). However, it should
be kept in mind that the acoustic correlate of a phonological feature varies as a function of the context of the adjacent and simultaneous features. For instance, voicing
cues change as a function of the vocalic aperture (an adjacent feature) and the mode of articulation (a simultaneous feature). However, the major cues remain the
same across contexts despite changes in their relative
perceptual weightings (negative and positive voice
onset time [VOT] for voicing; noise spectrum and formant transitions for place of articulation). Our word
list is, thus, not entirely balanced on acoustic grounds,
although the imbalance affects only the relative weightings of these major cues.
Participants gave their discrimination responses by
pressing one of two differently colored keys on the computer keyboard. A green button was used to indicate that
the two stimuli in a pair were the same and a red button
to indicate that they were different.
Identification task. The items used in this task were
the same as in the discrimination task. One word was
presented on each trial (e.g., "mouche" or "bouche"),
and children had to indicate whether the picture presented on the computer screen was the same as or different from the spoken word. Word-picture pairs included,
for example, the word "mouche" (fly) with a picture of a

146

fly, the word "bouche" (mouth) with a picture of a mouth,
the word "mouche" (fly) with a picture of a mouth, and
the word "bouche" (mouth) with a picture of a fly. Two
of these pairs thus corresponded to the response
"same" and two to the response "different." There were
140 different pairs (70 Stimulus Conditions x 2 Orders)
and 140 same pairs. The colored button responses were
the same as in the discrimination task.
This picture-matching task required participants to
compare stored representations of two stimuli, a picture
and a word. This task cannot be performed by comparing
the stimuli (the response would inevitably and always be
"different") but only by comparing the associated labels.
Discrimination on this task is thus entirely constrained
by labels, which is exactly what would be expected in the
case of perfect categorical perception. Therefore, discrimination performance is functionally equivalent to identification performance and, when compared with performance
on unconstrained discrimination of spoken words, is perfectly suited to assessing categorical perception.

Procedure
CI and NH listeners were tested individually in a
quiet room (at home and at school, respectively). They
received all features (place, voicing, manner, and nasality for consonants; frontness, nasality, and aperture for
vowels) during six sessions, which lasted around 20 min
each. For all groups, both identification and discrimination tasks were presented in a random order and all AX
pairs were presented only one time each in random
order. In both tasks, we assessed the features that define
consonants (e.g., place, voicing, manner, nasality) and
vowels (e.g., frontness, nasality, aperture).
Presentation was controlled by E-Prime (Version 2.0),
running on a Dell PC. Stimuli were presented at an
individual-adapted comfortable level through headphones (Beyerdynamic DT290). The DT 290 is a doublesided headphone headset with soft and large circumaural
ear cups that cover ear and microphone. Before the test
session, we first ensured that CI children were able to
hear the stimuli. Children listened to several lists of
10 very frequent words (e.g., "chat," "jambe," "petit,"
"maison," "enfant," "rat," "ours," "rouge," "velo," and
"neige"; in English translation: cat, leg, little, house,
child, rat, bear, red, bike, and snow) at a comfortable
level through headphones (70 dB SPL). They had to repeat one list, and we considered that the hearing level of
the CI children was sufficient if they repeated at least
80% of the words correctly. When they repeated less
than 80% of the words correctly, another list of words
was presented again with the level increased by 5 dB.
The stimuli were presented at 75 dB for 19 CI children
and at 80 dB for 6 other CI children.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Data Analysis
We converted the discrimination and identification responses collected for each of the seven feature
contrasts, four for consonants and three for vowels, into
d scores by taking the difference between the normal deviate (z value) corresponding to the proportion of correct
change detection (i.e., the proportion of "different"
responses to the "different" pairs or "hits") and the proportion of false alarms (i.e., the proportion of "different"
responses delivered in no-change trials; as in Hary &
Massaro, 1982; see Equation 1).8 As 0% and 100% scores
correspond to infinite z values, response scores were adjusted following the classical procedure described by
Macmillan and Creelman (2005) before conversion into
z values. Response scores above 50% were reduced by
1.25% (with 40 responses per couple of pairs, 1.25%
corresponds to one half of the precision of the response
scale, that is, one half of 1/40), and those below 50%
were increased by 1.25%. Finally, d on discrimination
and identification tasks was computed for each participant and each feature.
According to the original definition, there is categorical perception when discrimination of stimuli varying along some continuum depends on identification
(Liberman et al., 1957). Categorical perception is perfect when observed discrimination scores coincide with
those expected from identification, and the degree of categorical perception is characterized by the difference between observed and expected discrimination scores.
Observed discrimination scores correspond to actual discrimination responses (e.g., the correct discrimination
scores, or d transforms of stimulus pairs in an AX discrimination task), whereas expected discrimination
scores are derived from identification responses (e.g.,
the identification scores of the same stimuli presented
individually).

precision between features were tested with planned
comparisons.

Results
Figure 1 presents mean discrimination scores, both
observed and expected from the identification responses
(expressed in d values), for each group and all features
taken together. Figure 2 presents the mean d for each
group and each task for each of the seven different phonetic features tested (consonants in the top panel, vowels in the bottom panel). These results were tested with
a Task x Feature x Group repeated measures ANOVA.
Among the main effects, significant effects were found
for Group, F(1, 48) = 47.2. p < .001; Task, F(1, 48) =
35.3, p < .001; and Phonetic Feature, F(6, 288) = 6.64,
p < .001. Among the interactions, only the Group x
Feature interaction was significant, F(6, 288) = 3.36,
p < .01. The group effect was due to the NH children's
greater observed and expected scores compared with
the CI children. The Task effect indicates that categorical
perception was not perfect: this was due to greater observed
than expected discrimination scores (see Figure 1). However, the difference between the expected and observed
discrimination scores was quite similar for both groups
(as evidenced by the parallel lines in Figure 1 and by either parallel or nearly parallel lines in Figure 2). Neither
the Group x Task interaction nor the Group x Task x
Feature interaction was significant--F < 1; F(6, 288) =
1.08, p =.20, respectively--indicating that there was no
significant difference in categorical perception between
the CI children and NH controls. The Group x Feature

Figure 1. Discrimination and identification scores for children with
cochlear implants (CI children) and normal-hearing (NH) children.

The expected and observed discrimination scores
were converted into d values using the same procedure
and the d scores were entered into a repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA). The design of the ANOVA
run on the discrimination and identification scores comprised Task (observed versus expected) and Phonetic
Feature (voicing versus consonant nasality versus manner versus place versus aperture versus frontness versus
vowel nasality) as within-subjects factors and Group
(CI vs. NH) as a between-subjects factor.
Differences in categorical perception between
groups were tested with the Task x Group and Task x
Group x Feature interactions. Differences in categorical
precision between groups were tested with the Group
effect and with the Group x Feature interaction. Differences in categorical perception and categorical
Equation 1 : d0 1/4 zhit  zfalse alarm:

8

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

147

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Figure 2. Discrimination and identification scores for CI children and NH children for each articulatory feature. The first row presents consonant
features, and the second row presents vowel features.

interaction was due to larger differences in both the
expected and observed discrimination scores for some
features, especially consonant and vowel nasality (see
Figure 2).

This is compatible with the results of a previous study
suggesting a larger deficit for nasality and place compared with manner and voicing (Tye-Murray et al.,
1995). For vowel features, Newman-Keuls comparisons

In Figure 3, we present the differences between the
two different groups (CI versus NH) in mean d scores for
both identification and discrimination tasks and for the
seven different features under study (nasality, place of
articulation, manner, and voicing for consonants; nasality, frontness, and aperture for vowels).

Figure 3. Differences between NH children and CI children in mean
d  scores for identification and discrimination tasks, for articulatory
features of vowels and consonants.

We observed that the mean difference between
groups for each feature is different from chance: place,
t(24) = 8.4, p < .001; consonant nasality, t(24) = 6.4,
p < .001; voicing, t(24) = 1.2, p < .001; manner, t(24) =
1.3, p < .001; aperture, t(24) = 1.4, p < .001; vowel nasality, t(24) = 1.9, p < .001; frontness, t(24) = 1.1, p < .001.
For each feature, the accuracy scores of CI children were
lower than for those of NH children.
Figure 3 shows that, for consonant features, the differences between groups were larger for nasality and
place than for voicing and manner. Newman-Keuls comparisons indicated significant differences between nasality and manner ( p < .05), place and manner ( p = .05),
nasality and voicing ( p < .01), and place and voicing
( p < .05) but no significant difference between nasality
and place ( p > .20) or manner and voicing ( p > .20).

148

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

indicated significant differences between nasality and
aperture ( p < .05) and nasality and frontness ( p < .05)
but not between aperture and frontness ( p > .20).
Thus, there was a larger deficit for nasality compared
with aperture and frontness. A previous study suggested
that the deficit should also be larger for aperture versus
frontness, a difference that was present as a trend in our
results (see Figure 3) but was not significant (Medina &
Serniclaes, 2009).
In summary, these results show that for both the
CI children and NH controls, the observed discrimination scores were larger than those expected from identification. This means that categorical perception was not
perfect. The magnitude of the difference between the two
tasks did not depend on the group, which means that
CI children and NH children matched for listening age
show equivalent categorical perception skills. However, d for both identification and discrimination was
lower for CI children than for NH children, indicating a lower level of categorical precision. Differences
between features showed that for consonants, CI children have more difficulty perceiving nasality and place
than manner and voicing; for vowel features, their difficulties are greater for nasality than aperture and
frontness.

Discussion
The present study indicates that the categorical perception performance of children with cochlear implants
is much the same as that of normal-hearing children for
a fairly large set of different phonological features. The
differences between observed and expected discrimination scores were fairly similar for CI and NH children,
suggesting that discrimination was equally constrained
by identification in both groups. However, CI children
obtained lower discrimination and identification scores
than did NH children matched for listening age, indicating a lesser degree of categorical precision. Finally, this
categorical precision deficit was larger for some features
than for others. The differences between groups in the
precision of consonant perception were the smallest for
manner and voicing and the largest for nasality and
place. For vowel perception, differences in precision between groups were smallest for frontness and aperture
and largest for nasality.

Categorical Perception Versus Precision
Differences in categorical precision between NH
and CI children, as well as the fact that the magnitude
of the deficit depends on the feature, have already been
evidenced in previous studies (Medina & Serniclaes,
2009; Tye-Murray et al., 1995). There have also been

some indications as to the absence of differences in categorical perception with synthetic stimuli varying along
a VOT continuum (Medina & Serniclaes, 2009). The
present results make it possible to generalize these findings to a range of different consonant and vowel features
in natural stimuli within a single study.
The present results indicate that the observed discrimination scores of both groups were larger than predicted from identification data. Categorical perception
was thus not perfect, presumably due to the fact that discrimination can be based on all the acoustic differences
between two sounds, whereas identification must be
based on the particular acoustic differences that are relevant for making phonological distinctions. The important point for our purposes here is that the difference
between discrimination and identification scores is similar in both groups, indicating that both groups exhibit
the same degree of categorical perception. As explained
in the introduction, categorical perception depends on
both sensory and cognitive factors, which jointly contribute to the coherence of identification and discrimination responses. In the course of perceptual development,
categorical perception arises from the adaptation of
universal boundaries ( language-independent sensory
discontinuities) to the phonological categories present in
the environmental language (for review, see Hoonhorst
et al., 2009). This is a very complex process through
which fairly rigid sensory discontinuities are integrated
with other sensory cues and become much more flexible
after exposure to the sounds of a particular language.
The end product is often far from being perfect: The
sensory discontinuities can still act independently in
various conditions, giving rise to discrepancies between
discrimination and identification performance, that is,
to different degrees of noncategorical perception (Medina
et al., in press). However, what is most significant to us is
that the degree of noncategorical perception was not
larger in CI children compared with NH children, indicating that they possess unimpaired phonological integration capacities.
Our data thus suggest that the initial potential for
acquiring categorical perception remains fairly intact
at the end of the deprivation period. The fact that we
did not find any evidence for differences in categorical
perception between CI children and controls is even
more striking in light of the fact that there were significant differences in precision. Indeed, CI children obtained
lower scores than NH children for each feature, indicating
that the development of categorical precision in CI children is slower than in NH children. At first sight, the absence of a categorical perception deficit in CI children
despite the persistence of a categorical precision deficit is
rather surprising in light of results on speech development in NH children. Categorical perception has already
been acquired at 6 years of age, if not earlier, whereas

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

149

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

adult-like categorical precision performance is attained
only at the beginning of adolescence (see introduction;
Hoonhorst et al., in press; Medina et al., in press). If
the deficit in precision was due to the absence of auditory
stimulation before the implantation, the effect of auditory deprivation should be even larger on categorical perception because the latter property develops faster than
precision. Therefore, early auditory deprivation does not
seem to explain the precision deficit of CI children, nor
can it explain the absence of a categorical perception deficit, probably because the sensitive periods for acquiring
these properties are fairly flexible. This is in accordance
with other studies, which have found that an early deprivation period does not influence the development of the
auditory pathway and the central auditory system if
children receive a cochlear implant before age 3;6 (Ray,
Gibson, & Sanli, 2004; Sharma, Dorman, & Kral, 2005).
As CI children's lower precision in the perception of
phonological features does not seem to be the consequence of auditory deprivation before cochlear implantation, the explanation has to be sought elsewhere.
Limitations in the transmission of acoustic cues by the
cochlear implant might offer some insight on this issue.

Differences Between Features
Although the present results suggest that the categorical precision deficit of CI children compared with NH
children is not likely explained by the effects of an auditory deprivation period, the limitations of signal processing by the cochlear implant seem to be more relevant.
Differences in categorical precision between NH and
CI children might arise from differences between electrical and auditory stimulation. Indeed, different studies
have shown that acoustic cues are transmitted with lesser
accuracy by CI devices than by normal auditory stimulation (Dawson, McKay, Busby, Grayden, & Clark, 2000;
Dorman & Loizou, 1997; Loizou, Dorman, & Tu, 1999;
Loizou, Poroy, & Dorman, 2000). Furthermore, previous
studies have demonstrated differences in the magnitude
of perceptual deficits between phonological features
(Medina & Serniclaes, 2009; Tye-Murray et al., 1995).
The results of the present study confirm these findings and provide an overall picture of the reception of
the different features in relation to the corresponding
acoustic cues.
The present results reveal that, for consonant features, manner and voicing are better perceived than nasality and place by children using cochlear implant. These
patterns of information reception are globally consistent
with previous work on adult acoustic perception skills.
The ordering of feature reception (manner = voicing >
nasality = place) is reminiscent of the ordering of feature
reception in Tye-Murray et al.'s (1995) study. The fact
that we obtained much the same ordering some 15 years

150

later, despite considerable changes in processing strategies and sound processor technology, is worth highlighting. The simplest explanation for this ordering is that
voicing and manner information are mainly conveyed
by E cues, whereas place and nasality are mainly conveyed by TFS cues, as would be anticipated from acoustic
and phonetic considerations (Rosen, 1992; Verschuur &
Rafaely, 2001). However, a recent study suggests that for
NH listeners, the degradation between E and TFS speech
is lesser for voicing and nasality than for manner and
place (Bertoncini, Serniclaes, & Lorenzi, 2009). Clearly,
the relationship between each feature and the E versus
TFS cues needs further investigation and might be of
relevance to the transmission of consonant features by
cochlear implants. It would be worthwhile quantifying
individual differences in the acoustic limitations of the
CI devices through psychoacoustic measures of sensitivity to TFS and E cues (as in Won, Drennan, Kang, &
Rubinstein, 2010) and to relate them to differences in
categorical precision.
It is difficult to explain differences in the reception of
vowel features based on the dichotomy between E and
TFS cues. Vowel perception relies on spectral resolution
to resolve the formant pattern that distinguishes between
vowels, which seems to imply that all vowel features are
mainly defined by TFS cues. Rather, differences in perceptual precision between vowel features are better
explained by the consequences of insufficient frequency
resolution (see Harnsberger et al., 2001, as mentioned in
introduction). These consequences are more important
for the neural coding of low-frequency formants and
should therefore more severely affect nasality, which depends on the transmission of low-frequency energy in
the F1 region, than frontness, which depends on relatively high-frequency energy in the F2 and F3 regions
(e.g., Calliope, 1989). We found that not only frontness
but also aperture were better perceived than nasality,
which corresponds in part to our expectations. However,
Tyler, Preece, Lansing, and Gantz (1992) and Fitzgerald
et al. (2007) suggested that information about the F1 frequency, which is the main acoustic correlate of aperture,
was transmitted better than F2 and F3 frequencies,
which are the main acoustic correlates of frontness.
The contradictions between these studies suggest that
performance in feature perception varies as a function
of various factors, such as differences in the electrophysiological profiles of the CI users and perhaps also the
kind of CI device. It is also consistent with the fact
that there is no simple one-to-one correspondence between acoustic and phonetic properties.

Conclusion
The present study suggests that CI children present
the same degree of categorical perception as NH children.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

However, categorical precision is lower for CI children
than for NH children matched for listening age. This finding is important because it cannot be easily explained by
auditory deprivation before implantation. If auditory
deprivation played an important role in the deficits of
the CI children in this study, it should have stronger
effects on categorical perception than on categorical
precision because categorical precision develops more
slowly than categorical perception in NH children
(Hoonhorst et al. 2009, in press). It would thus seem
that the sensitive period for development of categorical
perception is not restricted to the first 1-2 years of life.
The sensitive period may be significantly longer. Among
all possible factors, the precision deficit could be attributed both to limitations in cochlear implants' transmission of acoustic cues and frequency resolution.

Chen, H., & Zeng, F. G. (2004). Frequency modulation detection in cochlear implant subjects. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 116, 2269-2277.
Cutting, J. E., & Rosner, B. S. (1974). Categories and boundaries in speech and music. Perception & Psychophysics, 16,
564-570.
Damper, R. I., & Harnad, S. R. (2000). Neural network modeling of categorical perception. Perception & Psychophysics,
62, 843-867.
Dawson, P., McKay, C., Busby, P., Grayden, D., & Clark, G.
(2000). Electrode discrimination and speech perception in
young children using cochlear implants. Ear and Hearing,
21, 597-607.
Dorman, M., & Loizou, P. (1997). Speech intelligibility as a
function of the number of channels of stimulation for normalhearing listeners and patients with cochlear implants.
American Journal of Otology, 18(Suppl. 6), S113-S114.

References

Dorman, M., Loizou, P., Spahr, A., & Maloff, E. (2002).
Factors that allow a high level of speech understanding by
patients fit with cochlear implants. American Journal of
Audiology, 11, 119-123.

Abramson, A. S., & Lisker, L. (1985). Relative power of cues:
F0 shift vs. voice timing. In V. Fromkin (Ed.), Phonetic linguistics: Essays in honor of Peter Ladefoged (pp. 25-33).
New York, NY: Academic Press.

Dufor, O., Serniclaes, W., Sprenger-Charolles, L., &
Demonet, J. F. (2007). Top-down processes during auditory
phoneme categorization in dyslexia: A PET study. NeuroImage, 34, 1692-1707.

Baptista, L. F., & Petrinovich, L. (1986). Song development
in the white crowned sparrow: Social factors and sex differences. Animal Behaviour, 34, 1359-1371.

Eilers, R. E., Gavin, W., & Wilson, W. R. (1979). Linguistic
experience and phonemic perception in infancy: A crosslinguistic study. Child Development, 50, 14-18.

Bergeson, T., Pisoni, D., & Davis, R. (2003). A longitudinal
study of audiovisual speech perception by children with
hearing loss who have cochlear implants. Volta Review,
103, 347-370.

Elliott, L. L., Busse, L. A., Partridge, R., Rupert, J., &
de Graaf, R. (1986). Adult and child discrimination of CV
syllables differing in voice onset time. Child Development,
57, 628-635.

Bergeson, T., Pisoni, D., & Davis, R. (2005). Development of
audiovisual comprehension skills in prelingually deaf children with cochlear implants. Ear and Hearing, 26, 149-164.

Elliott, L. L., Longinotti, C., Meyer, D., Raz, I., & Zucker,
K. (1981). Developmental differences in identifying and
discriminating CV syllables. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 70, 669-677.

Bertoncini, J., Serniclaes, W., & Lorenzi, C. (2009). Discrimination of speech sounds based upon temporal envelope
versus fine structure cues in 5- to 7-year-old children. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 52, 682-695.
Bogliotti, C., Serniclaes, W., Messaoud-Galusi, S., &
Sprenger-Charolles, L. (2008). Discrimination of speech
sounds by children with dyslexia: Comparisons with chronological age and reading level controls. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 101, 137-155.
Brainard, M. S., & Knudsen, E. I. (1998). Sensitive periods
for visual calibration of the auditory space map in the barn
owl optic tectum. Journal of Neurosciences, 18, 3929-3942.
Burnham, D. K., Earnshaw, L. J., & Clark, J. E. (1991).
Development of categorical identification of native and nonnative bilabial stops: Infants, children and adults. Journal
of Child Language, 18, 231-260.
Burns, T., Yoshida, K., Hill, K., & Werker, J. (2007). The
development of phonetic representation in bilingual and
monolingual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 455-474.
Calliope. (1989). La parole et son traitement automatique
[Speech and automatic processing]. Paris, France: Masson.
Chatterjee, M., & Shannon, R. V. (1998). Forward masked
excitation patterns in multi-electrode electrical stimulation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 103,
2565-2572.

Eimas, P. D., Siqueland, E. R., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, J.
(1971, January 22). Speech perception in infants. Science,
171, 303-306.
Faulkner, A., Rosen, S., & Moore, B. C. J. (1990). Residual
frequency selectivity in the profoundly hearing-impaired
listener. British Journal of Audiology, 24, 381-392.
Fitzgerald, M. B., Shapiro, W. H., McDonald, P. D.,
Neuburger, H. S., Ashburn-Reed, S., Immerman, S., . . .
Svirsky, M. A. (2007). The effect of perimodiolar placement
on speech perception and frequency discrimination by cochlear
implant users. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 127, 378-383.
Fu, Q., & Shannon, R. (2000). Effect of stimulation rate on phoneme recognition by nucleus-22 cochlear implant listeners.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 589-597.
Geers, A., Brenner, C., & Davidson, L. (2003). Factors associated with development of speech perception skills in children implanted by age five. Ear and Hearing, 24(Suppl. 1),
24S-35S.
Gervain, J., & Mehler, J. (2010). Speech perception and language acquisition in the first year of life. Annual Review of
Psychology, 61, 191-218.
Godfrey, J., Syrdal-Lasky, A., Millay, K., & Knox, C. (1981).
Performance of dyslexic children on speech perception tests.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 32, 401-424.

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

151

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Harnsberger, J. D., Svirsky, M. A., Kaiser, A. R., Pisoni,
D. B., Wright, R., & Meyer, T. A. (2001). Perceptual "vowel
spaces" of cochlear implant users: Implications for the study
of auditory adaptation to spectral shift. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 109, 2135-2145.
Hary, J. M., & Massaro, D. M. (1982). Categorical results do
not imply categorical perception. Perception & Psychophysics,
32, 409-418.
Hazan, V., & Barrett, S. (2000). The development of phonemic
categorization in children aged 6-12. Journal of Phonetics,
28, 377-396.
Hoonhorst, I., Colin, C., Markessis, E., Radeau, M.,
Deltenre, P., & Serniclaes, W. (2009). French native
speakers in the making: From language-general to languagespecific voicing boundaries. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 104, 353-366.
Hoonhorst, I., Medina, V., Colin, C., Markessis, E.,
Radeau, M., Deltenre, P., & Serniclaes, W. (in press).
The development of categorical perception: Comparisons
between voicing, colors and facial expressions. Speech
Communication.
Knudsen, E. I. (2004). Sensitive periods in the development of
the brain and behavior. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
16, 1412-1425.
Kral, A., & Eggermont, J. J. (2007). What's to lose and what's
to learn: Development under auditory deprivation, cochlear
implants and limits of cortical plasticity. Brain Research
Review, 56, 259-269.
Krause, S. F. (1982). Vowel duration as a perceptual cue
to post-vocalic consonant voicing in young children and
adults. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
71, 990-995.
Kuhl, P. K., Conboy, B. T., Coffey-Corina, S., Padden, D.,
Rivera-Gaxiola, M., & Nelson, T. (2008). Phonetic learning
as a pathway to language: New data and native language
magnet theory expanded ( NLM-e). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363, 979-1000.
Kuhl, P. K., & Miller, J. D. (1975, October 3). Speech perception by the chinchilla: Voiced-voiceless distinction in
alveolar plosive consonants. Science, 190, 69-72.
Kuhl, P. K., & Miller, J. D. (1978). Speech perception by
the chinchilla: Identification functions for synthetic VOT
stimuli. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 63,
905-917.
Lachs, L., Pisoni, D., & Kirk, K. (2001). Use of audiovisual
information in speech perception by prelingually deaf children with cochlear implants: A first report. Ear and Hearing,
22, 236-251.
Lete, B., Sprenger-Charolles, L., & Cole, P. (2004).
MANULEX: A grade-level lexical database from French
elementary school readers. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 36, 156-166.
Leybaert, J., & Colin, C. (2007). Le role des informations
visuelles dans le developpement du langage de l'enfant sourd
muni d'un implant cochleaire [Influence of visual information in language development of children using cochlear
implants]. Enfance, 59, 245-253.
Liberman, A., Harris, K., Hoffman, H., & Griffith, B.
(1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within and
across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 358-368.

152

Loizou, P., Dorman, M., & Tu, Z. (1999). On the number of
channels needed to understand speech. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 106, 22097-22103.
Loizou, P., Poroy, O., & Dorman, M. (2000). The effect of
parametric variations of cochlear implant processors on
speech understanding. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 108, 790-802.
Macmillan, N., & Creelman, C. (2005). Detection theory:
A user's guide. London, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Macmillan, N. A., Kaplan, H. L., & Creelman, C. D. (1977).
The psychophysics of categorical perception. Psychological
Review, 84, 452-471.
Malmberg, B. (1971). Les domaines de la phonetique [In the
fields of phonetics]. Paris, France: Presses Universitaires
de France.
Maye, J., Weiss, D. J., & Aslin, R. N. (2008). Statistical
phonetic learning in infants: Facilitation and feature
generalization. Developmental Science, 11, 122-134.
Maye, J., Werker, J. F., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity to distributional information can affect phonetic
discrimination. Cognition, 82, B101-B111.
McGurk, H., & MacDonald, J. (1976, December 23-30).
Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature, 264, 746-748.
Medina, V., Hoonhorst, I., Bogliotti, C., & Serniclaes, W.
(in press). Development of voicing perception in French: Comparing adults, adolescents and children. Journal of Phonetics.
Medina, V., & Serniclaes, W. (2009). Consecuencias de la
categorizacion fonologica sobre la lectura silenciosa de ninos
sordos con implante coclear [Consequences of phonological
categorization on silent reading in children using cochlear
implants]. Revista de Logopedia, Foniatria y Audiologia,
29, 186-194.
Nie, K., Barco, A., & Zeng, F. (2006). Spectral and temporal
cues in cochlear implant speech perception. Ear and Hearing,
27, 208-217.
O'Donoghue, G., Nikolopoulos, T., & Archbold, S. (2000).
Determinants of speech perception in children after cochlear
implantation. Lancet, 356, 466-468.
Qin, M. K., & Oxenham, A. J. (2003). Effects of simulated
cochlear-implant processing on speech reception in fluctuating
maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
114, 446-454.
Raven, J. (1947). Coloured Progressive Matrices. London, UK:
Lewis.
Ray, J., Gibson, W. P., & Sanli, H. (2004). Role of auditory
stimulation in maturation of the auditory pathway. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica, 124, 695-699.
Repp, B. H. (1982). Phonetic trading relations and context
effects: New evidence for a phonetic mode of perception.
Psychological Bulletin, 92, 81-110.
Rivera-Gaxiola, M., Silva-Pereyra, J., & Kuhl, P. K. (2005).
Brain potentials to native and non-native speech contrasts
in 7- and 11-month-old American infants. Developmental
Science, 8, 162-172.
Rosen, S. (1992). Temporal information in speech: Acoustic,
auditory and linguistic aspects. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 336, 367-373.
Ross, M., & Lerman, J. (1971). Word intelligibility by picture
identification. Pittsburgh, PA: Stanwix House.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 139-153 * February 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Saerens, M., Serniclaes, W., & Beeckmans, R. (1989).
Acoustic versus contextual factors in stop voicing perception
in spontaneous French. Language and Speech, 32, 291-314.

Tyler, R. S., Preece, J. P., Lansing, C. R., & Gantz, B. J.
(1992). Natural vowel perception by patients with the ineraid
cochlear implant. Audiology, 31, 228-239.

Serniclaes, W., Van Heghe, S., Mousty, P., Carre, R., &
Sprenger-Charolles, L. (2004). Allophonic mode of speech
perception in dyslexia. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 87, 336-361.

Verschuur, C., & Rafaely, V. (2001). An exploratory study
into perception of acoustic speech cues by hearing-impaired
adults. British Journal of Audiology, 35, 209-217.

Shannon, R., Zeng, F., Kamath, V., Wygonski, J., & Ekelid,
M. (1995, October 13). Speech recognition with primarily
temporal cues. Science, 270, 303-304.

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior & Development, 7,
49-63.

Sharma, A., Dorman, M. F., & Kral, A. (2005). The influence
of a sensitive period on central auditory development in
children with unilateral and bilateral cochlear implants.
Hearing Research, 203, 134-143.

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (2005). Speech perception as a
window for understanding plasticity and commitment in
language systems of the brain. Developmental Psychobiology,
46, 233-251.

Simon, C., & Fourcin, A. (1978). Cross-language study of
speech-pattern learning. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 63, 925-935.

Won, J. H., Drennan, W. R., Kang, R. S., & Rubinstein, J. T.
(2010). Psychoacoustic abilities associated with music perception in cochlear implant users. Ear and Hearing, 31,
796-805.

Spencer, L. J., & Tomblin, J. B. (2009). Evaluating phonological processing skills in children with prelingual deafness
who use cochlear implants. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education, 14, 1-21.
Stevens, K. N. (2000). Diverse acoustic cues at consonantal
landmarks. Phonetica, 57, 139-151.
Stickney, G. S., Zeng, F. G., Litovsky, R., & Assmann, P.
(2004). Cochlear implant speech recognition with speech
maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
116, 1081-1091.
Strange, W., & Dittmann, S. (1984). Effects of discrimination
training on the perception of /r-l / by Japanese adults learning
English. Perception & Psychophysics, 36, 131-145.
Tye-Murray, N., Spencer, L., & Gilbert-Bedia, E. (1995).
Relationships between speech production and speech perception skills in young cochlear-implant users. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 98, 2454-2460.
Tyler, R., Fryauf-Bertschy, H., & Kelsay, D. (1991). Audiovisual Feature Test for Young Children. Iowa City: University
of Iowa.

Xu, L., & Pfingst, B. (2008). Spectral and temporal cues for
speech recognition: Implications for auditory prostheses.
Hearing Research, 242, 132-140.
Xu, L., Thompson, C., & Pfingst, B. (2005). Relative contributions of spectral and temporal cues for phoneme recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117,
3255-3267.
Xu, L., & Zheng, Y. (2007). Spectral and temporal cues for
phoneme recognition in noise. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 122, 1758-1764.
Zeng, F. G., Nie, K., Stickney, G. S., Kong, Y. Y., Vongphoe,
M., Bhargave, A., . . . Cao, K. (2005). Speech recognition
with amplitude and frequency modulations. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 102, 2293-2298.
Zlatin, M. A., & Koenigsknecht, R. A. (1975). Development
of the voicing contrast: Perception of stop consonants. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 18, 541-553.

Tyler, R. S., Fryauf-Bertschy, H., Kelsay, D. M., Gantz,
B. J., Woodworth, G. P., & Parkinson, A. (1997). Speech
perception by prelingually deaf children using cochlear
implants. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 117,
180-187.

Bouton et al.: Perception of Speech Features

153

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

