JSLHR

Article

Examining Success of Communication Strategies
Used by Formal Caregivers Assisting Individuals
With Alzheimer's Disease During
an Activity of Daily Living
Rozanne Wilson,a,b Elizabeth Rochon,a,b Alex Mihailidis,a,b and Carol Leonarda,c

Purpose: To examine formal caregivers' (i.e., employed in long-term
care) use of task-focused verbal and nonverbal communication
strategies while assisting residents with moderate to severe
Alzheimer's disease (AD) during the successful completion of an
activity of daily living (ADL). Based on the literature, the authors
hypothesized that caregivers' use of 1 proposition, closed-ended
questions, and repetition would be of most benefit.
Method: Twelve caregiver-resident with AD dyads (hereafter
referred to as caregiver-resident dyads) participated in this
observational study. Each dyad was videorecorded on 6 separate
occasions while completing handwashing. Handwashing sessions
were transcribed and systematically coded for the use of
communication strategies during completion of the ADL.
Results: Caregiver-resident dyads successfully completed 90% of
all handwashing sessions, and caregivers employed a variety of

I

ndividuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) exhibit progressive impairments in communication and functional
abilities. Notable communication breakdowns typically
occur while caregivers assist during the completion
of activities of daily living (ADLs). AD is a progressive
neurodegenerative disease with insidious onset that
is commonly identified according to the differential

a

University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, Ontario
c
University of Ottawa, Ontario
Correspondence to Elizabeth Rochon:
elizabeth.rochon@utoronto.ca
Editor: Janna Oetting
Associate Editor: Julie Hengst
Received July 28, 2010
Revision received February 1, 2011
Accepted July 25, 2011
DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0206)
b

328

communication strategies. Consistent with our hypotheses, during
successful task completion, caregivers most frequently provided
individuals with AD with 1 direction or idea (i.e., proposition) at
a time, closed-ended questions, and paraphrased repetition.
Caregivers also frequently used encouraging comments and the
resident's name during the task; however, use of these strategies
was not correlated to task success rate.
Conclusion: This study adds to the limited body of evidence
supporting the use of specific communication strategies by
caregivers assisting individuals with moderate to severe AD
during successful completion of ADLs.

Key Words: Alzheimer's disease, communication strategies,
caregivers, activities of daily living

clinical criteria outlined in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edition; American Psychiatric Association, 1994), which characterizes AD as
having deterioration in three domains: cognition, social
or occupational functioning, and behavior. Declines in
memory, language, executive functioning, and visuospatial functioning are hallmarks of AD and are associated
with typical functional and behavioral disturbances
(Cummings, 2004; Potkin, 2002). Although forgetfulness
and recent memory loss are most often the first clinical
symptoms of AD, shortcomings in language abilities are
present in the majority of cases at the earliest stages of
the disease, with deterioration in both production and
comprehension abilities as the disease progresses
(Appell, Kertesz, & Fisman, 1982; Cummings, Benson,
Hill, & Read, 1985; Kempler, 1991). As such, interactions with individuals who have AD may become quite
challenging and frustrating for communication partners, such as family members, friends, and caregivers.

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012 * D American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Declines in multiple cognitive domains associated
with AD alter premorbid aspects of individuals' lives,
leaving functional impairment a core symptom of the
disease (American Psychiatric Association, 1994;
S. Gauthier, Gelinas, & Gauthier, 1997; Potkin, 2002;
Tekin, Fairbanks, O'Connor, Rosenberg, & Cummings,
2001). Functional decline can be accurately measured
by assessing performance of ADLs. In mild AD, performance on instrumental activities, which encompass
complex tasks (e.g., finances), is an initial indicator of
decline, and as the disease progresses, basic activities
(e.g., self-care tasks) become problematic (S. Gauthier
et al., 1997). In particular, the progressive deterioration
characteristic of AD has been linked to declines in the
ability to plan spontaneously, initiate the correct sequence of steps of a task, and use the appropriate tools
for carrying out the steps of a task, which eventually
have a negative impact on the person's ability to complete a task spontaneously (L. Gauthier & Gauthier,
1990). Furthermore, reduced functional capacity can
lead to many changes for individuals living with AD
and has been shown to predict depressive symptoms
(Holtzer et al., 2005), increased behavioral disturbances
(Logsdon et al., 1998), institutionalization (Gaugler, Yu,
Krichbaum, & Wyman, 2009), and decreased survival
rates (Heyman, Peterson, Fillenbaum, & Pieper, 1996;
also see Potkin, 2002; Tekin et al., 2001).
Caregiver assistance during ADLs becomes increasingly important as AD progresses, given the declining
ability to complete daily tasks independently. Caregivers report that at each stage of the disease, cognitive
decline, including language impairments and breakdown
in communication, negatively affects the caregiver-care
recipient dyad, leading to increased time spent on functional
activities, increased caregiver stress, and increased caregiver burden (Clark & Witte, 1991; Lubinski & Orange,
2000; Small, Geldart, & Gutman, 2000; Williamson &
Schulz, 1993). Caregivers have reported that difficulty
completing ADLs, which is coupled with communication
deterioration, is among the strongest predictors of placement in a long-term care (LTC) facility (Gaugler et al.,
2009; Lubinski & Orange, 2000; Steeman, Abraham, &
Godderis, 1997; Williamson & Schulz, 1993).Once in LTC,
formal caregivers (e.g., health care/nursing aides and registered nurses) are responsible for assisting individuals
during the completion of basic ADLs. Unfortunately, the
worsening of communicative function and other cognitive
abilities in residents with AD complicates formal caregivers'
efforts to complete ADLs. Moreover, the majority of communication between caregivers and care receivers takes place
during these daily care routines and is functional in nature
(i.e., is task driven rather than socially oriented; CarisVerhallen, Kerkstra, van der Heijden, & Bensing, 1998).
Interest in communication processes in AD and the
impact of communication breakdown on caregiver-care

recipient dyads has increased during the past decade.
There is a growing body of research that focuses on effective
caregiver-resident communication during conversation
(e.g., Orange, Lubinski, & Higginbotham, 1996; Orange,
Van Gennep, Miller, & Johnson, 1998). In addition, communication training programs have been developed and
evaluated, with several studies reporting beneficial
results of caregiver training (e.g., Bourgeois, Dijkstra,
Burgio, & Allen, 2004; Burgio et al., 2002; Dijkstra,
Bourgeois, Burgio, & Allen, 2002; Ripich, Ziol, Fritsch, &
Durand, 1999; Tappen, Williams, Barry, & DiSesa, 2001).
Moreover, recent systematic reviews evaluating the effectiveness of communication training interventions
for formal care providers of individuals with dementia
residing in LTC facilities have supported the beneficial
outcomes of some training programs (Egan, Berube,
Racine, Leonard, & Rochon, 2010; McGilton et al., 2009;
Vasse, Vernooij-Dassen, Spijker, Rikkert, & Koopmans,
2010). However, it is unclear which individual communication strategies are effective, ineffective, or potentially
hindering during the completion of ADLs.
A variety of clinically recommended verbal communication strategies are available to caregivers of individuals with AD, such as slowed speech rate, verbatim
repetition, closed-ended questions (yes/no response to
question), simple sentences/reduced syntactic complexity,
asking one question or giving one direction at a time, and
minimal use of pronouns (e.g., Beck, Heacock, Rapp, &
Mercer, 1993; Clark & Witte, 1991; Goldfarb & Pietro,
2004; Hopper, 2001; Lee, 1991; Ripich et al., 1999; Sheldon,
1994; Small, Gutman, Makela, & Hillhouse, 2003). However, it has been noted that these recommendations are
generally not based on empirical research (Small, Geldart,
& Gutman, 2000; Small, Kemper, & Lyons, 1997, 2000;
Small et al., 2003) and some may be unhelpful. For example, slowed speech rate is a commonly recommended
speech accommodation; however, Tomoeda, Bayles,
Boone, and Kaszniak (1990) found that not only did slowing of speech fail to improve comprehension of sentences,
it was counterproductive given that individuals with AD
have deficits in working memory. Similar findings were
reported in subsequent studies (Bourgeois et al., 2004;
Burgio et al., 2001; Dijkstra et al., 2002; Small, Andersen,
& Kempler, 1997; Small, Kemper, et al., 1997). Small,
Kemper, and Lyons (1997) also reported that individuals
with mild to moderate AD showed improved comprehension of complex sentences with the subsequent use of
verbatim repetition and with paraphrased repetition,
suggesting that syntax need not always be overly simplified and that repetition should not be limited to only verbatim repetition.
Although some recommended communication strategies have been found to impede communication, research
suggests that other strategies assist comprehension in
individuals with AD. Small, Kemper, and colleagues

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

329

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

(1997) found that syntactically simple sentences were
comprehended better than more complex ones by individuals with AD. Rochon, Waters, and Caplan (1994, 2000)
found evidence to suggest that sentence comprehension
is not solely a function of syntactic complexity. In their
studies, sentence comprehension by individuals with
AD was related to the number of propositions in the sentence (i.e., better comprehension associated with fewer
propositions), lending support for the communication
strategy of providing individuals with one direction or
one idea at a time. Use of closed-ended questions is another communication strategy that researchers have examined and have shown to be effective for caregivers
interacting with individuals who have AD (Ripich et al.,
1999; Small et al., 2003; Small & Perry, 2005; Tappen,
Williams-Burgess, Edelstein, Touhy, & Fishman, 1997).
In addition to verbal communication strategies, the
use of nonverbal communication strategies has also been
recommended, including establishing eye contact, sitting face to face, using gestures to help explain commands, using a calm tone of voice, using instrumental
touch to guide a person through tasks, using overemphasis and exaggerated facial expression, keeping distractions in the environment to a minimum, giving the
patient time to respond, and moving slowly (e.g., Bartol,
1979; Beck et al., 1993; Goldfarb & Pietro, 2004; Sheldon,
1994; Small et al., 2003). To date, there is a paucity of
research examining the influence of nonverbal communication strategies on the promotion of successful communication with individuals who have dementia
(Hubbard, Cook, Tester, & Downs, 2002). To our knowledge, there is no empirical research investigating the effectiveness of caregivers' use of nonverbal strategies
with individuals who have moderate to severe AD during ADL completion.
Preliminary research investigating caregivers' use
of effective communication strategies during completion
of ADLs is emerging (e.g., Roberto, Richter, Bottenberg,
& Campbell, 1998; Small, Geldart, et al., 2000; Small &
Gutman, 2002; Small et al., 2003). In a study by Small,
Geldart, and colleagues (2000), caregivers identified
several daily activities that entailed communication problems, including using the telephone, using the bathroom, and preparing meals. Small and Gutman (2002)
further explored family caregivers' reported use of
10 commonly recommended communication strategies
for use during ADL completion. They found a positive
correlation between caregivers' reported use and perceived effectiveness of the communication strategies,
with the strongest correlations being shown by the use
of short, simple sentences; closed-ended questions; verbatim repetition; and approaching the person slowly and
from the front. In addition, the use of communication
strategies did not significantly vary as a function of disease severity. Although these results are interesting,

330

this study is limited by the fact that the results are
based on self-report and perceived effectiveness rather
than on a more objective assessment.
Small et al. (2003) extended this line of research by
investigating the actual use of 10 of the most commonly
identified communication strategies during completion
of a set of ADLs that caregivers have reported as being
problematic in the home (i.e., engaging in conversation,
setting the table, using the phone, getting something on
request). Audiotaped recordings of interactions between
18 individuals with AD and their spouses indicated that
the caregivers frequently used a subset of verbal communication strategies (one question or direction at a time,
not interrupting, simple sentences, paraphrased repetition, and yes/no questions) and infrequently used verbatim
repetition or slowed speech rate. Further, only one communication strategy--the use of simple sentences--correlated
with disease severity. These findings highlight family caregivers' differential use of communication strategies during
completion of ADLs, some of which are consistent with the
current empirical research and inconsistent with the current clinical recommendations (e.g., slowed speech rate
and verbatim repetition only). This study is notable in
that it was the first systematic attempt to examine the effectiveness of communication strategies used by caregivers
assisting individuals with AD during the completion of
ADLs. However, it is limited in scope by the authors having
studied only individuals with mild to moderate AD and
family (as opposed to formal) caregivers. Further, the
authors of this study used audiotaped recordings to examine a selection of frequently used verbal communication
strategies, with the inclusion of two nonverbal communication strategies observed by the researcher during the
home visits. Finally, the representative ADLs in this
study provide contexts that can encourage more conversation than one would expect to observe during the completion of basic self-care tasks in the LTC setting. Basic
self-care tasks rely more heavily on procedural discourse
(i.e., step-by-step instructions on how to accomplish a
task). In sum, research to date has not systematically investigated the specific characteristics of the verbal and
nonverbal communication strategies (or prompts) used
in LTC facilities to facilitate comprehension in individuals with moderate to severe AD during successful completion of basic ADLs.

Purpose of the Study
The current study was motivated by two sets of gaps:
(a) the gap between the use of empirically supported
communication strategies and those actually being
used in formal care settings during interactions with
residents with moderate to severe AD and (b) the gap between the use of empirically supported communication
strategies and those clinically recommended. Further,

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

to date, much of the research has focused on caregiver
perceptions of effective communication strategies, on effective communication strategies in the conversational
setting, or on the performance of individuals with AD
in an experimental setting. Few studies have focused
on what actually occurs in the caregiver-resident dyad
in a naturalistic setting during the completion of ADLs
(i.e., ADLs that are more procedurally than conversationally based). In addition, few studies have identified
which individual communication strategy contributes to
success of the task.
The purpose of this study was to describe the communication strategies employed by formal caregivers
assisting individuals with moderate to severe AD during
a self-care task--specifically, handwashing--and to
investigate the effectiveness of verbal and nonverbal
communication strategies used by formal caregivers
during completion of a basic ADL. The objectives were
as follows:
1.

To examine which communication strategies caregivers use during the completion of an ADL.

2.

To examine which communication strategies caregivers use when the ADL is successfully completed.

3.

To examine which communication strategies are
related to success rate of the ADL.

On the basis of the literature to date, we hypothesized that caregivers' use of the verbal communication
strategies of one proposition, closed-ended questions,
and repetition (both verbatim and paraphrased) would
be most beneficial to individuals with moderate to severe
AD during handwashing. We also examined the use of
the nonverbal communication strategies of guided touch,
comforting touch, touch for attention, demonstrating
actions, handing an object to the individual, and pointing to an object (strategies frequently clinically recommended). However, the paucity of research examining
this issue did not allow us to develop any specific hypotheses regarding their use.

Method
Study Design
In the current study, we used a systematic observational design to measure communication behaviors of
formal caregivers assisting individuals with moderate
to severe AD during the completion of handwashing
(a basic ADL). We employed verbatim transcription of
the handwashing sessions to assess the caregivers' use
of task-focused communication strategies and accomplished this as follows: (a) conducted a real-time
video recording of the formal caregiver-resident dyad
interaction while participants were completing handwashing; (b) produced an orthographic transcription of

these interactions using the Systematic Analysis of
Language Transcripts (SALT; Miller & Chapman, 2008),
a computer-based software program that generates
quantitative data on linguistic elements of speech; and
(c) coded the computer-based transcripts using the standardized notation system of SALT with the manual addition of a priori operationally defined codes particular
to this study (for a review of the method of transcription
see Lapadat & Lindsay, 1999). Before conducting this research, we received ethics approval through the University of Toronto Office of Research Ethics and from the
LTC facility's affiliated hospital Research Ethics Board
Office.

Participants
Initially, we recruited 13 individuals diagnosed with
moderate to severe AD from an LTC facility in Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; however, due to the death of one resident, 12 residents with AD participated (11 women and
one man). A criterion-based sample was used for participant recruitment. All residents had a diagnosis of AD in
their medical records; were right handed; and did not
have a history of stroke, depression, psychosis, alcoholism,
drug abuse, or physical aggression toward caregivers. To
obtain an updated measure of disease severity, we administered the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE;
Folstein, Folstein, & McHugh, 1975). Cognitive impairment ranged from moderate to severe (average score =
6 of 30, SD = 6.3, range = 0-18). Nine residents were classified as having severe AD (score <10), and three residents
were in the range of moderate AD (score = 10-19). The
participants' average age was 88.1 years (SD = 6.1,
range = 76-99); they had an average of 12.5 years of
education (SD = 0.7, range = 12-14); and the average
number of years at the LTC facility was 2.6 (SD = 2.0,
range = 4 months-5.5 years).
In addition, 12 formal caregivers working the day
shift at the LTC facility participated. In general, staff
readily agreed to participate in the study; only two caregivers declined participation. All caregivers met the following inclusion criteria: They were female, had at least
1 year of experience working with individuals with AD,
and reported that they were able to speak English comfortably. The average age was 53.5 years (SD = 5.0, range =
47-59), the average number of years of education was
13.34 (SD = 1.8, range= 11-16), and the average number
of years working with individuals with AD was 15.9 (SD =
8.2, range = 3-33). Two of the caregivers were registered
nurses, and the remaining 10 caregivers were health
care aides. Ten of the caregivers indicated that they
had received onsite communication-skills training directed at working with individuals with dementia; one
caregiver indicated that she had received offsite communication training (during educational training); and one

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

331

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

caregiver indicated the absence of any communicationskills training for this population. No further information about caregiver communication training was
available. All 12 caregiver-resident dyads participated
in the entire study.

Procedure
Video recordings of formal caregivers assisting individuals with AD through the handwashing task were
collected. Each caregiver was randomly assigned a resident with AD from the pool of participants with AD residing on the caregiver's regular care unit. All caregivers
were familiar with the resident whom they assisted;
however, the assigned caregiver may or may not have
been the resident's usual care provider. Each formal
caregiver-resident dyad met on six separate occasions
to complete a handwashing session. During this study,
72 handwashing sessions were video recorded (with
audio); a session took an average of 133.5 s (SD = 57.1,
range = 48-278 s) to complete. At the beginning of each
handwashing session, caregivers were instructed to use
any verbal and nonverbal strategy needed to assist the
resident with AD in successfully completing the task.
The reason for the use of six sessions was to collect
a large enough corpus of data to allow analysis at the
dyad level as well as collapsed across dyads. Following
the first video recorded session with the caregivers, a
baseline video recording was collected. For the baseline,
the caregiver was asked to describe her daily morning
care routine. The purpose of the baseline video was to obtain an estimate of the caregivers' typical speech rate.
We were unable to collect baseline video for one caregiver; therefore, for task and baseline comparisons, we
excluded this dyad from the analysis.

Transcription and Data Coding Method
All handwashing sessions were included in the overall analysis. The same rater (one of the authors) transcribed and coded each of the 72 handwashing sessions
into SALT, a software program that researchers have
used to examine procedural discourse of individuals with
AD (e.g., Ripich, Carpenter, & Ziol, 1997). Transcription
of communication interactions during handwashing sessions was structured according to six identifiable steps
described in previous research: (a) turn on the water,
(b) wet the hands, (c) use the soap, (d) rinse the hands,
(e) turn off the water, and (f ) dry the hands (e.g., Mihailidis,
Barbenel, & Fernie, 2004). Further, these steps are consistent with Toronto Public Health standards implemented in hospital and LTC settings; thus, training of the
formal caregivers was not required. The beginning and
the end of each step of the task were determined by a
verbal indicator (e.g., "Turn on the water" or "It is
332

time to rinse your hands") or a behavioral indicator
(e.g., the resident turned the water off; the resident
began to dry his or her hands). Residents with AD can
demonstrate a breakdown in this ADL at any one of the
steps involved in proper handwashing (e.g., revert back
to previous steps, skip steps, get "stuck" on one step),
and caregivers are needed to provide guidance and
help them through the task. To understand how the
participants used communication strategies during
completion of the task, we used operationally defined
codes belonging to three main categories: (a) step engagement and step completion, (b) task success, and
(c) communication strategies.
Step engagement and step completion. We coded the
end of each step to indicate whether or not the resident was given the opportunity to participate and
whether the resident or the caregiver completed the
step of the task. Note that because the focus of this
study was on overall task success, we did not separately
perform additional analysis regarding the steps of the
task.
Task success. Upon completion of the task, we coded
each session for success by assessing step completion. A
session was considered successful when a resident completed at least one of the steps in which he or she was
given the opportunity to participate. This meant that
65 sessions were considered to be successful, with residents' performance ranging from one to all steps successfully completed in a session. A session was considered
unsuccessful when a resident did not complete any of
the steps in which they were given the opportunity to
participate. There were seven unsuccessful sessions.
Flexibility in the sequence of steps was permitted (e.g.,
using soap before wetting the hands), and functional
completion of the task was the primary consideration
for defining task success. However, we also measured
time to complete the task because research has shown
that time taken to complete an ADL is a reliable predictor of disease severity and caregiver burden (Marin
et al., 2000).
Communication strategies. Caregiver utterances
were the coded unit of analysis in this study and were
defined as phonological units as outlined by SALT conventions; these utterances were represented by the completion of a thought (marked by falling/rising intonation
or by the presence of a pause). Caregiver utterances were
identified as containing one or more communication
strategies, defined as any communication behavior that
served to prompt the resident through the steps of the
task. Our coding method differs from other observation
schemes that limit utterances to a single scoring category (i.e., mutually exclusive codes) for verbal behaviors
(e.g., Roter's Interaction Analysis System [RIAS]; Roter
& Larson, 2002]). Our coding also allowed for the exhaustive examination of caregivers' use of all communication

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

strategies and for the description of combinations of codes
used during task completion because utterances were not
restricted to a single communication code. Communication strategies belonged to two major categories:
task-focused verbal communication strategies and
task-focused nonverbal communication strategies.
Task-focused verbal communication strategies were defined as any verbal utterances provided by the caregiver
to prompt the resident with AD through the task. Eleven
were included in this study (see Table 1). Task-focused
nonverbal communication strategies were defined as
any nonverbal behaviors, including physical prompts
(e.g., guided touch) and modeling/gesturing prompts
(e.g., demonstrating the action), that the caregiver
used to assist the resident through the task. Six were included in this study (see Table 1). It was possible to have
more than one nonverbal code within a single utterance.
Nonverbal behaviors could also be coded for in the absence of a verbal utterance.
The task-focused communication strategies of interest
were established a priori and were based on previous

research investigating frequently occurring communication strategies used in caregiver-resident interactions
(Small & Gutman, 2002; Small et al., 2003); strategies
recommended in caregiver communication training programs (e.g., Ripich et al., 1999); public resources available to caregivers of individuals with AD (e.g., Alzheimer
Society of Canada, Alzheimer Society of Toronto, Alzheimer's Association); and results from pilot data collected
for this study based on one formal caregiver-resident
dyad during three handwashing sessions.

Interobserver Agreement/Reliability
A second person who was trained on code definitions
transcribed and coded 20% of the handwashing sessions;
this enabled us to establish interobserver agreement/
reliability. First, we calculated interobserver agreement
for the transcription of the caregivers' dialogue using
point-by-point percent agreement. Mostly adequate
(>80%; House, House, & Campbell, 1981) agreement
was obtained (words = 87%; number of utterances = 81%;

Table 1. Coding scheme: Verbal and nonverbal communication strategies.
Communication strategy
Verbal
1. One proposition
2. Two propositions
3. Verbatim repetition
4. Paraphrased repetition
5. Closed-ended question
6. Open-ended question
7. Simple-choice question
8. Verification question
9. Use of the resident's name
10. Encouraging comments
11. Explanation of actions
Speech ratea
Nonverbal
12. Guided touch

Definition

Example

Single direction, request, or idea present in utterance
(typically one phrase or clause)
Two directions, requests, or ideas present in caregiver's utterance
Caregiver repeats previous message with same words or utterance
Caregiver restates previous message using different wording
Question that can be answered with yes or no response
Question that allows for more elaborate response
Caregiver provides response options for resident to choose from
Caregiver clarifies/verifies resident's request or response
Caregiver uses resident's first or last name
Verbal praise directed toward resident
Caregiver explains what he/she is going to do with the resident

Caregiver uses physical touch to guide resident during
a step of the task
13. Comfort touch
Caregiver uses touch to indicate support/reassurance
during the task
14. Attention touch
Caregiver uses touch to gain or regain resident's attention
when off task
15. Demonstration gesture
Caregiver illustrates with action how to perform a step
of the task
16. Handing object to resident Caregiver provides object to resident
17. Pointing
Caregiver visually indicates direction of an object necessary
for a step of the task

"Turn the water on."
"Get the towel and dry your hands."
"Turn the tap like this, turn the tap."
"Turn the water on." "Turn the taps
to get some water."
"Can you turn the taps on?"
"How do you wash your hands?"
"Do you want the soap or the towel?"
"Are you telling me you are done?"
"Mrs. X, here is the soap."
"Good, you are doing a good job."
"I am going to help you wash your hands today."

Caregiver guides resident's hands to the soap.
Caregiver touches the shoulder of the resident.
Caregiver touches the resident's hand to begin
rinsing.
Caregiver shows resident how to use the soap.
Caregiver hands towel to resident.
Caregiver points to the soap.

a
Speech rate was a communication strategy examined, but it was not coded for in the transcripts. We examined speech rate by comparing words per minute in
the baseline video to the average words per minute in the handwashing sessions.

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

333

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

overall session duration = 100%; total step duration =
78%; step segmentation assignment = 86%). Second,
we calculated Cohen's kappa (k) statistic to assess reliability of codes indicating step completion and success
of the task, yielding excellent (k = .842, p = .00) and substantial (k = .659, p = .01) agreement, respectively
(Landis & Koch, 1977). Third, we used an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) to calculate reliability of coded
verbal communication strategies related to our hypotheses, which was the appropriate statistic to use for categories that are not mutually exclusive (Shrout & Fleiss,
1979). Reliability was excellent for utterances marked
with one proposition, paraphrased repetition, verbatim
repetition, and closed-ended questions (k = .831, k = .919,
k = .906, and k = .970, respectively) and was moderate for
utterances marked with two propositions (k = .690; Lee,
Koh, & Ong, 1989). The ICC could not be computed for
open-ended questions due to insufficient occurrences of
this strategy in the data.

Results
We conducted a one-way, within-subjects analysis of
variance (ANOVA), with session as the within-subjects
variable, in order to investigate possible change in strategy use by caregivers across sessions. Mauchly's test
indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been
violated, c2(14, N = 12) = 0.028, p = .004; therefore, we
corrected dfs using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of
sphericity (e = .57). The results showed that there was
no significant effect of session on caregivers' overall
use of communication strategies, F(2.83, 31.14) = 0.974,
p = .41. As such, the data from each caregiver-resident
dyad were collapsed across sessions for the remaining
analyses. Results are presented below relative to each
study objective.

Objective 1: To Examine Which
Communication Strategies Caregivers
Use During the Completion of an ADL
Overall use of verbal communication strategies. We
summarized caregivers' overall use of verbal and nonverbal communication strategies using the entire data
set, which included all coded utterances at each step of
the task. Frequency counts were obtained for the total
occurrences of all verbal and nonverbal communication
strategies across all handwashing sessions (N = 72) as
well as for the frequency of sessions with each communication strategy present. Percentage of handwashing sessions in which formal caregivers used at least one of the
communication strategies was also calculated. Relative
frequency proportion scores (frequency of each verbal

334

communication strategy used, divided by the total of
all verbal communication strategies employed) were calculated. To examine speech rate, we compared words per
minute in the baseline video to the average words per
minute of each caregiver during completion of the ADL
(collapsed across the six sessions).
Caregivers produced a combined total of 1,691 utterances, of which 78% contained one or more communication strategies. During an average handwashing
session, caregivers produced 23.49 utterances (SD =
15.12), with 18.22 (SD = 12.96) of those utterances
being coded as containing one or more communication
strategies. An average session contained 23.36 (SD =
14.11) verbal and 7.81 (SD = 5.13) nonverbal communication strategies. Across all sessions (collapsed across
caregivers), caregivers most frequently used verbal communication strategies including providing the resident
with one direction or idea (i.e., proposition) at a time,
using closed-ended questions, providing encouraging
comments, using paraphrased repetition, and using the
resident's name. Caregivers least frequently used verifying questions, an explanation of their actions, and openended questions. A simple-choice question was used only
once across all caregivers. The 12 caregiver participants
showed no significant difference between the average
relative frequency of paraphrased repetition (M = 0.086,
SD = 0.056) and verbatim repetition (M = 0.065, SD =
0.048) across handwashing sessions, t(11) = -1.403,
p = .188. Finally, caregivers significantly decreased
their speech rate (words per minute) when communicating with residents during the handwashing task
(M = 36.5, SD = 19.8) as compared with the baseline
description task (M = 116, SD = 36.8), t(10) = 9.203,
p < .001.
Overall use of nonverbal communication strategies.
Relative frequencies were also calculated for taskfocused nonverbal communication strategies. Overall,
caregivers' most frequent use of nonverbal communication strategies, found in at least 58% of all handwashing
sessions, included guided touch, demonstrating the action to the resident, handing an object to the resident,
and pointing to an object. The most infrequently used
task-focused nonverbal communication strategies were
using touch to comfort the resident and using touch to
get the resident's attention. Table 2 presents the data
for both task-focused verbal and task-focused nonverbal
communication strategies.
Co-occurrence of communication strategies. Of all
the coded utterances, 42% contained a single code (one
proposition = 13%; closed-ended question = 9%; encouraging comment = 8%; verifying question = 4%; all other
strategies < 3%). Caregivers used the co-occurrence
of two task-focused communication strategies in 41%
of the coded utterances (verbal/verbal communication
strategies = 24%; verbal /nonverbal strategies = 17%).

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Table 2. Caregivers' use of verbal and nonverbal communication strategies across all handwashing sessions and during successfully completed
sessions.

Number of sessions
with strategy present

Communication strategy
Verbal
1. One proposition
2. Two propositions
3. Verbatim repetition
4. Paraphrased repetition
5. Closed-ended question
6. Open-ended question
7. Simple-choice question
8. Verification question
9. Resident's name
10. Encouraging comments
11. Explanation of actions
Total
Nonverbal
12. Guided touch
13. Touch-comfort
14. Touch-attention
15. Demonstrate action
16. Handing resident
an object
17. Pointing to an object
Total

% sessions with
strategy present

Number of times
strategy used

% use of strategya

Caregivers' mean use
of communication
strategies during
a session

Overall
(N = 72)

Successful
(n = 65)

Overall

Successful

Overall

Successful

Overall

Successful

M

SD

72
50
42
48
54
11
1
24
55
50
21

64
39
33
42
45
7
1
18
44
48
14

100
69
58
67
75
15
1
33
79
69
29

98
60
51
65
69
11
2
28
68
74
22

619b
144
124
178b
215b
16
1
54
178b
180b
45
1,754

441b
86
75
122b
148b
10
1
38
131b
148b
18
1,218

35
8
7
10
12
1
0
3
10
10
3

36
7
6
10
12
1
0
3
11
12
1

8.6
2.0
1.7
2.5
3.0
0.22
0.014
0.75
2.5
2.5
0.63

6.7
2.2
2.3
3
3
0.61
0.12
1.3
2.8
2.9
1.18

51
13
2
44

38
8
1
33

71
18
3
61

58
12
2
51

193b
42
2
113c

122c
24
1
72c

34
7
0
20

31
6
0
18

2.7
0.58
0.028
1.6

3.4
2.1
0.16
2

55
42

49
41

76
58

75
63

107c
105c
562

85c
95c
399

19
19

21
24

1.5
1.5

1.3
1.7

a
Relative frequency = frequency of verbal or nonverbal strategy use/total number of all verbal or nonverbal strategies used. bDenotes the top five most
frequently used verbal strategies. cDenotes the top four most frequently used nonverbal strategies.

The most frequent two communication strategy combinations included one proposition + paraphrased repetition (6%), one proposition + verbatim repetition (5%),
and one proposition + guided touch (4%). Caregivers
used the combination of three communication strategies
infrequently (verbal only = 5%; mixed = 12%).

Objective 2: To Examine Which
Communication Strategies Caregivers Use
When the ADL Is Successfully Completed
With respect to Objective 2, caregivers' use of communication strategies during successful task completion
was derived from a subset of the data, which included
only those handwashing sessions considered to be successfully completed by the resident (n = 65).
Verbal communication strategies. Caregiver-resident
dyads successfully completed 90% of all handwashing
sessions. Further, with the exception of turning the
water on and turning the water off, the majority of

caregivers provided residents with the opportunity to
participate in the steps of the task, with few instances
of skipping a step or completing a step without encouraging resident participation. During successfully completed sessions, caregivers used verbal communication
strategies similar to those that caregivers most frequently used overall (see Table 2). The one exception was
the use of the resident's name, which was more frequently
used than paraphrased repetition (see Table 2). The use
of one proposition accounted for 84% of the propositiontype codes, closed-ended questions accounted for 75% of
all question types, and paraphrased repetition accounted
for 62% of repetition types used by caregivers.
Nonverbal communication strategies. Caregivers'
use of nonverbal communication strategies during successful task completion revealed a different pattern of
most frequently used strategies than that observed during overall frequency of use. Although guided touch
remained the most frequently used strategy in successful task completion, pointing to the object was the second
most frequently used, followed by handing an object to the

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

335

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

resident and demonstrating the action to the resident.
Guided touch accounted for 83% of all physical prompts,
and pointing to the object accounted for 38% of nonverbal
communication strategies involving modeling/gestures.

Objective 3: To Examine Which
Communication Strategies Are
Related to Success Rate of the ADL
To identify which strategies were specifically linked
to successful completion of the task in its entirety (i.e.,
"success rate"), we determined the number of sessions
(out of six) for which each participant successfully completed all steps of the task in which he or she was given
the opportunity to participate. We used the resulting
proportion in calculating a Pearson correlation coefficient to examine the size of the relationships between
success rate and caregivers' overall use of task-focused
communication strategies as well as between success
rate and caregivers' relative use of specific communication strategies.
Success rate. There was a large significant negative
correlation between the average number of verbal communication strategies used by caregivers and task success rate, r(10) = -.588, p = .044, but there was no
relationship between the average number of nonverbal
communication strategies used and task success rate,
r(10) = -.388, p = .213. There were large significant
negative correlations ( p < .05) between the relative frequency of use and task success rate for the following
task-focused communication strategies: verbatim repetition, r(10) = -.605; use of verifying question, r(10) =
-.638; and guided touch, r(10) = -.598. A large positive
correlation between task success rate and the use of
pointing to an object approached significance, r(10) =
.565, p = .056. Further, there was no significant relationship between the use of slowed speech (average words
per minute across all sessions) and task success rate,
r(9) = .140, p = .681. There was a large significant positive correlation between success rate of the task and
MMSE score, r(10) = .586, p = .05. Finally, there was
no significant relationship between task success rate
and caregivers' years of experience working with individuals with AD, r(10) = .111, p = .731, or between task success rate and the average time taken to complete the
task, r(10) = -.505, p = .094. There was no significant relationship between the average time spent on the task
and the average number of task-focused verbal communication strategies used, r(10) = .396, p = .203; however,
we observed large significant positive correlations between the average time to complete the task and the
use of open-ended questions and verifying questions,
r(10) = .805, p = .002, and r(10) = .631, p = .028, respectively. A large negative correlation between the use of

336

encouraging comments and duration of the task approached significance, r(10) = -.564, p = .056.
To control for possible variables that might have influenced the relationship between communication strategy use and task success rate, we computed partial
correlation coefficients correcting for the effects of disease severity and caregivers' years of experience working with AD. The inverse relationship between task
success rate and overall use of communication strategies, as well as the inverse relationship between success
rate and use of verbatim repetition, was no longer evident after controlling for disease severity; however,
large significant negative correlations persisted between task success rate and the use of a verifying question, as well as between task success rate and the use of
guided touch, when all controls were applied, rab .cd(8) =
-.643, p = .045, and rab .cd(8) = -.72, p = .019, respectively.
Disease severity. MMSE score was not significantly
correlated with caregivers' average use of verbal or nonverbal communication strategies, r(10) = -.489, p = .106,
and r(10) = -.378, p = .226, respectively, or with the
average time taken to complete the task, r(10) = -.219,
p = .495. There were large significant negative correlations between MMSE score and the relative frequency
of use of the following communication strategies: verbatim
repetition, r(10) = -.821, p = .001; paraphrased repetition, r(10) = -.584, p = .05; and caregiver demonstrating
an action, r(10) = -.754, p = .005. We also observed a
large positive relationship between MMSE score and
the use of encouraging comments that approached significance, r(10) = .571, p = .052. A large positive significant
correlation between MMSE score and the nonverbal
strategy of handing the object to the resident was observed, r(10) = .639, p = .025.
Caregiver experience. Large negative correlations
between caregiver experience and paraphrased repetition, r(10) = -.573, p = .051, and between caregiver experience and the use of guided touch, r(10) = -.565, p = .056,
approached significance. A large marginally significant
positive correlation between caregiver experience and
the use of handing the resident an object, r(10) = .545,
p = .067, was also present.

Discussion
This is the first systematic observation study to report on formal caregivers' use of verbal and nonverbal
communication strategies (grounded in empirical findings
and clinical recommendations), as well as co-occurrence
of these strategies, while caregivers assisted residents
who have moderate to severe AD during the completion
of a basic ADL--specifically, handwashing. The analyses focused on (a) the use of verbal and nonverbal communication strategies during successful handwashing

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

sessions and (b) the correlations between communication strategies and task success rate.

Use of Communication Strategies
During an ADL
Findings from this study indicate that, overall, formal caregivers routinely use a variety of verbal and
nonverbal communication strategies when assisting
individuals with AD during handwashing. Further, in
this study, all but three residents with AD were severely
impaired with functional and communication difficulties, yet, with caregivers' provision of various communication strategies, AD residents participated in their
self-care and were able to successfully complete the
task for the majority of all handwashing sessions. Caregivers used nonverbal communication strategies during
the majority of handwashing sessions; however, most of
these strategies were supplemented by verbal communication strategies. Individuals with moderate to severe
AD successfully completed 90% of the handwashing sessions with caregiver assistance.
Verbal communication strategies. Findings from this
study support our hypotheses that residents with AD
would benefit from caregivers' use of one idea or direction at a time, closed-ended questions, and paraphrased
repetition (listed in order of frequency), as we observed
that caregivers used these communication strategies
most frequently during successful task completion.
These results are consistent with those of Small et al.
(2003). Verbatim repetition was not observed in the top
most frequently used task-focused verbal communication strategies and, therefore, was inconsistent with
our hypothesis that caregivers' use of this strategy
would benefit residents with AD; however, we found
that verbatim repetition was present in half of all handwashing sessions, and there was no significant difference
between caregivers' relative frequency of use of the two
repetition types. This finding supports those of Small,
Kemper, et al. (1997) and Small et al. (2003), both of
which suggest that caregivers consider both types of repetition to facilitate comprehension in individuals with AD.
The finding that verbal praise was in the top five frequently used task-focused verbal communication strategies is consistent with other investigations reporting
the frequency of communication strategies occurring
between caregivers and residents during care routines
in the LTC setting (e.g., Bourgeois et al., 2004; Burgio
et al., 2001). Further, caregivers in our study likely
used verbal praise to provide positive feedback to residents about their progress through the steps of the
task. Indeed, this suggestion is consistent with a study
by Dijkstra et al. (2002) indicating that caregivers' use of
positive feedback with individuals who have dementia can
facilitate engagement in talking and topic maintenance

in conversation, and this benefit is present even in later
stages of dementia. Finally in this study, caregivers' use
of verbal praise also may have provided nonverbal information conveyed through emotional prosody (e.g.,
Bucks & Radford, 2004; Cadieux & Greve, 1997; but see
Horley, Reid, & Burnham, 2010; Taler, Baum, Chertkow,
& Saumier, 2008).
The fifth most frequently employed verbal communication strategy during successful completion of the
task was using the residents' names to gain their attention. Caregivers' frequent use of this strategy is supported
by findings from a study by Kim and Bayles (2007), in
which nearly all individuals with severe AD successfully
recognized the spoken form of his or her name and
responded appropriately to greetings from the examiner
(e.g., shook hands or provided appropriate verbal response to greeting and closing remarks).We also found
that, contrary to the findings of Small et al. (2003), formal caregivers did slow their speech during completion
of the handwashing task as compared with the baseline
task; however, slowed speech rate was unrelated to task
success. This finding supports two convergent results regarding formal caregivers' use of slowed speech. First, a
growing body of literature reports an extensive use of
"elderspeak," which includes slowed speech, by caregivers assisting residents in LTC (e.g., Draper, 2005;
Kemper & Harden, 1999; Williams, Herman, Gajewski,
& Wilson, 2009). Second, empirical research indicates
that slowed speech rate is not an effective communication strategy for increasing comprehension in individuals with AD (e.g., Kemper & Harden, 1999; Small,
Andersen, et al., 1997; Small, Kemper, et al., 1997;
Tomoeda et al., 1990).
Nonverbal communication strategies. During successful task completion, the most frequently used nonverbal communication strategies were guided touch,
pointing to an object, handing an object to the resident,
and demonstrating an action. We expected that guided
touch would be the most frequently used nonverbal
strategy, given that caring for older residents with moderate to severe AD in an LTC facility relies heavily on
personal contact during the completion of basic selfcare needs (Gleeson & Timmins, 2004). It is interesting
to note that the frequent use of demonstrating an action
(gesture) was found more often when the caregiver was
interacting with higher functioning individuals during
successful completion of the task. Research suggests
that production of co-verbal gestures (e.g., referential
gestures during conversation) may parallel declines in
speech production associated with AD, possibly due to
a common underlying central semantic-conceptual disorder (Carlomagno, Pandolfi, Marini, Di Iasi, & Cristilli,
2005; Glosser, Wiley, & Barnoski, 1998). However, preliminary research suggests that comprehension of gestures
may be less impaired relative to other linguistic and

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

337

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

communication impairments. For instance, Pashek and
DiVenere (2006) recently found that auditory comprehension improved when verbal commands given to individuals with mild to moderate AD were followed by
pantomime gestures.

Relationships Between Communication
Strategies and Success Rate of the Task
Verbal communication strategies. Although we did
not find any direct association between task success
rate and any of the most frequently used verbal communication strategies, our findings regarding caregivers'
frequency of use of verbal communication strategies during successful sessions are consistent with reported findings from experimental research examining sentence
comprehension in AD, including providing one proposition
at a time and using repetition (Rochon, Waters, & Caplan,
1994, 2000; Small, Kemper, et al., 1997). The initial correlation between overall communication strategies used
and task success rate indicated a relationship between
formal caregivers' greater use of verbal communication
strategies and lowered task success rate. However, when
we controlled for disease severity, this negative relationship did not persist, suggesting that caregivers' overall
use of task-focused strategies (verbal and nonverbal)
may not be related to successful task completion alone
but, instead, may be related to disease progression. It
was surprising that although we found that disease severity was not related to caregivers' overall use of communication strategies or to the time taken to complete
the task, disease progression was related to caregivers'
use of five task-focused communication strategies (verbatim repetition, paraphrased repetition, demonstrating
actions, handing an object to an individual with AD, and
using encouraging comments). Three of the strategies--
verbatim repetition, paraphrased repetition, and demonstrating actions--were more often employed by individuals
with more severe AD than by individuals with less severe AD, whereas caregivers employed handing an object to the resident and using encouraging comments
less frequently with more impaired individuals. Another
interesting finding was that although caregiver experience
was not related to task success rate, experience was related
to the use of three task-focused communication strategies
in particular. More experienced caregivers used paraphrased repetition and guided touch less frequently,
and less experienced caregivers used handing an object
to the resident more frequently. Although these correlational findings are noteworthy, a more systematic examination of the relationship between caregiver experience
and use of communication strategies is necessary.
Nonverbal communication strategies. Caregivers'
average use of nonverbal communication strategies
was not related to task success rate; although guided

338

touch was most frequently used in the analysis of successful handwashing sections, when all data were analyzed
(proportion of success), use of this nonverbal strategy
was associated with fewer instances of successful completion of the task. However, when disease severity
was controlled, this relationship did not persist, suggesting that caregivers may be using guided touch with more
functionally impaired individuals but also suggesting
that it does not appear to have an effect on the outcome
of the task. In addition, for individuals who were more
severely affected, the caregivers were more likely to
demonstrate an action. In contrast, there was a positive
relationship between caregivers' increased use of handing objects to residents and assisting higher functioning
individuals, suggesting that these individuals understand how to use an object necessary to the task.
Disease severity and communication strategies. As
expected, we observed that the progression of AD was related to poorer outcomes on the handwashing task. Although we did not find the anticipated relationship
between disease severity and an increase in caregivers'
overall use of task-focused communication strategies,
with more strategies being used to accommodate for
the cognitive declines in residents with AD, specific associations were noted. We observed a strong positive relationship between disease progression and caregivers'
relative use of verbatim repetition, paraphrased repetition, and demonstration gestures. Given the greater verbal comprehension deficits associated with progressing
AD, the finding that caregivers make greater use of both
types of repetition may coincide with a growing need for
caregivers to provide clarifications following initial
requests during steps of the task as the disease progresses.
Our finding that caregivers used demonstration gestures
more frequently as the disease progressed is not consistent
with the findings of Pashek and DiVenere (2006). They
reported no association between disease severity and
the beneficial effects of using pantomime gesture following a two-step command. However, the participants in
Pashek and DiVenere (2006) had mild to moderate AD,
whereas in our study, the participants were in the moderate to severe range. The use of gestures may be more
beneficial for those in the later stages of the disease as
deficits in verbal communication increase and caregivers appear to incorporate more nonverbal communication strategies. We also observed an association
between higher functioning residents with AD and caregivers' more frequent use of handing an object to residents and using encouraging comments.
In sum, the majority of participants in the current
study were classified as having severe AD, yet they
were able to successfully complete the representative
basic ADL with continuous assistance from caregivers.
Our current findings support some, but not all, of the
clinically recommended communication strategies

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

commonly suggested to caregivers of individuals with AD.
For example, the current study supports the use of one
idea or one instruction at a time and closed-ended questions; however, observations from the current study do
not lend support for the use of verbatim repetition only or
slowed speech rate. Furthermore, we found that caregivers
frequently used two task-focused verbal communication
strategies that are not commonly found in the clinical literature: verbal praise and use of the resident's name. Finally,
caregivers assisting individuals with moderate to severe
AD frequently used task-focused nonverbal communication strategies that are not commonly found in the current
clinical recommendations (e.g., pointing to an object, handing object to residents, and demonstrating an action).
Empirically determining the effectiveness of communication strategies is important to the validation of
clinical communication recommendations. Despite the
limitations of the descriptive and correlational nature
of the study (e.g., causal inferences cannot be made,
and generalizability is limited), our findings add to the
limited body of research that has investigated the use
of clinically recommended communication strategies
and demonstrate that some strategies that are recommended in practice may not be supported by empirical
research. Finally, the current study adds to the growing
awareness that research is needed to understand which
communication strategies are effective during completion
of ADLs, which strategies are appropriate across disease
progression, and which strategies promote participation
of individuals with AD in their own self-care. Indeed, it
is appropriate to use communication strategies that
reflect retained abilities across stages of the disease,
holding autonomy and participation central to the
experience of both caregivers and individuals with AD.
Future studies are needed to examine formal caregivers'
use of communication strategies while assisting individuals with moderate AD and individuals with severe AD
during different complex ADLs to support the validity
and generalizability of these preliminary findings. Further,
an examination of communication breakdowns and repairs during task completion will provide additional support for the effectiveness of task-focused communication
strategies. Formal caregivers are important stakeholders
in this research area, and as such, their perceptions of
which communication strategies are effective when assisting residents with moderate to severe AD should be
addressed. Together, these findings will help inform the
development of evidence-based communication guidelines
that can be examined for effectiveness following caregivers'
participation in a communication training program.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported, in part, by an operating grant
funded by the American Alzheimer Association (Everyday

Technologies for Alzheimer's Care [ETAC] program) and by
a Young Investigator Grant from the Alzheimer Society of
Canada, both awarded to the third author. This research was
also supported by a Master and a Doctoral Research Award from
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada,
awarded to the first author. We acknowledge the research
support provided by the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute.
Portions of this project were presented at the 2007 Academy of Aphasia meeting in Washington, DC; the 2007 Festival
of International Conferences on Caregiving, Disability, Aging
and Technology (FICCDAT), Toronto, Ontario, Canada; the
2006 Cognitive Aging Conference in Atlanta, Georgia; and the
2006 Celebrating Innovations in Health Care Expo, Toronto.
We extend our greatest appreciation to the Seniors Health
Centre, North York, Canada, and to all the individuals who
participated in this research. We would also like to express our
appreciation to Malcolm Binns, Jen Boger, Helen Ferley, and
Chris Jokel for their assistance.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
Appell, J., Kertesz, A., & Fisman, M. (1982). A study of
language functioning in Alzheimer patients. Brain &
Language, 17, 73-91.
Bartol, M. A. (1979). Dialogue with dementia: Nonverbal
communication in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 5(4), 21-31.
Beck, C., Heacock, P., Rapp, C. G., & Mercer, S. O. (1993).
Assisting cognitively impaired elders with activities of daily
living. American Journal of Alzheimer's Care and Related
Disorders and Research, 8(6), 11-20.
Bourgeois, M. S., Dijkstra, K., Burgio, L. D., & Allen, R. S.
(2004). Communication skills training for nursing aides of
residents with dementia: The impact of measuring performance. Clinical Gerontologist, 27, 119-138. doi:10.1300/
J018v27n01_10
Bucks, R. S., & Radford, S. A. (2004). Emotion processing
in Alzheimer's disease. Aging & Mental Health, 8, 222-232.
doi:10.1080/13607860410001669750
Burgio, L. D., Allen-Burge, R., Roth, D. L., Bourgeois,
M. S., Dijkstra, K., Gerstle, J., . . . Bankester, L. (2001).
Come talk with me: Improving communication between
nursing assistants and nursing home residents during care
routines. The Gerontologist, 41, 449-460.
Burgio, L., Stevens, A., Burgio, K., Roth, D., Paul, P., &
Gerstle, J. (2002). Teaching and maintaining behavior
management skills in the nursing home. The Gerontologist,
42, 487-496.
Cadieux, N. L., & Greve, K. W. (1997). Emotion processing
in Alzheimer's disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 3, 411-419.
Caris-Verhallen, W. M., Kerkstra, A., van der Heijden,
P. G. M., & Bensing, J. M. (1998). Nurse-elderly patient
communication in home care and institutional care: An explorative study. International Journal of Nursing Studies,
35, 95-108.

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

339

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

Carlomagno, S., Pandolfi, M., Marini, A., Di Iasi, G., &
Cristilli, C. (2005). Coverbal gestures in Alzheimer's type
dementia. Cortex, 41, 535-546.

Hopper, T. (2001). Indirect interventions to facilitate communication in Alzheimer's disease. Seminars in Speech
and Language, 22, 305-315.

Clark, L. W., & Witte, K. (1991). Nature and efficacy of
communication in management in Alzheimer's disease.
In R. Lubinski, J. B. Orange, D. Henderson, & N. Skecker
(Eds.), Dementia and communication (pp. 238-255).
Philadelphia, PA: B. C. Decker.

Horley, K., Reid, A., & Burnham, D. (2010). Emotional
prosody perception and production in dementia of the
Alzheimer's type. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 1132-1146.

Cummings, J. L. (2004). Alzheimer's disease. The New
England Journal of Medicine, 351, 56-67.
Cummings, J. L., Benson, F., Hill, M. A., & Read, S. (1985).
Aphasia in dementia of the Alzheimer type. Neurology, 35,
394-397.

House, A. E., House, B. J., & Campbell, M. B. (1981).
Measures of interobserver agreement: Calculation formulas
and distribution effects. Journal of Behavioral Assessment,
3, 37-57.
Hubbard, G., Cook, A., Tester, S., & Downs, M. (2002).
Beyond words: Older people with dementia using and interpreting nonverbal behaviour. Journal of Aging Studies, 16,
155-167.

Dijkstra, K., Bourgeois, M., Burgio, L., & Allen, R. (2002).
Effects of a communication intervention on the discourse of
nursing home residents with dementia and their nursing
assistants. Journal of Medical Speech-Language Pathology,
10, 143-157.

Kemper, S., & Harden, T. (1999). Experimentally disentangling what's beneficial about elderspeak from what's not.
Psychology and Aging, 14, 656-670.

Draper, P. (2005). Patronizing speech to older patients: A
literature review. Reviews in Clinical Gerontology, 15,
273-279. doi:10.1017/S0959259806001869

Kempler, D. (1991). Language changes in dementia of the
Alzheimer type. In R. Lubinski (Ed.), Dementia and communication (pp. 98-114). Philadelphia, PA: B. C. Decker.

Egan, M., Berube, D., Racine, G., Leonard, C., & Rochon, E.
(2010). Methods to enhance verbal communication between
individuals with Alzheimer's disease and their formal and
informal caregivers: A systematic review. International
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. doi:10.4061/2010/906818

Kim, E. S., & Bayles, K. A. (2007). Communication in latestage Alzheimer's disease: Relation to functional markers
of disease severity. Alzheimer's Care Quarterly, 8(1), 43-52.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 33, 159-174.

Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975).
"Mini-mental state": A practical method for grading the
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 12, 189-198.

Lapadat, J. C., & Lindsay, A. C. (1999). Transcription in
research and practice: From standardization of technique
to interpretive positionings. Qualitative Inquiry, 5, 64-86.

Gaugler, J. E., Yu, F., Krichbaum, K., & Wyman, J. F.
(2009). Predictors of nursing home admission for persons
with dementia. Medical Care, 47, 191-198.

Lee, V. K. (1991). Language changes and Alzheimer's disease:
A literature review. Journal of Gerentological Nursing, 17,
16-20.

Gauthier, L., & Gauthier, S. (1990). Assessment of functional
changes in Alzheimer's disease. Neuroepidemiology, 9, 183-188.
Gauthier, S., Gelinas, I., & Gauthier, L. (1997). Functional disability in Alzheimer's disease. International
Psychogeriatrics/IPA, 9(Suppl. 1), 163-165.
Gleeson, M., & Timmins, F. (2004). The use of touch to
enhance nursing care of older person in long-term mental
health care facilities. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental
Health Nursing, 11, 541-545. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2850.
2004.00757.x
Glosser, G., Wiley, M. J., & Barnoski, E. J. (1998). Gestural
communication in Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Clinical
and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20, 1-13. doi:10.1076/
jcen.20.1.1.1484
Goldfarb, R., & Pietro, M. J. S. (2004). Support systems:
Older adults with neurogenic communication disorders.
Journal of Ambulatory Care Management, 27, 356-365.
Heyman, A., Peterson, B., Fillenbaum, G., & Pieper, C.
(1996). The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's
Disease (CERAD): Part XIV. Demographic and clinical predictors of survival in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Neurology,
46, 656-660.
Holtzer, R., Scarmeas, N., Wegesin, D. J., Albert, M.,
Brandt, J., Dubois, B., . . . Stern, Y. (2005). Depressive
symptoms in Alzheimer's disease: Natural course and temporal relation to function and cognitive status. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 53, 2083-2089.

340

Lee, J., Koh, D., & Ong, C. N. (1989). Statistical evaluation
of agreement between two methods for measuring a quantitative variable. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 19,
61-70. doi:10.1016/0010-4825(89)90036-X
Logsdon, R. G., Teri, L., McCurry, S. M., Gibbons, L. E.,
Kukull, W. A., & Larson, E. B. (1998). Wandering: A significant problem among community-residing individuals with
Alzheimer's disease. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 53, 294-299.
Lubinski, R., & Orange, J. B. (2000). A framework for the
assessment and treatment of functional communication in
dementia. In E. Worrall & C. M. Frattali (Eds.), Neurogenic
communication disorders: A functional approach (pp. 220-246).
New York, NY: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Marin, D. B., Duque, M., Schmeidler, J., Sanoro, J.,
Neuqroschl, J., Zaklad, G., . . . Davis, K. L. (2000). The
caregiver activity survey (CAS): Longitudinal validation of
an instrument that measures time spent caregiving for individuals with Alzheimer's disease. International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 15, 680-686.
McGilton, K. S., Boscart, V., Fox, M., Sidani, S., Rochon,
E., & Sorin-Peters, R. (2009). A systematic review of the
effectiveness of communication interventions for health care
providers caring for patients in residential care settings.
Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 6, 149-159.
Mihailidis, A., Barbenel, J. C., & Fernie, G. (2004). The
efficacy of an intelligent cognitive orthosis to facilitate
handwashing by persons with moderate to severe dementia

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research * Vol. 55 * 328-341 * April 2012

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

[Special issue]. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 14(1-2),
135-171.
Miller, J. F., & Chapman, R. S. (2008). Systematic Analysis
of Language Transcripts (Version 8) [Computer software].
Madison, WI: Waisman Center.

Small, J. A., Gutman, G., Makela, S., & Hillhouse, B.
(2003). Effectiveness of communication strategies used
by caregivers of persons with Alzheimer's disease during
activities of daily living. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 46, 353-367.

Orange, J. B., Lubinski, R. B., & Higginbotham, D. J.
(1996). Conversational repair by individuals with dementia
of the Alzheimer's type. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 39, 881-895.

Small, J. A., Kemper, S., & Lyons, K. (1997). Sentence comprehension in Alzheimer's disease: Effects of grammatical
complexity, speech rate, and repetition. Psychology and
Aging, 12, 3-11. doi:10.1037//0882-7974.12.1.3

Orange, J. B., Van Gennep, K. M., Miller, L., & Johnson,
A. M. (1998). Resolution of communication breakdown in
dementia of the Alzheimer's type: A longitudinal study.
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 26, 120-138.

Small, J. A., Kemper, S., & Lyons, K. (2000). Sentence
repetition and processing resources in Alzheimer's disease.
Brain and Language, 75, 232-258.

Pashek, G. V., & DiVenere, E. (2006). Auditory comprehension in Alzheimer disease: Influences of gesture and speech
rate. Journal of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 14,
143-155.

Small, J. A., & Perry, J. (2005). Do you remember? How
caregivers question their spouses who have Alzheimer's
disease and the impact on communication. Journal of
Speech, 48, 125-136.

Potkin, S. G. (2002). The ABC of Alzheimer's disease: ADL and
improving day-to-day functioning of patients. International
Psychogeriatrics/IPA, 14(Suppl. 1), 7-26.

Steeman, E., Abraham, I. L., & Godderis, J. (1997). Risk
profiles for institutionalization in a cohort of elderly people
with dementia or depression. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing,
11, 295-303.

Ripich, D. N., Carpenter, B. D., & Ziol, E. W. (1997). Procedural discourse of men and women with Alzheimer's disease:
A longitudinal study with clinical implications. American
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 12, 258-271.

Taler, V., Baum, S. R., Chertkow, H., & Saumier, D. (2008).
Comprehension of grammatical and emotional prosody is
impaired in Alzheimer's disease. Neuropsychology, 22,
188-195.

Ripich, D. N., Ziol, E., Fritsch, T., & Durand, E. J. (1999).
Training Alzheimer's disease caregivers for successful
communication. Clinical Gerontologist, 21, 37-56.

Tappen, R. M., Williams, C. L., Barry, C., & DiSesa, D.
(2001). Conversation intervention with Alzheimer's patients:
Increasing the relevance of communication. Clinical Gerontologist, 24(3), 63-75. doi:10.1300/J018v24n03_06

Roberto, K. A., Richter, J. M., Bottenberg, D. J., &
Campbell, S. (1998). Communication patterns between
caregivers and their spouses with Alzheimer's disease:
A case study. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 12, 202-208.
Rochon, E., Waters, G. A., & Caplan, D. (1994). Sentence
comprehension in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Brain
and Language, 46, 329-349.
Rochon, E., Waters, G. S., & Caplan, D. (2000). The relationship between measures of working memory and sentence
comprehension in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 395-413.
Roter, D., & Larson, S. (2002). The Roter Interaction Analysis
System (RIAS): Utility and flexibility for analysis of medical
interactions. Patient Education and Counseling, 46, 243-251.
Sheldon, B. (1994). Communicating with Alzheimer's patients. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 20(10), 51-53.
Shrout, P. E., & Fleiss, J. L. (1979). Intraclass correlations:
Uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological Bulletin,
86, 420-428. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.86.2.420
Small, J. A., Andersen, E. S., & Kempler, D. (1997). Effects
of working memory capacity on understanding rate-altered
speech. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 4, 126-139.
Small, J. A., Geldart, K., & Gutman, G. (2000). Communication between individuals with dementia and their caregivers
during activities of daily living. American Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease, 15, 291-302.

Tappen, R. M., Williams-Burgess, C., Edelstein, J., Touhy,
T., & Fishman, S. (1997). Communicating with individuals
with Alzheimer's disease: Examination of recommended
strategies. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 11, 249-256.
doi:10.1016/S0883-9417(97)80015-5
Tekin, S., Fairbanks, L. A., O'Connor, S., Rosenberg, S.,
& Cummings, J. L. (2001). Activities of daily living in
Alzheimer's disease: Neuropsychiatric, cognitive, and
medical illness influences. The American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 9, 81-86.
Tomoeda, C. K., Bayles, K. A., Boone, D. R., & Kaszniak,
A. W. (1990). Speech rate and syntactic complexity effects
on the auditory comprehension of Alzheimer patients.
Journal of Communication Disorders, 23, 151-161.
Vasse, E., Vernooij-Dassen, M., Spijker, A., Rikkert, M. O.,
& Koopmans, R. (2010). A systematic review of communication strategies for people with dementia in residential and
nursing homes. International Psychogeriatrics, 22, 189-200.
doi:10.1017/S1041610209990615
Williams, K. N., Herman, R., Gajewski, B., & Wilson, K.
(2009). Elderspeak communication: Impact on dementia
care. American Journal of Alzheimer's Disease and Other
Dementias, 24, 11-20.
Williamson, G. M., & Schulz, R. (1993). Coping with specific
stressors in Alzheimer's disease caregiving. Gerontologist,
33, 747-755.

Small, J. A., & Gutman, G. (2002). Recommended and
reported use of communication strategies in Alzheimer
caregiving. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders,
16, 270-278.

Wilson et al.: Successful Communication Strategies

341

Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Bibliotheek Der Rijksuniversiteit on 04/17/2025, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions

