J. Child Lang. 40 (2013), 139-168. f Cambridge University Press 2012
doi:10.1017/S0305000912000499

Plural noun inflection in Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking
children with and without Specific Language
Impairment*
FAUZIA ABDALLA

AND

KHAWLA ALJENAIE

Department of Communication Science, Kuwait University
AND

ABDESSATAR MAHFOUDHI
Center for Child Evaluation and Teaching, Kuwait
(Received 13 June 2011 - Revised 2 February 2012 - Accepted 10 September 2012)

ABSTRACT

This study examined the production of three types of noun plural
inflections, feminine sound plural (FSP), masculine sound plural
(MSP), and broken plural (BP) in Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking children
with and without language impairment. A total of thirty-six Kuwaiti
participants - twelve adults, twelve children with specific language
impairment (SLI), and twelve typically developing age-matched
controls (TD) were presented with twenty-seven pictured stimuli of
real and nonsense words. The results showed that the TD children
were significantly more accurate in using the required noun plural
inflections than the SLI group. The TD children's preferred
overgeneralization strategy was to substitute FSP for the regular MSP
and irregular BP contexts much more than their peers with SLI.
The performance of the SLI group also differed from that of their
age-matched counterparts in the number of errors and their
distribution across categories. The results are discussed in the light of
relevant theories of atypical language development.

[*] A special word of gratitude goes to the adults and children who participated in this
study, and their parents who provided permission and supported this research. We wish
to thank CSL students (Sara Al-Subaie, Hissa Ali, Nuwayer Al-Mutairi, Maryam
Al-Oraifan, and Maryam Al-Ghaith) for their extraordinary help in data collection and
rendering. We also express our appreciation to the clinicians in Sheikh Salem Al Ali
Centre for assistance in recruiting participants with language impairment. Address for
correspondence : Fauzia Abdalla, PhD, CCC-SLP, Department of Communication
Science, College for Women, Kuwait University, PO Box 5969, Safat 13060, Kuwait.
e-mail : f.abdalla@ku.edu.kw

139

A B D A L L A E T A L.
INTRODUCTION

Children with specific language impairment (SLI) have been attested to
have problems in a broad range of language areas including phonology (e.g.
Fraser, Goswami & Conti-Ramsden, 2010), semantics (e.g. Gray, 2004),
and morphosyntax (e.g. Paradis & Crago, 2001), while necessary prerequisites for language learning such as hearing, non-verbal intelligence,
and neurological and socio-emotional development are relatively preserved
(Leonard, 1998 ; Leonard & Deevy, 2006). Grammatical morphology appears
to pose particular challenges for many individuals with SLI. For instance,
English-speaking children with SLI lag behind their typically developing
peers in acquiring certain closed-class free and bound morphemes, e.g.
copula be forms, present third person singular -s and regular past -ed verb
inflections (Leonard, Eyer, Bedore & Grela, 1997 ; Marchman, Wulfeck &
Ellis Weismer, 1999 ; Rice, Wexler & Cleave, 1995).
Cross-linguistic studies that have explored grammatical morphology in
SLI have yielded mixed results, confirming that language typology plays a
crucial role in determining specific linguistic features that are vulnerable in
this population (Leonard, 2009). Essentially, morphological development
and delay differ from one language to another based on the complexity of
the language, both in terms of the course it takes and the morphological
processes used. For example, unlike English, the profile of SLI in Italian
revealed special difficulties with function words like articles and direct
object clitics (Bortolini, Caselli & Leonard, 1997).
Research on language impairment in Arabic has received very little
attention, with the exception of a few studies that have examined
morphosyntax. Abdalla and Crago (2008) reported that preschool
Arabic-speaking children with SLI (Urban Hijazi dialect) were significantly
less accurate in using verb inflections than typically developing comparison
groups - mean length of utterance and chronological age matches. A
similar trend was also found for Egyptian Arabic-speaking children with
developmental language impairment (Fahim, 2005 ; Morsi, 2006). The
children with SLI often used a default form resembling the imperfective
bare stem (Fahim, 2005) or the imperative (Abdalla & Crago, 2008 ; Morsi
2006) as a substitute for correct finite verbs.
In his study on Qatari Arabic, Shaalan (2010) found that although
school-aged children with SLI had difficulty with verb inflection, their
performance was not significantly different from that of typically developing
children. However, he stated that further examination is warranted since
this observation was based on only a few verb inflections. In a study on another
Semitic language, Leonard, Dromi, Adam and Zadunaisky-Ehrlich (2000)
observed that Hebrew-speaking children with SLI performed well on verb
inflections ; however, their performance was affected when they were presented with verbs involving more complex morphophonological structures.
140

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

The focus in SLI research has been verb morphology, and yet noun
morphology has been shown to be affected in SLI in some languages (e.g.
Dalalakis, 1996; Lukacs, Leonard & Kas, 2010). In the current study, we
focused on noun morphology in Arabic, a language with a rich morphology,
to determine whether noun plurals posed a particular problem for children
with SLI, and whether the errors they made suggested a delay or deviance
in development.
Before we review previous research on typical and atypical acquisition of
noun plurals in Arabic and cross-linguistically, we will present an overview
of the plural system in Kuwaiti Arabic.
Nominal plural morphology in Kuwaiti Arabic
In every part of the Arab-speaking world, Arabic means at least two varieties : the standard variety and the colloquial/spoken variety. The standard
variety, known as Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), is the written variety
that is officially used all over the Arab world in formal contexts such as
school and the media. MSA has preserved the syntactic, morphological, and
phonological aspects of Classical Arabic, the language of the Koran from
which it descended (Fischer, 1997). Colloquial Arabic, such as Kuwaiti
Arabic, the focus of our study, is the native language of the child. Kuwaiti
Arabic (KA) still shares common characteristics of the conservative standard variety but has also diverged from it.
Plural formation in Arabic, as in other Semitic languages such as Hebrew,
relies on two processes : linear suffixation and non-linear stem modification.
In linear suffixation, a suffix is added at the end of a stem to form the plural,
very much like English (book, book-s). Suffixation is considered regular
because it applies to many nouns and does not involve any change in the
base word (the singular) from which it is derived. There are two forms :
feminine sound plural (FSP) and masculine sound plural (MSP). The FSP
suffix (-a :t) is more general and can apply even to singular nouns that do
not have the grammatical feminine marker (-at). The MSP suffix (i :n) is,
however, limited to deverbal singular nominals (i.e. derived from verbs).
Because the two plural affixes (-a :t and -i :n/-u :n) apply to many words
and do not involve modification of the stem of the singular noun, they are
considered regular or sound.
In non-linear processes, known as the broken plural (BP), the root is
combined with a number of plural patterns that are different from those of
the singular. Lyovin (1997) indicates that the BP is formed by internal
change in the word, e.g. CaCaC /sahan/ ` a plate ' CuCuuC /suhu :n/ `plates '.
These patterns are many in the standard variety, but fewer in Kuwaiti
Arabic; Holes (1995) cites five frequent patterns used in Gulf
Arabic (CuCCaaC /--umma :l/ ` workmen ', CaCaaCiC /mala :--ig/ `spoons ',
141

A B D A L L A E T A L.

CaCaaCiiC /fasa:ti:n/ ` dresses ', aCCaaC /agla:m/ `pens', and CuCuuC
/suhu:n/ ` plates'). The BP is not based on a clear rule and is lexicalized
(Fischer, 1997) and therefore needs to be learned item by item. This type
of plural morphology is also phonologically less salient than the regular
processes (i.e. suffixation), which could be particularly problematic for
children with SLI.
Although some researchers (e.g. Ravid & Farah, 1999) have cited Arabic
as a language where the minority form (Broken Plural) is the default in
some varieties of Arabic, Boudelaa and Gaskell (2002) have demonstrated
that the sound regular (FSP and MSP) is not only quantitatively more
productive as a process but also applies to more nominal forms. Because
MSP is limited to deverbal nominals, FSP (-a :t) is more common and
seems to be the default.
To sum up, plural formation in KA is achieved through two main
processes : linear suffixation and non-linear stem transformation. Suffixation
is considered regular because it applies to many nouns and does not involve
any change in the base word (the singular) from which it is derived. The
MSP marker is, however, limited to deverbal singular nominals, but the
FSP marker is more general and can apply even to singular nouns that do
not have the grammatical feminine marker (-at). The stem-transformation
process, the BP, is lexicalized and has to be learned item by item. This type
of plural morphology is also phonologically less salient than the regular
modification (i.e. suffixation), which could be particularly problematic for
children with SLI. This general picture suggests that the acquisition of the
noun plural would be in the following order : FSP is acquired before MSP
and BP. Previous studies on KA and other varieties seem to support this
prediction.
Plural noun morphology in typically developing children and children with SLI
Typically developing children. Previous studies of plural acquisition in
typically developing children showed varying developmental patterns across
languages. Studies on English-speaking children revealed that the plural
suffix -s and its two allomorphs emerge between 1 ;9 and 2;3, and that
children master the regular plural form as well as most irregular forms by
the age of five (Berko, 1958 ; Brown 1973 ; Cazden, 1968). Young children
were found to generalize the plural to novel forms in a longitudinal setting
(Zapf & Smith, 2007), and an experimental setting (Berko, 1958). The
errors seem to display a pattern where children first use some correct forms
of both regular and irregular inflections, then move to a stage where they
use both correct and incorrect forms of regular and irregular forms, and
finally master the plural inflectional system (Marcus, Ullman, Pinker,
Hollander, Rosen & Xu, 1992).
142

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

Early acquisition of nominal number marking has been found in German
child language, with an onset as early as 1; 4, and in some children with a
Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) of 1.25 and relatively good competence
at the age of 3; 8 (Szagun, 2001). In her longitudinal study of children aged
1; 4 to 3; 8, Szagun (2001) compared adults' speech to that of the children
and found that the growth rates of the plural classes were in accordance
with the frequencies of plurals in adult language and child language around
3; 8. The error patterns in child speech reflected the regularities in the
German plural system and children made errors early on at the onset of
acquiring plural inflection with no preference of one error type over others.
In Hebrew, a Semitic language like Arabic, regular plural formation is
acquired as early as two years, with an advantage for the masculine plural
over the feminine plural and both reaching adult mastery by the age of six
years. However, plurals that involve stems with irregular suffixes (masculine
plural marker for feminine singular or vice versa), nouns with changing
stems in the plural (for instance a deletion of a vowel or a vowel change after
suffixation), and nouns with changing stems and irregular suffixes were still
being acquired at the age of six (cf. Ravid & Schiff, 2009, and studies
therein).
Previous studies on Arabic-speaking children demonstrate a rather
homogeneous picture, namely the precedence in acquisition of the FSP
compared to the MSP and the BP, both of which were not acquired until
very late. In one of the earliest studies on the acquisition of Egyptian
Arabic, Omar (1973) found that children developed the regular plural
inflection at the age of three years and most BPs at the age of five. In
particular, Omar's study revealed a tendency by the children to use the FSP
inflection -a :t to regularize BPs or to create plurals for nonsense words.
The overgeneralization process categorically employed the FSP suffix -a :t
rather than the MSP suffix -i :n. At the same time, they used BPs but they
did not overgeneralize them once acquired.
Ravid and Farah (1999) tested the use of FSP, MSP, and BPs in forty-eight
Palestinian children aged two to five years, divided into four age groups
(2 years, 3 years, 4 years, and 5 years). The participants were asked to
provide the plural of a picture depicting a singular noun. Statistical analysis
of average correct scores showed that the FSP was easier to acquire than the
MSP and BP across ages. By the age of three, the children's performance
was at ceiling for FSP (approximately 13 out of 14 maximum responses).
The BP and MSP by contrast were around 5 to 6 correct (out of 14) at age
three and only reached an accuracy of 11 in the oldest age group (5 years).
Similar results were reported in another study on Palestinian Arabic,
(Ravid & Hayek, 2003) in children between 3;6 and 8 ;0, whereby mean
percentage scores showed a distinct development of the regular feminine
plural -a:t.
143

A B D A L L A E T A L.

Siddiki (2002) examined plural formation in typically developing speakers
of Saudi Arabic (Hijazi dialect) aged four to eleven years, divided into four
age groups (4 ; 1-5 ; 0, 5; 1-7 ; 0, 7; 1-9; 0 and 9; 1-11;0). The elicitation
stimuli comprised thirty-two real nouns (8 FSP and 24 BP) and eight
nonce words. The consistent result across age groups was more superior
performance on the regular nouns (FSP) than irregular (BPs). Mastery of
the regular FSP was reached only around the ages of seven and nine years
and the broken plurals were still being learned even at age eleven. Siddiki
indicated that the frequency of plurals (the regular FSP being the most
common) affected the performance of the children.
Similar results were reported by Nawwab (2009), who studied the
implementation of nominal number inflections (duals, sound plurals, broken
plurals, and collectives) of 240 typically developing Saudi children (Hijazi
Arabic dialect) aged 2 ; 0 to 6; 0, divided into eight age groups covering
six-month age intervals. She used two elicitation tasks to test the children's
comprehension (52 real words) and production (61 real and nonce words).
The study also included an analysis of a spontaneous speech task to
supplement the experimental findings. The results were presented
descriptively in percentages by noun pattern and age group with no
inferential statistical tests to compare the groups. Nawwab found that
comprehension of the different plural types were above chance level even in
the youngest group (70% or above). However, accuracy in producing the
real words showed that most patterns (BP and MSP) were below chance
level for all groups with the exception of the FSP, which reached 60 percent
accuracy in the older two groups only. She also observed that errors
occurred early on rather than after an initial period of correct use, reflecting
the regularities of the plural marking system. The most productive error
type was -a:t, which replaced almost all patterns in all tasks.
Daana (2009) studied the acquisition of plural inflection in children
speaking Jordanian Arabic aged between two and seven, and also found that
the regular feminine plural was acquired before the regular masculine plural
and the irregular plural (BP), with no clear advantage for one over the other
(i.e. MSP and BP). Within the irregular plural, the more common patterns
are acquired earlier than the less common ones. At age seven, the acquisition of the plural is still at around 90 percent accuracy compared to adults.
Aljenaie, Abdalla, and Farghal (2011), who examined the development
of noun number marking, dual and plural, by Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking
children between the ages of four and nine years in an elicited production
task, also found that correct FSP appeared more frequently than MSPs and
BPs in Group 1 (four- to five-year-olds) and demonstrated near-ceiling
effects in Group 2 (six- to seven-year-olds) and Group 3 (eight- to
nine-year-olds). In contrast, the acquisition of the other two plural types
(MSP and BP) increased in accuracy across age groups.
144

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

In summary, compared to other languages such as English (Brown,
1973) or German (Szagun, 2001), the plural is acquired rather late in
Arabic. The regular FSP (feminine sound plural), which is often used as the
default, is acquired quite early and with high accuracy around age three
(e.g. Omar, 1973, for Egyptian Arabic; Ravid & Farah, 1999, for Palestinian
Arabic; Aljenaie et al., 2011, for Kuwaiti Arabic), and adult-like accuracy
around age seven (e.g. Nawwab, 2009, for Hijazi Arabic; Daana, 2009,
for Jordanian Arabic; Aljenaie et al., 2011, for Kuwaiti Arabic). The more
restricted MSP (masculine sound plural) and the irregular (broken) plural
are acquired very late (Aljenaie et al., 2011, reported that up to age nine,
Kuwaiti children were still acquiring these two forms). At age five (the limit
of the age range studied), the BP was still being learned in Egyptian Arabic
(i.e. far from the adult-like 100 percent accuracy; Omar, 1973) and in
Palestinian Arabic (Ravid & Farah, 1999). Siddiki (2002) reported that the
broken plural was still developing at age eleven in Hijazi Arabic-speaking
children. This is comparable to the developmental pattern found in
Hebrew, a language with a similar plural morphology (Ravid & Schiff,
2009, and the studies therein).
Children with SLI. Results on plural inflection in English-speaking
children with language impairment are mixed. While Oetting and Rice
(1993) did not find it to be a major problem in English SLI, case studies
(Crystal, Fletcher & Garman, 1976; Eyer & Leonard, 1995) and group
studies (e.g. Leonard et al., 1997) have reported difficulties with noun plural
inflections. Gopnik and her colleagues (Gopnik & Crago, 1991 ; Ullman &
Gopnik, 1994) studied the use of noun plural -s in an English-speaking
family (13 members from three generations) with language impairment, and
found that their performance significantly diverged from those of controls
from the same family. According to the researchers, application of a
productive rule was limited, and the participants appeared to have learned
inflected words as distinct lexical items, much as one learns irregular
patterns like children and men.
Similar results to those found by Oetting and Rice (1993) in English
were found in Italian (Bortolini et al., 1997) and Hebrew (Dromi,
Leonard & Shteiman, 1993), where the performance of the participants
with SLI was comparable with their typically developing MLUmatched peers. This seems to be rather surprising, given the fact
that Italian and Hebrew have a more complex noun plural inflection
system than English. Leonard and his colleagues (e.g. Dromi et al.,
1993 ; Leonard, Sabbadini, Leonard & Volterra, 1987) argue that, in
morphologically rich languages like Italian and Hebrew, the focus is made
on the best rendition of morphology to better serve communication,
in contrast to a language like English where attention is devoted to word
order.
145

A B D A L L A E T A L.

Dalalakis (1996) found that Greek-speaking children with SLI performed
more poorly than age-matched controls in producing plural forms of
nonsense nouns. Greek has a rich noun morphology whereby noun plurals
differ not only according to three genders (feminine, masculine, and
neuter), but also in the singular form of the noun in the nominative case.
Interestingly, both groups displayed more success with feminine nouns
than with neuter nouns. Repeating singular nouns as plurals (i.e. omissions)
occurred more frequently than producing ungrammatical plural inflections
(e.g. incorrect gender).
Clahsen, Rothweiler, Woest, and Marcus (1992) examined plural
allomorphs by German-speaking children with SLI (aged 3 ;1 to 6;11). The
children's spontaneous correct use of plural allomorphs approximated
typically developing children aged three. Substitution of an inappropriate
inflection was more common in the spontaneous data, while the use of
singular for plural nouns dominated in the formal task. Ljubesic and
Kovacevic (1992) explored the use of dual and plural noun formation in
sixty-one school-age children with SLI (aged 7 to 10 years) learning
Serbo-Croatian, a Slavic language. The children with SLI scored
significantly lower in marking plurals (real and nonce stimuli) than their
age-matched typically developing peers. A higher tendency to repeat the
singular (omission) was observed in the group with SLI.
More recently, Lukacs et al. (2010) examined the use of regular and
irregular noun morphology in two groups of Hungarian-speaking children
with SLI - an older group (eight to ten years) and a younger group (four to
seven years) - and two control groups matched on size of vocabulary. The
younger group displayed lower accuracy in marking plurals and accusative
case in regular noun stems than the vocabulary-matched controls.
Overgeneralization of stem forms was frequently observed in all groups.
However, stronger lexical frequency effects and a higher reliance on
memorized forms were found in the children with SLI.
The studies reviewed thus far demonstrate that the typology of a language
can influence the types of grammatical difficulties displayed by children
with SLI in a given language. In some languages (e.g. English), plurals do
not seem to be problematic for SLI. However, noun plural marking, unlike
the case of Indo-European languages described above, constitutes a
complex system both semantically and structurally for children learning
Arabic. KA, like other dialects, uses three main processes to mark the
plural : two rule-based concatenative processes - linear suffixing - the FSP
(affix -a:t for feminine nouns) and the MSP (that adds the affix -i:n to
masculine nouns) ; and a non-concatenative process, BP, an irregular,
non-linear root-and-pattern plural form that relies on internal modification
of the singular stem rather than affixation. In addition to the large
number of irregular forms (BP), which do not follow a clear rule and have
146

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

to be learned item by item, the regular MSP does not apply to all masculine
nouns but is restricted to animate deverbal singular nominals. In other
words, Arabic does not seem to conform to the regular/irregular division
seen in the plural systems of English and other languages (Ravid & Farah,
2009), making it an interesting case study. In essence, one cannot conclude
that the irregular forms will pose more difficulty, given that one of
the regular markers (MSP) is less productive. As a result of this unique
typology, several researchers have demonstrated late acquisition of this
structure (Omar, 1973 ; Ravid & Farah, 1999; Aljenaie et al., 2011).
Very few studies have investigated noun plural formation in SLI speakers
of Arabic (Fahim, 2005 ; Shaalan, 2010), and the data they provide do not
permit a systematic examination of the structure. Fahim (2005) analyzed
longitudinal language data from three Egyptian Arabic-speaking children with
developmental language impairment (EA-DLI) (aged 3;01 to 4;06 when
first recorded) and twelve typically developing controls (aged between 1;00
and 4; 04). Data was recorded for twenty-one to thirty-six months and the
children with DLI were aged 5; 11 to 7 ; 01 by the end of study. Spontaneous
speech was used to analyze the children's production of noun plurals.
However, the number of plurals produced by the children with DLI was
very limited. For example, one of the three children with DLI only used
plurals on three occasions, while another did not produce any broken plurals.
Moreover, no productions of masculine sound plurals were witnessed in the
DLI data. Based on this preliminary data, Fahim concluded that plural
morphology was acquired late, with the FSP emerging before BP and MSP.
The children with DLI displayed error patterns that were similar to those of
controls (e.g. using quantifiers kitir kita:b ` many book ' or substituting the
FSP -a:t for BP), and others that deviated from the norms (e.g. repeating the
noun instead of using a morphological inflection to mark pluralization).
Shaalan (2010) tested two groups of Qatari Arabic-speaking children between the ages of 4; 6 to 9; 4. Twenty-six of these were diagnosed with SLI
while eighty-eight were developing language typically. Accuracy in using
three types of plurals (FSP, MSP, and BP) was elicited using an expressive
language test designed for Qatari Arabic. However, the number of tokens
for each plural type was restricted, e.g. there was only one item for MSP.
Shaalan's initial examination of plurals showed that the children with SLI
and controls up to the age of six years were more competent in using the
FSP than MSP. Irregular plurals (BP) were also a challenge for the group
with SLI, and overregularization (adding the FSP suffix -a :t) was the
preferred error pattern. In sum, although neither Fahim (2005) nor Shaalan
(2010) conducted a systematic investigation of the acquisition of Arabic
plurals, their preliminary observations seem to corroborate what has been
documented for typical Arabic language learners (Aljenaie et al., 2011 ;
Omar, 1973 ; Ravid & Farah, 1999).
147

A B D A L L A E T A L.

The primary purpose of this study was to extend the investigation of noun
plurals in SLI to yet another dialect of Arabic, Kuwaiti. At present we know
very little about how Arabic-speaking children with SLI use noun plurals.
The Arabic language is a morphologically rich language, and thus can shed
light on explanations of SLI which have largely been based on English and
a few Indo-European languages. Only two unpublished studies (Fahim,
2005 ; Shaalan, 2010) have reported preliminary observations of nominal
plurals in Arabic speakers with language impairment. As explained earlier,
neither of these studies thoroughly examined this type of morphology, leaving
us with an incomplete picture of exactly how children with SLI in Arabic use
regular and irregular noun plural markers. The present study is the first to
examine noun morphology in Kuwaiti-speaking children with SLI.
Moreover, it adopts a more carefully designed experimental paradigm to
elicit productions of a representative set of noun plural stimuli (regular and
irregular inflection) using two varying contexts - real and nonsense stimuli.
Additionally, two groups of native Kuwaiti Arabic speakers - typically
developing age-matched children and a group of adults - served as controls
to ensure the real and nonsense stimuli were effective in eliciting the target
plural forms and to contrast their pattern of results with the group with SLI.
More specifically, the investigation sought to answer the following questions :
1. How do the Kuwaiti children with SLI compare with the typically developing age peers in accuracy of using regular and irregular noun
plurals in real words ? We hypothesized that the group with SLI would
be less accurate than the age-matched peers, given that studies reviewed
earlier have demonstrated that noun plural development in Arabic is
rather prolonged.
2. Will the three types of plurals (FSP, MSP, and BP) display varying
levels of accuracy and frequency for the real and nonsense words in the
TD and SLI groups? Based on previous findings in the Arabic literature, we predicted that the feminine sound plural (FSP) would have a
special status (i.e. more accurately used in real words and resorted to
most frequently for nonsense forms).
3. Are the children with SLI qualitatively different in the types of errors
they exhibit ? We expected the errors of the children with SLI to
resemble those of the TD, and that FSP would be overgeneralized in
both groups.

METHOD

Participants
A total of thirty-six Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking individuals participated in
this study. The participants formed three groups of twelve each : a group of
148

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

adults and two groups of children - one with specific language impairment
(SLI group) and the other typically developing age-matched controls (TD
group).
The children with SLI (n=12) comprised nine boys and three girls aged
3; 7 to 6 ; 2 (Mean age=55.7 months, SD=10.3) recruited from Sheikh
Salem Al Ali Center for Hearing and Speech, Kuwait, a public specialty
clinic that serves Arabic-speaking individuals with communication
disorders. They had been clinically assessed by senior Arabic-speaking
speech-language pathologists and were in their initial month of treatment
sessions. Children who met the following exclusionary and inclusionary
criteria were included in the study : (1) they passed a hearing screening
(20 dB in each ear, at the frequencies 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz) conducted
by the hospital audiologist, and had no history of recent bouts of Otitis
Media ; (2) they presented developmentally appropriate articulation abilities
as measured by a one-word Arabic articulation test, and displayed good
speech intelligibility as judged by an independent research assistant ; (3) they
passed an oral-motor speech mechanism examination ; (4) they presented
records that indicated normal non-verbal IQ and no frank neurological
deficits or socio-emotional disturbances from their psychologist and
developmental specialists at the Psychiatric Hospital, Kuwait.
Identifying preschoolers with SLI posed a challenge because there are
currently no standardized language assessment batteries for Kuwaiti Arabic.
To document that the group with SLI demonstrated significant language
difficulties we used four sources of information : (a) adapted Arabic receptive
and expressive language tests; (b) adapted Arabic version of the Speech and
Language Assessment Scale (SLAS) (Hadley & Rice, 1993) which helps
parents to describe their child's competencies in terms of assertiveness,
responsiveness, semantics, syntax, and articulation ; (c) spontaneous
language sample analyses ; and (d) clinical judgements of bilingual
Arabic-English-speaking speech-language pathologists. We administered
three subtests (the Sentence Comprehension Test, the Expressive Language
Test, and the Sentence Repetition Test) based on an earlier version of
Shaalan's (2010) Arabic test battery. The tests examine the comprehension
and production of morphosyntactic structures in Gulf Arabic (e.g. negation,
verb markers, possessive pronouns, clitic pronouns, adjectives, relative and
subordinate clauses, etc.). We compared the test scores of the children with
SLI in this study to data in our lab from fifty typically developing Kuwaiti
children of similar ages. We used a more conservative cut-off than
previously used (e.g. Tomblin, Records, Buckwalter, Zhang, Smith &
O'Brien, 1997) to identify the children with SLI. All twelve children scored
below x1.5 SDs on two or more language tests.
An analysis of the spontaneous communication samples of the participants
with SLI revealed that their MLU, number of errors per utterance, and
149

A B D A L L A E T A L.

lexical diversity were below those of a comparison group of twenty-five
age-matched typically developing Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking children in our
clinical database. It is worth noting that Dunn, Flax, Sliwinsky, and Aram
(1996) found a higher congruency between clinical diagnoses of SLI and
measures based on children's spontaneous speech samples in terms of MLU
than results obtained from formal tests.
Twelve monolingual, typically developing Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking
children (6 boys, 6 girls), ranging in age from 3;9 to 5;7 (with a mean age
of 55.6 months, SD=5.5) served as chronological age-equivalent controls.
An independent samples t-test was conducted to compare age equivalency
between the SLI and TD groups. No significant differences in age were
found (t(22)=-0.02, p=0.98 [two-tailed]). Parental case history forms,
an Arabic version of SLAS, school reports, and preliminary hearing,
speech-language screenings by a speech-language pathologist indicated that
the TD groups had achieved developmental milestones as expected. No
neurological or intellectual impairments were reported.
The twelve adults were native speakers of KA and had completed twelve
years of high school in Arabic. They consisted of six females and six males,
age range was twenty to thirty-eight years, with a mean age of twenty-three
years, nine months (SD=4.6).
Materials and procedure
This study used an experimental design consisting of thirty-four pictured
stimuli - fourteen real singular nouns, seven plural real nouns, and thirteen
nonsense stimuli (see ` Appendix ' for a list of all stimuli). The word `real '
means conventional or attested in Arabic. The fourteen real singular nouns
consisted of common, concrete objects. Given that there are no frequency
tables for Kuwaiti Arabic, we selected the real stimuli based on the
following criteria : (a) imageable noun that could be represented via pictures
and required the target plural marker (FSP, MSP, or BP) ; (b) reportedly
used by two-year-old typical learners of Arabic in Aljenaie (2001) and
Daana (2009) ; and (c) received a scoring of 4 or more (highly familiar) on a
Likert scale of 1-5 from a list of words rated by sixty adult Arabic speakers
for familiarity (Shaalan & van der Lely, 2007). The real singular nouns were
further categorized into five items that require the FSP suffix -a:t, three
that take the MSP suffix -i:n, and six that change the singular to BP. The
number of items per plural suffix is based on a rough estimate of their
frequency in the language (Boudelaa & Gaskell, 2002).
The nonsense stimuli consisted of a mixture of both mono- and
multisyllabic words. The monosyllabic nonsense words and their pictures
were borrowed from Berko (1958). Three native KA informants generated
nonsense words that rhymed, and had a root pattern comparable to a
150

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

corresponding real singular noun used in the study, e.g. fla:b for gla :s
` glass ' and tankab for -arnab ` rabbit '. Overall, the nonsense forms conform
to expected patterns of Kuwaiti Arabic.
Seven highly familiar plural nouns were also presented as distracters, and
to control for priming effect (Schacter & Buckner, 1998). Two plural nouns
had FSP -a:t marker (tufa:h-a:t/tufa:h ` apples/apple'; kabat-a:t/kabat
` cupboards/cupboard '), one had MSP -i:n (hala:g-i :n/hala:g `barbers/
barber'), and four were BP that changed the root pattern (mafa:ti :h/muftah
` keys/key ' ; zehewi/zehewiya ` cockroaches/cockroach '; suwar/su:ra `pictures/
picture ' ; bana :t/bint ` girls/girl '). The thirty-four target stimuli (14 real
singular nouns, 7 plural nouns, and 13 nonsense singular forms) were
written on a piece of paper separately and drawn from a hat to generate a
randomized list consisting of real singular, real plural, and nonsense
singular forms. The order of presentation was fixed.
A native Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking research assistant administered the test
to each participant individually in a quiet room. The assistant followed a
research protocol to elicit the Arabic plural noun inflection. Testing was
preceded by three practice trials to familiarize the participant with the
procedure. The instructions were worded carefully to avoid providing the
participants with clues to the target noun's gender. Following Aljenaie et al.
(2011), the neutral form ihni ` here ' was used rather than the demonstrative
ha :a ` this ', which is conjugated for gender in Arabic. For example, to
elicit the plural forms, a laminated page consisting of multiple images of a
target object was used. A specially designed cover page was used to conceal
the objects except for one. The participant was then told, ihni ta:wla `Here
is a table '. Next, the cover page was lifted to reveal the remaining images of
the object (total of five). The examiner would then ask Ilhi:n sa:r xams
sunu ? ` Now we have five what ? ' while pointing to the multiple images. The
same procedure was adopted for eliciting the singular from the plural
distracters, except that the examiner would first show a page with multiple
images of one object and say ihni bana:t ` Here (are) girls ' before revealing a
page with only one object. During the experimental phase, the participants
were verbally encouraged without providing them with corrective feedback.
Responses for each stimulus were audio-recorded using a digital recorder
(Olympus DS-50). The examiner also transcribed the participants'
responses on-line in Arabic orthography during testing. A second research
assistant double-checked the transcript using the audio-recorded version.
Average inter-transcriber reliability for the real words was 98.2 percent, and
93.7 percent for the nonsense stimuli. Disagreements were resolved through
discussion.
Each participant's elicited production of the plural morpheme for the
real stimuli was coded as correct and incorrect using an adaptation of
Cazden's (1968) and Jia's (2003) coding system : SC (supplied correctly),
151

A B D A L L A E T A L.
TABLE

Code

1. Description of the codes used to classify the real words along with
examples from the corpus

Sub-code

SC
SCf
SCm

Description

Examples and English gloss

Supplied correctly
Correct feminine sound plural
Correct masculine sound plural

SCb

Correct broken plural

ROf
ROm

Required but omitted
Omitted feminine sound plural
Omitted masculine sound plural

ROb

Omitted broken plural

RO

MS
MSmf
MSbf
MSbm
MSbd
MSother
NM

Morphological substitutions
Feminine sound for sound
masculine plural
Feminine sound for broken plural
Masculine sound for broken
plural
Double marking - broken plus
feminine sound plural
Dual for broken plural or
feminine sound plural

NMn

Non-morphological
Numeral plus singular form

NMq

Quantifier plus singular form

NMc

Changes in stimuli

NMr

Repeated (more than two times)

sa:--a/sa--a:t ` clock/clocks'
muaris/muarisi:n ` male teacher/
male teachers'
7alb/7ila:b ` dog/dogs'
*sa:--a/sa--a ` clock/clock'
*muaris/muaris `male teacher/
male teacher'
*7alb/7alb ` dog/dog'
*muaris/muarisa:t ` male teacher/
female teachers'
*7alb/7alba:t (should be 7ila:b)
` dog/dogs'
*7alb/7albi:n (should be 7ila:b)
` dog/dogs'
*7alb/7ila:ba:t (should be 7ila:b)
` dog/dogs'
*-arnab/-arnabtein (should be
-ara:nib) ` rabbit/rabbits'
*-arnab/saba-- -arnab ` rabbit/seven
rabbit'
*-arnab/wa:jid- arnab ` rabbit/
many rabbit'
*7alb/7aalib (should be 7ila:b)
` dog/nonword'
*7alb/7alb 7alb 7alb (should be
7ila:b) ` dog/dog dog dog'

RO (required but omitted), MS (morphological substitutions), and NM
(non-morphological forms). Table 1 provides a breakdown of the coding
classification and examples from the corpus for each type of code. SC and
RO were further classified into the three inflectional types of interest in
this study - FSP, MSP, and BP. For example, the participant added the
correct plural inflection for FSP -a:t to change sa:--a `watch ' to sa:--a-a:t
` watches '. However, the same target would be categorized as an omission
of a required FSP plural marker (RO) when sa:--a is produced as sa:--a
without -a:t to mark pluralization. Morphological substitutions (MS) errors
consisted of the following types : (a) one plural marker replacing another
(e.g. 7alb ` dog', which requires a broken plural 7ila:b `dogs ', is erroneously
produced as FSP by adding -a:t *7alb-a:t) ; (b) double-marking (e.g.
152

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

7alb receives not only the correct broken plural form 7ila:b but also the FSP
-a:t to generate *7ila:b-a:t) ; or (c) using other forms such as the feminine
dual marker -tein as substitutes. A final error pattern included the use of
non-morphological forms (NM) such as changing the stimuli
(e.g. phonological or semantic alterations such as 7a:lib instead of 7ila:b
` dogs '), using a quantifier or a numeral with the singular form (e.g. saying
wajid ` many ' instead of inflecting for plural), or repeating the stimuli more
than two times (e.g. ha:a beit beit beit ` this house house house').
A similar coding procedure was used for the elicited nonsense word
productions. A main difference was that frequencies of occurrence rather
than correct-incorrect classification were used in the case of nonsense
stimuli. Hence the categories ` supplied correctly ' (SC) and `morphological
substitutions ' (MS) were precluded for the nonsense stimuli for two reasons :
(a) frequency of use rather than accuracy (SC) was the target ; and (b) the
participants' responses for the nonsense forms were described without
labelling them as morphological substitutions. Three main categories
appeared - a morphological inflection (regular linear suffixation : FSP
or MSP ; or irregular affixation : BP), RO (omitted plural inflection), and
non-morphological forms (NM).
RESULTS

The current study examined the acquisition of a particular inflectional
class, noun plurals in three groups of Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking participants :
a group of children with SLI, a chronological age equivalent group
(TD), and a group of adults. This section presents the participants'
responses along three measures : (a) proficiency in marking noun plurals
for the fourteen real stimuli ; (b) use of the three types of plural
morphological categories : regular, linear suffixation (FSP and MSP) and
irregular non-linear affixation (BP) in fourteen real nouns and thirteen
nonsense stimuli ; and (c) other response patterns the groups used for
indicating nominal number in both types of stimuli (real and nonsense).
Criterion for statistical significance was set at p-values of f.05.
Proficiency in producing plural inflection in real words
A composite percentage score was calculated for the three groups of
participants (adult, TD, and SLI) using the formula below as an indicator
of proficiency of marking plural inflections in real nouns (Jia, 2003).
Composite score=

Total correct plural tokens (SCf +SCm +SCb )
Total plural contexts (SC+RO+MS+NM)

The composite scores were divided by 100 to obtain a percentage. The
adults were 100 percent accurate in producing the elicited plural inflection
153

A B D A L L A E T A L.

2. Correct elicitations of real noun plural inflections (composite percent
scores, means and standard deviations and raw scores) for the two groups of
children (TD and SLI)

TABLE

Case

Group

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12

TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD
TD

C13
C14
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24

SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI
SLI

NOTE

Gender

Raw score1

Female
7
Female
5
Female
7
Male
5
Male
11
Male
4
Male
7
Female
6
Female
5
Male
6
Female
6
Male
11
Mean percentage correct (SD) 47.6 (15.9)
Male
0
Female
0
Male
0
Female
0
Female
5
Male
0
Male
0
Male
0
Male
0
Male
3
Male
4
Male
2
Mean percentage correct (SD) 8.3 (13.2)

Composite percent score
50
35.7
50
35.7
78.6
28.6
50
42.9
35.7
42.9
42.9
78.6
0
0
0
0
35.7
0
0
0
0
21.4
28.6
14.3

1 : Out of 14 real stimuli.

for real nouns. Table 2 presents the raw and composite percentage scores
obtained for each participant in the TD and SLI groups. A clear gap in
general proficiency of using the correct plural forms was evident for both
groups of children when compared with the adults.
As is evident from Table 2, the children with SLI appeared less proficient
than their age-matched typically developing peers in correctly inflecting
noun plurals. An independent samples t-test confirmed the significance of
this difference (TD >SLI), (t(22)=6.58, p<.001 [two-tailed]).
Interestingly, the groups had no problems with the distracter stimuli,
which required the participants to supply the singular forms of five real
words when presented with their plurals. Both the TD and the adults
scored at ceiling (Mean=100 %, SD=0.00) for this task. The group with
SLI were slightly lower in generating the singular forms (Mean=80.9 %,
SD=30.6) than either the TD or the Adult groups, (F(2, 33)=4.63, p=.02,
g2p=.220).
154

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

Fig. 1. Mean percentage scores for the three inflectional types (FSP, MSP, and BP) across
the three groups (SLI, TD, and Adults) - percent correct for real words and percent
frequency of occurrence for the nonsense stimuli. Error bars represent one standard error
above and below the mean.

Noun plural category
Three plural morphological categories occur in Kuwaiti Arabic: FSP,
MSP, and BP. This section examines the accuracy and frequency of these
inflections as used by the three groups of participants in both testing contexts (real and nonsense).
Figure 1 displays mean percentages of the three real and nonsense plural
categories (FSP, MSP, and BP). The nonsense percentages represent how
often the inflection occurred, while the scores for the real words signify
accuracy. An examination of Figure 1 depicts an obvious variability in how
the three types of plural inflections were used in the real and nonsense
words. In terms of accuracy for inflecting the real stimuli, a one-way ANOVA
revealed that the three groups were significantly different in their accuracy
of using the FSP (Adult : Mean=100 %; TD : Mean=91.6, SD=19.9; SLI :
Mean=21.6, SD=36.6) (F(2, 33)=38.3, p<.001, g2p=.69); MSP (Adult :
Mean=100% ; TD : Mean=24.9, SD=32 ; SLI : Mean=2.7, SD=9.6)
(F(2, 33)=82.8, p<.001, g2p=.83); and BP (Adult : Mean=100 %; TD :
Mean=22.2, SD=22.8 ; SLI : Mean=0 %) (F(2, 33)=190.2, p<.001,
g2p=.92). Post-hoc Fisher LSD pairwise comparisons revealed no reliable
differences between the adult and TD groups for the FSP. However, the
TD children performed significantly lower than the adults for the MSP
(p<.001) and BP (p<.001). In turn, scores for the MSP (p<.001) and BP
(p<.001) were significantly greater in the TD group than those of the
children with SLI.
155

A B D A L L A E T A L.

As is evident in Figure 1, the overall advantage of the FSP in real nouns
was also true for the elicited nonsense stimuli. In other words, the FSP (e.g.
ya :fig-a:t for ya:fig) was the most preferred plural category when participants were asked to inflect nonsense stimuli. Adults used FSP at 81.4 %
(SD=12), followed by the TD group at 64.7 % (SD=31) and the SLI group
at 9.6 % (SD=18.9). MSP (e.g. muttas-i:n for muttas) was rarely utilized
(adults and SLI Mean=0.64 %, SD=2.2; TD=1.3, SD=4.4). Frequency
of producing the BP (e.g. afla:b for fla:b) was higher in the Adults
(Mean=12.8 %, SD=11) than either the TD (Mean=1.9%, SD=4.8) or
the SLI groups (Mean=0.64%, SD=2.2). Interestingly, some of the TD
children (Mean=3.2%, SD=7.7) and the adults (Mean=3.8%, SD=6.1)
displayed a tendency to turn certain nonsense words into broken plural in
addition to attaching the FSP linear suffixation -a:t, e.g. tana:kib-a :t for
tankab.
Paired-samples t-tests were conducted to compare the use of FSP to the
other two plural forms in both elicitation contexts (real and nonsense). FSP
forms were not only more accurate in real words (Mean=71.6%, SD=42.6)
but also more frequent in nonsense stimuli (Mean=51.9%, SD=37.8)
than either the MSP (Mean for real=42.6%, SD=46.2; Mean for
nonsense=0.86 %, SD=3.1) or the BP (Mean for real=40.7%, SD=45.3;
Mean for nonsense=5.1%, SD=8.8) (p<.001 for real and nonsense words).
However, no reliable statistical differences emerged between the MSP and
BP forms for accuracy of real words or frequency of occurrence for nonsense words.
Other response patterns (error analysis)
This section focuses on the error analysis with comparison between
morphological substitutions in real words, and non-morphological responses
in both real and nonsense words. First, a comparison is made between the
children's responses for real and nonsense words.
Table 3 reiterates data reported earlier - that the TD children used the
required noun inflections in a real word context significantly more (47 %
of the time) than the group with SLI (8 %). Morphological markings were
also more common in the TD group's responses to nonsense stimuli (68 %)
than in the participants with SLI (11%) (x2 (3, n=24)=19.77, p<.001).
As for error patterns in the real words, the TD children substituted
morphological forms for plural forms more often (39%) than the group with
SLI (9 %) (x2 (3, n=24)=8.51, p<.04). However, the reverse pattern was
found in the case of non-morphological markers, whereby the children with
SLI resorted more to this strategy (35%) than the TD group (6%) (x2 (3,
n=24)=7.60, p<.05). The children's data also revealed an erroneous
strategy of using the singular (no affixation) instead of the inflected plural
156

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC
TABLE

3. Response patterns for real words vs. nonsense words by the TD and
SLI groups (raw scores in italics)
Real words
TD

Type
Morphological marking
(i.e. supplied correctly
(SC) for real words and
frequency of use for
nonsense stimuli)
Morphological
substitutions (MS)
MS others (dual)
Non-morphological
pattern (NM)
Required but omitted
(RO)
Total

Nonsense stimuli
SLI

TD

SLI

Raw Percent Raw Percent Raw Percent Raw Percent
80

47 %

14

8%

65

39 %

16

9%
5

3%

11

6%

59

35%

25

11

6%

72

43%

19

167

161

106

155

68%

17

11%

16%

64

43%

12%

69

46%

150

forms. This pattern was much higher in the SLI (43%) than the TD group
(6 %) (x2 (3, n=24)=10.1, p<.02). The same holds true for the nonsense
words, as can be seen in Table 3, whereby omissions (x2 (3, n=24)=12.11,
p<.007) and non-morphological forms (x2 (3, n=24)=10.46, p<.02) were
more frequent in the group with SLI than the TD group.
It is clear that the morphological marking, whether correct or
incorrect, was the frequent choice for TD children, while omission or
non-morphological patterns were considerably less so. On the other hand,
the opposite pattern was found in the children with SLI, where omission
(43%) and non-morphological marking (35 %) were more frequent than
correct (SC) (8 %) or incorrect noun morphology (MS) (9%). This pattern
was consistent with the nonsense words as well.
Morphological substitutions
This section provides more details on the morphological substitutions that
were used by the children when presented with real words.
Table 4 shows the first morphological substitution that includes the use
of the regular error, MSPpFSP, e.g. sajja:d ` hunter ' becoming sajja:d-a:t
(FSP) instead of sajja:d-i :n (MSP) ` hunters '. The other one is the use of
regular form such as FSP instead of BP (BPpFSP), which appears in high
proportions in both groups, while the BPpMSP appeared in a single
occurrence in the TD group. FSP, a preferred overgeneralization strategy,
was used as a substitute for both the regular MSP and irregular BP
157

A B D A L L A E T A L.
TABLE

4. Types of morphological substitutions in the real stimuli for the two
groups of children - TD and SLI (raw scores in italics)

Category

Type

Regular error category

MSPpFSP

Irregular error category

BPpFSP
BPpMSP

Double marking

BPpBP+FSP

Others

BPpDual

TD

SLI

Total

18
28%
41
63%
1
1%

2
13%
10
62%

20

1

5
8%

FSPpDual
Total

51

65

5
2
13%
2
13%
16

4

81

contexts. This strategy was employed more by the TD group (Mean=38.6,
SD=21.2) than the children with SLI (Mean=9.5, SD=13) (t(22)=4.05,
p<.001 [two-tailed]).
Another type of morphological substitution that was produced by a few
TD children (8%; Mean=2.97) was double marking. Table 4 shows that
in five occurrences, three of the TD children used double marking
(BP+FSP) in place of BP. For example, the three children said 7ila:b-a:t
instead of 7ila:b ` dogs ', gataw-a:t for gitawa ` cats ', and qissas-a:t instead of
qissas ` stories '. Their choice of the FSP in this case supports the overgeneralization of the FSP in the language. It is worth mentioning that on
four occasions, one of the children with SLI unexpectedly used the dual
marker instead of BP (BP/FSP pDual), as in ba:b-tein instead of abwa:b or
biba:n ` doors', and sajja:r-tein instead of sajja:r-a :t `cars'.
Non-morphological responses
As mentioned earlier, the TD children used morphological marking with
the nonsense words 71 percent of the time, while the participants with SLI
marked the nonsense words morphologically 11 percent of the time. The
non-morphological patterns in real and nonsense words are presented
in Table 5.
The frequency of non-morphological responses in the SLI group surpassed
that seen in the TD children (see total non-morphological in Table 3). Again,
there was a discrepancy in the totals of the non-morphological markers in
the real (Mean=6) versus nonsense (Mean=16) context for the TD group.
With the real words, the singular form was used in two occurrences
instead of marking the word for plural (about 15 %) in the SLI group. The
158

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC
TABLE

5. Non-morphological type responses (NM) in real vs. nonsense words
by the TD and SLI groups (raw scores in italics)
Real stimuli

Category

TD

Repeat (double)

Nonsense stimuli
SLI

TD

SLI

2
15%

Change stimuli

1
5%

6
5%

10
23%

21
16%

Numeral+singular

6
27%

48
37%

9
20%

35
26%

Quantifier

4
18%

3
2%

6
14%

8
6%

11

59

25

64

Total

data also showed negligible occurrence of the `changing the stimulus '
pattern, e.g. the use of the BP pattern of one category for the BP pattern
of another category with a different CV template as in -arnab `a rabbit '
becoming *-ara:ni:b instead of -ara:nib `rabbits '. This appeared
infrequently, 5% each in both groups in real words, and slightly higher
(23% and 16 %) in nonsense words in both TD and SLI, respectively.
Using the periphrastic expression of number sabi- `seven ' in plural
contexts before the singular form as in *sabi- sajja:ra `seven car' instead of
sabi- sajja:r-a :t ` seven cars ' occurred in both groups : the TD (27 %, 20%)
and SLI (37 %, 26%) with real and nonsense words, respectively. Employing
quantifiers such as wa:jid ` many ' before the singular form, as in *wa:jid
sajja :ra ` many car' instead of sajja:r-a:t ` cars ', was also found in real and
nonsense words. One child with SLI used the quantifier kiti :r `many '
before the singular form.
DISCUSSION

This study explored elicited productions of regular and irregular noun
plural inflections in Kuwaiti Arabic-speaking children with SLI and their
typically developing age-matched peers using real and nonsense stimuli.
Our threefold aim was to determine whether : (a) the performance of the
children with SLI differed from those of the TD age controls in the correct
use of noun plural inflections in real words ; (b) accuracy and frequency
varied depending on the type of plural category (FSP, MSP, and BP); and
(c) the error patterns of the group with SLI qualitatively differed from
those of the TD group.
The results of the present study revealed a significant delay in the
performance of the children with SLI compared with age-matched TD
159

A B D A L L A E T A L.

peers in the production of the three types of plural formation in Kuwaiti
Arabic, both in the composite score of all correct forms and in separate
analyses. These results, that children with SLI have problems acquiring
the plural inflection in Arabic, confirm what we hypothesized in the
introduction section of this article. One could argue that the children with
SLI's depressed performance in marking plurals stems from task difficulties.
However, this argument is countered by the participants' superior
performance in handling the distracter stimuli, whereby they readily
changed regular plurals (e.g. kabat-a:t ` cupboards ') and irregular plurals
(e.g. suwar ` pictures ') to their corresponding singular forms (kabat
` cupboard ' and su :ra ` picture ', respectively). Although noun plural inflection
in general was a challenge for the SLI and TD groups, their performance
varied according to the type of nominal plural marker (i.e. FSP, MSP, or
BP) that was elicited. The FSP was not only more accurate in real words
but was also the preferred choice in the nonsense context, especially in the
TD group.
Qualitative analyses of the data showed that the children with SLI
diverged from their age-matched counterparts in the number of errors and
their distribution across categories. In real words, the TD children used
morphology correctly or incorrectly (i.e. substitutions) significantly more
than their peers with SLI. The majority of the children's substitutions were
significantly towards FSP and no other patterns such as MSP in lieu of
FSP emerged in the data. An analogous picture was also recorded in the
nonsense word production task, where the use of morphology was more
prevalent among the TD children while non-morphological patterns
seemed the norm for the group with SLI. As for a breakdown in the types
of non-morphological errors (Table 5), the use of periphrastic expression of
number (e.g. *saba-- -arnab ` seven rabbit ') (n=54) was the most frequent
pattern followed by quantifiers (e.g. *wa:jid- arnab ` many rabbit ') and
modifications in the stimuli (e.g. *7aalib for 7ila:b ` dogs ') (n=7 each), with
negligible instances of repeating the stimuli to signal the plural (n=2)
(e.g. 7alb 7alb 7alb ` dog dog dog'). In addition to non-morphological errors,
the participants of this study displayed a tendency to replace the singular
with the inflected plural forms (i.e. required but omitted) in both experimental contexts (real and nonsense), albeit more widespread in the children
with SLI than the TD.
Interestingly, there were individual differences among the participants
with SLI, showing a developmental spectrum among this group. In
particular, three children with SLI stand out; one of them was slightly
older than the rest (C17) and the other two were in the upper half (older
50 %) (C22 and C23 in Table 2). These children not only produced correct
responses but also adopted the overgeneralization strategy of MSP to FSP
(13 %) and BP to FSP (62%). Most noteworthy was one participant with
160

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

SLI (C15) who utilized the dual for FSP and BP plural targets (e.g.
sa:-atein ` two watches' for sa:-ah ` watch ' instead of saa-a:t ` watches'),
a pattern not witnessed in any of the other children (TD or SLI group)
(Table 4). The remaining children with SLI did not seem to have developed
plural morphemes and therefore seemed to resort to other types of strategies
(e.g. periphrastic expression of number) that occurred to a lesser extent
in the typically developing sample because they seem to have passed that
stage.
Comparison with typical and atypical acquisition of nominal plurals
in the literature
The observation that the KA children with SLI have noticeable delay in
using noun plural inflections is in line with a longitudinal study of three
children with language impairment in Egyptian Arabic (Fahim, 2005) and a
cross-sectional study on Qatari Arabic (Shaalan, 2010). The results are
also similar to what was found in Hebrew, a language with comparable
morphology, in relation to the difference between the SLI and the agematched group (Dromi et al., 1993). The results of the present study are
also in agreement with what was reported in Hungarian (Lukacs et al.,
2010) and Greek (Dalalakis, 1996), two morphologically complex languages
but typologically different from Arabic, where children with SLI exhibited
particular delays in plural inflection compared to typically developing peers.
However, the present findings are at odds with those reported for English
and Italian. Oetting and Rice (1993) noted that English-speaking children
with SLI display a differentiated and productive noun plural inflection
system by the age of five. Bortolini et al. (1997) found no significant
difference between children with SLI and their MLU-matched controls in
use of plural noun inflection in Italian, a language with a rich morphology.
As for plural noun type, our prediction that the feminine sound plural
would have a central role was substantiated. Not only was this form more
accurate in the case of real stimuli and frequently overgeneralized by
the children, it was also the adult participants' predominant choice for
pluralizing nonsense words (81.4%). This trend of the FSP being acquired
earlier than the two other forms (MSP and BP) in typically developing
children has been confirmed in several previous studies of Arabic (e.g.
Kuwaiti by Aljenaie et al., 2011 ; Jordanian by Daana, 2009 ; Egyptian by
Omar, 1973; Palestinian by Ravid & Farah, 1999 ; Ravid & Hayek, 2003 ;
Saudi by Siddiki, 2002 ; Nawwab, 2009).
A common non-morphological error among the children with SLI
was the production of singular nouns (uninflected) in lieu of plural targets.
This type of error parallels a similar trend that emerged for younger
typically developing children reported for other languages (e.g. Clark
161

A B D A L L A E T A L.

and Nikitina, 2009) as well as children with SLI in Egyptian Arabic
(Fahim, 2005), German (Clahsen et al., 1992), Greek (Dalalakis, 1996),
Serbo-Croatian (Ljubesic and Kovacevic, 1992), and Spanish (Bedore &
Leonard, 2001). The prevalence of this type of error could be an indication
that some of the children are avoiding plurals because they are not competent in using number markers (Hoekstra & Hyams, 1998). Avoidance of
plurals seemed more pronounced in unfamiliar contexts, namely in the
nonsense task, in both groups of children. A further analysis of this type of
error revealed no clear pattern of avoidance with respect to the three
morphological categories, i.e. the number of omissions was comparable
whether the target was FSP, MSP, or BP. This is rather surprising, since
one would expect this error type to dominate for the MSP and BP targets
given that data from typical and atypical Arabic language learners (e.g.
Aljenaie et al., 2011 ; Fahim, 2005) found these forms (MSP and BP) to
emerge later developmentally.
An interesting observation emerges when the findings of this study are
compared to those reported for various languages in Stephany and Voeikova
(2009). Like those developing Spanish (Aguirre & Marrero, 2009) and
Italian (Noccetti, 2009), the participants in this study went through what
resembles a ` pre-morphology ' stage whereby the singular was often used
in contexts where the target is plural. During this phase they also often
referred to plurality through the use of numerals and quantifiers. What the
authors (Stephany & Voeikova, 2009) denote as the `proto-morphological
stage ' is evidenced in the current study in the emergence of morphological
patterns (FSP) that overextended to the other two inflectional categories :
MSP, which is less frequent in the language, and BP, which is less
transparent. The KA children (especially the TD group) seemed to be
transitioning to the stage of ` morphology proper ', whereby FSP were more
accurate than other forms of plural markers.
KA results in the light of SLI theories
It is very likely that language typology affects the development of
morphology (nominal plural inflection) in this case in both SLI and typical
populations. Nominal plural inflection presents a complex system for learners
of Arabic because it does not conform to the regular/irregular split for
marking plurals found in Indo-European languages such as English (Ravid &
Farah, 2009). KA, like other dialects of Arabic, inflects the plural using three
key processes - FSP and MSP follow a rule-based concatenative process
(linear suffixation of -a :t for feminine and -i :n for masculine nouns) while
BP constitutes a non-concatenative process (non-linear, root-and-pattern
plural form) that relies on the internal modification of the singular stem
rather than linear affixation. Though the plural morphemes in MSP and
162

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

FSP are both semantically transparent, the MSP is restricted to a few words
that have the feature (agent), and are in many cases (+animate), and are
therefore less frequent.
The fact that the broken plural (an irregular, morphotactically
less-transparent form) was problematic for the children may be easier to
comprehend than the incongruity found in using the two regular forms
(FSP and MSP). In other words, there was a discrepancy in the production
of the MSP and FSP in favour of the latter, despite the fact that they are
equally acoustically salient. Both forms of the plural are regular and both
are suffixes made of a long vowel followed by a consonant. The last
consonant of the stem is a heavy syllable (CV :C) that attracts stress in
most words. It is even easier to inflect the MSP since it simply involves
the addition of the suffix to the stem (mu--allim-mu--allim-i :n, `male
teacher-male teachers '). In the case of FSP, however, the affixation in
most cases also involves the deletion of the feminine marker (ah) at the end
of the singular word (mu--allimah-mu--allim-a:t, `female teacher-female
teachers ').
If we take into account Leonard's (1998) argument that acoustic saliency
is only one feature of a general saliency matrix that includes semantic
saliency and simplicity, the data of the present study could fit this hypothesis.
In fact, the morpheme that is less semantically restricted and therefore more
frequent and productive (namely the FSP) is acquired before the semantically
restricted, MSP. The broken/irregular plurals are acquired later because
they have numerous forms and do not follow a transparent rule, and are
therefore learned as lexical items. This is evident in the errors produced by
some of the children in this study, where an (already inflected) irregular
plural noun is inflected using the ostensible FSP marker (e.g. for the
singular 7alb ` dog ', they would add the feminine suffix a:t to the correct
broken 7ila:b to produce a doubly marked plural *7ila:ba:t). The
assumption that Arabic is a minority default language, where the regular
inflection used as the default is the less frequent morpheme in the language
has been adequately refuted (Boudelaa & Gaskell, 2002). The regular
(feminine and masculine combined) are by far more frequent than the
irregular plural forms.
According to Paradis and Crago (2001), the specific form typical and
atypical language learners select as default is often governed by the typology
of the target language. Theoretically, the unique typology of Arabic
nominal morphology explained above seems to lend support to the view that
FSP may very well be the default plural marker. The empirical findings
of the present research, as well as those from the Arabic literature (e.g.
Aljenaie et al., 2011 ; Fahim, 2005), further reinforce this proposition. The
results of this investigation highlighted that FSP was not only a popular
overgeneralization strategy for the TD children but also constituted
163

A B D A L L A E T A L.

the adults' favoured approach for marking plurals in non-Arabic words
(nonsense task). The FSP as a substitute also prevailed in the sub-group of
children with SLI who did supply correct responses. These children did
not differ qualitatively from their typically developing counterparts in their
types of errors and strategies. Essentially, their error profiles revealed no
arguments to reinforce the hypothesis that the linguistic characteristics of
the children with SLI were deviant when contrasted with the TD group.
Therefore, in this regard, the development of plural nouns in Kuwaiti
Arabic-speaking children appears to be delayed rather than deviant.
Clinical implications and future research
In sum, the above discussion has demonstrated that Kuwaiti Arabic learners
with specific language impairment seem to have special challenges with
inflectional morphology, just like their counterparts learning English and
other languages. However, this study clearly demonstrates that the child's
language typology will influence the particular morphosyntactic features
that are vulnerable. For example, the Arabic-speaking children (TD) were
still struggling with plural noun inflection at the age of five, even though
plural markers are acquired early in English (1 ;10 to 2 ;9; Brown, 1973).
The participants with SLI in this study were developmentally behind those
reported for children with SLI acquiring English (e.g. Oetting & Rice,
1993). We propose exploring the possibility of the nominal plural inflection
serving as a potential clinical marker in Arabic, given that similar trends
were observed in other varieties of Arabic : Egyptian (Fahim, 2005) and
Qatari (Shaalan, 2010). It could be practical from a clinical point of view to
examine the FSP in particular, which is acquired comparatively early in TD
children and would therefore serve as a reasonably early marker of SLI,
based on the results of the present study. However, it would be necessary
to control for language development by examining data from typically
developing language-matched children in addition to the SLI and chronological age-matched comparison design adopted in the present study.
This study has also contributed another practical benefit - i.e. examining
the types of plural categories as well as error patterns can yield insights
into the child's stage of development. The errors and the nonsense words
confirm that children with SLI do have the morphological rules/features to
produce novel words, as found in previous studies in English, for instance
in root compounds (Grela, Snyder & Hiramatsu, 2005). Some actually used
the default FSP forms and overgeneralized it in either real or nonsense
words. The possibility that FSP is a default presents important implications
for assessing and treating Arabic speakers with specific language impairment.
Clinicians may observe not only higher levels of accuracy in producing this
type of plural but also the possibility that FSP becomes the preferred
164

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

strategy for overgeneralization in children with SLI. The type of error can
also be telling - e.g. two children with SLI may score 0% for production of
plural inflections ; however, the child who substitutes FSP for other forms
(MSP and BP) would seem developmentally more advanced than the other
whose predominant error pattern is omission (i.e. supplying the singular for
the plural) or the use of periphrastic expression. In other words, it may be
functional to sort the children according to the stage of plural morphology,
using Stephany and Voeikova's (2009) aforementioned `pre-morphology,
proto-morphology, and morphology proper '.
This investigation also highlighted that error patterns of Kuwaiti
Arabic-speaking children with specific language impairment were not deviant.
In essence, the errors of the children with SLI were developmentally
similar to those of the TD except for higher frequency of occurrence. These
points emphasize the importance of clinicians attending not only to overall
accuracy of plural use but also closely examining the types and error patterns
when serving Arabic-speaking clients with language learning difficulties.

REFERENCES
Abdalla, F. & Crago, M. (2008). Verb morphology deficits in Arabic-speaking children with
SLI. Applied Psycholinguistics 29, 315-40.
Aguirre, C. & Marrero, V. (2009). Number morphology in Spanish first language
acquisition. In U. Stephany & M. Voeikova (eds), Development of nominal inflection in
first language acquisition : A cross-linguistic perspective, 341-69. Berlin : Mouton de
Gruyter.
Aljenaie, K. (2001). The emergence of tense and agreement in Kuwaiti Arabic children.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Reading.
Aljenaie, K, Abdalla, F. & Farghal, M. (2011). Developmental changes in using nominal
number inflections in Kuwaiti Arabic. First Language 31, 222-39.
Bedore, L. & Leonard, L. (2001). Grammatical morphology deficits in Spanish-speaking
children with Specific Language Impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research 44, 905-24.
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word 14, 150-77.
Bortolini, U., Caselli, M. C. & Leonard, L. B. (1997). Grammatical deficits in Italianspeaking children with Specific Language Impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research 40, 809-820.
Boudelaa, S. & Gaskell, M. G (2002). A re-examination of the default system for Arabic
plurals. Language and Cognitive Processes 17, 321-43.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language : The early stages. London : George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Cazden, C. (1968). The acquisition of noun and verb inflections. Child Development 39,
433-48.
Clahsen, H., Rothweiler, M., Woest, A. & Marcus, G. (1992). Regular versus irregular
inflection in the acquisition of German noun plurals. Cognition 45, 225-55.
Clark, E. & Nikitina, T. (2009). One vs. more than one : Antecedents to plurality in early
language acquisition. Linguistics 47, 103-139.
Crystal, D., Fletcher, P. & Garman, M. (1976). The grammatical analysis of language disability. London : Edward Arnold.
Daana, H. A. (2009). The development of consonant clusters, stress and plural nouns
in Jordanian Arabic child language. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Essex.

165

A B D A L L A E T A L.

Dalalakis, J. (1996). Developmental language impairment : Evidence from Greek and its
implications for morphological representation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, McGill
University.
Dromi, E., Leonard, L. & Shteiman, M. (1993). The grammatical morphology of Hebrewspeaking children with Specific Language Impairment : Some competing hypotheses.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 36, 760-71.
Dunn, M., Flax, J., Sliwinski, M. & Aram, D. (1996). The use of spontaneous language
measures as criteria for identifying children with specific language impairment : An
attempt to reconcile clinical and research incongruence. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 39, 643-54.
Eyer, J. & Leonard, L. (1995). Functional categories and specific language impairment :
A case study. Language Acquisition 4, 177-203.
Fahim, D. (2005). Developmental language impairment in Egyptian Arabic. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of London.
Fischer, W. (1997). Classical Arabic. In R. Hertzron (ed.), The Semitic languages, 187-219.
London : Routledge.
Fraser, J., Goswami, U. & Conti-Ramsden, G. (2010). Dyslexia and specific language
impairment : The role of phonology and auditory processing. Scientific Studies of Reading
14, 8-29.
Gopnik, M. & Crago, M. (1991). Familial aggregation of a developmental language disorder.
Cognition 39, 1-50.
Gray, S. (2004). Word learning by preschoolers with specific language impairment :
Predictors and poor learners. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 47,
1117-32.
Grela, B., Snyder, W. & Hiramatsu, K. (2005). The production of novel root compounds in
children with specific language impairment. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics 19, 701-715.
Hadley, P. & Rice, M. (1993). Parental judgments of preschoolers' speech and language
development : A resource for assessment and IEP planning. Seminars in Speech and
Language 14, 278-88.
Hoekstra, T. & Hyams, N. (1998). Aspects of root infinitives. Lingua 106, 81-112.
Holes, C. (1995). Modern Arabic structures and functions and varieties. London : Longman.
Jia, G. (2003). The acquisition of the English plural morpheme by native Mandarin
Chinese-speaking children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 46,
1297-311.
Leonard, L. (1998). Children with Specific Language Impairment. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.
Leonard, L. (2009). Some reflections on the study of children with Specific Language
Impairment. Child Language Teaching and Therapy 25, 169-71.
Leonard, L. & Deevy, P. (2006). Cognitive and linguistic issues in the study of children with
Specific Language Impairment. In M. Traxler & M. A. Gernsbacher (eds), Handbook of
psycholinguistics, 2nd edn. 1143-71. London : Elsevier.
Leonard, L., Dromi, E., Adam, G. & Zadunaisky-Ehrlich, S. (2000). Tense and finiteness in
the speech of children with specific language impairment acquiring Hebrew. International
Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 35, 319-35.
Leonard, L., Eyer, J., Bedore, L. & Grela, B. (1997). Three accounts of the grammatical
morpheme difficulties of English-speaking children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 40, 741-53.
Leonard, L., Sabbadini, L., Leonard, L. & Volterra, V. (1987). Specific language impairment
in children : A crosslinguistic study. Brain and Language 32, 233-52.
Ljubesic, M. & Kovacevic, M. (1992). Some insights into specific language impairment in
Croatian. Scandinavian Journal of Logopedics and Phoniatrics 17, 37-43.
Lukacs, A., Leonard, L. & Kas, B. (2010). Use of noun morphology by children with
language impairment : The case of Hungarian. International Journal of Language and
Communication Disorders 45, 145-61.
Lyovin, A. (1997). An introduction to the languages of the world. Oxford : Oxford University
Press.

166

PLURAL INFLECTION IN ATYPICAL KUWAITI ARABIC

Marchman, V., Wulfeck, B. & Ellis Weismer, S. (1999). Productivity of past tense in
children with normal language and specific language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research 42, 206-219.
Marcus, G., Ullman, U., Pinker, S., Hollander, J., Rosen, T. & Xu, F. (1992). Overregularization in language acquisition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development 57.
Morsi, R. (2006). A preliminary investigation on an Arabic-speaking child with SLI.
Paper presented at the Linguistics Association of Great Britain Conference, Newcastle,
England.
Nawwab, N. (2009). Children's acquisition of Arabic nominal number. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, King Faisal University.
Noccetti, S. (2009). The emergence of nominal number in Italian. In U. Stephany & M.
Voeikova (eds), Development of nominal inflection in first language acquisition : A
cross-linguistic perspective, 303-340. Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter.
Oetting, J. & Rice, M. (1993). Plural acquisition in children with Specific Language
Impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 36, 1236-48.
Omar, M. (1973). The acquisition of Egyptian Arabic as a native language. The Hague :
Mouton.
Paradis, J. & Crago, M. (2001). The morphosyntax of Specific Language Impairment in
French : An extended optional default account. Language Acquisition 9, 269-300.
Ravid, D. & Farah, R. (1999). Learning about noun plurals in early Palestinian Arabic.
First Language 19, 187-206.
Ravid, D. & Farah, R. (2009). Noun plurals in early Palestinian Arabic : A longitudinal
case study. In U. Stephany & M. Voeikova (eds), Development of nominal inflection in
first language acquisition : A cross-linguistic perspective, 411-32. Berlin : Mouton de
Gruyter.
Ravid, D. & Hayek, L. (2003). Learning about different ways of expressing number in the
development of Palestinian Arabic. First Language 23, 41-63.
Ravid, D. & Schiff, R. (2009). Morpho-phonological categories of noun plurals in Hebrew :
A developmental study. Linguistics 47, 45-63.
Rice, M., Wexler, K. & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language impairment as a period of
extended optional infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 38, 850-63.
Schacter, D. & Buckner, R. (1998). Priming and the brain. Neuron 20, 185-95.
Shaalan, S. (2010). Investigating grammatical complexity in Gulf Arabic speaking children
with Specific Language Impairment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University
College London.
Shaalan, S. & van der Lely, H. K. (2007). Characteristics of morphosyntactic deficits in
Qatari children with SLI. Paper presented at Linguistics in the Gulf Conference,
University of Qatar, Doha.
Siddiki, A. (2002). Developmental and behavioural studies in English and Arabic inflectional
morphology. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Oxford.
Stephany, U. & Voeikova, M. (2009). Development of nominal inflection in first language
acquisition : A cross-linguistic perspective. Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter.
Szagun, G. (2001). Learning different regularities : The acquisition of noun plurals by
German-speaking children. First language 21, 109-141.
Tomblin, J., Records, N. L., Buckwalter, P., Zhang, X., Smith, E. & O'Brien, M. (1997).
Prevalence of Specific Language Impairment in kindergarten. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research 40, 1245-60.
Ullman, M. & Gopnik, M. (1994). Past tense production : Regular, irregular and nonsense
verbs. McGill Working Papers in Linguistics 10, 81-118.
Zapf, J. & Smith, L. (2007). When do children generalize the plural to novel nouns? First
Language 27, 53-73.

167

A B D A L L A E T A L.

APPENDIX
Real words and nonsense stimuli used in the study. English meanings for the
Arabic words are provided in the gloss
Real word
Plural type

Singular

English gloss

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Masculine sound plural
Masculine sound plural
Masculine sound plural
Broken plural
Broken plural
Broken plural
Broken plural
Broken plural
Broken plural
Feminine sound plural
Feminine sound plural
Feminine sound plural
Feminine sound plural
Feminine sound plural

la :-ib
muddaris
sajja :d1
qissa
gatwa
beit
ba :b
-arnab
7alb
ba :s
gla :sa :t
sa :-a
sajja :ra
ta :wla

player
teacher
fisherman
story
cat
house
door
rabbit
dog
bus
glass
watch
car
table

NOTE

1 : Underlined sound=emphatic.

168

Plural
la :-ibi :n
muddarisi :n
sajjadi :n
qissas
gitawa
biju :t
biba :n
-ara :nib
7ila :b
ba :sa :t
gla :s
sa :-a :t
sajja :ra :t
ta :wla :t

Corresponding
nonsense word
ya :fig
tunannis
mutta :s
bikka
banya
weig
sa :z
tankab
narg
ka :d
fla :b
ta :ja
ballaba

