Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/yangmeng.pdf

June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2
pp. 220-238

THE EFFECTS OF ONLINE FEEDBACK TRAINING
ON STUDENTS' TEXT REVISION
Yu-Fen Yang, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology
Wen-Ting Meng, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology
Oftentimes, college students who learn English as a Foreign Language (EFL) provide their
peers with incorrect and misleading feedback during text revision. To improve the
effectiveness of peer feedback, this study examined the degree to which online feedback
training impacted EFL college students' text revisions. A sample of 50 college students
was grouped into the more- and less-proficient groups with 25 students in each. Results of
this study reveal that the less-proficient students improved more during text revision than
the more-proficient students did after the online feedback training on error correction.
They were better able to detect and correct both local errors (i.e., grammatical) and global
errors (i.e., text development, organization, and style) in their own and peers' texts. Their
texts improved as a result of receiving immediate feedback and having the opportunity to
explicitly observe how their more-proficient peers provided corrections and useful
suggestions to peers and clarified writing problems for text improvement. The moreproficient students did not trust their peers' suggestions as much and made corrections
mainly on local errors. These EFL college students' perceptions toward the effects of
online feedback training on text revision were elaborated in this study.
Keywords: Online Feedback Training; Text Revision; Peer Feedback; Collaborative
Learning; Local and Global Revisions.
APA Citation: Yang, Y.-F., & Meng, W.-T. (2013). The effects of online feedback on
students' text revision. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 220-238. Retrieved
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/yangmeng.pdf
Received: October 24, 2012; Accepted: February 25, 2013; Published: June 1, 2013
Copyright: (c) Yu-Fen Yang & Wen-Ting Meng
INTRODUCTION
Many college students are unable to keep up with highly demanding college courses because of their
writing proficiency (Kellogg & Whiteford, 2009). Accordingly, the improvement of writing skills is
important for many students as "professional and academic success in all disciplines depends, at least in
part, upon writing skills" (Cho & Schunn, 2007, p. 409). For college students enrolled in English as a
Foreign Language (EFL), the challenges involved with writing at the college level are much greater
(Yang, in press). It has been reported that EFL college students may benefit from reading peers' texts,
detecting peers' errors, and providing peers with suggestions, as writing is no longer an individual task
but rather one supported by feedback from peers to improve their texts (e.g., Liou & Peng, 2009;
Lundstrom & Baker, 2009; Min, 2006; Vass, Littleton, Miell, & Jones, 2008). When receiving and
providing peer feedback, EFL college students learn how to support and be helped by peers with the
common goal of text revision (e.g., Chandler, 2003; Tsui & Ng, 2000).
Peer Feedback and Text Revision
Peer feedback, the practice of discussing each other's written work, has been shown to be beneficial when
EFL college students are learning to write and learning to revise (Berg, 1999; Min, 2005, 2006).
However, peers, as opposed to teachers, are not domain experts, and peer advice or judgment may be
correct, incorrect, or misleading. Peers are not regarded as "knowledge authorities," and there may be

Copyright (c) 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

220

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

reticence in deciding whether to accept peers' suggestions or not (Hanrahan & Isaacs, 2001; Strijbos,
Narciss, & Dunnebier, 2010). The rate of accepting peers' revisions may be low as peers participate in
non-revision-oriented activities such as socially chatting with other peers or expressing complimentary
remarks instead of revision-oriented feedback such as constructive comments, suggestions, and
clarifications (Liou & Peng, 2009). That is, not all peer feedback leads to student revisions of texts as
useful feedback is uncommon (Bangert-Drowns, Kulik, Kulik, & Morgan, 1991; Chou, 1999; Kluger &
DeNisi, 1996; Tsui & Ng, 2000).
Typical EFL college students are frequently unprepared to provide peer feedback during teacher-centered
instruction (Leki, 1990; Min, 2003; Tsui & Ng, 2000), and few studies have examined the extent to which
peer feedback affects students' text revisions (Chou, 1999; Connor & Asenavage, 1994; Nelson &
Murphy, 1993; Tsui & Ng, 2000). Results from these few studies reveal a fluctuating degree of adoption
of peer feedback ranging from 5% (Connor & Asenavage, 1994), to 22% (Chou, 1999), to less than 50%
(Paulus, 1999; Tsui & Ng, 2000), to a little above 50% (Mendonca & Johnson, 1994; Tang & Tithecott,
1999). Furthermore, students may provide or receive invalid or incorrect feedback without feedback
training, leading them to reject peer feedback no matter how many times their peers revise the texts
(Sluijsmans, Brand-Gruwel, & Van Merrienboer, 2002; Topping, 1998). To improve the effectiveness of
peer feedback, feedback training on error correction should be implemented to enhance the quality of text
revision (Ferris, Chaney, Komura, Roberts, & McKee, 2000; Ferris & Helt, 2000).
Error correction refers to correcting or revising errors in texts, with the goal of improving writers'
language knowledge (Truscott, 2004, 2007). As students engage in detecting and correcting errors in
texts, their reading and writing proficiencies improve (Berg, 1999). Similar to error correction, text
revision refers to the process of correcting or revising errors by the writers after receiving revisers'
suggestions (Faigley & Witte, 1981). As such, text revision can "increase student engagement and
attention to detect and correct writing problems" (Ferris, 2003, p. 52). In this study, there are two main
types of text revision (Cho & Schunn, 2007; Hall, 1990): local and global revisions. Local revision refers
to detecting grammatical errors in linguistics units at the word- (e.g., spelling errors), phrase- (e.g.,
incorrect singular or plural in phrases), clause- (e.g., misuse of words in adjective clauses), and sentence(e.g., misuse of sentence structures) levels. Global revision refers to providing feedback on text
organization, reader-based perspective, and clarity of purpose, including addition, deletion, substitution,
reordering, and consolidation of content. Both local and global revisions are important for students to
improve their text revision quality (Yang, 2011; Yang, Yeh, & Wong, 2010). Local revision helps
students recognize different kinds of grammatical errors and enhances their grammar in use, while global
revision disciplines students to detect inconsistencies of text organization or unrelated statements in a
text. The result of Min's study (2005) indicates that students who have received feedback training provide
more feedback for text revisions.
The use of feedback training to improve students' text revision is based on the theory of scaffolding (de
Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Vygotsky, 1978). Scaffolding, according to Wood, Bruner, and Ross (1976),
is defined as an instructional support that helps students accomplish tasks that are beyond their skill level
to complete alone. Scaffolding is also a learning process by which an expert provides temporary support
to help students develop initial learning skills, gradually reducing support as students gain competence to
accomplish learning tasks. The final goal is to help students construct their own knowledge without any
assistance (Sun, Wang, & Chan, 2011). Rogoff (1990) further describes scaffolding as being able to help
students extend their current skills and knowledge to a higher level of competence. Four stages of
scaffolding have been proposed: modeling, practice, fading, and independent application (Rogoff, 1990;
Yang, Yeh, & Wong, 2008). Modeling refers to the teacher who provides his students with demonstrations
and explicit guidance. Practice refers to the opportunities given to students to practice each learning task.
Fading refers to the decreasing support given by a teacher to his students as they gradually take over
responsibilities and engage more fully in the learning process. Independent application refers to students

Language Learning & Technology

221

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

becoming able to independently provide peers with correct and useful feedback as they make comparisons
with peers' comments to diagnose their own difficulties and adjust revision strategies.
Statement of the Problem
While previous studies have examined peer feedback and text revisions, few have focused on feedback
training. First, although the benefits of peer feedback on text revision have been seen in some studies
(e.g., de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000), the key to improving the quality of text revision depends upon
instruction that incorporates feedback training (Stanley, 1992). Next, although some studies have
indicated that feedback training will help EFL college students develop feedback skills, (de Guerrero &
Villamil, 1994; Mendonca & Johnson, 1994; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996), the explicit and strategic
instruction of feedback training has seldom been provided. Third, using paper-based error correction
typically relies on the teacher's instructional support. For example, Min (2005) emphasized paper-based
feedback training on how students provided comments to their peers and how teacher-student conferences
provided individual assistance. However, Graham and Perin (2007) suggested that students were required
to receive explicit and systematic training and have ample practices of error correction for revising and
editing peers' texts. Finally, the process of paper-based error correction is largely unobservable during
onsite instruction. Without the process data of detecting and correcting errors on the texts, the teachers
may have difficulties observing and monitoring their students' learning processes and further providing
their students with appropriate scaffoldings. Similarly, EFL college students may lose opportunities to
observe their peers' revising processes and reflect on their own.
Study Background
This study examined the effects of online feedback training on EFL college students' text revision. Based
on the theory of scaffolding (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Vygotsky, 1978; Wood, Bruner, & Ross,
1976), a computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) system was developed for students to help
each other build writing knowledge through feedback training in error detection and correction. The
features of online feedback training include: (a) the CSCL system, which provides immediate feedback of
error detection and correction; (b) process data recorded in the log files, which can be used by instructors
to monitor students' editing difficulties and used by students to observe and compare their text revisions
with those of more proficient peers; and (c) no limitations of time and space on the practice of error
detection and correction.
In this study, before receiving any online feedback training on peer feedback, the students had directly
provided their peers with feedback on a first draft assignment. They had also revised their own first drafts
and had written final drafts after receiving peer feedback (final draft 1). During the training on providing
peer feedback, the teacher explicitly modeled for the students how to make revisions of local and global
errors. Then, students were invited to practice peer error detection and correction using the CSCL system.
Next, the students' responsibilities for providing their peers with correct and useful feedback to improve
peers' texts was increased. Finally, the students individually applied peer feedback to revise their original
first drafts and write a second final draft (final draft 2). The comparison of final drafts 1 and 2 reveals the
effects of online feedback training on students' writing progress as students provide peer feedback and
revise their own texts.
To examine the effects of online feedback training on EFL college students' text revisions, three research
questions were posed:
1. To what degree do college students' texts improve after online feedback training?
2. What differences are there between the more- and less-proficient students' revisions?
3. What are college students' perceptions towards online feedback training concerning text revision?

Language Learning & Technology

222

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

METHODOLOGY
Participants
A sample of 50 students who were studying English as a Foreign Language (EFL) voluntarily signed up
for the writing program at a university of science and technology in central Taiwan. These 50 students
were from different departments and colleges at the university. Before entering the writing program, the
students were asked to take a writing test, namely an error correction test, to identify their English writing
proficiency. The 25 test items, including spelling errors, grammatical errors (e.g., misuse of verb tense),
and sentence correction (e.g., substitution), in either the pre- or post-test of error corrections were chosen
from different versions of nationwide college entrance exams in Taiwan. The maximum score of the error
correction pre- and post-tests is 100 and this test's reliability is .87. To evaluate the degree to which
students at different English proficiency levels enhance their writing ability using the online feedback
training, they were grouped into two groups--more- and less- proficient students--with 25 students in
each. The mean score and standard deviation of the more-proficient group on the pre-test were 78.84 and
15.11 respectively, while the less-proficient group's mean score and standard deviation were 62.75 and
10.87. The paired-sample t test shows a significant difference between the two groups' proficiencies
(t(24) = 4.32, p < .01).
Research Design
The computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) system was developed to help EFL college
students enhance their text revisions when they provide peers with written feedback. The CSCL system
includes two modules: a student interface and a teacher interface.
The Student Interface
The passages in the student interface had been written by three native English teachers for the purpose of
expanding students' vision of the world; accordingly, a variety of topics were included such as social
studies, history, science, and cross-cultural communication. Following Hayes, Flower, Schriver,
Stratman, and Carey's revision model (1987), four steps of text revision were included during feedback
training: task definition, evaluation, strategy selection, and modification of the text, as described below.

Figure 1. The interface of online feedback training.

Language Learning & Technology

223

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Task Definition. Students understand the purpose of the learning task as they view the test item
in each task (see Figure 1).
Task Evaluation. Students detect errors based on grammatical and organizational knowledge as
prompted by the task definition (see Figure 1).
Strategy Selection. As students detect and correct errors in the online feedback training, they can
focus on different error types, either local (e.g., misuse of verb tense) or global errors (e.g.,
description), and consult the online dictionary when they encounter unknown words (see Figure 1).
Modification of the Text. Students correct errors to make the text more comprehensible. In
addition, comprehensive explanations, which are the immediate feedback to students' detection
and correction, are automatically provided by the CSCL system after students finish the task. For
example, as shown in Figure 2, the student is unable to detect and correct the misuse of noun in
plurals (local revision), and the system provides students with further explanations. In addition
to the immediate feedback from the CSCL system, the teacher assigns sample texts to his
students for detecting and correcting text errors. In the practice of correcting errors on the
sample texts, students are encouraged to provide their peers with suggestions and comments for
text improvement.

Figure 2. Modification of a text.
The Teacher Interface
The process data and students' actions available in the CSCL system permit the teacher to monitor the
students' detection and correction of errors. The teacher can read students' log files, diagnose their
difficulties on local and global revisions based on their scores, understand their students' interactions on
providing and receiving local and global revisions in dialogue boxes, and explore how students solve their
writing problems after receiving peers' corrections and suggestions. For example, as shown in Figure 3,

Figure 3. Log files in the system.

Language Learning & Technology

224

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

the teacher is able to view student scores (automated scoring) on local and global revisions from the log
files and understand what difficulties the students have on different revision tasks. The log files record the
students' actions in the system such as task identification, evaluation, and scores for each practice task.
As such, teachers can provide their students with further scaffoldings.
Procedures of Data Collection
In this study, the online feedback training aimed at strengthening EFL college students' competence in
detecting and correcting local and global errors for text revision. The instruction was conducted for 12
weeks from October 5, 2011, through December 28, 2011. Before the instruction began, the pre-test of
error correction was provided to identify the students' writing proficiency levels. According to the pretest, the students were grouped into the more- and less- proficient groups for comparing their different
writing improvement after online feedback training. In the first three weeks, the students were asked to
write their first drafts of a paper called "My Holiday" and provide peers with feedback in order to help
them revise their first drafts and write final texts (final draft 1). Three peers were randomly assigned to
read and provide corrections and suggestions toward each student's first draft.
After three weeks of instruction (three hours per week), the online feedback training was implemented for
students to practice error detection and correction for another six weeks. The online feedback training on
error correction amounted to approximately three to four hours each week and the students were expected
to edit two online texts per week. After the online feedback training, the students were again asked to read
the same three peers' first drafts, detect, and correct peers' errors, receive peer feedback, revise the same
first drafts, and write final texts (final draft 2) during the last three weeks. In other words, all students
underwent the revising process as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. The revising process.
The students' local and global revisions between final drafts 1 and 2 were compared to examine their
writing progress before and after the online feedback training. At the end of instruction, the college
students were required to take a post-test of error correction to evaluate their progress. The log files which
recorded the students' action details in the CSCL system were also analyzed. Finally, an open-ended
questionnaire (see Appendix A) was given to the more- and less-proficient groups to investigate their
different perceptions toward the effects of online feedback training on text revision.
Procedures of Data Analysis
Data collected in this study include the more- and less-proficient students' pre- and post-tests, statistics
between local and global revisions before (final draft 1) and after the online feedback training (final draft
2), the process data (log files) of error correction, and the open-ended questionnaire. First, a pairedsample t test compared the means of pre- and post-tests of error correction for both the more- and lessproficient student groups. Second, the scores of text revisions (local or global revisions) on online
feedback training were automatically calculated by the CSCL system as feedback to the students. Each
online text contained between nine and 12 errors, and the total possible score was 100. Third, in
comparing the differences between final drafts 1 and 2, one score point was independently given to each

Language Learning & Technology

225

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

correct revision by two trained raters who had more than 10 years experiences in EFL teaching, using the
scoring rubrics from Cho and Schunn's (2007) and Hall's taxonomy of revision (1990) to analyze the
students' corrections of errors in final drafts 1 and 2 (see Appendix B). Finally, the two raters followed
the steps of content analysis (Patton, 2002) to evaluate students' text revisions in final drafts. Another two
trained researchers investigated the students' perceptions toward the online feedback training in the openended questionnaire.
Four steps of content analysis were adopted in this study: coding, categorization, description, and
interpretation. First, two groups of raters (two raters for final drafts 1 and 2 and two researchers for the
open-ended questionnaire) coded statements from students' error correction recorded in the log files as
well as their perspectives toward before and after receiving online feedback training. Next, students'
written feedback relating to text revision was categorized into two types, including local and global
revisions. The students' statements from the open-ended questionnaire were also categorized. After this,
the researchers described the statements by summarizing the main points. Finally, the researchers
interpreted the main ideas by offering explanations, drawing conclusions, and making inferences. The
inter-rater reliability for the students' text revisions and open-ended questionnaire were .82 and .85,
respectively, in this study. Disagreements between two groups of raters (the two raters for text revisions
and two researchers for open-ended questionnaire) were resolved through discussion. Data interpretation
driven by these research methods is further explained in the following sections.
RESULTS
This section presents the following four categories of results. First, the students' writing progress between
the more- and less-proficient groups is shown by the pre- and post-tests of error correction. Second, the
students' writing progress between local and global revisions is investigated by the paired-sample t tests
between the two groups on final drafts 1 and 2. Third, two students, student A and student B, were
randomly selected from the more- and less-proficient groups and are presented here to show how the
students used revision strategies differently. Multiple revision types are also compared and presented.
Finally, the students' perceptions toward the effects of online feedback training on text revision from the
two groups are presented.
Students' Writing Progress between the Two Groups
A paired-sample t test was conducted in order to compare the effects of online feedback training on the
more- and less-proficient students in writing. The results show that the more-proficient students made
little writing progress as the mean scores increased from 78.84 on the pre-test to 80.98 on the post-test.
Nevertheless, this difference is statistically significant (t(24) = -2.06, p < .05). In contrast, the mean
scores of the less-proficient students increased much more, from 62.75 on the pre-test to 75.82 on the
post-test. This was also statistically significant (t(24) = -6.25, p < .01). This result indicates that the lessproficient students made even more improvement on writing than the more- proficient students did.
Students' Revision Types on Feedback Training of the Two Groups
Revision Types
In this study, the paired-sample t test was employed to investigate the effects of online feedback training
on EFL college students' text revision. As shown in Table 1, the types of local revision were compared
before (final draft 1) and after the online feedback training (final draft 2) of the two groups. Before the
online feedback training, the more-proficient students made different types of local revisions in their final
drafts 1, but almost no significance were detected in their first and final drafts after the online feedback
training. In contrast, the less-proficient students made significantly more revisions in word (t(24) = -3.25,
p = .01) and sentence (t(24)=-1.47, p = .03) types compared to other revision types between first and final

Language Learning & Technology

226

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Table 1. Types of Local Revision
More-proficient students
Before
feedback
training

Less-proficient students

After
feedback
training

Before
feedback
training

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

Word

4.92

3.84

6.38

4.21

.57

Phrase

3.07

2.37

3.15

2.27

Clause

3.25

2.11

3.53

Sentence

3.15

2.23

3.23

After
feedback
training

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

.07

7.08

4.83

9.33

5.61

-3.25

2.33

.58

3.79

2.28

4.25

3.45

.56

.07

2.66

1.17

.23

3.08

2.93

3.83

2.12

1.34

.06

2.43

2.11

.46

5.27

3.12

5.33

4.49

-1.47

.03*

.01**

Note. **p < .01, *p < .05

drafts. That is to say, the online feedback training became a key factor in helping the less-proficient
students make writing progress on revising local errors on their final drafts 2, while the more-proficient
students did not make much progress in correcting local errors.
The results of global revision are presented in Table 2. The more-proficient students also detected and
corrected various types of global revision before the online feedback training (final draft 1), and there is a
statistically significant difference on substitution between first and final drafts (t(24) = -.33, p = .05) after
receiving online feedback training. By contrast, the less-proficient students made great improvement on
substitution (t(24) = -3.26, p = .01), reordering (t(24) = -.59, p = .05) and consolidation revision
(t(24) = -2.69, p = .03) as they accepted the training of peer feedback. In other words, the moreproficient students were aware of making substitutions after receiving online feedback training while the
less-proficient students made significant progress in detecting and correcting errors with substitution,
reordering, and consolidation. As a result, after the online feedback training, the less-proficient students
greatly raised the quality of their text revisions in revising their final drafts 2.
Table 2. Types of Global Revision
More-proficient students
Before
feedback
training

Less-proficient students

After
feedback
training

M

SD

M

SD

Addition

3.16

2.38

3.92

2.18

Deletion

3.05

2.28

3.69

Substitution

4.84

3.62

Reordering

3.53

Consolidation

3.38

Before
feedback
training
t

After
feedback
training

p

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

1.07

.96

3.25

2.38

4.33

2.49

1.45

.63

2.25

1.02

.94

3.83

2.86

4.75

3.05

.78

.16

5.17

3.76

-.33

.05**

6.08

4.06

7.91

4.67

-3.26

.01**

2.77

3.84

2.58

1.12

.98

4.41

3.51

4.98

3.51

-.59

.05*

2.50

3.53

2.54

.99

.87

4.50

3.67

5.85

4.33

-2.69

.03*

Note. **p < .01, *p < .05

Language Learning & Technology

227

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

The Process of Text Revision
To investigate the effects of online feedback training in receiving and providing peer feedback between
the more- and less-proficient students, two sample cases--student A and student B--were randomly
selected from the more- and less-proficient groups. Student A, from the more-proficient group, made no
measurable progress on his text revisions. Student B, from the less-proficient group, made many more
text revisions.

Figure 5. Student A's scores on the online peer training.
Tracing the action logs in the online feedback training, student A made reading and writing progress on
local revision (verb voice) and global revision (description) as he practiced detecting and correcting errors
(see Figure 5). After the online feedback training, student A made two revisions on his final draft 2 after
receiving his peers' error corrections (Table 3). For example, in sentence (2), student A did not use a
conjunction to connect two sentences. After receiving his peers, S2, S3, and S4's comments, student A
added the conjunction but to connect the two sentences during text revision. In sentence (5), student A
made the incorrect word usage error spend more time to read in his first draft. After receiving his
peers'comments, student A revised the sentence to become spend more time reading on his final draft 2.
Table 3. Student A's Final Draft 2
Student A's first draft

Peer feedback

Error
correction

Student A's final draft 2

None

(1) During the holiday, we have
a lot of free time to do whatever
we want.

Revise

(2) Some people maybe go
shopping with their
friends, but others may play
video games.

(3) In my opinion, we should
take a plan to have a meaningful
holiday.

None

(3) In my opinion, we should
take a plan to have a
meaningful holiday.

(4) For example, I meet my old
friends because we can not only
talk some interesting news, but
also play some table games.

None

(4) For example, I meet my old
friends because we can not only
talk some interesting news, but
also play some table games.

Revise

(5) Besides, I would also plan
to spend more time reading
some books in my holiday.

(1) During the holiday, we have
a lot of free time to do whatever
we want.
(2) Some people maybe go
shopping with their friends,
others may play video games.

(5) Besides, I would also plan to
spend more time to read some
books in my holiday.

Language Learning & Technology

You should use but as a
conjunction to connect two
sentences (S2, S3, and S4)

When you write the word of
spend, you should use V-ing
after the verb. (S2 and S4)

228

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

In addition to receiving his peers' suggestions, student A also provided his peers with two revisions
(Table 4). For example, for sentence (2), he suggested that his peers delete because and add the article the
before amusement park in sentence (3). No detailed explanations were found for these two suggestions.
Table 4. Student A's Feedback to His Peer's Text
S5's first draft

Student A's
feedback

(1) Having a holiday is a very exciting
thing.

Error
correction

S5's final draft 2

None

(1) Having a holiday is a very exciting
thing.

(2) Because you can going to
anywhere or do something what you
want to do.

You should
delete because
here.

Revise

(2) You can going to anywhere or do
something what you want to do.

(3) For example, I go to amusement
park with my family or friends to
search for interesting things.

You should add
the before
amusement park.

Revise

(3) For example, I go to the
amusement park with my family or
friends to search for interesting things.

(4) Sometimes, I also choose to see a
movie or play the computer games in
the holiday because these activities
help me relax my mind.

None

(4) Sometimes, I also choose to see a
movie or play the computer games in
the holiday because these activities
help me relax my mind.

(5) Hence, we should enjoy our
holiday and plan it carefully.

None

(5) Hence, we should enjoy our
holiday and plan it carefully.

That is, student A did not clarify his peers' writing problems. Viewing the log files in the CSCL system,
student A did not actively engage in text revision with his peers since he only detected and corrected his
peers' local errors but failed to give detailed explanations to clarify his peers' writing problems. Student
B, on the other hand, actively participated in the online feedback training and made greater improvement
on local revision (verb voice and relative pronoun) and global revision (exposition) (see Figure 6).

Figure 6. Student B's scores on the online feedback training.

Language Learning & Technology

229

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Table 5. Student B's First Draft and Final Draft 2
Student B's first draft
(1) In a year, we have many
holidays.
(2) But Chinese new year is my
favorite holidays because my
family would gather together
and I can play with my cousins.
(1) After dinner, adult would
give children lucky money in a
red envelope in Chinese new
year because we believe that the
lucky money brings wishes for
children.
(2) Sometimes we also play
firecrackers to celebrate Chinese
new year.
(3) Most important of all, we
can take a trip to relax our mind
and body for a special day.

Peer feedback

You cannot put but and
because in a sentence. You
cannot use but here because
there is no comparison.
(S10, S14, and S17)
Adult is a countable noun, you
should use adults or the adult.
(S10, S14,and S17)

Error
correction
None
Revise

Revise

None

Is it only one day for Chinese
new year?
(S10 and S17)

Revise

Student B's final draft 2
(1) In a year, we have many
holidays.
(2) Chinese new year is my
favorite holidays because my
family would gather together
and I can play with my cousins.
(3) After dinner, adults would
give children lucky money in a
red envelope in Chinese new
year because we believe that
lucky money brings wishes for
children.
(4) Sometimes we also play
firecrackers to celebrate
Chinese new year.
(5) Most important of all, we
can take a trip to relax our mind
and body for several days.

After her online feedback training, student B received suggestions from S10, S14, and S17 regarding
sentence (2) that she could not use both but and because in an English sentence. Her peers also provided
student B with detailed explanations (Table 5). For sentence (3), S10, S14, and S17 pointed out that adult
is a countable noun, so student B should use the word adults instead of adult. In addition, student B's
peers also suggested a global revision by proposing the question Is it only one day in a Chinese new year?
to raise her awareness.
Table 6. Student B's Text Revision to Her Peer's Text
Error
S15's final draft 2
correction

S15's first draft

Student A's feedback

(1) In everyone's life has a
different experience.

The sentence structure should
be revised like Everyone has
different experiences in life.

Revise

(1) Everyone has different
experiences in life.

(2) A good experience makes
people have a good impression,
and the bad experience is
opposite.

A good experience is a
singular noun, so you should
add -s of make.

Revise

(2) A good experience makes
people have a good impression,
and the bad experience is
opposite.

(3) No matter good or bad
experience, these can let people
left a deep impression.

Let is a causative verb, so you
should use leave instead of
left.

Revise

(3) No matter good or bad
experience, these can let
people leave a deep impression.

(4) An unforgettable experience
occurred when I was ten.

Spelling errors.

Revise

(4) An unforgettable
experience occurred when I
was ten.

Language Learning & Technology

230

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

(5) My teacher asked me to
participate in a speech contest.

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

None

(5) My teacher asked me to
participate in a speech contest.

On giving feedback to one of her peers (Table 6), student B provided S15 with local and global revisions.
In sentence (1), student B detected incorrect sentence structure and suggested that her peer revise the
sentence and write Everyone has different experiences in life. It can be seen that student B raised her
language awareness of how to revise sentence structure after receiving the online feedback training.
Student B also detected S15's grammatical errors in sentences (2), (3), and (4) and provided detailed
explanations to S15. Based on the detailed explanations, S15 was able to understand his writing problems
better and made further text improvement. Consequently, student B received more benefits from the
online feedback training since she explicitly observed her peers' local and global revisions of her first
draft. She became a facilitator as she supported her peer (S15), increasing his writing knowledge of text
structure, noun, and verb use.
Student B's interactions with peers, based on her action logs in the CSCL system, are shown in Figure 7.
After student B received her peers' text revisions (S10, S14, and S17), she also provided her peers (S11,
S15, and S20) with feedback to clarify the writing problems. Student B's local and global revisions to
S15's text is shown in Table 6. The reciprocal interactions for text revisions were extended to other
students.

Figure 7. Student B's interactions with peers.
Students' Perceptions toward the Effects of Online Feedback Training on Text Revision
The results from students' open-ended questionnaire toward the effects of online feedback training on text
revision are presented in Table 7. Most of the more-proficient students (92%) could not trust their peers'
text revisions even if their peers had received the online feedback training. In contrast, all 25 participants
in the less-proficient group provided their peers with both local and global revisions after the online
feedback training. There were 21 participants (84%) who pinpointed that they were aware of how to
detect and correct their peers' errors since they had had opportunities to explicitly observe how their
more-proficient peers detected and corrected errors in the CSCL system. They had also had chances to
practice error correction in the CSCL without the limitations of time and space. In addition, they corrected
their written errors and learned from each other as they corrected other peers' errors which were similar to
theirs.

Language Learning & Technology

231

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Table 7. Students' Perceptions Toward Text Revision (N = 50)
Statement
The moreproficient group

The lessproficient group

Frequency
1. I cannot trust my peers' comments because they are unable to
provide correct feedback to me.

23

2. My peers usually revise my local errors. They spend time checking
my spelling and punctuation marks only.

20

3. Though my peers are not as professional as my teacher, they still
give me some comments which help me improve my text.

16

1. I think that the online feedback training (without the limitations of
time and space) assists me to raise my revision quality when I
revise my peers' texts.

21

2. I become more sensitive to detect and correct my peers' errors, and
confidently provide my peers with useful suggestions.
3. As I revise my peers' texts, I can observe how the more-proficient
peers detect and correct errors. I can make both local and global
revisions after the online feedback training.
4. I think I can provide my peers with correct and useful feedback to
improve their writing.
5. After I clarify and revise my errors, I can detect other peers' errors
which are similar to mine.

22
18
18
14

As shown in Table 8, almost all participants, both the more-and less-proficient groups, agreed that
receiving immediate feedback from the online feedback training was beneficial for them since they could
verify the reason why they had made incorrect text revisions. There were 44 (88%) participants stating
that the online feedback training could enhance their text revision quality, and they were willing to do
more practices online as they liked it when their peers considered their suggestions.
Table 8. Students' Perceptions Toward the Online Feedback Training (N = 50)
Statement

Frequency

1. I liked to receive immediate feedback from the online system. It helped me to
understand why I made incorrect text revisions.

48

2. Using online feedback training is a good way to improve my text revision quality. I
think I should spend more time practicing error correction in the system.

44

3. I encountered many unknown words as I practiced online error corrections, but I
consulted the online dictionary to understand the word meanings.

40

4. Though I practiced online error corrections many times, I was sometimes still unable to
detect and correct my peers' errors.

16

5. As I had difficulties in detecting and correcting errors in the online system, I asked for

10

Language Learning & Technology

232

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

help from my peers and the teacher.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The results of this study show that the online training for providing peer feedback had positive effects on
improving EFL college students' text revisions (Berg, 1999; Min, 2005, 2006; Stanley, 1992). In online
feedback training, EFL college students engaged in providing and receiving local and global revisions as
they had gradually developed reader-based perspectives and the clarity of writing purpose in substitution,
reordering, and consolidation rather than revised surface level of errors only. Particularly, the lessproficient made more local and global revisions after explicit guidance/instruction of online feedback
training. In contrast, the more-proficient students did not have many significant differences on local and
global revisions after online feedback training. This finding is in line with some studies (e.g., de Guerrero
& Villamil, 1994; Mendonca & Johnson, 1994; Steendam, Rijlaarsdam, Sercu, & den Bergh, 2010;
Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996) that receiving the feedback training could help students improve their
written texts and increase their writing awareness, especially for the less-proficient students. In addition,
different from Min's studies (2005, 2006) which emphasized the statistics of revision types and quality
for feedback training in onsite instruction, this study designed the CSCL system for feedback training to
help EFL college students practice local and global revisions without restrictions of time and space. The
students received immediate feedback of explanations and scores from the CSCL system for text errors
which they did not detect or correct in revision tasks. They could explicitly observe how their moreproficient peers detected and corrected errors, clarified writing problems, and finally provided useful
suggestions for text improvement.
In terms of this study's key findings, first, the less-proficient students made greater improvements in text
revisions than the more-proficient students did after the online feedback training on error detection and
correction. That is, the less-proficient students enhanced their language awareness through reading the
texts, detecting and correcting online local and global errors, and finally providing their peers with useful
suggestions and explanations to clarify their writing problems. The more-proficient students made little
writing progress in text revisions since they might not make many local and global errors in their first
drafts. Second, through comparing the types of revisions made by the more- and less-proficient groups,
the results show that the less-proficient students raised the quality of their text revisions on correcting
both local and global errors. They frequently detected errors at word and sentence levels (local revisions).
They also corrected errors on substitution, reordering and consolidation for global revision. In contrast,
the more-proficient group made less progress on local and global revisions. Most of the more-proficient
students (92%) did not trust their peers' revisions much, and consequently, did not raise the quality and
acceptance on text revisions after the online feedback training.
Third, with respect to students' perceptions toward the effects of online feedback training on text
revisions, the more-proficient students expressed their lack of trust on their peers' feedback since their
peers were not domain experts. They might reject their peers' comments due to their peers' limited
writing knowledge. The less-proficient students, however, actively participated in the online feedback
training and observed how their peers detected and corrected errors for them. They also learned from
peers as they were able to detect other peers' errors which were similar to theirs. Fourth, both the moreand the less-proficient groups agreed that receiving immediate feedback on local and global errors from
the online system was helpful for them in clarifying their reading and writing problems.
Finally, online feedback training is confirmed to help EFL students detect and correct their own and
peers' errors. After online feedback training, collaborative revisions can be beneficial for bettering
writing competence as it elicits more suggestions and comments when students engage in revising texts.

Language Learning & Technology

233

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Without feedback training, students may commonly provide or receive invalid and incorrect feedback,
leading them to distrust or reject peer feedback no matter how many times their peers revise the texts
(Sluijsmans et al., 2002; Topping, 1998).
Some limitations and suggestions for the future studies were also found in this study. First, since only 50
college students participated in this study, the sample size was not big enough to explain EFL college
students' revision types, learning experiences, and perceptions in terms of online error correction. In other
words, the results of this study might not be representative to fully interpret all the problems that EFL
college students encountered and solutions that can be proposed for online feedback training. Second, the
scores that the students obtained in online feedback training and final drafts should be investigated in the
future study. By examining these two scores, the correlation between online peer training and written
texts could be further explored. Finally, the teacher's perceptions toward online feedback training should
be investigated in the future (Steendam et al., 2010). This could reveal more information regarding how
the teacher could use online feedback training as instructional intervention to improve EFL college
students' text revisions and provide further scaffolding to clarify their students' writing problems.

APPENDIX A. Open-Ended Questionnaire
1. How does online feedback training help you enhance English writing competence?
2. Do you think that receiving immediate feedback from the online system benefits your error
detection and correction task?
3. Do you think that you can detect and correct local and global errors for text improvement after
online feedback training? And how?
4. How do you improve your texts after receiving peers' corrections and suggestions?
5. Do you think that you can provide peers with correct and useful feedback before or after online
feedback training? And how?
6. How do you accept or reject your peers' feedback before and after online feedback training?
7. What are the difficulties that you encounter in using the online system?
8. When you encounter the difficulties in using the online system, what are the strategies that you
use to overcome?
9. What are the differences between before and after online feedback training in your text
improvement?

APPENDIX B. Scoring Rubrics for Text Revision
Examples of Local Revision (Cho & Schunn, 2007)
Type

Example

Word

My grandmother grows some carots in the garden.
 My grandmother grows some carrots in the garden.

Phrase

I often take grammatical errors in writing academic texts.
 I often make grammatical errors in writing academic texts.

Language Learning & Technology

234

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

Clause

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Jason is the right leader who all teenagers can rely on.
 Jason is the right leader whom all teenagers can rely on.

Sentence

It spends Karen many hours to get to the airport in terms of the traffic jam.
 Karen spends many hours to get to the airport in terms of the traffic jam.
 It takes Karen many hours to get to the airport in terms of the traffic jam.

Examples of Global Revision (Hall, 1990, p. 50)
Type

Example

Addition

When others might have run away in fear, the soldier fought against the horrible
enemy.
 When others might have run away in fear, the soldier bravely fought against the
horrible enemy.

Deletion

We tried three new meals, and the tastiest dish was the Thai dish, but I think Chinese
dish is also a good choice.
 We tried three new meals, and the tastiest dish was the Thai dish.

Substitution

So as to win the championship of gymnastics, we have to practice hard.
 We have to greatly practice in order to win the championship of gymnastics.

Reordering

I didn't learn any new knowledge, but I took their classes.
 I took their classes, but I didn't learn any new knowledge.

Consolidation

He never taught me anything I had not learned. I can't say I liked that English teacher.
 Because he never taught me anything I had not learned, I can't say I liked that
English teacher.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This article was partially supported by the National Science Council in the Republic of China, Taiwan
(NSC 101-2410-H-224-029-MY2).

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Yu-Fen Yang is currently a distinguished professor in the Graduate School of Applied Foreign Languages
at National Yunlin University of Science and Technology in Taiwan. Her research focus is mainly on
learning psychology of reading and writing, computer-assisted language learning (CALL), language
education for special needs, and language assessment. Along with the development of CALL systems, she
has published many articles in journals such as Language Learning and Technology, Computer-Assisted
Language Learning, British Journal of Educational Technology, Computers and Education, Computers in
Human Behavior, and Educational Technology and Society.
Wen-Ting Meng is a graduate student in the Graduate School of Applied Foreign Languages at National
Yunlin University of Science and Technology in Taiwan

Language Learning & Technology

235

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

REFERENCES
Bangert-Drowns, R. L., Kulik, C., Kulik, J. A., & Morgan, M. T. (1991). The instructional effect of
feedback in test-like events. Review of Educational Research, 61, 213-238.
Berg, B. C. (1999). The effects of trained peer response on ESL students' revision types and writing
quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3), 215-241.
Chandler, J. (2003). The efficacy of various kinds of error feedback for improvement in the accuracy and
fluency of L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 267-296.
Cho, K., & Schunn, C. (2007). Scaffolded writing and rewriting in the discipline: A web-based reciprocal
peer review system. Computers & Education, 48, 409-426.
Chou, M. C. (1999). How peer negotiations shape revisions. In J. Katchen, & Y. N. Leung (Eds.), The
proceedings of the seventh international symposium on English teaching (pp. 349-359). Taipei, Taiwan:
Crane Publishing Company.
Connor, U., & Asenavage, K. (1994). Peer response groups in ESL writing classes: How much impact on
revision? Journal of Second Language Writing, 3(3), 257-276.
de Guerrero, M. C. M., & Villamil, O. S. (1994). Social cognitive dimensions of interaction in L2 peer
revision. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 484-496.
de Guerrero, M. C. M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer
revision. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 51-68.
Faigley, L., & Witte, S. (1981). Analyzing revision.College Composition and Communication, 32, 400-
414.
Ferris, D. R., Chaney, S. J., Komura, K., Roberts, B. J., & McKee, S. (2000). Perspectives, problems, &
practices in treating written error. Colloquium presented at International TESOL Convention,
Vancouver, Canada.
Ferris, D. R. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language students. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ferris, D. R., & Helt, M. (2000). Was Truscott right? New evidence on the effects of error correction in
L2 writing classes. Paper presented at American Association for Applied Linguistics Conference,
Vancouver, BC.
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 99, 445-476.
Hall, C. (1990), Managing the complexity of revising across languages. TESOL Quarterly, 24(1), 43-60.
Hanrahan, S. J., & Isaacs, G. (2001). Assessing self- and peer-assessment: the students' views. Higher
Education Research and Development, 20, 53-70.
Hayes, J. R., Flower, L. S., Schriver, K. A., Stratman, J. F. & Carey, L. (1987). Cognitive processes in
revision. In S. Rosenberg (Ed.), Advances in Applied Psycholinguistics, Vol. 2: Reading, Writing and
Language Learning (pp. 176-240). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kellogg, R. T., & Whiteford, A. P. (2009). Training advanced writing skills: the case for deliberate
practice. Educational Psychologist, 44, 250-266.

Language Learning & Technology

236

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance: a historical
review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119,
254-284.
Leki, I. (1990). Potential problems with peer responding in ESL writing classes. CATESOL Journal, 3, 5-
17.
Liou, H. C. & Peng, Z. Y. (2009). Training effects on computer-mediated peer review. System, 37, 514-
525.
Lundstrom, K., & Baker, W. (2009). To give is better than to receive: The benefits of peer review to
the reviewer's own writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 30-43.

Mangelsdorf, K., & Schlumberger, A. (1992). ESL student response stances in a peer-review task.
Journal of Second Language Writing, 1, 235-254.

Mendonca, C. O., & Johnson, K. E. (1994). Peer review negotiations: Revision activities in ESL writing
instruction. TESOL Quarterly, 28(4), 745-769.
Min, H. T. (2003). Why peer comments fail? English Teaching and Learning, 27(3), 85-103.
Min, H. T. (2005). Training students to become successful peer reviewers. System, 33(2), 293-308.
Min, H. T. (2006). The effects of trained peer review on EFL students' revision types and writing quality.
Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(2), 118-141.
Nelson, G. L., & Murphy, J. M. (1993). Peer response groups: Do L2 writers use peer comments in
revising their drafts? TESOL Quarterly, 27, 135-142.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Paulus, T. (1999).The effect of peer and teacher feedback on student writing. Journal of Second
Language Writing, 8(3), 265-289.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking-cognitive development in social context. NY: Oxford
University Press.
Sluijsmans, D. M. A., Brand-Gruwel, S., & Van Merrienboer, J. J. G. (2002). Peer assessment training in
teacher education: effects on performance and perceptions. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher
Education, 27, 443-454.
Steendam, E. V., Rijlaarsdam, G., Sercu, L., & den Bergh, H. V. (2010). The effect of instruction type
and dyadic or individual emulation on the quality of higher-order peer feedback in EFL. Learning and
Instruction, 20(4), 316-327.
Strijbos, J. W., Narciss, S., & Dunnebier, K. (2010). Peer feedback content and sender's competence level
in academic writing revision tasks: are they critical for feedback perceptions and efficiency? Learning
and Instruction, 20(4), 291-303.
Stanley, J. (1992). Coaching student writers to be effective peer evaluators. Journal of Second Language
Writing, 1(3), 217-234.
Sun, C.-T., Wang, D.-Y., & Chan, H.-L. (2011). How digital scaffolds in games direct problem-solving
behaviors. Computers & Education, 57(3), 2118-2125.
Tang, G. M., & Tithecott, J. (1999). Peer response in ESL writing. TESL Canada Journal, 16(2), 20-38.
Topping, K. (1998). Peer assessment between students in colleges and universities. Review of Educational
Research, 68(3), 249-276.

Language Learning & Technology

237

Yu-Fen Yang and Wen-Ting Meng

The Effects of Online Feedback Training on Students' Text Revision

Truscott, J. (2004). Evidence and conjecture on the effects of correction: A response to Chandler. Journal
of Second Language Writing, 13, 337-343.
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners' ability to write accurately. Journal of
Second Language Writing, 16, 255-272.
Tsui, A. B. M., & Ng, M. (2000). Do secondary L2 writers benefit from peer comments? Journal of
Second Language Writing, 9(2), 147-170.
Vass, E., Littleton, K., Miell, D., & Jones, A. (2008). The discourse of collaborative creative writing:
Peer collaboration as a context for mutual inspiration. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 3, 192-202.

Villamil, O. S., & De Guerrero, M. C. M. (1996). Peer revision in the second language classroom: Social
cognitive activities, mediating strategies and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language
Writing, 3(1), 51-75.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child
Psychiatry and Psychology, 17(2), 89-100.
Yang, Y. F. (2011). A reciprocal peer review system to support college students' writing. British
Journal of Educational Technology, 42(4), 687-700.

Yang, Y. F. (in press). Preparing language teachers for blended teaching of summary writing. ComputerAssisted Language Learning.
Yang ,Y. F., Yeh, H. C., & Wong, W. K. (2008). Constructing mental representation of reference by
feedback in a computer system. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5), 1959-1976.
Yang,Y. F., Yeh, H. C., & Wong, W. K. (2010). The influence of social interaction on meaning
construction in a virtual community. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2), 287-306.

Language Learning & Technology

238

