Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Brain & Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Manipulating instructions strategically affects reliance on the ventral-lexical
reading stream: Converging evidence from neuroimaging and reaction time
Jacqueline Cummine a,b, Layla Gould c, Crystal Zhou b, Stan Hrybouski b, Zohaib Siddiqi b, Brea Chouinard a,
Ron Borowsky c,
a
b
c

Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2G4
Centre for Neuroscience, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2G4
Department of Psychology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5A5

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Available online 24 May 2012
Keywords:
Ventral-lexical
Dorsal-sublexical
Visual processing streams
Reading
Naming RT
fMRI

a b s t r a c t
Neurobiology of reading research has yet to explore whether reliance on the ventral-lexical stream during word reading can be enhanced by the instructed reading strategy, or whether it is impervious to such
strategies. We examined Instructions: name all vs. name words (based on spelling), Word Type: regular
words vs. exception words, and Word Frequency (WF) in print (log10 HAL WF) in an experiment while measuring fMRI BOLD and overt naming reaction time (RT) simultaneously. Instructions to name words
increased overall reliance on the ventral-lexical stream, as measured by visible BOLD activation and
the WF effect on RT, with regular words showing the greatest effects as a function of this reading strategy.
Furthermore, the pattern of joint effects of these variables on RT supports the notion of cascaded, not parallel, processing. These results can be accommodated by dual-stream cascaded models of reading, and
present a challenge to single-mechanism parallel processing models.
O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Many neurobiological models of basic reading processes subscribe to the notion that participants rely on the ventral visual processing stream while reading aloud familiar words for which they
have a whole-word/lexical representation, and that the dorsal visual processing stream is relied on while participants read aloud
unfamiliar letter strings that they must `sound out' using sublexical
serial reading strategies (Borowsky, Esopenko, Cummine, & Sarty,
2007; Borowsky et al., 2006; Cohen, Dehaene, Vinckier, Jobert, &
Montavont, 2008; Herbster, Mintun, Nebes, & Becker, 1997; Hickok
& Poeppel, 2007; Indefrey & Levelt, 2004; Jobard, Crivello, & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; Joubert et al., 2004; Price & Devlin, 2003).
Words in the English language can be roughly categorized into
two groups in terms of their mapping from orthography onto phonology as either regular words (REGs), which follow the more regular mappings (e.g., cone, gave) and thus can be read correctly
through either stream, or exception words (EXCs), which have
exceptional mappings (e.g., one, have) and thus can only be read
correctly through the ventral-lexical stream. Research on basic
reading processes commonly includes a standard naming task with
words plus novel letter strings (or nonwords), and participants are

 Corresponding author. Address: Dept. of Psychology, 9 Campus Drive, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5A5. Fax: +1 306 966 6630.
E-mail address: ron.borowsky@usask.ca (R. Borowsky).
0093-934X/$ - see front matter O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2012.04.009

required to simply name aloud all of the stimuli presented to them.
A critical question is whether reliance on the ventral-lexical stream
for REGs and EXCs can change as a function of reading strategy, or
if ventral-lexical activation is a relatively involuntary process like
simple associative memory (e.g., automatic spreading activation,
see McNamara, 2005, for a review). Specifically, would instructions
to only name items that spell words increase reliance on the ventral-lexical stream? Existing models of the neurobiology of reading
have yet to consider such strategic effects. The focus of the research reported here is the extent to which the ventral-lexical
stream is activated by REGs and EXCs when the participants are instructed to name all stimuli vs. instructions to name only items
that spell words.
1.1. Ventral-lexical and dorsal-sublexical streams
The ventral-lexical stream has been associated with lexically
based reading tasks (e.g., reading familiar words, Cohen & Dehaene,
2009; Price, 2010; Schurz et al., 2010). This stream has been
reported to include such regions as the inferior occipitotemporal
region (Borowsky et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2008; Pugh et al.,
2000; Simos et al., 2007), the inferior temporal gyrus (Borowsky
et al., 2006; Hickok & Poeppel, 2004; Pugh et al., 2000; Sandak
et al., 2004) and the middle temporal gyrus (Borowsky et al.,
2006; Hickok & Poeppel, 2004; Pugh et al., 2000; Sandak et al.,
2004; Simos et al., 2002). In contrast, the dorsal-sublexical stream

204

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

has been associated with sublexical spelling-to-sound reading
tasks (e.g., reading unfamiliar letter strings, Cohen et al., 2008;
Pugh et al., 2000). Regions associated with the dorsal-sublexical
stream include the parietal lobe (particularly when a decision task
is used) and the temporal and frontal lobes of the left hemisphere,
specifically the posterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus
(STG; Pugh et al., 2000; Sandak et al., 2004; Simos et al., 2002),
the inferior parietal lobule (including the supramarginal gyrus
and the angular gyrus, McDermott, Petersen, Watson, & Ojemann,
2003; Newman & Joanisse, 2011; Pugh et al., 2000; Sandak et al.,
2004; Schurz et al., 2010; Shaywitz et al., 2002), the supplementary
motor area (SMA; Cohen et al., 2008; Cummine, Sarty, & Borowsky,
2010), and the precentral gyrus/BA6 (Bokde, Tagamets, Friedman,
& Horwitz, 2001; Cohen et al., 2008; Gold, Balota, Kirchhoff et al.,
2005).
The behavioral aspects of the ventral-lexical, dorsal-sublexical
models of reading are based on the traditional dual-route models
of basic reading processes (e.g., Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins, & Haller,
1993; Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson, & Besner, 1977; Coltheart,
Rastle, Perry, Langdon, & Ziegler, 2001; see also Borowsky, Owen,
& Fonos, 1999; Owen & Borowsky, 2003, for discussion on single
vs. dual-route models). The dual-route models postulate a lexical
route where orthographic lexical (i.e., whole-word spelling) representations are mapped onto phonological lexical (i.e., whole-word
sound) representations, and a sublexical route where graphemic
(i.e., letter or groups of letter) representations are mapped onto
the phonemic (i.e., basic speech sound) representations that they
most commonly correspond to. The lexical route is also referred
to as the addressed phonology route in that it is relied on to address
correct pronunciations for words that we are familiar with (i.e.,
sight vocabulary), whereas the sublexical route is also referred to
as the assembled phonology route in that it can be relied on to
assemble correct pronunciations for words as long as they have
regular and consistent sublexical spelling-to-sound mappings
(i.e., phonetic decoding).
Several behavioral experiments have been reported that have
successfully manipulated reliance on these lexical and sublexical
pathways, supporting the notion that they are under strategic control. For example, Monsell, Patterson, Graham, Hughes, and Milroy
(1992) reported that familiar EXC words, which can only be read
correctly via the lexical route, were named faster and more accurately when presented with other such words than if mixed with novel nonwords, which can only be named correctly via the sublexical
route. Other extensions of reading route reliance effects have also
been reported in the behavioral literature (e.g., Borowsky, Owen, &
Masson, 2002; Rastle & Coltheart, 1999; Reynolds & Besner, 2005;
Zevin & Balota, 2000; see Balota, Yap, & Cortese, 2006 for a thorough
review of these and other visual word recognition phenomena). Furthermore, recent neuropsychological research by Gold, Balota, Cortese et al. (2005) showed that individuals with semantic dementia
(including loss of semantic and lexical input) rely more on the sublexical route than normal controls or individuals with Alzheimer's
dementia. Earlier neuropsychological research has also established
that individuals with acquired dyslexia show evidence for a double
dissociation between the lexical and sublexical routes, where individuals with surface dyslexia have a dysfunctional lexical route
and thus rely on their sublexical route as evidenced by intact nonword and/or REG word reading, but make regularisation errors to
EXC words (e.g., pronouncing pint to rhyme with mint; Marshall &
Newcombe, 1980; Shallice, Warrington, & McCarthy, 1983),
whereas individuals with phonological dyslexia have a dysfunctional sublexical route and thus rely on their lexical route as
evidenced by intact familiar EXC word reading, but make errors
when trying to name nonwords (e.g., Patterson, 1982; Shallice &

Warrington, 1980). This same double dissociation on route reliance
has also been shown in the developmental reading literature (e.g.,
Castles & Coltheart, 1993; McDougall, Borowsky, MacKinnon, &
Hymel, 2005). We also note at this point that an alternative account
to route reliance effects has also been proposed in the behavioral
research literature, one which relies on a time criterion for responding that gets shifted as a function of the other types of word stimuli
that accompany the target stimuli, and not on any change in reliance
on the lexical and sublexical reading routes per se (Kinoshita &
Lupker, 2002, 2003). It would seem that a functional imaging experiment that clearly demonstrates an increase (or decrease) in activation on the lexical or sublexical reading streams as a function of a
reading strategy manipulation would support the notion of strategic
control of reliance on that reading stream, and bring neuroimaging
evidence to bear on this debate.
1.2. Manipulating reliance on reading streams
Previous work from our lab and others has demonstrated that
the contribution of the ventral-lexical and dorsal-sublexical
streams varies as a function of manipulating the stimuli to be read
(e.g., Borowsky et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2008; Cummine, Borowsky, Vakorin, Bird, & Sarty, 2008; Cummine et al., 2010). For example, using a sparse-sampling technique with a gap in image
acquisition to allow participants to name letter strings aloud,
Borowsky et al. showed that reading EXCs predominantly activates
the ventral-lexical stream, whereas naming pseudohomophones
(nonwords designed to sound like familiar words when pronounced through sublexical spelling-sound mappings, e.g., phocks)
predominantly activates the dorsal-sublexical stream. Particularly
important to the present work, REGs and EXCs have been used in
varying ways to examine the contribution of the ventral-lexical
and dorsal-sublexical streams in word recognition research (e.g.,
Binder, Medler, Desai, Conant, & Liebenthal, 2005; Cummine
et al., 2008, 2010). Under normal instructions, REGs have been
shown to be read correctly by relying on ventral-lexical processing
and/or sublexical-dorsal processing, whereas EXCs are named correctly by way of lexical-ventral processing, as sublexical reading of
these stimuli would result in incorrect phonological codes (e.g.,
pronouncing have to rhyme with gave). Another stimulus characteristic whose effects can be diagnostic of lexically-based reading
is printed word frequency (WF) and the effect it has on word identification reaction time (RT). We now turn to a discussion of how
WF effects may be used as converging evidence for when the ventral-lexical stream is being relied on during reading.
1.3. Word frequency effect as a measure of lexical processing
If lexical processing can be forced by instructions to name only
the stimuli that spell words, then one way to detect this is by measuring the WF effect: the greater the reliance on a frequency-sensitive lexical system, the greater the WF effect on naming RTs
should be. There are several models of how WF effects can manifest in the lexical system (e.g., Borowsky & Besner, 1993; McCann
& Besner, 1987; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981; Morton, 1979;
Reynolds & Besner, 2005). For example, WF could affect the connections between orthographic lexical representations and representations downstream (e.g., the semantic system), whereby the
more often the stimulus has been encountered in print, the faster
the rate of activation in these systems, and the faster a response
can be made (Borowsky & Besner, 1993).
Word Type (REG, EXC) and WF have typically been shown to
interact on naming RT, whereby EXCs are slower on average, and
elicit a greater WF effect, which has typically been accounted for

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

in terms of dual route models of reading (e.g., Andrews, 1982;
Monsell et al., 1992; Paap & Noel, 1991; Seidenberg, Waters,
Barnes, & Tanenhaus, 1984; and see Cummine et al., 2010, for a detailed account of this interaction in the SMA). Given that EXCs must
be read lexically in order to be named correctly, it makes sense that
they should show a larger WF effect than REGs. The additional time
that EXCs require relative to REGs has typically been accounted for
by a conflict resolution process at the level of phonological output,
where lexical and sublexical processes converge and a single phonological response must be selected. The WF effect on naming RT
has been shown to be diluted (i.e., smaller) under conditions when
more sublexical processing is occurring, and is largest under conditions when more lexical processing is occurring (e.g., Borowsky
et al., 2002). Given that EXCs, by definition, can generate two different pronunciations via the two reading streams, instructions
to name words only may serve to focus processing on only the lexical-ventral stream by requiring a lexical verification of the stimulus before naming it, and produce even larger WF effects than
when instructions to name all stimuli are used.
The strategic effects of instructions have yet to be explored in
research on the neurobiology of reading, and so the experiment
we report here has the potential to help constrain such models.
If instructions to name words (based on spelling) are effective at
forcing maximal ventral-lexical processing, then they should also
increase the size of WF effect relative to instructions to name all
stimuli. Name words instructions should also slow responding
overall, due to the time required to verify that the stimulus does
indeed spell a word (or in other words, make a lexical decision)
prior to making a response. Such strategic effects, if they occur,
will elucidate whether ventral-lexical processing can be strategically controlled, or whether ventral-lexical processing is operating
like an associative memory system that is impervious to strategic
control by instruction. The dual-stream (ventral-lexical, dorsalsublexical) models seem particularly well-suited to handle such
an effect of reading strategy, whereby processing along the ventral-lexical stream would be enhanced through conscious efforts
by the participant trying to read lexically through the orthographic lexical system. The ability of the alternative single mechanism parallel distributed processing (PDP) models (e.g.,
Desroches, McNorgan, Minas, & Booth, 2012; Plaut & Booth,
2000) to account for such effects will be considered later in the
Discussion.

1.4. Hypotheses
Our hypotheses explore whether reliance on the ventral-lexical
stream when reading words can be increased by manipulating the
naming instructions from name all to name words (based on spelling): (1) To the extent that processing along the ventral-lexical
stream can be strategically forced by instructions to name words,
there should be more visible activation, and a greater WF effect
on RT, relative to instructions to name all stimuli. (2) Furthermore,
to the extent that processing of REGs can be strategically forced
through the ventral-lexical stream by name words instructions,
there should be more visible activation in the ventral-lexical
stream, and a greater WF effect on RT, for REGs in the name words
condition relative to the name all condition. (3) EXCs, which are
thought to be read lexically under both types of instructions,
should show substantial visible activation in the ventral-lexical
stream, and the WF effect on RT, under both sets of instructions,
relative to REGs. If EXCs show additional visible activation, or WF
effect on RT, under the name words instructions relative to the
name all condition, these increases would reflect the more optimal
reliance on the ventral-lexical stream without any dilution from
monitoring of processing along the dorsal-sublexical stream.

205

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Participants
Twenty participants took part in the study. Inclusion criteria
consisted of normal or corrected to normal vision and English as
a first language. The sample of participants were 14 females (average age = 22 years, 13 right handed), and 6 males (average age
24 years, 5 right handed). The participants' consent was obtained
according to the Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and the experiment
was performed in compliance with the relevant laws and institutional guidelines, and was approved by the University of Alberta
Health Research Ethics Board.
2.2. Stimuli
One hundred and twenty-six pairs of monosyllabic REGs and
EXCs matched for initial onset and length were used as critical
stimuli (Patterson & Hodges, 1992). These stimuli appear to be very
well matched on several of the variables available from the E-Lexicon Database (http://elexicon.wustl.edu/, Balota et al., 2007), as
we found that Word Type (REG = 0, EXC = 1) did not correlate significantly with log10 HAL WF (r = .036, p = .57), bigram frequency
by position (r = .033, p = .60), bigram mean frequency, (r = .051,
p = .42), bigram sum frequency (r = .036, p = .57), number of
morphemes (r = .058, p = .357), or number of phonemes
(r = .082, p = .20). These words can be considered to be of fairly
high familiarity, as their mean WF is relatively high (log10 HAL
WF mean = 9.63). A set of 128 pronouncible nonwords were also
generated from the critical words by changing one or two letters.
For each instruction condition, a total of 190 stimuli were presented in two runs (63 REGs, 63 EXCs, and 64 nonwords), such that
every participant was presented with each stimulus only once, and
stimuli were cycled through instruction conditions across participants so that each stimulus was presented equally often under
each instruction set.
2.3. Procedure and apparatus
For the name all stimuli condition, participants were instructed
to read aloud each letter string as quickly and accurately as possible. For the name words condition, participants were instructed to
read aloud each letter string that spelled a word as quickly and
accurately as possible. Participants responded vocally during a regular, periodic gap in the image acquisition that followed the offset
of each volume of image acquisition. That is, a letter string was presented at the offset of an image acquisition for 1850 ms, providing
a silent gap for participants to name aloud the letter string. Letter
strings were randomly selected, without repetition, and back-projected one at a time on a screen such that they were visible to the
participants through the mirror on the head coil.
All images were acquired on a 1.5 T Siemens Sonata scanner and
were positioned along the anterior-posterior-commissure line.
Anatomical scans included a high resolution axial T1 MPRAGE sequence with the following parameters: TR = 2000 ms, TE = 4.38 ms,
number of slices = 112, base resolution 256  256, voxel size
1  1  1 mm, scan time 4 min 48 s. For the functional blood oxygenated level dependent (BOLD) images, four runs/sessions of 160
volumes of 36 slices, axial spin-echo echo planar images (EPIs)
were obtained. The time required to obtain each image volume
was the repetition time TR = 3700 ms, with a 1850 ms gap of no
image acquisition in each TR, gradient echo time was TE = 40 ms
and a 64  64 acquisition matrix was used with a 128  128 reconstruction matrix that improved pixel resolution through zero-filling prior to Fourier transform reconstruction.

206

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

The EPI slice thickness was 4 mm with no gap between slices.
The first five image volumes were used to achieve a steady state
of image contrast and were discarded prior to analysis. The
remaining 155 image volumes in each run were comprised of 31/
32 REGs, 32/31 EXCs, 32 nonwords, and 60 rest/fixations. For the
name all stimuli condition, each run consisted of 95 image volumes, during which the participant responded to the presented
stimuli (i.e., EXCs, REGs and nonwords), and 60 image volumes
during which the participant rested. For the name words only condition, each run consisted of 63 image volumes, during which the
participant responded to the presented stimuli (i.e., EXCs and
REGs), 32 image volumes (i.e., nonwords), during which the participant did not respond to the presented stimuli, and 60 image volumes during which the participant rested. The total session time
was approximately 10 min (160 volumes  TR = 3700 ms). The total functional experiment time was approximately 40 min (160
volumes  4 sessions  TR = 3700 ms). A computer running
EPrime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc., http://www.pstnet.com) was used to trigger each image acquisition in synchrony
with the presentation of visual stimuli. Responses were made during the 1850 ms gaps in image acquisition and were recorded over
the MRI intercom as there was no noise interference from the MRI
during the acquisition gap.
2.4. Method for measuring naming onset reaction time
Vocal responses were recorded at 96 KHz, 24 bit, through the
intercom using an Olympus LS11 digital recorder. These recordings
were then analyzed using PRAAT software (Boersma & Weenink,
2011), and the speech spectrograms and formants were used to
help identify vocalization onset relative to the gradient noise of
the MRI. Given that we used a sparse-sampling (gap paradigm)
fMRI method that allows the participant to respond during a gap
in image acquisition (e.g., Borowsky et al., 2006; Cummine, Stockdale-Winder, Crossley, & Borowsky, 2009; Cummine et al., 2010;
Esopenko, Borowsky, Cummine, & Sarty, 2008), the stimulus onset
was synchronized with the last gradient sound before the gap. This
provided an acoustic marker for stimulus onset on the recording
while the gap allowed for a clear recording of the participant's vocal response.
2.5. fMRI analyses
The fMRI data were analyzed using an event-related method. All
pre-processing and statistical analyses for anatomical and functional images were performed with AFNI (Cox, 1996). All data were
subject to several levels of pre-processing including spatial realignment and coregistration of experimental runs, slice timing correction, motion correction, normalization to a standardized Talairach
and Tournoux (1988) space, and smoothing using a full width at
half maximum (FWHM) 8 mm kernel. First level modelling, for
each participant, included identification of a stimulus indicatortime-series of ones, representing the stimulus of interest, and zeros
that corresponded to the presentation of the other stimuli. The impulse response functions (IRFs) for each stimulus type were estimated using a general linear model (GLM) approach.
For each participant, contrast maps were created that separated
out activation strictly unique to a stimulus type (e.g., EXCs vs.
REGs) or condition (e.g., name words vs. name all) and activation
that was shared between two stimuli or conditions (e.g., Borowsky
et al., 2005, 2006, 2007; Cummine et al., 2010). For example, let C
denote one of the stimulus types, REGs or EXCs. For each stimulustype, C, and for each subject, two maps were computed. A threshold map FC(p) of F-values (h) and a visibility, or intensity map, VC(p)
(IRF maximum amplitude), where p is a voxel coordinate were created. The F-value represents the ratio of the data variance to the

variance remaining after the IRF model fit. We used an F-value
threshold of greater than 1.79 (p 6 .05) to define an active voxel,
which corresponds to the significance level of the overall GLM
model for the experiment. The corresponding activation map for
C was defined as MC(p) = KC,h(p) VC(p) where KC,h(p) = 1 if FC(p) P h
and zero otherwise where h = 1.79 is the threshold above which we
considered a voxel to be activated. Letting A and B denote a pair of
stimulus types (e.g., REGs and EXCs), unique maps (Muni) and conjunction maps (Mconj) were defined for paired stimuli A and B for
each subject according to:

Muni p 1/4 1/2K A;h pV A p  K B;h pV B p1/21  K A;h pK B;h p;

1

Mconj p 1/4 K A;h pK B;h pV A p  V B p=2:

2

The unique map represents a difference (A [ B)/(A \ B) and
shows task subtraction for activations that are not common to conditions A and B. In the representation of Eq. (1), unique activation
to A is represented as a positive intensity and unique activation
to B is represented as a negative intensity. The conjunction map
of Eq. (2) is a map of average A and B intensities and represents
an intersection A \ B showing activation shared to both conditions
A and B (i.e., a shared activation map). The activation maps were
calculated for the combinations of the two instruction conditions,
name all and name words, and the two word types REGs and EXCs,
as well as for the two instruction conditions for the nonwords. The
unique and conjunction maps, as computed for each participant,
were based on the initial contrast images for each word or nonword relative to rest, and were averaged across the participants
in each experiment to produce the final unique and intersection
maps. All procedures are consistent with those previously used
from our lab (e.g., Borowsky et al., 2005, 2006, 2007, in press; Cummine et al., 2010; Esopenko et al., 2012).
Using Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI; Cox, 1996;
Version 12_31_1431), unique and intersection map voxels for each
participant separated by 1.1 mm distance were clustered and clusters of volume less than 100 lL were clipped out. Mean activation
maps in Talairach coordinates were determined voxel-wise for
each map type along with the corresponding one sample t statistic
for each voxel mean. The maps that follow show regions of activation containing voxels that surpass the activation threshold at the
group level t(18) = 1.734, p = .05 (one-tailed). A cluster size threshold of 317 vmul (p = .01 with a correction for multiple comparisons) was applied at the group level. Given that our focus is on
interpreting the presence of activation in the maps, and not on
where there is an absence of activation, we felt that minimizing
the Type I error rate (i.e., minimizing the rejection of the null
hypothesis when there is really no difference between conditions)
was relatively more important than the Type II error rate (accepting the null hypothesis when there is actually a very small difference). As such, we used a correction for multiple comparisons at
p = .01 instead of p = .05. One of the participants had to be excluded
for excessive head motion.

3. Results
3.1. fMRI data
3.1.1. Name words
Activation common to both EXCs and REGs in the name words
condition was primarily localized to the ventral-lexical stream
and included bilateral middle (R: 51 -50 7, L: -53 -21 -6) and inferior (R: 44 -53 -6, L: -53 -52 -6) temporal gyri (Fig. 1a). Additional
activation unique for REGs included left inferior temporal gyrus
(ITG; L: -62 -39 -10) (Fig. 1b).

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

207

Fig. 1. Activation for the name only words condition. A. Shared activation between exception and regular words is primarily localized to the ventral visual processing stream. B.
Unique activation for exception words (yellow) and regular words (blue) were localized to the ventral visual processing stream. Activation for the name all stimuli condition. C.
Shared activation between exception and regular words is primarily localized to the ventral visual processing stream. D. Unique activation for exception words (yellow) and
regular words (blue) were localized to the ventral visual processing stream (individual voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold,
t(18) = 1.734, p = .05, one-tailed test against zero). Left (L) and right (R) hemispheres are marked (red) at the anterior of each brain image.

3.1.2. Name all
Activation common to both EXCs and REGs in the name all condition was primarily localized to the ventral-lexical stream and included bilateral lingual gyri, (R: 14 -79 -13, L: -7 -86 -13), inferior
(R: 59 -45 -5, L: -53 -50 -11) and middle temporal gyri (MTG; R: 52
-13 -6, L: -55 -3 -9) (Fig. 1c). There was little unique activation for
either stimulus type (Fig. 1d).
3.1.3. Exception words
Activation common to both name words and name all instructions for EXCs included bilateral inferior (R: 58 -51 -8, L: -54 -49
-8), middle (R: 55 -8 -9, L: -56 -18 -6) and superior (R: 55 2 -5,
L: -57 -13 4) temporal gyri (Fig. 2a). Additional unique activation
was found for the name words condition in left inferior temporal
gyri (L: -54 -55 -12) and right lateral occipital gyrus (R: 38 -80
4). Additional unique activation was found for the name all condition in bilateral inferior frontal gyri (R: 42 38 -6, L: -43 28 -6)
(Fig. 2b).
3.1.4. Regular words
Activation common to both name words and name all instructions for REGs included bilateral inferior (R: 53 -60 -8, L: -52 -49
-8), middle (R: 53 -55 5, L: -57 -15 -4) and superior (R: 49 -9 3,
L: -57 -16 7) temporal gyri (Fig. 2c). Additional unique activation
was found for the name words condition in the right lateral occipital gyrus (R: 38 -79 12) (Fig. 2d).

3.1.5. Nonwords
Activation common to both name words and name all instructions for nonwords (NWs) included bilateral inferior (R: 53 -52 7, L: -55 -48 -11) and superior (R: 48 5 -5, L: -46 9 -5) temporal gyri
and left insula (L: -38 5 10) (Fig. 3a). Additional unique activation
was found for the name all condition in the bilateral inferior temporal gyri (R: 49 -43 0, L -55 -40 -10), right middle temporal gyrus
(R: 51 -16 -2), left anterior insula (L: -37, 24, 5), and left motor (L: 55 -7 38) (Fig. 3b).
3.1.6. ANOVA of word type and instruction
An ANOVA was conducted that included two within-subject
factors (e.g., word type and instructions) and subjects as a random
factor. Mean activation maps in Talairach coordinates were determined voxel-wise for each map type along with the corresponding
one sample t-statistic for each voxel mean. The maps that follow
show regions of activation containing voxels that surpass an activation threshold at the group level, t(18) = 4.112, p < .05 (twotailed) for the interaction map, and t(18) = 1.689, p < .05 (onetailed) for the difference maps of exception words vs. regular
words in the name words condition and exception words vs. regular
words in the name all condition. A cluster size threshold of
317 vmul (corrected p = .01) was applied at the group level. Activation for the word type (REG, EXC)  Instruction (name words, name
all) interaction effect was found in the left middle temporal gyrus
(L: -62 -29 0) and right inferior frontal gyrus (R: 61 6 7) (Fig. 3c). In
order to further explore the nature of this effect in the left MTG, a

208

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

Fig. 2. Activation for naming exception words. A. Shared activation between the name only words condition and the name all stimuli condition was localized primarily to the
ventral visual processing stream. B. Additional unique activation for the name only words condition shows greater contribution of the ventral visual processing stream
relative to the name all stimuli condition. Activation for the naming of regular words. C. Shared activation between the name only words condition and the name all stimuli
condition was localized primarily to the ventral visual processing stream. D. Additional unique activation for the name only words condition shows greater contribution of the
ventral visual processing stream relative to the name all stimuli condition (individual voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold,
t(18) = 1.734, p = .05, one-tailed test against zero). Left (L) and right (R) hemispheres are marked (red) at the anterior of each brain image.

contrast of EXC vs. REG at each level of Instructions was examined.
For the name words condition, there was no remaining activation
for EXC vs. REG (Fig. 3d left), supporting the results from the conjunction maps for the name words condition in Fig. 1a that activation in that region is similarly shared for both word types, which
also fits with the instructional demands to verify lexical status
prior to naming. For the name all condition, the contrast of EXC
vs. REG showed that there was remaining activation for EXCs in
the left middle temporal gyrus (L: -60 -31 4; Fig. 3d right), which
also fits with the notion that under instructions to name all stimuli,
only the EXCs have to be read lexically.
3.2. Behavioral naming data
The naming onset RT data were first aggregated by participant
as a function of Instructions (Name All, Name Words) and Word
Type (REG, EXC). Medians of the correctly named item RTs were
submitted to a 2  2 general linear model ANOVA, with Word Type
and Instructions as repeated measures factors. The median naming
RTs are presented in Fig. 4a. There were significant main effects of
Instructions, F(1, 19) = 7.626, MSe = 4659, p = .01, and Word Type,
F(1, 19) = 4.970, MSe = 239, p = .04, and no significant interaction,
F(1, 19) = .049, MSe = 442, p = .83. Paired t-tests were conducted
to evaluate the effect of Word Type at each level of instruction,
and showed a significant effect of Word Type under instructions
to name all, t(19) = 2.430, SEM = 2.74, p = .03, and no significant

difference under instructions to name words, t(19) = 1.124,
SEM = 7.78, p = .28.
The accuracy data were aggregated by participant as a function
of Instructions and Word Type, and the mean accuracy rates were
submitted to a 2  2 general linear model ANOVA, with Word Type
and Instructions as repeated measures factors. The mean accuracy
rates are presented in Fig. 4b. There were significant main effects of
Instructions, F(1, 19) = 17.292, MSe = .001, p = .001, and Word Type,
F(1, 19) = 5.245, MSe = .001, p = .03, and no significant interaction,
F(1, 19) = 1.062, MSe = .001, p = .32. Paired t-tests were conducted
to evaluate the effect of Word Type at each level of instruction,
and showed no significant effect of Word Type under instructions
to name all, t(19) = 1.630, SEM = .004, p = .12, and approached significance under instructions to name words, t(19) = 1.893,
SEM = .009, p = .07.
In order to evaluate the effects of Word Frequency (WF, i.e.,
log10 HAL Word Frequency) as a continuous variable, general linear
model regressions were conducted on each participant's correct
RTs, with RT as the dependent variable, and WF as a continuous
independent variable, separately for each combination of Instructions and Word Types. The resulting WF coefficients for each Word
Type and Instruction set were then aggregated over participants
(e.g., Borowsky et al., 2002), and submitted to a 2  2 general linear
model ANOVA, with Word Type and Instructions as repeated measures factors. Fig. 4c shows the mean coefficients above the adjusted means (i.e., adjusted for WF, or in other words, with WF

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

209

Fig. 3. Activation for naming nonwords. A. Shared activation between name words and name all is primarily localized to the lower level visual processing regions. B. Additional
unique activation for the name all condition (orange) was found in the dorsal-sublexical stream, particularly the left supramarginal gyrus and insular regions (individual
voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold, t(18) = 1.734, p = .05, one-tailed test against zero). Activation for the word
type  instruction effect. C. Activation for the word type  instruction interaction includes regions in the left ventral visual processing stream and right inferior frontal gyri
(individual voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold, t(18) = 4.112, p = .05, two-tailed). Activation for the difference map of
exception words and regular words. D. Name words: Activation for exception words (yellow) was found in left anterior temporal gyri. Activation for regular words (blue) was
found in bilateral inferior frontal gyri (individual voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold, t(18) = 1.689, p = .05, one-tailed test
against zero). Name all: Activation for exception words (yellow) was found in left ventral visual processing regions. Activation for regular words (blue) was found in right
medial frontal gyri (individual voxel-wise threshold, p < .05, cluster extent >317 vmul, p < .01, group level threshold, t(18) = 1.689, p = .05, one-tailed test against zero). Left (L)
and right (R) hemispheres are marked (red) at the anterior of each brain image.

effects partialled out). There was a significant main effect of
Instructions on the size of WF effect, F(1, 19) = 15.182, MSe = 82,
p = .001, which represents an Instruction by WF interaction on
naming RT, whereby the WF effects are greater under name words
instructions. There was no significant main effect of Word Type on
the size of WF effect, F(1, 19) = 2.425, MSe = 98, p = .14, nor was
there a significant Word Type by Instruction interaction on the size
of WF effect, F(1, 19) = 1.024, MSe = 102, p = .32. The t-tests of
parameter estimates from this general linear model indicated that
the coefficients relating WF to RT in each combination of Word
Type and Instruction were significantly different from 0, name all
REG b = 4.1 ms/log10WF, t (19) = 2.345, SEM = 1.732, p = .03,
name all EXC b = 9.8 ms/log10WF, t (19) = 5.053, SEM = 1.936,
p < .001, name words REG b = 14.2 ms/log10WF, t (19) = 5.801,
SEM = 2.447, p < .001, name words EXC b = 14.2 ms/log10WF, t
(19) = 6.238, SEM = 2.467, p < .001. Paired t-tests were then conducted to determine if the WF effect differs as a function of Word
Type at each level of Instructions, and revealed that the WF effect is
significantly different for REGs and EXCs under name all instructions, t(19) = 2.061, SEM = 2.775, p = .05, which represents the standard WF by Word Type interaction that is typically reported in the

literature, whereas the WF effect did not differ significantly for
REGs and EXCs under the name words instructions, t(19) = .342,
SEM = 3.484, p = .74. Paired t-tests were also conducted to evaluate
the hypotheses that the WF effect differs as a function of Instructions, at each level of Word Type. The WF effect was found to differ
significantly between name all and name words instructions for
REGs, t(19) = 3.206, SEM = 3.161, p = .01, and approached a significant difference between these instructions for EXCs, t(19) = 1.963,
SEM = 2.857, p = .06. Given that these tests were hypothesis driven,
a one-tailed test would be justified and this difference could be
considered significant at p = .03.
Given that the partialling of WF effects resulted in an adjustment
to the cell means for the combinations of Word Type and Instructions, these adjusted mean RTs were also compared through a
2  2 general linear model ANOVA, with Word Type and Instructions as repeated measures factors, and the same paired t-tests as
conducted on the median RTs. There was a significant main effect
of Instructions, F(1, 19) = 25.459, MSe = 2718, p < .001, no significant
effect of Word Type, F(1, 19) = 2.225, MSe = 499, p = .15, and no significant interaction, F(1, 19) = 1.386, MSe = 414, p = .254. For the
paired t-tests, the same pattern of significant and non-significant ef-

210

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

(A)

(B)

(C)

(-14.2)

(-15.4)

(-9.8)
(-4.1)

Fig. 4. A. Median naming onset RT (in ms) as a function of instructions and word type. B. Mean Proportion Accurate as a function of instructions and word type. C. Adjusted
mean naming onset RT (in ms) as a function of instructions and word type. Averaged coefficients relating word frequency to RT (ms/unit of log10 HAL word frequency) in
parentheses.

fects was found as was obtained with the unadjusted median RTs
earlier: a significant effect of Word Type under instructions to name
all, t(19) = 3.086, SEM = 4.15, p = .01, and no significant difference
under instructions to name words, t(19) = .243, SEM = 8.60, p = .81.

all condition, reflecting optimal reliance on the ventral-lexical
stream, perhaps due to less dilution of the WF effect from monitoring of processing along the dorsal-sublexical stream.

4.1. Name words instructions
4. Discussion
Our experiment provided direct functional and behavioral evidence that reliance on the ventral-lexical stream can be strategically enhanced by instructions to name words only. Consistent
with our hypotheses, we found greater reliance on the ventral-lexical stream, for the name words condition, as evidenced by additional unique activation when compared to the name all
condition, for both EXCs and REGs. More activation is also visible
in the name words conjunction maps relative to the name all conjunction maps. Converging with greater WF effects, these findings
support the notion that processing along the ventral-lexical stream
can be strategically forced by instructions. In addition, REGs can be
strategically forced through the ventral-lexical stream by name
words instructions, as evidenced by unique activation in the
ventral-lexical stream for the name words instructions, and an
increased WF effect on RT compared to the name all instructions.
Furthermore, EXCs were read lexically relative to REGs, as they
showed unique activation in the ventral-lexical stream for the
name words instructions, and the greater WF effect on RT, under
both sets of instructions. Finally, EXCs showed additional unique
activation in the ventral-lexical stream, and a greater effect of
WF on RT, under the name words instructions relative to the name

When stimuli were presented under task instructions that required participants to name words only, we found evidence for
shared bilateral activation in the ventral-lexical stream including
inferior, middle and superior temporal gyri. Furthermore, given
that a traditional subtractive contrast map showed no differences
between REGs and EXCs for the name words condition, the intensity
of the shared activation must be fairly similar for both word types.
Additional shared activation was found in bilateral cingulate and
supplementary motor association cortex. Unique activation was
found in the ventral-lexical stream for REGs (e.g., bilateral inferior
temporal gyri; although we note the limitations of using fMRI to
examine the anterior inferior temporal region, Wise & Price,
2006). These results provide compelling evidence that the reliance
on the ventral-lexical stream can be strategically altered depending on the nature of the task instructions. Converging with this
interpretation is the behavioral result of a WF by Instruction interaction on RT, whereby the WF effects are greatest under name
words instructions, and additivity between Instructions and Word
Type, whereby the effect of Instructions was an overall slowing effect (representing lexical verification prior to naming, or in other
words, making a lexical decision) which did not interact with Word
Type.

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

4.2. Name all instructions
When stimuli were presented under task instructions that required participants to name all stimuli, the shared activation map
for REGs and EXCs demonstrated activation in the bilateral ventral
visual processing streams from the occipital cortex through to the
anterior temporal lobes. In addition, regions of activation included
the bilateral supplementary motor association cortex. What is particularly important to our hypotheses was the finding that EXCs
produced additional unique activation in the ventral-lexical stream
including left middle temporal gyri. Furthermore, given that a traditional subtractive contrast map for the name all condition
showed differences favoring EXCs over REGs in the ventral-lexical
stream, the intensity of the unique activation is significantly greater for EXCs. Given that EXCs can only be correctly read by way of a
lexical representation in memory, we expected activation for these
stimuli to be largely constrained to the ventral-lexical stream. Converging with this interpretation is the behavioral result that the
WF effect was also greater for EXCs than REGs under these typical
naming instructions, and represents the standard Word Type by
WF interaction (Cummine et al., 2010).
4.3. Exception words
Regardless of task instructions, EXC naming produced a substantial volume of activation in the ventral-lexical stream. This
finding is consistent with the notion that EXCs rely on ventral-lexical based strategies for correct pronunciation. Converging with
this interpretation is the behavioral result of greater WF effects
for EXCs in the name words condition.
4.4. Regular words
Similar to EXC naming, REG naming produced activation that
was predominantly ventral. While these stimuli can utilize information from both the dorsal-sublexical processing stream and
the ventral-lexical stream, the visible activation suggests that participants appeared to rely on the ventral-lexical processing stream.
The relatively high average WF for these items likely allowed most
participants to rely on their ventral-lexical stream, and rarely required the dorsal-sublexical reading stream. Converging with this
interpretation is the behavioral result of a significant WF effect
for REGs even under the name all instructions. Furthermore, the
name words condition produced relatively greater WF effects for
REGs compared to the name all condition, providing further support for the notion that task instructions can encourage participants to strategically rely on the ventral-lexical reading system.
4.5. Nonwords
Shared activation for nonwords between the name words only
condition and the name all stimuli condition appeared to be more
constrained in the left ITG (whereas the word maps showed activation in left ITG, MTG and STG) and showed no activation in the
SMA, which has been suggested to be the locus of selection for phonological output when both the lexical and sublexical streams are
computing phonology (Cummine et al., 2010). Given that the proportion of nonwords was 1/3 in this experiment, and that participants only named the nonwords in the name all condition, the
degree of dorsal activation was not quite as extensive as when
we have had participants name only nonwords in a blocked design
(e.g., the pseudohomophone condition from Borowsky et al., 2006).
Additional unique activation for the name all condition showed a
greater contribution of the dorsal-sublexical stream, particularly
the left supramarginal gyrus (which has been shown to be involved

211

in phonological processing, e.g., Price, Moore, Humphreys, & Wise,
1997) through to the sensory and motor cortices and the anterior
insula.
4.6. Ventral-lexical, dorsal-sublexical model of reading
Overall, our findings are consistent with the dual-stream (ventral-lexical, dorsal-sublexical) models of reading, and advance
our knowledge about strategic reliance on the ventral-lexical
stream in basic word recognition (Price, 2010; Cohen et al., 2008;
Borowsky et al., 2006; Borowsky et al., 2007; Fiebach, Friederici,
Muller, & von Cramon, 2002; Hickok & Poeppel, 2007; Posner &
Raichle, 1994; Pugh et al., 2000). Specifically, the ventral-lexical
processing stream is involved when participants read familiar
words or words that require lexical processing to be named correctly. EXCs must be named by ventral-lexical processes given
their atypical spelling-to-sound correspondences, and consequently, these stimuli produced marked ventral processing in both
the name words and name all conditions. Although REGs can, by
definition, be read by either or both systems, the relatively high
frequency of all the words used in the experiment produced activation primarily in ventral-lexical regions that was increased as a
function of instructions to name words. Given that both EXCs and
REGs showed increased ventral-lexical activation as a function of
instructions to read lexically, this strategic effect can be described
as one where optimal reliance on ventral-lexical processing is engaged, and no dilution of WF effects occurs, suggesting that activation/monitoring of the dorsal-sublexical stream is likely being
minimized. These dual-stream models are well-equipped to handle
such strategic effects, as the instruction to name words simply
encourages the participant to rely on one distinct processing
stream over the other. Furthermore, our functional imaging results
clearly demonstrate an increase in activation in the ventral-lexical
reading stream as a function of a name words reading strategy, and
thus support the idea of strategic control of reliance on the ventrallexical stream, particularly over any account that does not subscribe to such strategic reliance (e.g., Kinoshita & Lupker, 2002,
2003).
4.7. Single-mechanism PDP models
Single-mechanism PDP Models (e.g., Desroches et al., 2012;
Plaut & Booth, 2000) may find the current results to be a bit of a
challenge. Such models have been developed to account for the basic effect of Word Type (REG, EXC), and the Word Type by WF
interaction, on RT by a `division-of-labor' between an Orthography-Phonology (O-P) pathway and an Orthography-Semantics-
Phonology (O-S-P) pathway (e.g., Harm & Seidenberg, 2004,
although ``pathway'' is a bit of a misnomer here since these models
subscribe to parallel distributed processing (PDP), and so activation
occurs in parallel across the entire network). Larger WF effects for
EXCs are thought to occur due to the additional WF-sensitive connections involved in the O-S-P pathway, compared to the O-P
pathway that REG reading is thought to rely on. There is no distinct
orthographic lexicon in these models, unlike the dual-stream models, and so instructions to read by first checking the orthographic
lexicon (name words, based on spelling) raises a challenge in and
of itself. Waiting (to any degree) for the O units to settle on the
word's pattern of activation and using that information to gate processing in the S and P units might be a solution, but such ``stagelike'' or ``cascaded'' processing is counter to the Parallel definition
of these models (Plaut & Booth, 2000; and see the debate by
Borowsky and Besner (2006), Plaut and Booth (2006), and Besner
and Borowsky (2006) for additional discussion of these issues).
Alternatively, perhaps the level of familiarity with the stimulus

212

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

Grapheme to Phoneme
Conversion
(ant.Insula)

Phonological
Lexical
System

Phonological
Output
System

(post.Insula IF)

(SMA-M1)

Orthographic
Encoding
Orthographic
Lexical
System
(IT-MT)

Instructions

Semantic
System
(IT-MT-AT-Frontal-PreM)

Word Frequency

Word Type

Fig. 5. Example of a dual-stream, ventral-lexical, dorsal-sublexical, cascaded processing framework for basic reading processes. The effects of instructions and word type are
additive on RT, and thus these variables affect systems where the onset of activation is temporally separable, whereas word frequency interacts with both instructions and
word type, overadditively on RT, and thus these variables affect systems in common.

in the network is assessed by monitoring how close activation patterns in the O and S (and perhaps even P) units are to the basins of
attraction that represent word knowledge (e.g., such as Borowsky
and Masson's (1996), simulation of lexical decision in such models). However, this account would be easier to defend if activation
in regions known to be involved in S and P processing (including
regions in the parietal-frontal network) were also found to be more
active under the name word instructions of the experiment reported here. Finally, and perhaps most challenging, is the presence
of additive effects on RT (i.e., Instructions and Word Type) in the
same range of RTs that also show overadditive interactions (i.e.,
WF by Instructions interaction, and the standard WF by Word Type
interaction under the typical name all condition). Although a sigmoid activation function within a single-mechanism PDP model
has been explored as a means to account for both additivity and
overadditive interactions (Plaut & Booth, 2000), this approach is
problematic as additive effects can only arise equidistant from
the center of the sigmoid input-output function, yet additive effects occur regularly within the very same range of RTs as overadditive effects, as demonstrated in the research reported here, and
elsewhere (see Borowsky & Besner, 2006 for a review).
Additive effects in the same range of RTs as overadditive effects
are still best accounted for by the additive factors logic originally
developed by Sternberg (1969; Borowsky & Besner, 1993). Additive
effects of two variables is easily accounted for by implementing the
effects of the two variables at two different timepoints in processing, which can be thought of as two systems with stage-like processing. These systems may be in cascade (e.g., Borowsky &
Besner, 1993; Coltheart et al., 2001; McClelland & Rumelhart,
1981) - all that is necessary is at least some delay between the initiation of activation in one system compared to the other1. Such a
delay is parsimonious with the known behavior of real neural net1
There has recently been some confusion about the interpretation of cascaded
processing with regards to parallel vs. stage-like models of basic reading processes.
We note that ``additive factors logic can be applied to a continuous (or ``cascade'')
processing framework'' (Borowsky & Besner, 1993, p. 834) and ``cascaded processing
can also yield additive effects of two factors on RT'' (Borowsky & Besner, 2006, p.181;
see also McClelland, 1979). Although Laszlo, Stites and Federmeier (2012, see also
Laszlo & Federmeier, 2011) have argued that cascaded processing does not fit with
stages-of-processing models, such a statement is incorrect as cascaded processing fits
very well within this framework. Indeed, cascaded processing could be argued to be
problematic for any exclusively-parallel processing model, as these models would be
challenged by any degree of delay in the onset of activation between subsystems (i.e.,
cascaded processing), given that the assumption of parallel processing implies that all
subsystems are activated simultaneously.

works, and thus it can also be argued to be a necessary characteristic
in all neurobiological models. Overadditive effects of two variables
can be accounted for by implementing the effects of the two variables
within the same system of processing (e.g., by affecting its activation
rate, threshold, or baseline activation level). Dual-stream models of
reading can readily handle the overadditive interactions of WF with
Instructions and Word Type and the additivity between Instructions
and Word Type as long as cascaded processing (i.e., some degree of
delay of activation in systems downstream), is assumed. For example,
one can account for the overadditive interaction between Instructions and WF by assuming that Instructions have a relatively early effect along with WF (Instructions to name words serving to gate
processing through the Orthographic Lexical system, and WF affecting the connections from the Orthographic Lexical system to other later word-level representation systems downstream; e.g., Borowsky &
Besner, 1993, 2006). One can also account for the overadditive interaction between WF and Word Type under typical naming instructions by assuming that WF affects the same later word-level
representation system that is affected by Word Type (e.g., the Phonological Output system, or buffer, in the SMA, see Cummine et al.,
2010). Given that WF has both a relatively early and a relatively later
effect, there must be at least one cascaded system to separate the effects of Instructions from interacting with the effects of Word Type on
RT. Given that Word Type has already been shown to have an effect as
far downstream/late as the SMA/Phonological Output system, the observed additivity between Instructions and Word Type would be easily accounted for by this framework (see Fig. 5 for an example of such
a framework, and Borowsky & Besner, 1993, 2006, for examples of
activation functions and thresholds that yield additive and overadditive joint effects). Although REG and EXC words can be processed
along both routes (although not correctly in the case of EXC words),
the selection of a phonological output has to occur fairly late. For
example, an EXC word like pint would yield two different pronunciations along the lexical and sublexical streams, whereas a REG word
like mint would yield the same pronunciation along both streams.
It would not be until the phonological output system that an actual
selection between the two pronunciations in the case of an EXC word,
or the acceptance of both pronunciations in the case of a REG word,
would need to take place.
5. Conclusion
Our findings are particularly important for neurobiological
models of reading, and for researchers interested in the strategic

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

effects of instructions on reading processes. We provided a direct
demonstration that participants can increase their reliance on the
ventral-lexical processing stream as a function of task instructions
to read lexically (i.e., name words, as based on spelling), both in
terms of fMRI activation and WF effects on RT. We argue that these
strategic effects of Instructions, as well as the pattern of joint effects on RT between Instructions, WF and Word Type, are best handled by dual-stream (ventral-lexical, dorsal-sublexical) models of
reading, with cascaded (as opposed to parallel) processing. As such,
these results also provide an interesting challenge to single-mechanism, parallel distributed processing, models.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada in the form
of research grants to J.C. and R.B., and a research assistantship to
L.G. The lead author (J.C.) and senior author (R.B.) contributed
equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to Ron
Borowsky (ron.borowsky@usask.ca) at Department of Psychology,
University of Saskatchewan, 9 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5A5, or Jacqueline Cummine (jcummine@ualberta.ca) at
the Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology, University of
Alberta, 8205 114St, 2-70 Corbett Hall, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G4.

References
Andrews, S. (1982). Phonological recoding: Is the regularity effect consistent?
Memory & Cognition, 10, 565-575.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Kessler, B., Loftis, B., et al.
(2007). The English lexicon project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445-459.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., & Cortese, M. J. (2006). Visual word recognition: The journey
from features to meaning (a travel update). In M. Traxler & M. A. Gernsbacher
(Eds.), Handbook of psycholinguistics (2nd ed., pp. 285-375). Amsterdam:
Academic Press.
Besner, D., & Borowsky, R. (2006). Postscript: Plaut and Booth's (2006) new
simulations - What have we learned? Psychological Review, 113, 194-195.
Binder, J. R., Medler, D. A., Desai, R., Conant, L. L., & Liebenthal, E. (2005). Some
neuropsychological constraints on models of word naming. NeuroImage, 27,
677-693.
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2011). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer [Computer
program]. Version 5.2.34. <http://www.praat.org/> Retrieved 03.08.11.
Bokde, A. L. W., Tagamets, M. A., Friedman, R. B., & Horwitz, B. (2001). Functional
interactions of the inferior frontal cortex during the processing of words and
wordlike stimuli. Neuron, 30, 609-617.
Borowsky, R., & Besner, D. (1993). Visual word recognition: A multistage activation
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19,
813-840.
Borowsky, R., & Besner, D. (2006). Parallel distributed processing and lexicalsemantic effects in visual word recognition: Are a few stages necessary?
Psychological Review, 113, 181-193.
Borowsky, R., Cummine, J., Owen, W. J., Friesen, C. K., Shih, F., & Sarty, G. (2006).
FMRI of ventral and dorsal processing streams in basic reading processes:
Insular sensitivity to phonology. Brain Topography, 18, 233-239.
Borowsky, R., Esopenko, C., Cummine, J., & Sarty, G. (2007). Neural representations
of visual words and objects: A functional MRI study on the modularity of
reading and object processing. Brain Topography, 20, 89-96.
Borowsky, R., Esopenko, C., Gould, L., Kuhlmann, N., Sarty, G. & Cummine, J. (in
press). Localisation of function for noun and verb reading: Converging evidence
for shared processing from fMRI activation and reaction time. Language and
Cognitive Processes (Special Section on the Cognitive Neuroscience of Language).
Borowsky, R., Loehr, J., Friesen, C. K., Kraushaar, G., Kingstone, A., & Sarty, G. (2005).
Modularity and intersection of `what', `where', and `how' processing of visual
stimuli: A new method of fMRI localization. Brain Topography, 18, 67-75.
Borowsky, R., Owen, W. J., & Fonos, N. (1999). Reading speech and hearing print:
Constraining models of visual word recognition by exploring connections with
speech perception. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology (Special Issue:
Visual Word Recognition) (5), 294-305.
Borowsky, R., Owen, W. J., & Masson, M. E. J. (2002). Diagnostics of phonological
lexical processing: Pseudohomophone naming advantages, disadvantages, and
baseword frequency effects. Memory & Cognition, 30, 969-987.
Borowsky, R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1996). Semantic ambiguity effects in wordidentification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 63-85.
Castles, A., & Coltheart, M. (1993). Varieties of developmental dyslexia. Cognition,
47, 149-180.

213

Cohen, L., Dehaene, S., Vinckier, F., Jobert, A., & Montavont, A. (2008). Reading
normal and degraded words: Contribution of the dorsal and ventral visual
pathways. NeuroImage, 40, 353-356.
Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2009). Ventral and dorsal contribution to word reading. In
M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), Cognitive neuroscience (4th ed.. MIT Press.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993). Models of reading aloud:
Dual-route and parallel-distributed-processing approaches. Psychological
Review, 100, 589-608.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J., & Besner, D. (1977). Access to the internal
lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and performance VI (pp. 535-555). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler, J. (2001). DRC: A dual route
cascaded model of visual word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological
Review, 108(1), 204-256.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, 29,
162-173. AFNI 3-d anatomical brain available at: http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/
old/afni/astrip+orig.HEAD (and BRIK).
Cummine, J., Borowsky, R., Vakorin, V., Bird, J., & Sarty, G. (2008). The relationship
between naming reaction time and functional MRI parameters in Broca's area.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 26, 824-834.
Cummine, J., Sarty, G., & Borowsky, R. (2010). Localizing the frequency  regularity
word reading interaction in the cerebral cortex. Neuropsychologia, 48,
2147-2157.
Cummine, J., Stockdale-Winder, F., Crossley, M., & Borowsky, R. (2009). Language
function and dyslexia following hemispherectomy for intractable epilepsy.
Epilepsy and Behaviour, 15, 470-475.
Declaration of Helsinki (2008). World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki:
Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. Available
from: http://www.who.int/en/.
Desroches, A. S., McNorgan, C., Minas, J. E., & Booth, J. R. (2012). Lexicality effects
constrain models of the neural basis of reading development. Brain and
Language: (Special Issue on Neurobiology of Reading), submitted for publication.
Esopenko, C., Borowsky, R., Cummine, J., & Sarty, G. E. (2008). Mapping the semantic
homunculus: A functional and behavioural analysis of overt semantic
generation. Brain Topography, 21, 22-35.
Esopenko, C., Gould, L., Cummine, J., Sarty, G., Kuhlmann, N., & Borowsky, R. (2012).
A neuroanatomical examination of embodied cognition: Semantic generation to
action-related stimuli. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (Special Section on
Semantic Richness Effects) 6. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00084.
Fiebach, C. J., Friederici, A. D., Muller, K., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2002). FMRI evidence
for dual routes to the mental lexicon in visual word recognition. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 11-23.
Gold, B. T., Balota, D. A., Kirchhoff, B. A., & Buckner, R. L. (2005). Common and
dissociable activation patterns associated with controlled semantic and
phonological processing: Evidence from FMRI adaptation. Cerebral Cortex, 15,
1438-1450.
Gold, B. T., Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D., Snyder, A. Z., Salat, D.
H., et al. (2005). Differing neuropsychological and neuroanatomical correlates of
abnormal reading in early-stage semantic dementia and dementia of the
Alzheimer type. Neuropsychologia, 43, 833-846.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the meanings of words in
reading: Cooperative division of labor between visual and phonological
processes. Psychological Review, 111, 662-720.
Herbster, A. N., Mintun, M. A., Nebes, R. D., & Becker, J. T. (1997). Regional cerebral
blood flow during word and nonword reading. Human Brain Mapping, 5, 84-92.
Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2004). Dorsal and ventral streams: A framework for
understanding aspects of the functional anatomy of language. Cognition, 92,
67-99.
Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 393-402.
Indefrey, P., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2004). The spatial and temporal signatures of word
production components. Cognition, 92, 101-144.
Jobard, G., Crivello, F., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2003). Evaluation of the dual route
theory of reading: A metanalysis of 35 neuroimaging studies. NeuroImage, 20,
693-712.
Joubert, S., Beauregard, M., Walter, N., Bourgouin, P., Beaudoin, G., Leroux, J., et al.
(2004). Neural correlates of lexical and sublexical processes in reading. Brain
and Language, 89, 9-20.
Kinoshita, S., & Lupker, S. J. (2002). Effects of filler type in naming: Change in time
criterion or attentional control of pathways? Memory and Cognition, 30,
1277-1287.
Kinoshita, S., & Lupker, S. J. (2003). Priming and attentional control of lexical and
sublexical pathways in naming: A re-evaluation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 405-415.
Laszlo, S., & Federmeier, K. D. (2011). The N400 as a snapshot of interactive
processing: Evidence from regression analyses of orthographic neighbor and
lexical associate effects. Psychophysiology, 48, 176-186.
Laszlo, S., Stites, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2012). Won't get fooled again: An eventrelated potential study of task and repetition effects on the semantic processing
of items without semantics. Language and Cognitive Processes, 27, 257-274.
Marshall, J. C., & Newcombe, F. (1980). The conceptual status of deep dyslexia: An
historical perspective. In M. Coltheart, K. Patterson, & J. C. Marshall (Eds.), Deep
dyslexia (pp. 1-21). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
McCann, R. S., & Besner, D. (1987). Reading pseudohomophones: Implications for
models of pronunciation assembly and the locus of word-frequency effects in

214

J. Cummine et al. / Brain & Language 125 (2013) 203-214

naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
13, 14-24.
McClelland, J. L. (1979). On the time relations of mental processes: A framework for
analyzing processes in cascade. Psychological Review, 86, 287-330.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation model of
context effects in letter perception: Part 1. An account of basic findings.
Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.
McDermott, K. B., Petersen, S. E., Watson, J. M., & Ojemann, J. G. (2003). A procedure
for identifying regions preferentially activated by attention to semantic and
phonological relations using functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 293-303.
McDougall, P., Borowsky, R., MacKinnon, G. E., & Hymel, S. (2005). Process
dissociation of sight vocabulary and phonetic decoding in reading: A new
perspective on surface and phonological dyslexias. Brain and Language, 92,
185-203.
McNamara, T. (2005). Semantic priming: Perspectives from memory and word
recognition. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Monsell, S., Patterson, K., Graham, A., Hughes, C. H., & Milroy, R. (1992). Lexical and
sublexical translations of spelling to sound: Strategic anticipation of lexical
status. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18,
452-467.
Morton, J. (1979). Facilitation in word recognition: Experiments causing change in
the logogen model. In P. A. Kolers, W. E. Wrolstad, & M. Bouma (Eds.). Processing
visible language (Vol. 1, pp. 259-268). New York: Plenum Press.
Newman, R. L., & Joanisse, M. F. (2011). Modulation of brain regions involved in
word recognition by homophonous stimuli: An fMRI study. Brain Research, 1367,
250-264.
Owen, W. J., & Borowsky, R. (2003). Examining the interactivity of lexical
orthographic and phonological processing. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57, 290-303.
Paap, K. R., & Noel, R. W. (1991). Dual route models of print to sound: Still a good
horse race. Psychological Research Psychologische Forschung, 53, 13-24.
Patterson, K. E. (1982). The relation between reading and phonological coding:
Further neuropsychological observations. In A. W. Ellis (Ed.), Normality and
pathology in cognitive functions (pp. 77-111). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. (1992). Deterioration of word meaning: Implications for
word reading. Neuropsychologia, 30, 1025-1040.
Plaut, D. C., & Booth, J. R. (2000). Individual and developmental differences in
semantic priming: Empirical and computational support for a singlemechanism account of lexical processing. Psychological Review, 107, 786-823.
Plaut, D. C., & Booth, J. R. (2006). More modelling but still no stages: Reply to
Borowsky and Besner. Psychological Review, 113, 196-200.
Posner, M. I., & Raichle, M. E. (1994). Images of mind. New York: Scientific American
Library.
Price, C. J. (2010). The anatomy of language: A review of 100 fMRI studies published
in 2009. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1191, 62-88.
Price, C. J., & Devlin, J. T. (2003). The myth of the visual word form area. NeuroImage,
19, 473-481.

Price, C. J., Moore, C. J., Humphreys, G. W., & Wise, R. J. S. (1997). Segregating
semantic from phonological processes during reading. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 9, 727-733.
Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Jenner, A. R., Katz, L., Frost, S. J., Lee, J. R., et al. (2000).
Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability
(developmental dyslexia). Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities
Research Reviews, 6, 207-213.
Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (1999). Lexical and nonlexical phonological priming in
reading aloud. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Perception, 25, 461-481.
Reynolds, M., & Besner, D. (2005). Basic processes in reading: A critical review of
pseudohomophone effects in reading aloud and a new computational account.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 622-646.
Sandak, R., Mencl, W. E., Frost, S. J., Rueckl, J. G., Katz, L., Moore, D. L., et al. (2004).
The neurobiology of adaptive learning in reading: A contrast of different
training conditions. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 67-88.
Schurz, M., Sturm, D., Richlan, F., Kronbichler, M., Ladruner, G., & Wimmer, H.
(2010). A dual-route perspective on brain activation in response to visual
words: Evidence for a length by lexicality interaction in the visual word form
area (VWFA). NeuroImage, 49, 2649-2661.
Seidenberg, M. S., Waters, G. S., Barnes, M. A., & Tanenhaus, M. (1984). When does
irregular spelling or pronunciation influence word recognition? Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 383-404.
Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Fulbright, R. K., Skudlarski,
P., et al. (2002). Disruption of posterior brain systems for reading in children
with developmental dyslexia. Biological Psychiatry, 52, 101-110.
Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K. (1980). Single and multiple component central
dyslexic syndromes. In M. Coltheart, K. Patterson, & J. C. Marshall (Eds.), Deep
dyslexia (pp. 119-145). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Shallice, T., Warrington, E. K., & McCarthy, R. (1983). Reading without semantics.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 35A, 111-138.
Simos, P. G., Breier, J. I., Fletcher, J. M., Foorman, B. R., Castillo, E. M., & Papanicolaou,
A. C. (2002). Brain mechanisms for reading words and pseudowords: An
integrated approach. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 297-305.
Simos, P. G., Fletcher, J. M., Sarkari, S., Billingsley-Marshall, R., Denton, C. A., &
Papanicolaou, A. C. (2007). Intensive instruction affects brain magnetic activity
associated with oral word reading in children with persistent reading
disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 40, 37-48.
Sternberg, S. (1969). Memory-scanning: Mental processes revealed by reactiontime experiments. American Scientist, 57, 421-457.
Talairach, J., & Tournoux, P. (1988). Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain.
New York, NY: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.
Wise, R. J. S., & Price, C. J. (2006). Functional neuroimaging of language. In R. Cabeza
& A. Kingstone (Eds.), Handbook of functional neuroimaging of cognition (2nd ed.,
pp. 191-228). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Zevin, J. D., & Balota, D. A. (2000). Priming and attentional control of lexical and
sublexical pathways during naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 121-135.

