Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 2013, 35, 353-387.
doi:10.1017/S0272263112000915

WHEN GENDER AND LOOKING
GO HAND IN HAND
Grammatical Gender Processing
In L2 Spanish

Paola E. Dussias
Penn State University, Center for Language Science

Jorge R. Valdes Kroff
University of Pennsylvania

Rosa E. Guzzardo Tamargo
Universidad de Puerto Rico

Chip Gerfen
American University

In a recent study, Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007) showed that native
Spanish speakers use grammatical gender information encoded in
Spanish articles to facilitate the processing of upcoming nouns. In
this article, we report the results of a study investigating whether grammatical gender facilitates noun recognition during second language (L2)
processing. Sixteen monolingual Spanish participants (control group)
The writing of this article was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
grant BCS-0821924 to Paola E. Dussias and Chip Gerfen, by NSF grants BCS-0955090 and
OISE-0968369 to Judith F. Kroll and Paola E. Dussias, and by a National Science Foundation
graduate research fellowship to Jorge Valdes Kroff. We would like to thank the audience
at Penn State's Center for Language Science and the audience at the 2010 Second Language
Research Forum for helpful comments. All errors are our own.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Paola E. Dussias, 237
Burrowes Building, Department of Spanish, Italian & Portuguese, Penn State University,
University Park, PA 16802; E-mail: pdussias@psu.edu
(c) Cambridge University Press 2013

353

354

Paola E. Dussias et al.
and 18 English-speaking learners of Spanish (evenly divided into
high and low Spanish proficiency) saw two-picture visual scenes in
which items matched or did not match in gender. Participants' eye
movements were recorded while they listened to 28 sentences in
which masculine and feminine target items were preceded by an
article that agreed in gender with the two pictures or agreed only with
one of the pictures. An additional group of 15 Italian learners of Spanish
was tested to examine whether the presence of gender in the first
language (L1) modulates the degree to which gender is used during
L2 processing. Data were analyzed by comparing the proportion of
eye fixations on the objects in each condition. Monolingual Spanish
speakers looked sooner at the referent on different-gender trials than
on same-gender trials, replicating results reported in past literature.
Italian-Spanish bilinguals exhibited a gender anticipatory effect, but
only for the feminine condition. For the masculine condition, participants waited to hear the noun before identifying the referent. Like the
Spanish monolinguals, the highly proficient English-Spanish speakers
showed evidence of using gender information during online processing, whereas the less proficient learners did not. The results suggest
that both proficiency in the L2 and similarities between the L1 and the L2
modulate the usefulness of morphosyntactic information during speech
processing.

Relative to the extensive psycholinguistic literature on gender agreement
during lexical and syntactic processing in monolinguals (e.g., Barber &
Carreiras, 2005; Bates, Devescovi, Hernandez, & Pizzamiglio, 1996; Cole &
Segui, 1994; Costa, Kovacic, Fedorenko, & Caramazza, 2003; Cubelli, Lotto,
Paolieri, Girelli, & Job, 2005; Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus, & Magnuson,
2000; Faussart, Jakubowicz, & Costes, 1999; Friederici & Jacobsen, 1999;
Grosjean, Dommergues, Cornu, Guillelmon, & Besson, 1994; Gurjanov,
Lukatela, Lukatela, Savi, & Turvey, 1985; Jacobsen, 1999; Jakubowicz &
Faussart, 1998; Jescheniak, 1999; Schmidt, 1986; van Berkum, 1996),
surprisingly little is known about how grammatical gender constrains
processing in a second language (L2). Most studies in the SLA tradition
have utilized gender agreement not to investigate processing per se but
rather as a tool for adjudicating between competing theories within
generative approaches to SLA (Bruhn de Garavito & White, 2002; Carroll,
1989; Franceschina, 2005; Hawkins & Chan, 1997; McCarthy, 2007;
Montrul, 2004; Montrul, Foote, & Perpinan, 2008; White, Valenzuela,
Kozlowska-MacGregor, & Leung, 2004). Central to this debate is whether or
not adult L2 learners are able to acquire abstract grammatical features
in the L2 that are not instantiated in the first language (L1; e.g., Duffield &
White, 1999; Epstein, Flynn, & Martohardjono, 1996; Schwartz & Sprouse,

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

355

1994, 1996; White, 1989, 2003). The results reveal important asymmetries
between native and nonnative speakers, but the task that participants
must complete modulates these results. For oral or written production
tasks, L2 speakers show persistent problems with gender agreement,
consistently performing below the native speaker mark (Carroll, 1989;
Fernandez-Garcia, 1999; Franceschina, 2005; Hawkins & Franceschina,
2004; McCarthy, 2007). This also appears to be true for speakers who
have been immersed in the L2 environment for lengthy periods of time
(e.g., Franceschina, 2001). However, with comprehension-based tasks,
the results are less clear. Some studies show that performance by L2
speakers is indistinguishable from that of native speakers (e.g., Gess &
Herschensohn, 2001; White et al., 2004), whereas others report behavioral differences between the two groups that suggest underlying representational differences (e.g., Montrul et al., 2008).
Nevertheless, one striking generalization stands out: Specifically, across
numerous studies, the accuracy rate for gender assignment and gender
agreement is quite high, most often ranging between 80 and 90%. This is
true for speakers with and without grammatical gender in their L1
(e.g., the learners of Dutch in Sabourin, Stowe, & de Haan, 2006; the
learners of Spanish in White et al., 2004). Even those studies that argue
most strongly for fundamental representational differences between
native and nonnative speakers report accuracy rates above the 75-80%
mark. If researchers shift their focus away from evaluating knowledge of
grammatical gender in learners solely in terms of native speaker competence, they are left with the realization that learners do, in fact, exhibit
a high degree of knowledge of the target language gender system, even
if that knowledge is not identical to that of native speakers who perform
at ceiling on the tasks that have been employed. This, in turn, suggests
that important questions remain if scholars are to reach a more comprehensive understanding of what L2 speakers can do with the gender
system of the L2. Most relevant here is the observation that the relatively high level of accuracy exhibited by L2 learners leads us to ask
whether learners access and use the knowledge they have acquired
about grammatical gender in their L2 during online processing.
To address this question, we explore whether adult L2 speakers of
Spanish process gender-marked articles similarly to native speakers. In
a recent study, Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007) showed that native
Spanish speakers use grammatical gender information encoded in Spanish
articles to facilitate the processing of upcoming nouns. Building on this
finding, we asked whether L2 speakers of Spanish whose L1 (English)
lacks grammatical gender can exploit gender information in articles to
speed up lexical processing. An additional group of Italian learners of
Spanish was also tested to investigate whether having gender in the L1
modulates the degree to which gender is used during L2 processing.
By expanding the scope of gender agreement research to processing,

356

Paola E. Dussias et al.

we argue, it becomes possible to contribute significantly to the debate
over whether and how grammatical gender is acquired during adult L2
learning.
GRAMMATICAL GENDER PROCESSING IN A L2
One important area of investigation in the L1 psycholinguistic literature
has focused on whether grammatical gender modulates lexical processing under the hypothesis that the presence of overt gender marking
may facilitate the processing of subsequent gender-marked target items
(e.g., Barber & Carreiras, 2005; Bates et al., 1996; Carello, Lukatela, &
Turvey, 1988; Cole & Segui, 1994; Costa et al., 2003; Dahan et al., 2000;
Faussart et al., 1999; Grosjean et al., 1994; Gurjanov et al., 1985; Hagoort &
Brown, 1999; Jacobsen, 1999; Jakubowicz & Faussart, 1998; Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2007; Schmidt, 1986; van Berkum, 1996). For example, when
speakers produce noun phrases (e.g., determiner + noun combinations,
such as la manzana "the FEM apple FEM") in response to a target picture,
the presence of a distractor word printed on the picture that matches
the picture in gender (e.g., camisa "shirtFEM") yields shorter naming
latencies. This so-called gender congruency effect has also been observed
in comprehension studies. For example, Grosjean et al. (1994) found
that when a French gender-marked article preceded a noun, listeners
needed to hear less of the noun to identify it and were significantly more
confident in their choices than when the gender-marked article was
absent. A subsequent auditory lexical decision experiment showed that
the presence of a prenominal modifier carrying gender (e.g., the article
une "a" in une jolie montre "a pretty watch") resulted in significantly
shorter reaction times than did its absence (e.g., jolie montre).
Likewise, gender mismatches yield inhibitory effects (e.g., Bates et al.,
1996; Carello et al., 1988; Cole & Segui, 1994; Faussart et al., 1999;
Gurjanov et al., 1985; Jacobsen, 1999; Jakubowicz & Faussart, 1998; LewWilliams & Fernald, 2007; Schiller, 2009; Schmidt, 1986; van Berkum,
1996; Wicha et al., 2005). Studies have shown that when the gender of an
article and an adjacent noun are incongruent (e.g., laFEM cuadernoMASC "the
book"), noun recognition is significantly slowed. Gender congruency
effects are robust in studies that use both visual tasks (e.g., Carello et al.,
1988; Cole & Segui, 1994; Cubelli et al., 2005; Gurjanov et al., 1985; Jacobsen,
1999; Jescheniak, 1999) and auditory tasks (e.g., Dahan et al., 2000;
Faussart et al., 1999; Grosjean et al., 1994; Jescheniak, 1999). They have
also been found for languages such as Spanish, which has two grammatical genders (e.g., Barber & Carreiras, 2005; Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007),
as well as for languages with more than two grammatically marked
genders, such as German and Serbo-Croatian (e.g., Gurjanov et al., 1985;
Jacobsen, 1999; van Berkum, 1996). The general consensus in the literature

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

357

is that gender marking is one variable among many (e.g., word frequency,
word length, neighborhood size) that have already been proposed to
account for the time it takes to identify a word (Grosjean et al., 1994).
There remains less consensus regarding how gender agreement affects
processing in the L2. A few recent neurophysiological studies that used
methods that are highly sensitive to the time course of comprehension
have provided evidence for both similarities and differences between
native and nonnative speakers' processing of grammatical gender. To
contextualize the logic of our own study, we highlight relevant results
in studies that investigated the possible contributions of both L1 and
language experience to gender processing in a L2.
Sabourin and Stowe (2008) used event-related potentials (ERPs) to
investigate whether simply having grammatical gender in the L1 modulated the detection of grammatical gender violations in the L2. Using the
so-called P600 as their index of syntactic anomaly detection (AinsworthDarnell, Shulman, & Boland, 1998; Gouvea, Phillips, Kazanina, & Poeppel,
2010; Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992), Sabourin and Stowe reported a P600
response during the processing of grammatical gender agreement
violations in the L2 only when the gender system of the L2 (Dutch)
was very similar to that of the L1 (German). When the two systems were
dissimilar--as was the case with Romance speakers proficient in
Dutch--they found no P600 effect in the L2 and concluded that the mere
presence of grammatical gender in the L1 does not lead to the recruitment
of the same type of neurological areas to process gender violations.
Other recent ERP evidence, however, suggests that under conditions
in which the gender agreement system of the L1 has little in common
with that of the L2 (see Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011, for French and
German) or even when grammatical gender is entirely absent in the L1
(Dowens, Vergara, Barber, & Carreiras, 2010), L2 speakers with enough
proficiency in the L2 show some of the same signature effects associated with native speaker detection of gender-agreement anomaly.
The ERP study in Dowens et al. (2010) is particularly interesting in
that it indicates that immersion experience in the L2 modulates sensitivity to grammatical gender in speakers whose L1 does not make grammatical gender distinctions. For within-phrase agreement violations,
results showed qualitatively similar ERP patterns between the L2
speakers and a control group of L1 Spanish speakers, consisting of an
early negativity followed by a P600 effect. The findings provided important evidence that L1 speakers of a language without grammatical gender
can show electrophysiological correlates during the processing of L2
gender agreement violations that are qualitatively similar to those of
native speakers (see also Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2012, for additional
supporting evidence as well as Morgan-Short, Sanz, Steinhauer, & Ullman,
2010, for evidence from an artificial language paradigm for effects of
proficiency and immersion-like learning of a L2).

358

Paola E. Dussias et al.

It is important to note, however, that most recent studies on gender
processing in the L2 have limited themselves to examining the time
course of processing gender agreement violations. Few L2 studies that
use techniques that provide a sensitive and continuous measure of realtime processing have investigated grammatical gender processing
under conditions of higher ecological validity (e.g., while participants
are engaged in tasks that require continuous spoken-language comprehension without the need to perform metalinguistic judgments or to
resort to the use of secondary tasks to obtain the dependent measure).
One exception is a recent study by Lew-Williams and Fernald (2010)
that employed the looking-while-listening technique--an eye-tracking
measure of real-time language processing--to examine whether English
learners of Spanish used the grammatical gender of articles to facilitate
the processing of upcoming nouns. They presented Spanish-speaking
adults with two-picture visual scenes in which the pictured objects either
matched in gender (e.g., pelota "ballFEM" displayed alongside galleta
"cookieFEM") or differed in gender (e.g., pelota "ballFEM" displayed with
carro "carMASC"). The researchers videotaped participants' gazes with a
digital camera while participants heard simple sentences that named
one of two pictured objects (e.g., encuentra la pelota "find the ball";
donde esta la pelota? "where is the ball?"). The task was to click on the
named object. A series of three experiments showed that when listening
to sentences that named both familiar and newly learned objects and
words, native speakers were able to orient their eyes toward target
objects more quickly on different-gender trials (i.e., when the gender
information in the article was informative) than on same-gender trials,
eliciting a so-called anticipatory effect. In other words, on different-gender
trials, native speakers of Spanish used gender information in the article
to identify the correct reference before hearing it in the instruction.
Second language speakers of Spanish, however, waited to hear the noun
to initiate a gaze shift. These findings suggested that the presence of a
congruent gender-marked article immediately preceding a noun does
not speed up lexical processing by L2 speakers.
One potentially crucial limitation of the Lew-Williams and Fernald
(2010) study is that the L2 learners were only moderately proficient in
Spanish. Results of a language history questionnaire showed that the
L2 participants had been exposed to Spanish in instructional settings,
including elementary school, middle school, high school, and college,
for an average of 5.5 years, and that their mean self-rated proficiency in
Spanish was 3.6 out of a possible 5. We previously noted that nearnative levels of grammatical gender processing are attainable when
L2 speakers have had extensive immersion experience in the L2 environment and are highly proficient speakers of the target language
(e.g., Dowens et al., 2010; Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011). It is thus likely
that the English-speaking participants in the Lew-Williams and Fernald

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

359

study were not sufficiently proficient in Spanish to exploit grammatical
gender information in articles in a manner resembling that of native
speakers of Spanish.
THE PRESENT STUDY
We address two of the central questions related to grammatical gender
processing as seen in the review of the recent neurophysiological work
in the previous section. First, we ask whether L1 speakers of a language
without grammatical gender show effects of prenominal gender marking
on the identification of subsequent words when processing a L2 with
grammatical gender. Second, because current models of L2 processing
demonstrate that processing is influenced by the native language
system (Dijkstra, 2005; Kroll & Stewart, 1994), we also examine whether
the presence of a gender system in the L1 that overlaps significantly
with the gender system of the L2 determines the extent to which grammatical gender processing in the L2 is nativelike. To investigate these
questions, we compared L1 speakers of English and Italian who were
highly proficient in Spanish to L1 Spanish speakers. To maximize ecological validity in the study of grammatical gender processing in the L2,
we employed the eye-tracking technique known as the visual-world
paradigm (e.g., Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998; Altmann &
Kamide, 1999; Cooper, 1974; Tanenhaus & Spivey-Knowlton, 1996;
Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995; Trueswell,
Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999). In one variation of the task, auditory
material is concurrently presented with a related visual scene containing
pictured objects that are displayed on a computer screen. The auditory
material plays spoken instructions related to the objects (e.g., click on
the bell), which participants are asked to follow. During the experiment,
participants' eye movements to the objects are recorded while the
name of the target object (i.e., the object mentioned in the instruction)
unfolds over time. Because eye movements to the visual scene are
closely time locked with the auditory input, and because eye movements are recorded while participants are presented with continuous
spoken language, the task provides a sensitive, implicit measure of processing in which responses are closely time locked to the input without
interrupting the flow of speech (Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 2006).
A third central goal of our study involves increasing the syntactic
complexity of the frames in which the target grammatical agreement
structures are embedded. Previous studies in which eye movements
are examined to investigate the role of gender-marked articles in spoken
word recognition have used spoken instructions in which the target
object is embedded in an invariant sentence context (e.g., encuentra la
pelota "find the ball," in Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007, 2010; cliquez sur

360

Paola E. Dussias et al.

le bouton "click on the button," in Dahan et al., 2000). Expectation-based
accounts of sentence processing (e.g., Levy, 2008) predict that invariant
contexts may facilitate the recognition of target nouns, given that words
are easier to comprehend in highly predictable contexts. Resourceallocation theories make similar predictions. Invariant sentence frames
presumably make fewer demands on cognitive resources than do more
elaborate sentence contexts and thus leave comparatively more resources
available for alternative processes to be engaged (e.g., when the display
contains different-gender objects, participants may use available resources
to focus on the gender of the article in the spoken instruction to predict
the upcoming noun). One important additional question, then, is to
examine whether the anticipatory effect reported when words are
embedded in invariant frames is observed when target words appear in
richer and more varied sentence contexts. In summary, the study was
guided by three principal research questions:
1. Do L1 speakers of a language without grammatical gender show effects of
prenominal gender marking on the identification of subsequent words when
processing a L2 with grammatical gender?
2. Does the presence of a gender system in the L1 that overlaps significantly
with the gender system of the L2 determine the extent to which grammatical
gender processing in the L2 is nativelike?
3. Is the anticipatory effect that emerges when words are embedded in invariant
frames also present when target words appear in richer and more varied
sentence contexts?

METHOD
Participants
Three groups of participants took part in this study: 16 functionally
monolingual native speakers of Spanish--who served as native controls--
from the University of Granada, Spain; 18 English-speaking learners of
Spanish from a large U.S. institution; and 16 Italian learners of Spanish
who had learned Spanish during adulthood and were completing a year
of university study in Granada. All received monetary compensation for
their participation. In a language history questionnaire--described in the
Materials section--the native group reported having studied English or
French in high school, and none had spent more than one month in a
country where the L2 was spoken. The mean self-reported score for
overall proficiency in the L2 on a 10-point scale on which 1 was the
lowest score and 10 was the highest score was 2.75 (range = 2.0-3.0),
indicating that the native speaker group was functionally monolingual.
The 18 English-Spanish speakers had learned Spanish during adulthood
(i.e., none were heritage speakers of Spanish). This group was divided

361

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

Table 1.
DELE

Mean percentage accuracy and standard deviation on the

Group

N

M

SD

English-Spanish (higher)
English-Spanish (lower)
Italian-Spanish

9
9
15

43.33 (41-45)
30.00 (21-38)
26.13 (16-41)

1.41
5.40
8.23

Note. Range provided in parentheses.

into two proficiency levels on the basis of their performance on a standardized test of Spanish (i.e., Diploma de Espanol como Lengua Extranjera "Diploma of Spanish as a Foreign Language"; DELE). We provide a
detailed description of the test and all other proficiency measures in
the Materials section. Because the median correct response was 41 (out
of a possible 50 points), we classified the participants whose score was
41 or higher as more proficient and those whose score was less than 41
as less proficient. Table 1 displays mean percentage accuracy, standard
deviation, and score ranges for the two English-Spanish groups and for
the Italian-Spanish participants. Two-tailed independent samples t tests
revealed a significant difference between the scores of the two groups
of English-Spanish speakers, t(16) = 7.15, p < .001, and between the
higher proficiency English-Spanish group and the Italian-Spanish group,
t(22) = 6.15, p < .001, but no difference between the lower proficiency
English-Spanish group and the Italian-Spanish group, t(22) = 1.25, p = .220.
As an additional measure of language proficiency, we administered a
picture-naming task in which participants produced article + noun fragments to describe pictures displayed on a computer screen. Results of
the picture-naming task are presented in Table 2. Two-tailed independent
samples t tests conducted on the correctly named pictures revealed
a significant difference between the two proficiency groups of EnglishSpanish speakers, t(16) = 6.40, p < .001, and between the higher proficiency
English-Spanish speakers and the Italian-Spanish group, t(22) = 4.33,
p < .001, but no significant differences between the lower proficiency
English-Spanish group and the Italian-Spanish group, t(22) = 1.42, p = .160.
Table 2. Mean percentage accuracy and standard deviation on the
picture-naming task
Group

N

M

SD

English-Spanish (higher)
English-Spanish (lower)
Italian-Spanish

9
9
15

62.55 (60-68)
49.29 (45-56)
52.80 (42-65)

3.08
5.38
6.49

Note. Range provided in parentheses.

362

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Further examination showed that when participants correctly named a
picture, they were also highly accurate in supplying the correct article.
On average, the higher proficiency English-Spanish group was 98.9%
accurate (SD = 1.15), the lower proficiency English-Spanish group was
92.1% accurate (SD = 2.00), and the Italian-Spanish group was 97.6%
accurate (SD = 2.97). This indicates that all three groups were knowledgeable in gender marking in Spanish.
Finally, to assess knowledge of gender assignment in comprehension,
we administered a written picture-identification task. Table 3 provides
mean percentage accuracy and standard deviation for the three groups
of participants. Two-tailed independent samples t tests revealed a significant difference between the two groups of English-Spanish participants,
t(16) = 5.63, p < .001. There was also a significant difference between the
higher proficiency English-Spanish group and the Italian-Spanish group,
t(22) = 2.66, p = .014, but no significant difference between the lower
proficiency English-Spanish participants and the Italian-Spanish group,
t(22) = 1.54, p = .130. The results indicate that the higher proficiency
English-Spanish participants were more competent in gender assignment
in Spanish than the two other groups. Nevertheless, the high mean correct responses of the lower proficiency English-Spanish group and the
Italian-Spanish group suggest that gender assignment in Spanish for
these participants proved largely unproblematic. Participants knew the
agreement rules in Spanish and applied them with a high degree of
accuracy in a production task and a comprehension task. One remaining
question is whether these same participants can access this knowledge
during online processing of grammatical gender in Spanish.

Materials
Proficiency Measure for the Monolingual Speakers of Spanish: Language
History Questionnaire. To assess whether these speakers had knowledge

of a L2, the native control group completed a language history questionnaire designed to tap into several aspects of language proficiency and
Table 3. Mean percentage accuracy and standard deviation on the
written picture-identification task
Group

N

M

SD

English-Spanish (higher)
English-Spanish (lower)
Italian-Spanish

9
9
15

31.33 (30-32)
26.44 (24-32)
28.38 (22-32)

0.86
2.45
3.23

Note. Range provided in parentheses.

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

363

use by self-report (e.g., language dominance; level of proficiency in
reading, writing, speaking, and listening; number of years that they
studied the L2; length of stay in a country where the L2 was spoken).
The self-rated proficiency measure was a 10-point scale with 1 being the
lowest score and 10 being the highest score.
Proficiency Measures for the L2 Groups. For the English-Spanish and
the Italian-Spanish participants, proficiency in Spanish was assessed
via the use of three measures.

DELE. Overall knowledge of Spanish was assessed by administering
a section of the DELE. The DELE is a standardized test of Spanish issued
by the Ministry of Education, Culture, and Sport of Spain, which tests
proficiency in Spanish at seven levels. More information is available at
http://diplomas.cervantes.es/en. We administered the Nivel Superior C2
"Superior Level C2", the highest level of accreditation. The test had
a maximum score of 50 points and was comprised of three sections:
a cloze test, a vocabulary test that included highly specialized uses of
the language, and a multiple-choice grammar test. Participants received
1 point for each correct answer and 0 points for incorrect answers.
Picture-naming task. As an additional measure of language proficiency,
we administered a picture-naming task. Seventy-two pictures referencing words that range in lexical frequency from low (e.g., trineo "sled")
to high (e.g., mesa "table") appeared, one by one, on a computer screen.
The participants' task was to name each picture along with an accompanying definite article (for trineo the expected answer was el trineo). We
chose a picture-naming task because Moreno and Kutas (2005) recently
showed that proficiency in vocabulary (as measured by a picture-naming
task) affects how quickly L2 speakers recognize and integrate words
into a sentence context. Because we required participants to provide
article + noun fragments, the picture-naming task also served as a
way to assess knowledge of gender assignment in a production task.
Responses were scored by one of the experimenters, who assigned a
score of 1 to correctly named pictures. All pictures that participants did
not name or that they named incorrectly received a 0.
Picture-identification task. Finally, to assess knowledge of gender
assignment and agreement in comprehension, we administered a written
picture-identification task closely modeled after White et al. (2004) and
Montrul et al. (2008). The task, which exploits the availability of nominal ellipsis in Spanish, required participants to complete sentences that
were part of a conversation between two individuals who were packing
a suitcase for an upcoming vacation. The task included 32 items targeting gender agreement (taken from Appendix A in Montrul et al., 2008)

364

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Figure 1.

Sample item from the picture-identification task.

and 16 filler items. Across different varieties of Spanish, objects can vary
both in name and grammatical gender. Therefore, we followed Montrul
et al. in providing the name of the object below each picture. A sample
is given in Figure 1 (objects appeared in color). We assigned a score of
1 to participants' correct responses and a score of 0 to their incorrect
responses.
Eye-Tracking Experiment. The eye-tracking portion of the experiment
included 112 color pictures of highly familiar concrete objects (see the
appendix). Half represented Spanish object names with feminine gender and half with masculine gender. The vast majority of the feminine
object names (93%) ended in -a, the pattern most typically associated
with feminine gender in Spanish. Endings for the masculine object
names included the vowels -o (69%) and -e (12%) as well as a number of
consonants (e.g., -l [caracol "snail"], -z [arroz "rice"], -j [reloj "watch"]),
reflecting the fact that Spanish masculine phonological endings are less
restricted. Lexical frequency for the masculine items did not differ significantly from the feminine items, t(94.77) = 0.88, p = .370.1
Each picture served as the target on one trial and as a distractor on
an additional trial. An example is provided in Table 4.
Because readers of left-to-right languages show a bias to view the left
side of the screen before viewing the right side, we counterbalanced the
presentation side of target items such that each target appeared on the
left and on the right side of the screen, as shown in Table 5.

Table 4.

Snapshot of the experimental design

Condition 1
Fem

Fem

Condition 2
Masc

Masc

Condition 3
Masc

Fem

Condition 4
Fem

Masc

Target Distractor Target Distractor Target Distractor Target Distractor
pera
"pear"

bufanda
"scarf"

reloj
"watch"

pozo
"well"

Note. Fem = feminine, Masc = masculine.

pozo
"well"

pera
"pear"

bufanda
"scarf"

reloj
"watch"

365

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

Table 5. Sample of the counterbalance design
Condition 1
Fem

Fem

Condition 2
Masc

Masc

Condition 3
Masc

Fem

Condition 4
Fem

Masc

Distractor Target Distractor Target Distractor Target Distractor Target
bufanda
"scarf"

pera
"pear"

pozo
"well"

reloj
"watch"

pera
"pear"

pozo
"well"

reloj
"watch"

bufanda
"scarf"

Note. Fem = feminine, Masc = masculine.

To investigate whether a gender facilitatory effect occurs when participants process sentence contexts, we embedded the picture names
in variable sentences, and we distributed the target items evenly so that
half appeared in the middle of the sentence (e.g., for el reloj "the clock":
El estudiante estaba dibujando el reloj que vio ayer "The student was
drawing the clock that he saw yesterday") and half at the end (e.g., El nino
miraba a su hermano mientras fotografiaba el reloj "The boy watched his
brother taking a picture of the clock"). To conceal the main purpose of
the experiment, after listening to each sentence, participants performed
a plausibility judgment task. Half of the sentences were plausible
(e.g., like those previously exemplified) and half implausible (e.g., El
senor compro el reloj para la piedra "The man bought the clock for the
rock"). During debriefing, participants confirmed they were not aware
that the focus of the experiment was grammatical gender.
A female speaker of Puerto Rican Spanish, who is also a trained
linguist, recorded each experimental sentence between three and five
times at a comfortable speaking rate in a sound-attenuated chamber
with a Shure SM57 microphone on a Marantz Solid State Recorder
PMD670 at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. The sentences were produced
using standard, broad-focus intonation (i.e., no narrow focus or other
emphasis was produced on any of the target noun phrases). From the
master recordings, one token was selected for inclusion in the experiment. To precisely match the durational properties of the masculine
and feminine articles for all of the experimental items, the article preceding the target noun in each selected sentence was edited by hand to
a duration of 147 ms  3 ms using Praat (Boersma, 2001). This duration
was chosen by sampling the master recordings and calculating a mean
duration of the masculine and feminine articles. In this way, the duration of the acoustic signal conveying grammatical gender prior to the
onset of the target noun was identical across all items.
Picture-Naming Verification Task. To ensure that participants could
correctly name the pictures that appeared in the eye-tracking session,

366

Paola E. Dussias et al.

we administered a picture-naming verification task. This task included
the 112 pictures used in the experiment as well as 10 additional pictures.
Half of the 112 experimental pictures comprised the target items in the
eye-tracking experiment and, therefore, had been previously named in
the auditory presentation of the sentences. The remaining 56 experimental pictures comprised the distractor items in the eye-tracking
experiment. Thus, participants had not previously heard those names.
Participants saw the pictures one at a time and were asked to say the
name of each picture into a microphone. A score of 1 was given to
correctly named pictures. One of the experimenters scored correctly
named pictures as 1. All pictures that participants did not name or the
ones that they named incorrectly received a 0.

Procedure
After providing their consent, participants completed the eye-tracking
experiment. Participants' eye movements were recorded using an Eyelink II eye-tracker manufactured by SR Research. Viewing was binocular,
but eye movements were recorded from the left eye only.2 Stimuli were
presented on a color 17-in. ViewSonic 17PS monitor; participants were
seated 65 cm from the monitor and rested their chins comfortably on a
chin rest. Calibration was checked on each trial, and spatial resolution
was better than 0.5 degrees. To begin each trial, participants looked at
a fixation point in the center of the computer screen. Subsequently, two
pictures appeared on the screen, and a sentence was played simultaneously in which the name of one of the two pictures was mentioned.
Participants clicked on the picture named in the sentence. After selection, the display disappeared, and two squares appeared on the screen,
one with the word plausible and one with the word implausible printed
inside. Participants then made a plausibility judgment for each sentence
by clicking on one of the squares. Ten practice sentences preceded the
experimental items. The session lasted approximately 18 min. After
completing the eye-tracking experiment, the participants were administered the language history questionnaire, the picture-naming task,
and the DELE. After a short break, participants completed the written
identification task and the picture-naming verification task.

Analysis
There is no clear consensus on the best way to analyze proportional
data obtained with the visual-world paradigm (see special issue 59 of

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

367

the Journal of Memory and Language for topics on eye-tracking data
analysis). In particular, researchers are confronted with a critical
decision on how participants are allowed to interact with the visual
scene (i.e., free-view or fixed-view presentation). Both methods have
their advantages and disadvantages. Allowing free view of the visual
scene represents a more ecological task, reflective of what participants
would presumably do under nonexperimental settings. Therefore, a freeview presentation offers an ecological advantage over a fixed-visual
presentation. However, a free-view presentation aggravates one potentially problematic issue in data analysis that is attenuated in fixed-visual
presentations. Specifically, because participants are idiosyncratic in
the manner in which they view a visual scene prior to hearing a named
object, the free-view presentation greatly increases the likelihood for
baseline effects. Briefly, baseline effects are represented on a time-course
plot by the y-intercept--the value of y at x = 0. The greater the magnitude
of difference between the y-intercept of the target and any distractors,
the greater the baseline effect, which subsequently represents a random effect in eye-tracking data. Because, in fixed visual presentations,
participants do not begin looking at the visual scene until the onset of
the target region of interest, baseline effects are nullified. In other
words, all proportional data begin at 0 at the onset of the target region
of interest. In the context of the experiments reported here--because
the target region is embedded in sentential contexts--a fixed-view presentation mode is not appropriate as it would artificially alert the
participant to the target region of interest.
Given this, our analysis needs to account for random baseline effects.
One method that has been proposed is known as a contingent-based
analysis. This method of data trimming includes only trials in which the
participant is not looking at target items at the onset of the critical
region, thus removing baseline effects post hoc. Although this method
may be a viable option for a traditional four-picture display, we consider it an unviable option for our two-picture display due to high loss
of data. Furthermore, some researchers have reported that a contingentbased analysis may be biased, leading to an overestimation of effects
(e.g. Barr, Gann, & Pierce, 2010). Thus, our approach would need to attenuate random baseline effects while retaining higher amounts of data. To
achieve this, we conducted a change point analysis by implementing a
multiphase mixed-effects regression model (Cudeck & Klebe, 2002,
see also Baayen, 2008). This type of analysis has been proposed for
repeated measures longitudinal studies to determine whether an experimental treatment has an impact on behavioral change modeled over
many days, months, or years. The basic feature of this analysis is that
any number of phases, each of which is uniquely modeled by its own
function, can be united into a more complex whole (described in more
detail in Cudeck & Klebe, 2002). This method allows us to maintain all of

368

Paola E. Dussias et al.

the data extracted from the eye-tracker. Another advantage to this
approach is that we can estimate a point in the time course (i.e., the
change point, or the point at which there is a shift between phases). The
change point describes the moment in time when one rate of change
changes to a different one.
Although typically applied to longitudinal studies, we apply the logic
of this approach to the millisecond timescale for visual-world eye-tracking
data. The data that we attain from the eye-tracker is repeated measures
data. Because eye movements are impacted by auditory stimuli
(i.e., participants fixate on named objects), the onset of the critical region
is the experimental treatment. In terms of the current study, we defined
this critical onset as the beginning of the Spanish article and extracted
1,000 ms from this critical onset. Plots of fixations over time to target
items were best characterized by an s-shaped curve. Therefore, we
modeled a three-phase regression model, with each phase described by
a linear function. We term these three phases (a) the preconvergence
phase, (b) the convergence phase, and (c) the postconvergence phase.
The preconvergence phase corresponds to eye movements that are not
directly impacted by the critical region in the auditory stimuli; rather,
they include random baseline effects due to participants' free view of
the visual scene and the time dedicated to launching eye movements
toward target items. The convergence phase represents the period of
time whereby participants' eye movements shift toward target items.
Finally, the postconvergence phase corresponds to the stage in realtime processing in which participants are no longer uniformly affected
by the experimental stimuli; that is, participants begin to return to a
random state of free view. Despite these three distinct phases, the data
are continuous over time. Thus, we can calculate change points that
represent the points in time when a new phase begins.
Experimentally, we are interested in the first change point. The first
change point between the preconvergence and convergence phases indicates the point in time when a critical mass of participants begins to
shift fixations to the target item. We can then compare change points
across conditions. Specifically, by conducting simple paired t tests, we
then determine whether one change point occurs significantly earlier
(or later) than another change point. This method reveals whether an
experimental condition induces a facilitatory or delayed effect when
compared to a baseline condition. For the current study, we are interested in whether the change point for different-gender conditions happens
significantly earlier than for same-gender conditions.
To calculate parameter estimates for the model, we estimated starting values by using the grand averaged data across all participants by
condition. These estimates were then included as parameter starting
values for the mixed-effects model applied to the individual-level data.
Furthermore, the y-intercept was included as a random effect across

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

369

participants and conditions to allow variability in baseline effects prevalent in spoken word eye-tracking data (Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 2006).
After estimating change points, we conducted paired-sample t tests on
the first change point. We estimated the difference between same-gender
and different-gender conditions for both the masculine and feminine
targets to see whether both genders yielded facilitatory effects in the different-gender condition relative to the same-gender condition. A negative
difference estimate indicates that the different-gender condition results
in a facilitatory effect as compared to the same-gender condition.
RESULTS
Plausibility Judgment
In general, participants were accurate in providing plausibility judgments for the sentences they heard, although, overall, they were more
accurate judging implausible sentences than judging plausible ones.
This may not be surprising if identification of lexicosemantic fit is more
straightforward in implausible sentences given their severely poor fit
(e.g., John used a pump to inflate the carrots) than in plausible sentences,
in which participants could imagine different scenarios that could
potentially lead to either judgment (e.g., John used a fork to cut the carrots).
For plausible sentences, accuracy was 91% for the monolingual Spanish
speakers, 89% for the English-Spanish speakers, and 84% for the ItalianSpanish group. For the implausible sentences, accuracy was 98% for the
monolingual group, 93% for the English-Spanish group, and 96% for the
Italian-Spanish group. Taken together, these results indicate that participants were, in fact, truly paying attention to meaning and, importantly,
understood the sentences.

Picture-Naming Verification Task
Recall that this task assessed whether participants could correctly identify
the pictures employed during the eye-tracking session of the study.
Pictures named correctly were assigned a score of 1, and those named
incorrectly were given a score of 0. Mean percent accuracy and standard
deviations are provided in Table 6. Two-tailed independent samples t tests
conducted on the correct responses revealed no significant differences
among the three groups of participants (between the two groups of
English-Spanish speakers, t(16) = 0.45, p = .650; between the higher
proficiency English-Spanish group and the Italian-Spanish participants,
t(22) = 0.93, p = .350; and between the lower proficiency English-Spanish

370

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Table 6. Mean percentage accuracy and standard deviation on the
picture-naming verification task
Group

N

M

SD

English-Spanish (higher)
English-Spanish (lower)
Italian-Spanish

9
9
15

120.34 (118-122)
120.00 (117-122)
119.66 (115-122)

1.40
1.73
1.87

Note. Range provided in parentheses.

group and the Italian-Spanish participants, t(22) = 0.44, p = .660). This
finding indicates that all three groups could identify the pictures used
during the eye-tracking session with a high degree of accuracy.3

Eye-Tracking Experiment
Monolingual Speakers of Spanish. The minimum latency to plan and
launch a saccade has been estimated to be approximately 200 ms
(e.g., Fischer, 1992; Saslow, 1967). Thus, approximately 200 ms after target
onset is the earliest point at which one expects to see fixations driven
by acoustic information from the target word. Visually, we plot the time
course of proportion of fixations toward target items, following LewWilliams and Fernald (2007, 2010).4 To delineate where the model calculates the first change point estimates for each condition, we overlay
short vertical segments on top of the time-course plots (see Figure 2).
Additionally, we plot the change point estimates for each condition,

Figure 2. Proportion of fixations to targets over time for different-gender
and same-gender trials (monolingual Spanish speakers).

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

371

including a standard estimate band to more clearly isolate the estimates
on which we conduct our statistical tests (see Figure 3).
For feminine conditions, the change point estimate was 439 ms
(SE = 41.40) for the same-gender trials. In contrast, different-gender
trials have a change point of 317 ms (SE = 27.40). Additionally, the
y-intercept random effect (i.e., baseline) variance was 0.0072 (SE =
0.0027), and the model error was 0.0268 (SE = 0.0009). Thus, feminine
different-gender trials have an earlier change point (MD = 122 ms)
than same-gender trials (SE = 49.65, paired t(15) = -2.45, p = .027),
indicating that Spanish monolinguals use the feminine article as a
facilitatory cue in real-time speech. For masculine conditions, samegender trials reveal a change point of 414 ms (SE = 22.94). For the
different-gender trials, the change point is 280 ms (SE = 48.66). Here,
the y-intercept random effect variance was 0.006 (SE = 0.002), and
the model error was 0.022 (SE = 0.001).5 As in the feminine conditions, masculine different-gender trials have an earlier change point
(MD = 134 ms) than same-gender trials (SE = 53.79, paired t(15) = -2.50,
p = .025). Spanish monolinguals also use masculine as a facilitatory
cue in real-time processing.
Higher Proficiency English-Spanish Speakers. For feminine targets,
the high-proficiency group has a change point estimate of 466 ms (SE =
24.83) for same-gender trials. On different-gender trials, the change
point estimate is 375 ms (SE = 31.34; see Figures 4 and 5). The y-intercept
random effect variance was 0.006 (SE = 0.003), and the model error
was 0.029 (SE = 0.001).
The associated paired-sample t test for the difference magnitude reveals
a marginally significant faster change point (MD = 91 ms) for different-gender

Figure 3. Change point estimates plotted with standard errors (monolingual Spanish speakers).

372

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Figure 4. Proportion of fixations to targets over time for different-gender
and same-gender trials (high-proficiency English-Spanish learners).
trials (SE = 39.99, paired t(8) = -2.28, p = .050). For masculine targets,
the change point estimate for same-gender trials is 532 ms (SE = 30.48).
For different-gender trials, the change point estimate is 366 ms (SE = 30.56).
The different-gender trial change point is significantly faster (MD = 166 ms)
than the same-gender trial change point (SE = 43.16, paired t(8) = -3.85,
p = .005). Additionally, the y-intercept random effect variance was
0.006 (SE = 0.003), and the model error was 0.032 (SE = 0.001). The
results suggest that for both gender types, high-proficiency EnglishSpanish bilinguals are capable of using grammatical gender as a facilitatory
cue in real-time processing.

Figure 5. Change point estimates plotted with standard errors (highproficiency English-Spanish learners).

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

373

Figure 6. Proportion of fixations to targets over time for different-gender
and same-gender trials (low-proficiency English-Spanish learners).
Lower Proficiency English-Spanish Speakers. For feminine targets, the
change point estimate for the low-proficiency group is 406 ms (SE = 25.67)
on same-gender trials. Different-gender trials have a change point estimate
of 439 ms (SE = 27.02; see Figures 6 and 7). The y-intercept random
effect variance was 0.022 (SE = 0.010), and the model error was 0.033
(SE = 0.001).
The difference between the two change points is not significant,
difference = 31 ms (SE = 37.27, paired t(8) = 0.82, p = .434). For masculine
targets, same-gender trials have a change point estimate of 261 ms (SE =
36.78). The change point estimate for different-gender trials is 523 ms
(SE = 52.64). Here, the difference estimate is significantly different, but

Figure 7. Change point estimates plotted with standard errors (lowproficiency English-Spanish learners).

374

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Figure 8. Proportion of fixations to targets over time for different-gender
and same-gender trials (Italian-Spanish learners).
in the unanticipated direction. That is, the same-gender change point
is significantly faster (MD = 262 ms) than the different-gender change
point (SE = 64.22, paired t(8) = 4.08, p < .005). The y-intercept random
effect variance was 0.015 (SE = 0.007), and the model error was 0.242
(SE = 0.001).
Italian-Spanish Speakers. For feminine targets, the same-gender change
point is estimated at 408 ms (SE = 21.38) from article onset. In contrast,
the change point is 211 ms (SE = 29.54) for different-gender trials (see
Figures 8 and 9). The y-intercept random effect variance was 0.007
(SE = 0.003), and the model error was 0.027 (SE = 0.001).

Figure 9. Change point estimates plotted with standard errors (ItalianSpanish learners).

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

375

The difference estimate and associated paired-sample t test indicate
that Italian-Spanish bilinguals use the feminine article as a facilitatory
cue in real-time processing of Spanish (MD = 197 ms, SE = 36.46, paired
t(14) = -5.40, p < .0001). For masculine targets, the change point estimate is 298 ms (SE = 31.32) for same-gender trials. For different-gender
trials, the change point estimate is 308 ms (SE = 33.53). The y-intercept
random effect was 0.006 (SE = 0.002), and the model error was 0.022
(SE = 0.001). The difference estimate and associated paired-sample
t test is 10 ms (SE = 45.88, paired t(14) = 0.88, p = .827). In contrast to the
manner in which they exploit gender cue provided by the feminine
article, Italian-Spanish bilinguals do not appear to make use of masculine
articles as a facilitatory cue.
DISCUSSION
As we note in the introduction, much of the traditional work on L2 gender agreement in the SLA literature has taken as its point of departure
differences between native and nonnative speakers with respect to ultimate attainment--differences largely examined in the context of competing competence-based theoretical accounts of L2 acquisition in the
generative tradition. Although insightful, a consequence of this discourse
is that it minimizes the surprisingly accurate overall performance
(generally 80-90% accuracy) exhibited by learners on tasks involving
gender agreement. This kind of performance across numerous studies
suggests that L2 learners have integrated the target language gender
system into their developing L2, and it thus becomes interesting to
examine whether and how L2 speakers can exploit gender during online
processing tasks--an approach that provides an excellent means of furthering our understanding of the similarities and differences between
native speakers and learners while also illuminating our understanding
of the mechanisms underlying the architecture of the language-processing
system.
Our study addressed three particular questions. First, can and do
native speakers of a language without grammatical gender use grammatical gender information in the L2 to facilitate the processing of upcoming
nouns? Second, does the presence of grammatical gender in the L1 facilitate gender agreement processing in L2 as indexed by anticipatory eye
movements to noun referents? Third, does the anticipatory effect reported
in previous gender-processing studies of spoken word recognition
obtain when target nouns are embedded in variable sentence contexts
and participants are engaged in a secondary task (i.e., providing a
semantic judgment on the sentence)?
Unlike most recent studies on grammatical gender processing in the L2,
which have focused on the processing of gender agreement violations,

376

Paola E. Dussias et al.

we examined grammatical gender processing while participants were
engaged in a task that required attention to meaning. This was important
because past research has shown that the allocation of visual attention
during spoken-language processing is task dependent and that task can
critically affect linguistically driven eye movements during online spokenlanguage comprehension (Kreysa & Knoeferle, 2011). Therefore, an
important additional goal was to examine whether the facilitatory effect
reported during the processing of grammatical gender marking in articles generalized beyond tasks in which participants respond to simple
(and invariant) instructions.
To address these questions, we compared the performance of two
groups of native speakers of English and a group of native speakers of
Italian to that of native speakers of Spanish. Participants saw two pictured objects on a computer screen while hearing a sentence naming
one of the two objects. We collected data using the visual-world paradigm, an eye-tracking technique that capitalizes on the dynamics of
speaker gaze during online sentence processing to provide information
about the time course of spoken-language processing with millisecond
precision. In this technique, moment-by-moment allocation of visual
attention to target and distractor pictures is recorded to yield a dependent measure comprised of proportion of gaze shifts to the pictured
objects in response to the unfolding speech signal.
In line with previous findings (Dahan et al., 2000; Lew-Williams & Fernald,
2007), results for the native Spanish-speaking group showed evidence
of the use of gender marking on articles to anticipate upcoming nouns
in contexts in which two pictured objects belonged to different gender
classes. Native speakers launched anticipatory eye movements to target items in different-gender trials (when information in the article was
informative) but waited to hear the target nouns in the same-gender
trials before shifting their gaze. It is useful, in particular, to highlight
three aspects of our results in the context of Lew-Williams and Fernald's
(2007) work on Spanish. Specifically, we have replicated their finding of
an anticipatory effect with a more precisely time-locked methodology
(i.e., eye-tracking), in varied carrier phrases, and with a secondary task
that adds cognitive load. Additionally, in contrast to Lew-Williams and
Fernald, we have broken down the effect for both genders and provide
evidence of anticipatory eye movements for both masculine and feminine agreement structures independently.
One particularly noteworthy feature of our findings is that this anticipatory effect was observed even when the target nouns were embedded
in rich sentence contexts, as opposed to invariant sentence structures
such as those employed in the Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007, 2010)
studies (which can potentially focus participants' attention on article +
noun processing alone), and when participants were engaged in a task
that required attending to other properties of the sentence--in this

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

377

case its plausibility. To our knowledge, our study is the first to provide
empirical evidence demonstrating the rapid use of gender-marked
information in articles to speed up noun recognition when attention
is directed to other features of processing (i.e., in-depth semantic
processing), and it suggests that (a) previous findings in the genderprocessing literature are not artifacts of the experimental setup and (b)
native listeners do attend to gender cues and exploit them to quickly
make sense of a speaker's message.
Turning to the learner data, results from the two groups of late EnglishSpanish learners revealed sensitivity to gender marking on Spanish
articles similar to that found in native speakers, but this sensitivity was
affected by the level of proficiency. Specifically, the higher proficiency
English-Spanish group was quicker to orient to both feminine and masculine target pictures when the article was informative (i.e., in differentgender trials) than when it was not (i.e., in same-gender trials). This
result is crucial in that it clearly indicates that late L2 learners of Spanish
are able use the information they have acquired about grammatical
gender in Spanish quickly and efficiently to establish reference in a task
that was resource demanding, both because it required the secondary
task of clicking on a picture and because it required listeners to process
the auditorily presented stimuli for semantic plausibility. Even if it is
not surprising that the mean processing time--as measured by the
timing of the change point--is slower than that of native Spanish
speakers, the results for the high-proficiency learners are qualitatively
the same. In this sense, our eye-tracking results for the high-proficiency
English learners are congenial with recent electrophysiological results,
such as those of Dowens et al. (2010) and Foucart and Frenck-Mestre
(2011). Although these studies were different in that they examined
learner sensitivity to gender violations within different constituency
structures and across phrases, when taken together, their early electrophysiological results and our later behavioral measures provide converging evidence that, with sufficient proficiency, late adult learners
can process grammatical gender in a manner highly comparable to that
of native speakers. Such converging results have important theoretical
implications in that they support an experience-based view of acquisition and provide evidence for continued plasticity in the system, even
for L2 learners such as our participants whose L1 lacks grammatical
gender (Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2012).
The data from the low-proficiency English learners present a more complicated picture. In sentences with feminine targets, the low-proficiency
participants exhibited no anticipatory effects for gender; that is, we
found no significant difference when we compared the change points
for scenes in which the items pictured were both feminine nouns versus
scenes in which the two items differed in grammatical gender. If these
participants were exploiting gender cues on the article in the processing

378

Paola E. Dussias et al.

of an upcoming noun, we should have expected an anticipatory effect.
Again, this result accords with what has been found in the electrophysiological literature by Dowens et al. (2010) for English learners of Spanish.
Their nonimmersed participants did not exhibit evidence in the ERP
signal of sensitivity to gender violations, whereas our low-proficiency
participants did not show behavioral evidence of using the gender cue
to facilitate the processing of an upcoming noun.
The complication for this group resides in the masculine condition.
As reported previously, we find a significant difference in the masculine
condition, but the results indicate a facilitatory effect for scenes in
which both pictures have masculine gender in Spanish. This is a reversal of what would be expected if the article's gender facilitates processing. That is, we should expect the masculine determiner to speed the
processing of a masculine noun in scenes in which the two pictures do
not both have masculine gender. It is not clear to us at this point why
same-gender scenes should lead to faster identification (i.e., an earlier
change point) in the masculine condition. What is extremely clear, however, is that our low-proficiency group shows no evidence of nativelike
behavior in the task. For these participants, gender does not serve as a
cue that is exploited to facilitate online processing.
One admittedly speculative explanation of what may be happening in
this condition is that our learner participants may be evidencing the
initial stages of incorporating an awareness of grammatical gender
during processing that becomes manifest as a reverse effect under the
particular task conditions here. Recall that we allow our participants to
freely view the scene prior to the onset of each trial, and we know from
our posttest that the participants could name the pictures used in the
experiment with a high degree of accuracy. One potential explanation
for the results in this condition could be that in same-gender trials,
participants made no attempt whatsoever to incorporate gender processing into their response to the task, given the fact that when two
same-gendered pictures appeared on screen, there would be no reason
to engage resources in processing the gender of the article. However,
when different-gender items appeared in trials, it is plausible that these
speakers began to attempt to process the gender of the masculine article
as the speech signal unfolded. However, at this point in their development, rather than providing a beneficial cue, the cost of attempting to
process masculine gender online, under these task demands, yielded an
inhibitory effect in terms of the time needed to converge on the named
picture. Although this reasoning is speculative, it does lead to two possible predictions. The first is that the time course of learning to process
gender for late L2 English-speaking learners of Spanish may be different
for the masculine versus feminine gender. The second is that the cognitive
demands of gender processing may yield inhibitory effects in lower
proficiency learners and facilitative effects in higher proficiency learners.

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

379

Further studies must examine this issue. However, stepping back from
the particular details of the masculine conditions in our experiment,
our results clearly suggest that high-proficiency English-speaking learners
of Spanish can process grammatical gender agreement in article + noun
structures in a manner qualitatively equivalent to that of native Spanish
speakers, whereas low-proficiency late learners do not exhibit the ability
to do so.
The Italian learners provide an interesting contrast to the native
English-speaking participants. In the feminine condition, the Italian participants exhibited an anticipatory effect when viewing scenes in which
one picture was a masculine noun and the other a feminine noun. That is,
the change point in the different-gender displays was significantly
earlier than in the same-gender displays. This result is comparable to
both the results we found for native Spanish speakers and for the highproficiency English-speaking participants. For the feminine condition,
at least, our results suggest that the Italian participants do exploit grammatical gender on the article as a means of predicting the identity of an
upcoming noun. By contrast, there is no significant difference between
the change points for the same- and different-gender displays in the
masculine article conditions, which indicates that the Italian participants
did not exploit gender as a cue in predicting the identity of a following
noun when the determiner carried masculine grammatical gender.
The results of the Italian participants are particularly useful to consider in the context of the performance of the high- and low-proficiency
groups of English-Spanish speakers. On the one hand, unlike the English
speakers, the Italian learners may be advantaged by the presence of
grammatical gender in the L1, especially given the similarities between
Italian and Spanish. This would appear to be the case in the feminine
conditions in which the Italian participants capitalize on the gender of
the feminine article to facilitate the processing of the noun. This result
is compatible with Sabourin and Stowe's (2008) results that learners of
a L2 with a similar gender system as their L1--in their case, German
learners of Dutch--can exhibit nativelike processing of gender, whereas
speakers of languages with highly distinct gender systems do not
(i.e., Romance languages and Dutch).
On the other hand, the relatively low proficiency of the Italian participants might be expected to mitigate their having sufficient resources
available to efficiently capitalize on the presence of the gender on the
article as a means of predicting the identity of the upcoming noun while
processing the unfolding acoustic stream. This might have influenced
the results for the masculine conditions in which we found no difference
in time to convergence between same- and different-gender displays.
For the masculine article, the native Italian participants did not exploit
gender to facilitate the processing of the following noun. If this view is
correct, the low-proficiency Italian participants provide an illustrative

380

Paola E. Dussias et al.

example of the balancing of factors that may advantage learners
(e.g., having a L1 with a very similar, two-gender system and a large degree
of overlap in cognate vocabulary) and that may hinder learners (e.g., low
proficiency) in their allocation of resources when processing gender in
a L2. Such a finding is compatible with results that display that proficiency
is a critical factor in predicting whether late L2 learners can exhibit
nativelike processing of grammatical gender in the L2 (e.g., Foucart &
Frenck-Mestre, 2011).
Nevertheless, if the results for the Italian speakers may be modulated
by a combination of factors that should both facilitate (i.e., having gender in their L1 that is very similar to the Spanish gender system) and
hinder (i.e., their relatively low Spanish proficiency) the use of grammatical gender in processing the L2, the question arises as to why the
masculine, but not the feminine, condition should be affected by proficiency level. After all, the gender agreement systems in Italian and Spanish
share many features. Both languages have a two-gender system (masculine
and feminine), and, like Spanish, Italian words that end in -o generally
correlate with masculine gender (e.g., il tavolo "the table," lo scoiattolo
"the squirrel," il treno "the train") and words that end in -a are generally
feminine gender (e.g., la bicicletta "the bicycle," la chitarra "the guitar,"
la sedia "the chair"). In the context of our study, approximately 84% of
the words used in the experiment shared the same gender between the
two languages. This high degree of convergence--coupled with past
findings that show that, when agreement rules are similar between the
L1 and the L2, L2 speakers can process gender in a similar way to native
speakers (Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011; Sabourin & Stowe, 2008)--
predicted that anticipatory effects would be manifested in both the feminine and the masculine different-gender trials. Yet, our Italian-Spanish
learners used gender information encoded in the article anticipatorily
only in the feminine condition.
One reason may have to do with the nature of the experimental items.
Most pictures in the experiment had transparent gender in Spanish
(e.g., ended in either -a or -o), but a little more than 17% of the pictures
had opaque gender (i.e., they ended in a vowel other than -a or -o or
ended in a consonant). Of these opaque words, approximately 80%
were masculine gender. It is possible, then, that for this group of lowproficiency Italian-Spanish learners, deploying resources to process
words with opaque gender may have been effortful, resulting in the lack
of an anticipatory effect for the masculine different-gender trials. This
explanation is congruent with recent findings in the functional imagining literature showing that gender processing for opaque words in
Spanish requires deeper and more effortful processing than gender processing for transparent words (Hernandez et al., 2004). The difference
in behavior for the masculine and feminine gender trials may also have
to do with differences in the masculine articles in the two languages.

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

381

Italian has two masculine definite articles (i.e., il and lo), which are phonologically conditioned, and only one feminine definite article (i.e., la).
Spanish, on the other hand, only has two definite articles (i.e., el for
masculine and la for feminine). Sabourin and Stowe (2008) showed that
when there is not sufficient congruence between the L1 and the L2
systems, transfer of information from one system to the other can fail.
Hence, the inability of the Italian-Spanish learners to use the presence
of the gender on masculine articles as a means to predict upcoming
nouns may also be at least partially related to differences in the definite
article systems of the two languages. Clearly, both of these explanations
remain largely speculative because our design does not allow us to pinpoint the cause for the difference in behavior between the masculine
and feminine conditions. In future research, it may be useful to carefully
control list composition as a way of testing for the potential contributions of subtle differences between the gender systems of the two
languages when Italians process gender in Spanish.
In conclusion, these results contribute to our understanding of L2
gender processing and, thus, to our growing understanding of the
approximation of L2 learners to native speaker performance in a number
of ways. First, methodologically, we have shown that despite our task's
higher cognitive load, we replicate the findings of a facilitatory effect
of gender cue on articles in the processing of upcoming nouns for
native speakers of Spanish (e.g., Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007) and highproficiency learners. Additionally, we go beyond the Lew-Williams and
Fernald results by showing these effects separately for both the masculine
and feminine genders. Second, we provide clear behavioral evidence, congruent with previous electrophysiological studies, that high-proficiency
learners of Spanish can achieve qualitatively similar patterns of performance as native monolingual Spanish speakers, even if they are L1
speakers of a language that lacks grammatical gender. This contrasts
with the Lew-Williams and Fernald (2010) results, a difference we attribute
to the lower proficiency of their participants.
Our results also give rise to a number of issues that warrant further
investigation. One of these involves the performance of our lowproficiency English learners of Spanish. Given both the earlier work in
generative approaches to SLA previously cited and the reviewed electrophysiological studies, it is not surprising that these learners showed
no facilitatory effect of feminine gender. We were surprised, however,
to see that in the cases of masculine agreement, same-gender trials
were significantly faster than different-gender trials. We hypothesize
that this may actually be due to an emerging effect of gender processing--
that is, an attempt to exploit masculine gender that leads to a slowing
down of processing, given the lack of automatized gender processing. In
future research, one way to begin testing this hypothesis is to exploit
the potential for task effects by simplifying the task--for example,

382

Paola E. Dussias et al.

by using an invariant syntactic frame, such as that of Lew-Williams
and Fernald (2007), to probe the question of whether a task involving
a lower cognitive load would allow for the facilitative use of the masculine gender. The assumption would be that resources would be freed up
to allocate to the task of processing gender. Another remaining question involves potential differences in the time course of acquisition
regarding the ability to exploit gender on the masculine and feminine
articles, respectively. Whether the two genders in Spanish are acquired
on the same time course and what effect the L1 might have on that
acquisition time course may remain open questions.
Regarding the Italian participants, two important questions remain
concerning the interplay of L1 and proficiency. What is clear from our
results is that the Italian learners look like neither the high-proficiency
nor the low-proficiency English learners of Spanish. We reason that this
finding derives from the two principal variables in play in this study:
(a) the presence of a gender system in the L1 and its similarity to the
gender system of the target language, and (b) the target language proficiency of the speakers. In future work, we will begin to tease these
factors apart both by testing high-proficiency Italian learners of Spanish
and by manipulating the list composition of the stimuli to gain a more
granular perspective on the effects of the particular similarities and
differences between the gender systems of Spanish and Italian.
NOTES
1. Lexical frequency data were obtained using the Diccionario de frecuencias de las
unidades linguisticas del castellano "Dictionary of the Linguistic Units of Spanish" (Alameda &
Cuetos, 1995).
2. An anonymous reviewer asked why viewing was binocular, whereas recording was
monocular. The decision to record just one eye is largely driven by practical issues. The
Eyelink 1000 records with a default monocular setting; this setting provides a number of
advantages. First, it allows for a higher sampling rate, which results in more precise data
per participant. Second, monocular recording speeds up the process of camera setup and
calibration and also allows more freedom of head movement on the part of the participant
(i.e., binocular recording reduces the allowed head movement to approximately 25 mm for
horizontal and vertical movement, which makes the experimental session less comfortable
for participants). Third, data extraction and data analysis for monocular recording are
significantly more efficient than for binocular recording. For example, minuscule differences typically arise between the two eyes, which are difficult to reconcile. While one eye
may be in saccadic movement, the other eye may be in fixation. These differences must
be reconciled, but averaging the results of the two eyes is not an appropriate solution
because the measures are binary (i.e., the eye is either in saccadic movement or is not;
the eye is either blinking or is not). Additionally, the data files produced from one eye
alone are quite large. Having twice as much data considerably slows down the processing
time of the system. In short, binocular recording adds a number of complications to the
data-collection process and does not produce any clear benefits. For this reason, most
eye-tracking studies allow binocular viewing but analyze data from one eye only.
3. An anonymous reviewer asked whether participants could conceivably complete
the task if they did not know the meaning of the nouns. In this task, participants were shown
pictures and were asked to name them. Because picture naming minimally requires

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

383

accessing the concept represented by the picture and retrieving the word that names the
object (Potter, So, Von Eckardt, & Feldman, 1984), we believe that participants could not
complete the task unless they knew the meaning of the nouns represented in the pictures.
4. Although we followed the basic experimental design (i.e., a two-picture display) of
Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007, 2010), there are a number of differences between our
study and their studies. First, the experimental procedures employ different equipment
and means of data coding. Specifically, the Lew-Williams and Fernald studies use the lookingwhile-listening technique, a procedure that was primarily developed for use with children
(Fernald, Perfors, & Marchman, 2006). Although this procedure is similar to a visual-world
design, participants are seated in a booth with two monitors presented side by side. A video
camera is embedded between the two monitors and records the children as they turn to
look at either monitor. In a highly labor-intensive procedure, data coders who are blind
to the objectives of the experiment hand-code the location of eye movements of the video
recorded session frame by frame with a standard refresh rate of 33 ms. In contrast, the
participants in the experiments reported here were shown a visual scene on one monitor
alone. The software that accompanies the eye-tracker determines the vertical and horizontal
position of the eye and whether the eye is in fixation, blinking, or in saccadic movement
by way of an internal algorithm. To our knowledge, no study has directly compared the
results of an eye-tracking study using the visual-world paradigm with the looking-whilelistening procedure. Second, as the focus of the original Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007)
study was very young children, the experimental materials and procedure also differ from
our experiments. The original study, which was followed in the 2010 study, included eight
experimental objects that were repeated eight times, four times as the target and four
times as the distractor (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). Furthermore, target objects were
embedded in sentence-final position in simple Spanish sentences. In contrast, the stimuli
used in the experiments reported here were not repeated. Participants viewed targets and
distractors only once during the experimental session. Additionally, target items were embedded in variable sentential contexts that were distinct in each trial. Due to these
methodological and experimental differences, a replication of the results found in LewWilliams and Fernald (2007) was warranted to determine whether our experimental procedure would be comparable. Ultimately, we replicated the Lew-Williams and Fernald study
with a Spanish monolingual control group, which leads us to interpret the differences that
we found in the bilingual groups as attributable to proficiency.
5. Random effect variance and model error terms and their associated standard errors
are reported to three decimal places given their difference in magnitude from the change
point estimates.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth-Darnell, K., Shulman, H. G., & Boland, J. E. (1998). Dissociating brain responses
to syntactic and semantic anomalies: Evidence from Event-Related Potentials. Journal
of Memory and Language, 38, 112-130.
Alameda, J. R., & Cuetos, F. (1995). Diccionario de las unidades linguisticas del castellano:
Volumen I: Orden alfabetico / Volumen II: Orden por frecuencias [Dictionary of the
linguistic units of Spanish: Volume I: Ordered alphabetically / Volume II: Ordered by
frequencies]. Oviedo, Spain: Servicio de publicaciones de la Universidad de Oviedo.
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Tracking the time course of
spoken word recognition: Evidence for continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory
and Language, 38, 419-439.
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting
the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics using R.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barber, H., & Carreiras, M. (2005). Grammatical gender and number agreement in Spanish:
An ERP comparison. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 137-153.
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Hernandez, A., & Pizzamiglio, L. (1996). Gender priming in Italian.
Perception & Psychophysics, 85, 992-1004.
Boersma, P. (2001). Praat, a system for doing phonetics by computer. Glot International,
5, 341-345.

384

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Bruhn de Garavito, J., & White, L. (2002). L2 acquisition of Spanish DPs: The status of
grammatical features. In A. T. Perez-Leroux & J. M. Liceras (Eds.), The acquisition of
Spanish morphosyntax: The L1/L2 connection (pp. 151-176). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Carello, C., Lukatela, G., & Turvey, M. T. (1988). Rapid naming is affected by association
but not by syntax. Memory & Cognition, 16, 187-195.
Carroll, S. (1989). Second-language acquisition and the computational paradigm. Language
Learning, 39, 535-594.
Cole, P., & Segui, J. (1994). Grammatical incongruency and vocabulary types. Memory &
Cognition, 22, 387-394.
Cooper, R. (1974). The control of eye-fixation by the meaning of spoken language: A new
methodology for the real-time investigation of speech perception, memory and
language processing. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 84-107.
Costa, A., Kovacic, D., Fedorenko, E., & Caramazza, A. (2003). The gender congruency
effect and the selection of free-standing and bound morphemes: Evidence from
Croatian. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29,
1270-1282.
Cubelli, R., Lotto, L., Paolieri, D., Girelli, M., & Job, R. (2005). Grammatical gender is
selected in bare noun production: Evidence from the picture-word interference paradigm. Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 42-59.
Cudeck, R., & Klebe, K. J. (2002). Multiphase mixed-effects models for repeated measures
data. Psychological Methods, 7, 41-63.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson, J. S. (2000). Linguistic gender
and spoken-word recognition in French. Journal of Memory and Language, 42,
465-480.
Dijkstra, T. (2005). Bilingual visual word recognition and lexical access. In J. F. Kroll &
A. M. B. de Groot (Eds.), Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches
(pp. 179-201). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dowens, M. G., Vergara, M., Barber, H. A., & Carreiras, M. (2010). Morphosyntactic processing in late second-language learners. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 1870-1887.
Duffield, N., & White, L. (1999). Assessing L2 knowledge of Spanish clitic placement:
Converging methodologies. Second Language Research, 15, 133-160.
Epstein, S. D., Flynn, S., & Martohardjono, G. (1996). Second language acquisition: Theoretical
and experimental issues in contemporary research. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
19, 677-758.
Faussart, C., Jakubowicz, C., & Costes, M. (1999). Gender and number processing in
spoken French and Spanish. Rivista di Linguistica, 11, 75-101.
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V. A. (2006). Picking up speech in understanding:
Speech processing efficiency and vocabulary growth across the 2nd year. Developmental
Psychology, 42, 98-116.
Fernandez-Garcia, M. (1999). Patterns of gender agreement in the speech of second
language learners. In J. Gutierrez-Rexach & F. Martinez-Gil (Eds.), Advances in Hispanic
linguistics: Papers from the 2nd Hispanic Linguistics Symposium (pp. 3-15). Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla Press.
Fischer, B. (1992). Saccadic reaction time: Implications for reading, dyslexia and visual
cognition. In K. Rayner (Ed.), Eye movements and visual cognition: Scene perception
and reading (pp. 31-45). New York: Springer Verlag.
Franceschina, F. (2001). Against an L2 morphological deficit as an explanation for the differences between native and non-native grammars. In S. H. Foster-Cohen & A. Nizegorodcew
(Eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook: Vol. 1 (pp. 143-158). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Franceschina, F. (2005). Fossilized second language grammars: The acquisition of grammatical
gender. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Friederici, A. D., & Jacobsen, T. (1999). Processing grammatical gender during comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 467-484.
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2011). Grammatical gender processing in L2: Electrophysiological evidence of the effect of L1-L2 syntactic similarity. Bilingualism, 14,
379-399.
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2012). Can late L2 learners acquire new grammatical
features? Evidence from ERPs and eye-tracking. Journal of Memory and Language, 66,
226-248.

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

385

Gess, R., & Herschensohn, J. (2001). Shifting the DP parameter: A study of Anglophone
French L2ers. In J. Camps & C. R. Wiltshire (Eds.), Romance syntax, semantics and
their L2 acquisition (pp. 105-119). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Gouvea, A. C., Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Poeppel, D. (2010). The linguistic processes
underlying the P600. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25, 149-188.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J.-Y., Cornu, E., Guillelmon, D., & Besson, C. (1994). The gendermarking effect in spoken word recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590-598.
Gurjanov, M., Lukatela, G., Lukatela, K., Savi, M., & Turvey, M. T. (1985). Grammatical
priming of inflected nouns by the gender of possessive adjectives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11, 692-701.
Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. M. (1999). Gender electrified: ERP evidence on the syntactic
nature of gender processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 715-728.
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C. Y. (1997). The partial availability of Universal Grammar in second
language acquisition: The "failed functional features hypothesis." Second Language
Research, 13, 187-226.
Hawkins, R., & Franceschina, F. (2004). Explaining the acquisition and non-acquisition of
determiner-noun gender concord in French and Spanish. In P. Prevost & J. Paradis
(Eds.), The acquisition of French in different contexts (pp. 175-205). Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Hernandez, A. E., Kotz, S. A., Hofmann, J., Valentin, V. V., Dapretto, M., & Bookheimer, S. Y.
(2004). The neural correlates of grammatical gender decisions in Spanish. Brain Imaging,
15, 863-866.
Jacobsen, T. (1999). Effects of grammatical gender on picture and word naming: Evidence
from German. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 499-514.
Jakubowicz, C., & Faussart, C. (1998). Gender agreement in the processing of spoken
French. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 27, 597-617.
Jescheniak, J. D. (1999). Gender priming in picture naming: Modality and baseline effects.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 729-737.
Kreysa, H., & Knoeferle, P. (2011). Effects of speaker gaze on spoken language comprehension: Task matters. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1557-1562). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming:
Evidence for asymmetric connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish make rapid use of
grammatical gender in spoken word recognition. Psychological Science, 18, 193-198.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2010). Real-time processing of gender-marked articles by
native and non-native Spanish speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 63, 447-464.
McCarthy, C. (2007). Morphological variability in second language Spanish (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
Montrul, S. (2004). Subject and object expression in Spanish heritage speakers: A case of
morphosyntactic convergence. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7, 125-142.
Montrul, S., Foote, R., & Perpinan, S. (2008). Gender agreement in adult second language
learners and Spanish heritage speakers: The effects of age and context of acquisition.
Language Learning, 58, 503-553.
Moreno, E. M., & Kutas, M. (2005). Processing semantic anomalies in two languages: An
electrophysiological exploration in both languages of Spanish-English bilinguals.
Cognitive Brain Research, 22, 205-220.
Morgan-Short, K., Sanz, C., Steinhauer, K., & Ullman, M. T. (2010). Acquisition of gender
agreement in second language learners: An event-related potential study. Language
Learning, 60, 154-193.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related brain potentials elicited by syntactic
anomaly. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 785-806.
Potter, M. C., So, K.-F., Von Eckardt, B., & Feldman, L. B. (1984). Lexical and conceptual
representation in beginning and proficient bilinguals. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 23, 23-38.

386

Paola E. Dussias et al.

Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L. A. (2008). Second language processing: When are first and second
languages processed similarly? Second Language Research, 24, 397-430.
Sabourin, L., Stowe, L. A., & de Haan, G. J. (2006). Transfer effects in learning a second
language grammatical gender system. Second Language Research, 22, 1-29.
Saslow, M. G. (1967). Latency for saccadic eye movement. Journal of the Optical Society of
America, 57, 1030-1033.
Schiller, N. (2009, July). Grammatical gender in L2 from a processing perspective. Paper
presented at the 7th International Symposium on Bilingualism, Utretch, Netherlands.
Schmidt, R. (1986). Was weiss der Artikel vom Hauptwort? Ein Beitrag zur Verarbeitung
syntaktischer Beziehungen beim Lesen [What does the article know about the noun?
A study of syntactic agreement processing during reading]. Zeitschrift fur Experimentelle und Angewandte Psychologie, 23, 150-163.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1994). Word order and nominative case in non-native
language acquisition: A longitudinal study of (L1 Turkish) German interlanguage. In
T. Hoekstra & B. D. Schwartz (Eds.), Language acquisition studies in generative
grammar (pp. 317-368). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full
access model. Second Language Research, 12, 40-72.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Spivey-Knowlton, M. J. (1996). Eye-tracking. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 11, 583-588.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration
of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 286,
1632-1634.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (2006). Eye movement and spoken language comprehension. In M. J. Traxler & M. A. Gernsbacher (Eds.), Handbook of psycholinguistics
(pp. 835-862). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L. (1999). The kindergarten-path effect:
Studying on-line sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89-134.
van Berkum, J. J. A. (1996). The psycholinguistics of grammatical gender. Nijmegen, Netherlands: Nijmegen University Press.
White, L. (1989). Linguistic universals, markedness and learnability: Comparing two different
approaches. Second Language Research, 5, 127-140.
White, L. (2003). Second language acquisition and Universal Grammar. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-MacGregor, M., & Leung, Y.-K. I. (2004). Gender and
number agreement in nonnative Spanish. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 105-133.
Wicha, N. Y. Y., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Reyes, I., Hernandez, A., Gavaldon de Barreto, L., &
Bates, E. (2005). When zebras become painted donkeys: Grammatical gender and
semantic priming interact during picture integration in a spoken Spanish sentence.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 20, 553-587.

387

When Gender and Looking Go Hand in Hand

APPENDIX
NAMES OF PICTURED OBJECTS USED IN THE EYE-TRACKING
EXPERIMENT
abanico
abeja
abrigo
arbol
arroz
ballena
banco
bandera
barco
boligrafo
bolsa
bomba
botella
bufanda
buho
caballo
cabello
cadena
caja
cama
camion
camisa
campana
candado
cangrejo
caracol
carro
casa
castillo
cementerio

cerebro
chaleco
clavo
columpio
copa
corbata
corona
correa
cuchillo
cuerno
diamante
diente
enchufe
escoba
escorpion
escudo
espada
esparrago
espatula
espina
estatua
falda
flauta
flecha
fosforo
fuego
gato
grapadora
guante
gusano

harina
hidrante
hormiga
huella
hueso
huevo
iglesia
jamon
jaula
ladrillo
lampara
lavamanos
leche
lengua
libelula
libro
llave
lupa
maiz
mano
medalla
media
mosca
muneca
murcielago
nariz
nido
nube
ojo
oreja

pajaro
pato
pega
pera
perro
piedra
piscina
pistola
plato
playa
pozo
puente
puerta
rana
reloj
remolacha
rosa
rueda
semaforo
silla
sobre
sopa
teclado
tenedor
trampa
una
vaso
venado
vestido
zapato

