520983

research-article2014

JLSXXX10.1177/0261927X14520983Journal of Language and Social PsychologyStruthers et al.

Short Research Paper

The Role of Victim
Embarrassment in Explaining
Why Apologies Affect
Reported (But Not Actual)
Forgiveness

Journal of Language and Social Psychology
2014, Vol. 33(5) 517-525
(c) The Author(s) 2014
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X14520983
jls.sagepub.com

C. Ward Struthers1, Alexander G. Santelli1,
Careen Khoury1, Melissa Pang1, Rebecca E. Young1,
Yasaman Kashefi1, Zdravko Marjanovic1, Curtis Phills1,
Kyle Nash1, and Noelia A. Vasquez1

Abstract
This research examines the mediating role of victims' embarrassment in explaining
why apologies from transgressors sometimes affect victims' reported forgiveness,
but not actual forgiveness toward transgressors. Victims sometimes insincerely
communicate forgiveness following a transgressor's apology because they feel put
on the spot and embarrassed and try to escape the awkwardness of such situations.
The results of an online experiment supported our hypothesis by showing that
victim embarrassment mediated the relation between a transgressor's apology and
victims' reported forgiveness but not between a transgressor's apology and victims'
experienced forgiveness.
Keywords
apology, embarrassment, forgiveness
Following a transgression, victims often feel that they are owed an apology from the
transgressor to make up for the offense (Baumeister, Exline, & Sommer, 1998), and a
growing body of empirical evidence suggests that apologies do increase reports of

1York

University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Corresponding Author:
C. Ward Struthers, Department of Psychology, York University, 238 BSB, 4700 Keele St., Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M3J 1P3.
Email: struther@yorku.ca

518

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 33(5)

forgiveness (Fehr, Gelfand, & Nag, 2010). Despite the desire for an apology, the process of apologizing can be uncomfortable for victims because it puts them on the spot
and embarrasses them. Embarrassment is the aversive emotional state of feeling awkward, put on the spot, and evaluated in social interactions that typically involve violations of social norms (Buss, 1980; Goffman, 1956; Keltner & Buswell, 1997). We
argue that victims caught in this aversive situation may try to escape their embarrassment and manage the impressions of others by explicitly reporting that they have forgiven the transgressor. Given that such direct expressions are easily communicated by
the victim and easily detected by the transgressor, they can be adaptive and end the
embarrassing situation for the victim. One danger of such explicit claims of forgiveness is that they may be insincere and therefore victims may continue to harbor negative feelings and grudges toward transgressors after they report that they have forgiven
them (Baumeister et al., 1998). Another danger of communicating forgiveness when it
is not truly felt is that it might be perceived by the transgressor as deceptive.
Self-conscious emotions, such as embarrassment have likely evolved to ensure
adherence to social conventions and expectations that govern our capacity to initiate,
develop, and maintain relationships (Keltner, 1995; Miller & Leary, 1992). According
to Keltner (1995), embarrassment works as an alarm and repair mechanism by helping
individuals cope with awkward social situations. Individuals are expected to maintain
a certain level of poise in social encounters and when they are made to feel awkward,
put on the spot, or evaluated, they lose their poise, become flustered, and feel embarrassed (Goffman, 1955, 1956). Given that embarrassment is averse, individuals try to
flee from it by interacting in polite and charitable ways (Apsler, 1975; Semin &
Manstead, 1982).
Although apologies are often used by transgressors to benefit victims, facilitate
forgiveness, and repair damaged relationships (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Lee, Park,
Imai, & Dolan, 2012; Metts & Cupach, 1989), they can ironically make victims feel
embarrassed (Buss, 1980; Goffman, 1956; Keltner, 1995; Tavuchis, 1991). Threats to
one's face can occur when one individual in an interpersonal interaction violates the
face needs of another involved in the interaction (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Park &
Guan, 2009). Based on this, victims may feel that they are being evaluated by the
transgressor in terms of what they should do following an apology (Bennett &
Dewberry, 1994). Victims who are presented with an apology may also feel pressured
to forgive because their forgiveness is being solicited, but they may not be ready to
forgive. Although there seems to be a clear set of norms about how transgressors and
victims are suppose to interact following a transgression (Goffman, 1955), the conventions associated with how victims are supposed to interact when they are not ready to
forgive are more opaque (Bennett & Dewberry, 1994; Harth, Hornsey, & Barlow,
2011). If people are uncertain about the rules of social engagement, such as when the
victim does not accept the offer of apology and does not feel forgiving, they will feel
put on the spot, and embarrassment will result (Edelmann, 1981). In addition, people
including victims of transgressions do not enjoy witnessing others having to address
someone they have wronged and therefore they feel awkward in such predicaments
(Goffman, 1955; Tavuchis, 1991).

Struthers et al.

519

In sum, apologies can make victims of transgressions feel evaluated, put on the
spot, and awkward, which, in turn, trigger feelings of embarrassment. To cope with the
embarrassment associated with an apology some victims may simply act politely by
reporting forgiveness even if it is not genuine. This is adaptive because they protect
their self-image by quickly escaping the embarrassing situation and repair their social
bond by reassuring the transgressor through normative expressions such as "I forgive
you." However, there is also a danger in making such explicit claims of forgiveness
because they may not reflect a victim's genuine state of forgiveness.
Forgiveness is the process by which victims' negative evaluations and motivation
(e.g., avoidance) toward transgressors are transformed into positive evaluations and
motivation (e.g., approach; Carlisle et al., 2012). According to Exline and Baumeister
(2000), expressions of forgiveness can be communicated explicitly via direct reports
of forgiveness (e.g., saying "I forgive you") and implicitly via indirect expressions of
forgiveness (e.g., approach motivation). We argue that direct expressions of forgiveness, such as reported forgiveness, will be more affected by a victim's embarrassment
because they can be easily offered by the victim (Payne, Burkley, & Stokes, 2008),
detected by transgressors (Tracy & Robins, 2008), and used by the victim as a quick
escape from embarrassing situations (Neto & Mullet, 2004). In contrast, indirect
expressions of forgiveness, such as approach motivation, are more difficult to detect
and alter and thus do not provide a quick escape for victims.
Based on previous research demonstrating the positive benefit of apology on reports
of forgiveness (e.g., Fehr et al., 2010), we predicted that a transgressor's apology
would lead to greater reports of forgiveness compared with no apology. Importantly,
we predicted that the extent to which victims felt embarrassment would only mediate
the apology  forgiveness process when assessed with direct expressions of forgiveness but not indirect expressions of forgiveness. To test these predictions, we manipulated victim embarrassment and transgressor apology and examined their combined
effects on direct and indirect expressions of forgiveness (Spencer, Zanna, & Fong,
2005).

Method
Participants
The participants were 78 undergraduate psychology students enrolled in a large Canadian
university. They participated in exchange for 1% toward their grade in their introductory
psychology course. The participants were 20.55 years old on average (SD = 5.05).

Materials and Procedure
The entire study was administered online. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of the four embarrassment (2: no, yes) by apology (2: no, yes) conditions. Once participants gave informed consent to participate, they were asked to imagine themselves
as a victim of a transgression. Transgressions are defined as violations of social norms

520

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 33(5)

(e.g., Exline, Baumeister, Zell, Kraft, & Witvliet, 2008). Participants imagined that a
person they were interacting with online, Melissa, was communicating personal information about them to her friend after being explicitly instructed by the researcher not
to do so (i.e., violation of social norm/transgression). The participants were to imagine
that they had arrived early for the study. Another student, Melissa (the transgressor),
was also waiting outside of the study location for the experimenter to show up and so
the participants decided to quickly use the bathroom which was located across from
the study location. The participants were then to imagine that they were a little late and
so they either forgot to wash their hands, or they quickly washed their hands, before
they exited the bathroom. Once they exited the bathroom Melissa was still waiting.
During the study, participants were to ask and answer a series of question about
each other using an instant messaging program. Here, the researcher stressed that it
was important that they did not carry on any other instant messaging conversations
during the study because it was dealing with personal information about the participants. However, during the exchange, the participants received a message from
Melissa that was intended for one of Melissa's friends who she had been interacting
with during the study. In the embarrassment condition, the participant received the
following text:
hey linds, i'm stuck here at york for into to psych. i'm not suppose to be interacting with
anyone else, lol. In the study we're suupose to be finding out personal info about each
other. It's okay. but omg, the person i'm talking to doesn't even wash their hands after
using the bathroom. eww, right?

In the no embarrassment condition, the participants received the following text:
hey linds, i'm stuck here at york for into to psych. i'm not suppose to be interacting with
anyone else, lol. In the study we're suupose to be finding out personal info about each
other. It's okay. at least the person i'm talking to washes their hands after using the
bathroom.

Note that the typos in the instant messages were intended to make the messages
seem consistent with commonly sent messages and therefore more realistic. To assess
the manipulation of the embarrassment independent variable, participants responded
to the following item, after reading Melissa's message to her friend I felt humiliated (1
= not at all, 7 = very much so). To check the severity of the transgression, we assessed
the extent to which the participants perceived the transgression as severe (1 = not at
all, 7 = very much so). The participants were then presented with a video of Melissa
either apologizing or not. In the apology condition Melissa said the following: "Hey
listen, I'm so sorry I sent that message to you. It was really immature and I feel horrible about it. I wish I hadn't done it." In the no apology condition nothing is said.
Three items were used to assess the manipulation of apology. The participants
responded on a 7-point scale (1 = not at all, 7 = very much so) to three items, for
example, how apologetic was Melissa for what happened? Participants then responded

Struthers et al.

521

to the direct (reported) measure of forgiveness, "To what extent could you imagine
saying I forgive you to Melissa to simply escape the situation?" Participants responded
on a 7-point scale from 1 = not at all to 7 = very much so. For our indirect measure of
forgiveness (i.e., approach motivation) we used the line bisection task (LBT; Nash,
McGregor, & Inzlicht, 2010). Given that forgiveness has been described as a transformation in victim motivation toward a transgressor from negative motivation (avoidance) to positive motivation (approach), we decided to use the extent to which
participants had adopted an approach-oriented motivational mindset as an indirect
measure of forgiveness. Research has shown that approach motivational mindsets
associated with focusing on, and moving toward, desirable goals or outcomes are characterized by greater activation of the left hemisphere of the brain (Drake & Meyers,
2006; Friedman & Forster, 2005). We used a computer-based version of the LBT as an
indirect measure of relative hemispheric activation (Elliot, 2008; Nash et al., 2010).
Specifically, participants used a mouse to click what they perceived was the center of
a series of 20 horizontal lines presented one at a time in different locations on the
computer monitor. The LBT works on the principle that if a person has an attention
bias toward the right visual field then she or he will perceive the right half of each line
as longer than it actually is. Consequently such individuals will select a midpoint of
each line that is to the right of the line's actual midpoint. Bias toward the right visual
field has been associated with neural activity in the contralateral left hemisphere of the
brain (Nash et al., 2010). Motivational researchers have used the LBT as an implicit
measure of approach motivation (e.g., Drake & Meyers, 2006; Friedman & Forster,
2005). More recently, Nash et al. (2010) found a positive relation between the LBT
and left prefrontal hemisphericity assessed by the electroencephalography (EEG),
which is associated with approach motivation (Elliot, 2008). Accordingly, we expected
participants who had forgiven the transgressor to be approach oriented, and therefore,
to make more rightward errors on the LBT.

Results
Manipulation Check Analysis
An embarrassment (2) by apology (2) ANOVA was conducted on the manipulation
check items to assess the successful manipulation of the independent variables. A significant main effect for embarrassment on the embarrassment manipulation check was
found, F(1, 74) = 8.34, p < .01, 2 = .09. No other significant effects were found for
the embarrassment manipulation check. A significant apology effect was also found
for the apology manipulation check, F(1, 74) = 22.12, p < .01, 2 = .23. No other significant effects were found for the apology manipulation check. Inspection of the
manipulation check means indicated that both independent variables were manipulated as intended: no embarrassment M = 2.89, SD = 2.10, embarrassment M = 4.28,
SD = 1.72; no apology M = 3.02, SD = 1.22, apology M = 4.43, SD = 1.43. No significant main or interaction effects were found for the severity manipulation check variable, all Fs < 1.0. Thus, our manipulation of embarrassment and apology had no effect

522

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 33(5)

on the participants' perceived severity of the event. All participants perceived the
event to be moderately severe, M = 3.10, SD = 1.43.

Main Analysis
We predicted a main effect for apology on reported forgiveness. This hypothesis was
confirmed, F(1, 74) = 5.15, p < .05, 2 = .06. Participants in the apology condition indicated greater reported forgiveness, M = 3.52, SD = 2.02, compared with participants in
the no apology condition, M = 2.54, SD = 1.76. In addition, a simple main effect for
apology on reported forgiveness for the embarrassment condition was also predicted. In
contrast, we predicted a simple main effect for apology on expressed forgiveness for the
no embarrassment condition. Given our specific directional predictions concerned simple main effects of apology at each level of victim embarrassment, we conducted onetailed simple main effect tests. Consistent with our hypotheses, we found a significant
simple effect for apology on reported forgiveness for participants in the embarrassment
condition, t(38) = 1.67, p < .05. Participants in the apology condition expressed a
greater willingness to tell the transgressor that they forgave her to escape the situation,
M = 3.16, SD = 1.77, compared with participants in the no apology condition, M = 2.13,
SD = 1.85. No significant effect for apology was found for participants in the no embarrassment condition on reported forgiveness, t(38) = 1.54, p > .05. A significant simple
effect for apology was predicted and found on the indirect measure of forgiveness in the
no embarrassment condition, t(36) = 1.88, p < .05. The apology condition produced
higher line bisection scores (i.e., greater forgiveness), M = 29.96, SD = 29.02, than did
the no apology condition, M = 12.41, SD = 22.02. No significant simple effect for apology was found for the embarrassment condition, t(36) = -0.89, p > .05.

Discussion
In this article, we proposed that reported forgiveness may not always be what it seems
following an apology from a transgressor. When transgressors apologize, victims of
transgressions often feel embarrassed because they feel awkward, put on the spot, and
the object of evaluation. In turn, the embarrassment experienced by victims appears to
partly engender reports of, but not actual experienced forgiveness. We argued that
victims may report forgiveness in these situations to escape the embarrassment associated with an apology. Reported forgiveness is more affected by the vagaries of a victim's embarrassment than experienced forgiveness because it is easily offered by
victims and easily detected by the transgressor and therefore it can be used as a coping
strategy to escape from embarrassing situations.
Our findings replicate a great deal of previous research demonstrating a positive
relation between apologies and reported forgiveness (Fehr et al., 2010). More interestingly perhaps, the results of this experiment extends the forgiveness literature by
showing that apologies can also have an impact on victims' embarrassment, which in
turn, affects reported, but not experienced, forgiveness. Insofar as victims understand
that saying "I forgive you" to escape embarrassing situations might be perceived as

Struthers et al.

523

hypocritical and deceptive by transgressors speaks to the power of embarrassment and
the desire to escape embarrassing situations and maintain social bonds.
One limitation of our research is that it cannot definitively address the authenticity of
our participants' direct and indirect forgiveness. It could be that embarrassment causes a
bona fide decision to directly report forgiveness to the transgressor following an apology
as well as a coping strategy to neutralize the embarrassing situation. Moreover, it may
take approach motivation toward the transgressor time to catch up to explicit reports of
forgiveness. Future research that examines the veridicality of forgiveness following
apologies and victims' embarrassment would help to clarify this issue.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to express their appreciation to the two anonymous reviewers and the
editor for their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this article.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

References
Apsler, R. (1975). Effects of embarrassment on behavior toward others. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 32, 145-153.
Baumeister, R. F., Exline, J. J., & Sommer, K. L. (1998). The victim role, grudge theory, and
two dimensions of forgiveness. In E. L. Worthington Jr. (Ed.), Dimensions of forgiveness:
Psychological research and theological perspective (pp. 79-104). Radnor, PA: Templeton
Foundation Press.
Bennett, M., & Dewberry, C. (1994). "I've said I'm sorry, haven't I?" A study of the identity
implications and constraints that apologies create for their recipients. Current Psychology:
Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 13, 10-20.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language uses. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Buss, A. H. (1980). Self-consciousness and social anxiety. San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Carlisle, R. D., Tsang, J., Ahmad, N. Y., Worthington, E. L., Witvliet, C. V., & Wade, N.
(2012). Do actions speak louder than words? Differential effects of apology and restitution
on behavioral and self-report measures of forgiveness. Journal of Positive Psychology, 7,
294-305.
Drake, R. A., & Myers, L. R. (2006). Visual attention, emotion, and action tendency: Feeling
active or passive. Cognition and Emotion, 20, 608-622.
Edelmann, R. J. (1981). Embarrassment: The state of research. Current Psychological Research,
1, 125-138.
Elliot, A. J. (2008). Handbook of approach and avoidance motivation. New York, NY:
Psychology Press.

524

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 33(5)

Exline, J. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Expressing forgiveness and apology: Benefits and
barriers. In M. E. McCullough (Ed.), Forgiveness: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 133155). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Exline, J. J., Baumeister, R. F., Zell, A. L., Kraft, A. J., & Witvliet, C. V. O. (2008). Not so
innocent: Does seeing one's own capability for wrongdoing predict forgiveness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 495-515.
Fehr, R., Gelfand, M. J., & Nag, M. (2010). The road to forgiveness: A meta-analytic synthesis
of its situational and dispositional correlates. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 894-914.
Friedman, V. S., & Forster, J. (2005). Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry: Implications for creativity and analytical problem solving. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 88, 263-275.
Goffman, E. (1955). On face work: An analysis of ritual elements in social interaction. Journal
of the Study of Interpersonal Processes, 18, 213-231.
Goffman, E. (1956). Embarrassment and social organization. American Journal of Sociology,
62, 264-271.
Harth, N. S., Hornsey, M. J., & Barlow, F. K. (2011). Emotional responses to rejection of gestures of intergroup reconciliation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 815-829.
Keltner, D. (1995). The signs of appeasement: Evidence for the distinct displays of embarrassment, amusement, and shame. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 441-454.
Keltner, D., & Buswell, B. N. (1997). Embarrassment: Its distinct form and appeasement functions. Psychological Bulletin, 122, 250-270.
Lee, H. E., Park, H. S., Imai, T., & Dolan, D. (2012). Cultural differences between Japan and
the United States in uses of "apology" and "thank you" in favor asking messages. Journal
of Language and Social Psychology, 31, 263-289.
Metts, S., & Cupach, W. R. (1989). Situational influences on the use of remedial strategies in
embarrassing predicaments. Communication Monographs, 56, 151-162.
Miller, R. S., & Leary, M. R. (1992). Social sources and interactive functions of embarrassment.
In M. Clark (Ed.), Emotion and social behavior (pp. 202-221). New York, NY: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Nash, K. A., McGregor, I., & Inzlicht, M. (2010). Line bisection as a neural marker of approach
motivation. Psychophysiology, 47, 979-983.
Neto, F., & Mullet, E. (2004). Personality, self-esteem, and self-construal as correlates of forgiveness. European Journal of Personality, 18, 15-30.
Park, H. S., & Guan, X. (2009). Culture, positive and negative face threats, and apology intentions. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 28, 244-262.
Payne, K. B., Burkley, M. A., & Stokes, M. B. (2008). Why do implicit and explicit attitude
tests diverge? The role of structural fit. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94,
16-31.
Semin, G. R., & Manstead, A. S. R. (1982). The social implications of embarrassment displays
and restitution behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology, 12, 367-377.
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain: Why experiments are often more effective than mediational analyses in examining psychological processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 845-851.
Tavuchis, N. (1991). Mea culpa: A sociology of apology and reconciliation. Stanford CA:
Stanford University Press.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2008). The automaticity of emotion recognition. Emotion, 8,
81-95.

Struthers et al.

525

Author Biographies
C. Ward Struthers is a professor of psychology at York University in Toronto, Canada, where
he has worked since 1996. His research interests concern the social motivation of victims and
transgressors following interpersonal offenses.
Alexander G. Santelli (PhD, York University) is an associate at The Strategic Counsel, a market research consulting firm in Toronto, Canada. Prior to his work as an organizational research
consultant, his academic work focused on interpersonal conflict (e.g., forgiveness and apology),
self-regulation, and value.
Careen Khoury is a doctoral candidate in social personality psychology at York University in
Toronto, Canada, under the supervision of Ward Struthers. Her research interests mainly focus
on victims' posttransgression responses following interpersonal offenses.
Melissa Pang is a graduate of the Undergraduate Honors Psychology Program at York
University in Toronto, Canada. Her honors thesis, under the supervision of Ward Struthers,
concerned the role of victim embarrassment in the forgiveness and repentance process following interpersonal transgressions.
Rebecca E. Young is currently a doctoral candidate in the Adult Clinical Psychology Program
at York University in Toronto, Canada. Her research concerns the social motivation of individuals toward those with mental health issues.
Yasaman Kashefi is a graduate of the Undergraduate Honors Psychology Program at York
University in Toronto, Canada. Her honors thesis, under the supervision of Ward Struthers,
examined how victim embarrassment influences the forgiveness process.
Zdravko Marjanovic is a lecturer of psychology at Thompson Rivers University in Kamloops,
British Columbia, Canada. He earned his PhD in social personality psychology from York
University in 2010. His current research interests concern prosocial behavior, health psychology, and measurement.
Curtis Phills completed his PhD in 2012 at York University in Toronto, Canada. He is currently
a postdoctoral fellow at Western University in London, Ontario, Canada.
Kyle Nash is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Basel in Basel, Switzerland. His
research, grounded in the neuropsychology of motivation and conflict, examines basic neural,
motivational, and affective mechanisms of personality and self-regulatory processes.
Noelia A. Vasquez is a PhD of the Graduate Psychology Program at York University in
Toronto, Canada. She is currently working in the field of market research. Prior to her work as
a market research consultant, her academic work focused on individuals' temporal focus and
self-regulation.

