Applied Psycholinguistics 35 (2014), 419-442
doi:10.1017/S0142716412000446

Comparing the effect of skewed and
balanced input on English as a
foreign language learners'
comprehension of the double-object
dative construction
KIM MCDONOUGH
Concordia University
TATIANA NEKRASOVA-BECKER
Second Language Testing, Inc.
Received: April 29, 2011

Accepted for publication: December 22, 2011

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Kim McDonough, Department of Education, Concordia University (LB-583-1), 1455 de
Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, QC H3G 1M8, Canada. E-mail: kim.mcdonough@
concordia.ca
ABSTRACT
According to usage-based approaches to acquisition, the detection of a construction may be facilitated
when input contains numerous exemplars with a shared lexical item, which is referred to as skewed
input. First language studies have shown that skewed input is more beneficial for the acquisition of
novel constructions than balanced input, in which a small set of lexical verbs occurs an equal number
of times. However, a second language (L2) study of datives found no advantage for skewed input
compared to balanced input. The present study compared the effectiveness of skewed and balanced
input at facilitating the comprehension of the double-object dative construction in L2 English. Over a
2-week period, Thai English as foreign language learners (N = 78) completed comprehension tests and
a treatment activity that provided either skewed first, skewed random, or balanced input. The results
indicated that balanced input was most effective at promoting comprehension of double-object datives.
The implications are discussed in terms of the benefits of different types of input for L2 learners.

In usage-based approaches to acquisition, exposure to exemplars in the input and
the engagement of cognitive mechanisms are believed to facilitate the acquisition
of constructions (Bybee, 2006, 2008; Ellis, 2006; Goldberg, 2006; Tomasello,
2003). At various stages in the acquisition of a construction, different types of input
may be particularly effective. For example, the initial detection of a construction
may be aided by input in which that construction appears repeatedly with a limited
set of lexical items (i.e., low variability input). The goal of the current study is
(c) Cambridge University Press 2012 0142-7164/12 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

420

to compare the effectiveness of low variability input at promoting comprehension
of the double-object dative construction in English learned as a second language
(L2). Prior to describing in more detail the specific types of low variability input
targeted in the current study, we first provide an overview of constructions and
usage-based approaches to their acquisition.
CONSTRUCTIONS AND THEIR ACQUISITION

Following Goldberg (1995, 2006), a construction is defined as a pairing of form
and meaning that expresses a proposition that is encoded through surface level
forms. Constructions represent form-meaning pairings of different sizes and abstractness, ranging from simple, concrete units such as nouns (e.g., cat, flower) to
fully schematized argument structures such as the passive construction (Subj aux
VPpp [PPby]; Boyd & Goldberg, 2009; Goldberg, 2009). Because constructions
entail meaning and form, both individual lexical items and the construction itself
contribute to the overall interpretation of an utterance. For example, the verb save
does not necessarily trigger an association with a beneficiary or recipient (e.g., I
saved a little money last month), except when it occurs in a dative construction
(e.g., I saved my mom a little money last month; Bencini & Goldberg, 2000).
Constructions are hierarchically organized, with simpler constructions eventually forming higher-level constructions such as transitive, ditransitive, and causedmotion constructions (Akhtar, 1999; Chan, 2010; Childers & Tomasello, 2001;
Ellis & Ferreira-Junior, 2009; Goldberg, 2006; Goldberg, Casenhiser, &
Sethuraman, 2004; Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello, 2007; Year &
Gordon, 2009), wh-question constructions (Ambridge, Rowland, Theakston,
& Tomasello, 2006; McDonough & Kim, 2009; Rowland, 2007), negative
constructions (Cameron-Faulkner, Lieven, & Theakston, 2007), tense-aspect
constructions (Wulff, Ellis, Romer, Bardovi-Harlig, & LeBlanc, 2009), and finite
sentential complement constructions (Kidd, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2006, 2010).
Unlike approaches to grammar that emphasize the acquisition of syntactic rules
or processing procedures that are independent of the meaning of the individual
lexical items in an utterance, construction-based approaches assume that form
and meaning are linked.
In terms of the acquisition of constructions, usage-based approaches emphasize the item-based nature of learning, which is often driven by the structural
patterns associated with lexical verbs. Because language learning involves the
acquisition of a variety of constructions and generalization across those constructions, this process is gradual and requires that learners move from reliance on
concrete exemplars to the formation of more abstract schemata. Learning occurs
through domain-general mechanisms, such as categorization, schema formation,
and analogical processing (Bybee, 2008; Ellis & Cadierno, 2009; Goldberg &
Casenhiser, 2008; Goldberg, Casenhiser, & White, 2007; Lieven & Tomasello,
2008). Acquisition involves the creation of an inventory of lexically based frames
that occur frequently in the input followed by generalization through analogy
to derive complex abstract constructions from those lexical frames (Rowland,
2007; Tomasello, 2003). In this framework, moving away from a lexically fixed
construction to the productive use of construction with a variety of lexical items

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

421

represents a step in development. Along with general cognitive abilities, input
features are also believed to play an important role in the detection and extension
of constructions. In addition to general input features, such as perceptual salience
and overall frequency (Goldschneider & DeKeyser, 2001), low variability input
(which is elaborated in the following sections), is believed to drive the detection
of constructions and category formation.
LOW VARIABILITY INPUT AND THE ACQUISITION
OF CONSTRUCTIONS

Low variability input is characterized by the repeated occurrence of a construction
with little lexical diversity. For example, a conversation between two people who
are wrapping presents is likely to contain numerous double-object datives, but
their dative utterances will probably contain the same lexical verbs repeatedly,
such as give, pass, and hand (e.g., give me the first present, pass me the scissors,
hand me the tape, pass me the ribbon, give me the blue paper, hand me a tag). This
conversation illustrates low variability because the double-object datives contain
only three lexical verbs, and all of the exemplars follow the same basic pattern
of [verb + me + a/the N]. Researchers have further distinguished between low
variability input that has either a balanced or skewed distribution, which refers
to the token frequency of each verb (Casenhiser & Goldberg, 2005; Goldberg &
Casenhiser, 2008; Year & Gordon, 2009). In balanced input, the distribution of
exemplars across lexical verbs is equal, which means that each lexical verb has
equally low token frequency. The conversation above illustrates balanced input in
that only three lexical verb types occurred in the double-object dative constructions
and each verb type had two tokens. In contrast, skewed input contains more
exemplars created from one lexical verb (i.e., high-token frequency) while the
other lexical verbs occur less frequently (i.e., low-token frequency). In terms of
the gift-wrapping example described previously, that conversation would represent
skewed input if one lexical verb, such as give, occurred in most of the doubleobject datives while the other lexical verbs occurred less often (e.g., give me the
first present, give me the scissors, hand me the tape, pass me the ribbon, give me
the blue paper, hand me a tag). In these examples, both the balanced and skewed
input conversations presented the same number of lexical verb types (three) and the
same number of tokens (six). The crucial difference is that balanced input presents
all three verbs with equally low token frequency, while skewed input presents one
verb with high token frequency and two verbs with low token frequency.
The tendency for a single lexical item to account for a large proportion of
exemplars is referred to as Zipf's law (Zipf, 1935, as cited in Goldberg, 2006),
with that lexical item (often a verb) considered prototypical of the entire construction. The prototypical exemplar expresses the most representative attributes
against which other less representative exemplars are compared. Numerous studies
have investigated whether specific constructions, such as ditransitives, locatives,
and causatives, are associated with a particular high-frequency verb (Ellis &
Ferreira-Junior, 2009; Goldberg, 2009; Goldberg, Casenhiser, & Sethuraman,
2005; Goldberg et al., 2007; Wulff et al., 2009). The double-object dative construction, for example, is prototypically associated with the lexical verb give.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

422

Both corpus-based and experimental research have shown that give occurs more
frequently in the double-object dative construction and receives high acceptability
and preference ratings compared to other lexical verbs (Campbell & Tomasello,
2001; Ellis & Ferreira-Junior, 2009; Goldberg, 2009; Gries, 2005; Snyder &
Stromswald, 1997; Wolfe-Quintero, 1998). Skewed input is believed to promote
the organization of exemplars into categories that capture key elements of its form
and meaning (Goldberg et al., 2007). The concrete similarity that exists between
exemplars with the same lexical verb makes the underlying construction easier to
detect. In other words, the abstract relational structure expressed by a construction
will be easier to learn if the exemplars share a concrete feature, such as their lexical
verb. The underlying constructional category may be less apparent if the exemplars
provide an equal number of a small set of lexical verbs (i.e., balanced input) or
are created from a large set of lexical verbs (i.e., high type frequency input).
Empirical support for the benefits of skewed input for category formation has
been provided by experimental studies that examined the acquisition of novel
constructions with nonce verbs. For example, Goldberg and colleagues (Casenhiser
& Goldberg, 2005; Goldberg et al., 2004) compared the effectiveness of balanced
and skewed input at promoting the comprehension and production of subject-
object-verb constructions of appearance by both children and adults. The verbs
were nonce words that conformed to English phonological rules, while the nouns
in the subject and object slots were actual English nouns. In the appearance
construction, the first noun indicates the agent, while the second noun indicates
the location where the first noun appears. The novel sentence the rabbit the hat
mooped describes a situation in which a rabbit appears on a hat (Casenhiser &
Goldberg, 2005). The balanced input condition contained five nonce verbs, each
of which occurred with low-token frequency (one or two tokens per verb). In
contrast, the skewed input condition contained one nonce verb with high-token
frequency (four tokens) and four nonce verbs with low-token frequency (one
token each). These studies found that although both balanced and skewed input
promoted category formation as compared to a control condition, skewed input
was more effective than balanced input. A subsequent study (Goldberg et al., 2007)
further explored whether presenting the skewed exemplars first (skewed first input)
is more beneficial than randomizing all of the exemplars (skewed random input).
Presenting the skewed exemplars first may increase the salience of their underlying
similarity and facilitate faster category formation, after which exemplars with other
verbs can be more easily assimilated into the category. This study confirmed the
benefits of skewed first input compared to skewed random input with first language
(L1) English speakers. Additional evidence that skewed input may play a role in
language acquisition has been provided by studies which have shown that children
tend to rely on a single high-frequency verb when producing sentential complement
constructions (Kidd et al., 2006, 2010), and studies which examined children's
acquisition of novel verbs (Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Brandone, 2008).
Only one study to date has compared the effectiveness of skewed and balanced
input at facilitating the acquisition of dative constructions in learning English as a
second language (L2; Year, 2009; Year & Gordon, 2009). Six English as a foreign
language (EFL) classes of Korean L1 children were randomly assigned to either
a skewed condition in which prepositional and double-object dative constructions

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

423

had more tokens with give, or a balanced condition in which there were an equal
tokens created from five lexical verbs. The control classes did not receive any exposure to dative constructions. Because the order of presentation was randomized
in the skewed frequency condition, it is comparable to Goldberg's skewed random
group. The dative constructions were presented through 80 video clips that had an
equal number of prepositional and double-object datives. Acceptability judgment
and elicited written production tasks were used to compare the impact of the input
conditions on the learners' knowledge and use of both dative constructions. They
found that both skewed and balanced input outperformed the control group, and
that there were no differences in their effectiveness.
Year and Gordon (2009) described a number of factors that may have accounted
for the divergent findings from the prior L1 research. Whereas the L1 novel construction research was carried out over a short time period, which might promote
reliance on exemplars, their study was carried out over a longer time frame. The
longer intervention may have discouraged reliance on exemplars and promoted
abstract learning for both input groups. Whereas the L1 studies introduced a single
construction, their activities provided both prepositional and double-object datives,
which may have led the input to be more "noisy" than the L1 studies. In addition,
their study was carried out in a classroom context, which may have encouraged
learners to employ explicit learning strategies and to draw upon their metalinguistic knowledge. Finally, whereas the L1 studies focused on the participants'
comprehension of the novel construction, Year and Gordon assessed the impact of
the input types on the L2 learners' judgments of acceptability and written elicited
production tasks, which may have encouraged metalinguistic reflection.
In sum, L1 research has indicated that skewed input may be more beneficial for
promoting the acquisition of a completely novel construction for child and adult
speakers, particularly when the exemplars with the same lexical verb are presented
first (Casenhiser & Goldberg, 2005; Goldberg et al., 2004, 2007). However, Year
and Gordon (2009) found balanced input may be as effective as skewed input for
EFL learners in classroom contexts. In order to expand the existing L2 research,
the current study compares the effectiveness of skewed first, skewed random,
and balanced input on EFL learners' comprehension of the double-object dative
construction.
METHOD

Participants

The initial participant pool consisted of 142 Thai EFL learners at a large, public
university in Northern Thailand who were enrolled in six classes of the same
required English course. Each class was randomly assigned to one of the three
input groups (skewed first, skewed random, balanced). After completion of the
research activities, the participants' pretest scores for the dative items (n = 10)
were analyzed to identify whether they could accurately interpret the meaning
of the double-object dative test items prior to carrying out the treatment task.
Participants who scored the same as native English speakers or advanced Thai
EFL speakers during pilot testing (7 or higher) were excluded from the study

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

424

(n = 20), as were participants (n = 44) who had emerging knowledge of the
construction (scores of 5 or 6). The pretest scores (4 or less) of the remaining
78 participants were compared against chance (50%), and the one sample t test
revealed that they scored significantly lower than chance t (79) = 17.03, p < .000.
To summarize the inclusion criteria, only participants whose pretest performance
revealed a consistent and incorrect identification of the first noun phrase after the
lexical verb as the object undergoing transfer, rather than the beneficiary/recipient,
were included in the study.
The final participant pool consisted of 78 Thai EFL learners (46 women and 32
men) distributed across the balanced (n = 23), skewed first (n = 24), and skewed
random (n = 31) input groups. There were no differences in the participants'
mean age, years of prior instruction, or degree programs across the three groups.
They were all native speakers of Thai with a mean age of 20.1 years (SD = 1.02)
who had reported no prior experience living in an environment where English is
spoken as a native or official language. They were enrolled in bachelor degree
programs in the sciences (40), social sciences (27), and humanities (11), but none
were majoring in English or any other languages offered at the university (e.g.,
French, German and Japanese). They reported having studied English previously
for a mean of 11.5 years (SD = 2.06), which consisted of required grammar and
reading EFL courses taken in primary and secondary school. They had never taken
any standardized tests to assess their proficiency in English, but their functional
speaking ability corresponded to the Intermediate Mid level of the American
Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages guidelines. More specifically, the
participants could join in simple conversations and answer direct questions about
predictable topics of personal and social character. They could create with the
language by arranging strings of familiar chunks into sentence-length utterances
that contained considerable hesitation (e.g., pauses and reformulations) along
with inaccuracies in vocabulary and/or grammar and/or pronunciation. In terms
of their reading level, their course textbook was designed for intermediate-level
EFL learners and contained texts with Flesch-Kincaid reading ease scores ranging
from 65.0 to 70.3 and grade levels ranging from 7.1 to 7.9.
Target structure

The target structure was the double-object dative construction, which has been
the focus of considerable research in terms of the semantic, morphological, and
discourse constraints that influence its occurrence, productivity, and learnability (Arnold, Wasow, Losongco, & Ginstrom, 2000; Goldberg, 1992; Groefsema,
2001; Gropen, Pinker, Hollander, Goldberg, & Wilson, 1989; Hollmann, 2007;
Jackendoff, 1990; Mazurkewich & White, 1984; Wolfe-Quintero, 1998). The core
meaning of the double-object dative involves the transfer of possession of an
object to a goal, which is typically a human recipient or a beneficiary. In terms
of its form, the double-object dative construction contains a subject and lexical
verb that is immediately followed by the recipient/beneficiary and then the object
undergoing transfer (e.g., the accountant sent her client an invoice). There is
a limited number of lexical verbs that can occur in this structure, and various
semantic and morphological constraints have been proposed to account for its

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

425

lack of productivity as compared to prepositional datives. In terms of its discourse
context, the double-object dative construction typically occurs when the recipient/beneficiary is given information and is expressed as a pronoun, while the
object undergoing transfer appears in the dominant, focusing, or new information
position (Arnold et al., 2000; Bresnan, 2007; Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina, & Baayen,
2007; Collins, 1995; Ferreira, 1996; Park & Zhang, 2002; Sawyer, 1996; WolfeQuintero, 1998). For example, after stating that his parents' anniversary was next
week, a speaker might use a double-object dative such as so I'm sending them a
card this afternoon. In this context, the parents are given information and are expressed using them, while a card is the new information. Although it is common
to elicit knowledge or production of the double-object dative construction using decontextualized sentences, studies that have embedded dative constructions
into discourse contexts have found that both L1 and L2 speakers are sensitive
to the given before new principle along with animacy, linguistic form and the
"heaviness" of the object and recipient/beneficiary noun phrases (Arnold et al.,
2000; Bresnan, 2007; Gries, 2003; Marefat, 2005; Park & Zhang, 2002; Tanaka,
1987).
Adults acquiring English as an L2 tend to produce more prepositional datives, in
which the object undergoing transfer immediately follows the lexical verb and the
recipient/beneficiary is expressed in a prepositional phrase (e.g., the accountant
sent an invoice to her client), and tend to rate prepositional datives as more acceptable than double-object datives (Hawkins, 1987; Marefat, 2005; Mazurkewich,
1984; Park & Zhang, 2002). Among other factors, L2 proficiency and L1 characteristics have been investigated as a potential influence on L2 speakers' perception
and production of double-object datives (Bley-Vroman & Yoshinaga, 1992; Inagaki, 1997; Marefat, 2005; Izumi & Nishimura, 2002; Oh, 2010; Whong-Barr
& Schwartz, 2002). For example, cross-sectional studies have reported that both
favorable judgments and production of double-object datives increase as English
proficiency increases (Marefat, 2005; Tanaka, 1987). Learners whose L1 allows
dative alternation tend to rate English double-object datives more acceptable than
learners whose L1 does not allow alternation (Inagaki, 1997).
In terms of the current participants' L1 background, in Thai the lexical verb
give (hay) is used in a construction which indicates the transfer of an object from
an agent to a recipient. However, the word order differs from the double-object
dative in English in that the object undergoing transfer follows the lexical verb,
while the recipient occurs after the object, as in (1) (examples from Yap & Iwasaki,
1998).
(1) khaw hay NEn
chan
s/he
give money me
"S/he gave me money"

A preposition to/for (kae) optionally occurs between the object and recipient, but
it tends to occur only when the noun phrase expressing the object undergoing
transfer is heavy (Thepkanjana & Uehara, 2008). When the optional preposition
is used, Thai sentences using hay as the lexical verb have the same word order
as English prepositional dative constructions. Other lexical verbs that similarly

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

426

express the transfer of an object from an agent to a recipient, such as send and
build, do not occur in this structure. Instead these lexical verbs are followed by
object undergoing transfer, then hay as a postverbal dative/benefactive marker and
the recipient, as illustrated in examples (2) and (3).
(2) chan soN cotmaay hay
I
send letter
to
"I mailed a letter to her/him"
(3) khaw saaN baan hay
s/he
build house for
"S/he built a house for me"

khaw
her/him
chan
me

When hay is used as a postverbal marker, the Thai sentences have the same
word order as English prepositional dative constructions. In sum, both usages
of hay in Thai, either as a lexical verb or as a postverbal dative/benefactive
marker, involve constructions in which the object undergoing transfer of possession
always follows the lexical verb. Consequently, if L1 features influence Thai EFL
learners' perceptions of English double-object dative constructions, then they
may be more likely to perceive the noun that follows the lexical verb as the object
undergoing transfer of possession rather than the recipient. For more information
about additional usages of hay in Thai see Thepkanjana and Uehara (2008) and
Yap and Iwasaki (1998).
Target lexical verbs

The lexical verbs targeted in the materials were selected through a multistep
process. First, the lexical verbs that occur in the double-object construction that
were tested in previous studies were identified (e.g., Inagaki, 1997; Mazurkewich,
1984; Wolfe-Quintero, 1998). However, one verb (give) was excluded at this step
because of its use in Thai as a lexical verb in a similar dative construction and
as a dative marker with other lexical verbs. Next, the verbs were checked for
occurrence on the General Service List (Baumann & Culligan, 1995) in order to
eliminate verbs that were likely to be unknown to the participants. Examples of
lexical verbs eliminated at this step include issue, slap, award, grant, pose, cite, and
steal. The overall frequency of the remaining lexical verbs was then checked in the
American conversation subcorpus (5,071,196 words) of the Longman Grammar
of Spoken and Written Corpus (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan,
1999). Based on their frequency information, the verbs were assigned to three
categories: test set A, test set B, and treatment task. The verbs assigned to test sets
A and B were matched in terms of their overall frequency in the corpus (107 and
102 per million words, respectively) and percentage of occurrence in the doubleobject dative construction (7.8 and 5.7, respectively). In terms of their semantic
subclasses, each test contained three verbs from the give class (e.g., pass, hand,
feed), two verbs from the creation class (e.g., bake, build), one verb each from
ballistic motion (e.g., throw, kick), send (e.g., mail, ship), and future having (e.g.,
offer, loan) classes. The only difference in the semantic subclasses was that test
set A contained one verb each from the communicated message (e.g., read, write)

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

427

Table 1. Input characteristics by condition
Condition
Skewed first
Skewed random
Balanced

Token Frequency

Order

8 send tokens and 3 tokens each with
pass, owe, teach, and fix
8 send tokens and 3 tokens each with
pass, owe, teach, and fix
4 tokens each with send, pass, owe,
teach, and fix

Send items first,
then mixed
Mixed
Mixed

and motion in a direction (e.g., bring, take) classes, while test set B contained two
verbs from the communicated message class.
The remaining verbs were assigned to the treatment task. The treatment task
verbs included one verb each from the give, send, future having, communicated
message, and creation semantic subclasses. These verbs had a higher mean frequency in the corpus (152 per million words) and occurred more frequently in the
double-object dative form (21%) than the verbs in the test sets. The mean frequency
(overall and occurrence in the double-object dative) of the verbs assigned to the
tests was lower than the mean frequency of the verbs in the treatment tasks in
order to reduce the possibility that improvement from pretest to posttest could
be attributed to performance on individual lexical verbs that are more strongly
associated with the double-object dative construction. A complete list of the verbs
with their frequency information is provided in Appendix A.
Design

A pretest-posttest design was used to identify which type of input was most effective for facilitating Thai EFL learners' comprehension of double-object datives.
The independent variable was input type, which was operationalized as the token
frequency and order of double-object datives during the treatment task: send, owe,
teach, pass, and fix (i.e., to fix someone something to eat). It was a between-groups
variable with three levels: skewed first, skewed random, and balanced. The token
frequency and order of the five lexical verbs are summarized for each level of the
independent variable in Table 1. The dependent variable was comprehension of
double-object datives, which was operationalized as accurate identification of the
object undergoing transfer of possession, as opposed to the recipient/beneficiary.
Materials
Treatment materials. The treatment task was presented as running recognition

memory activity in order to reduce the possibility that the participants would adopt
a metalinguistic orientation toward the task or the target construction. Their task
was to look at a picture while hearing a short scenario, after which they indicated
on an answer sheet whether they had seen the picture or heard the last sentence
before. The 20 aural texts each contained two to four sentences in which the last

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

428

sentence contained a double-object dative construction in its prototypical form
and context, with the recipient/beneficiary occurring as a pronoun and expressing
given information. In terms of the cover task, the pictures and aural texts were
manipulated so that there were responses for all logical possibilities based on
having seen the picture before (yes/no) and having heard the sentence before
(yes/no). This is illustrated through the example items in Table 2, where the same
picture is presented as Items 1 and 4 but with different aural texts to elicit no/no
and yes/no responses. Also shown in Table 2 are the use of a new picture with a
previously presented aural text (no/yes) and the exact repetition of a picture and
aural text (yes/yes). These items are from the skewed first treatment materials in
which the first eight items presented dative constructions with the verb send. The
treatment task contained an equal number of all four response options.
Following previous research (Casenhiser & Goldberg, 2005; Goldberg et al.,
2004; Year & Gordon, 2009) all treatment materials presented low variability
input, which contained 20 lexical verb tokens created from five lexical verb types.
The five lexical verbs were send, pass, owe, teach, and fix. Both skewed input conditions included eight tokens of send (high-token frequency) and three
tokens each for pass, owe, teach and fix (low-token frequency). However, the
order of presentation in the skewed input conditions differed so that the skewed
first materials presented all of the send tokens first while the skewed random
group presented all tokens in mixed order. The balanced input materials included
four tokens for each of the five verb types, and all of the tokens were in mixed
order. Additional examples of the treatment task dative items are provided in
Appendix B.
The aural texts plus three practice items were recorded to audiocassettes by
a female L1 speaker of American English, spoken slightly slower than natural
speed with brief pauses (0.5 s) at clausal boundaries. Each item was separated
by a 3-s pause so that learners had time to select answers for the cover task. All
of the pictures that accompanied the aural texts were reproduced onto overhead
transparencies. A subset of the treatment items (n = 25) representing all four
response options was pilot tested with undergraduate students enrolled at a regional
university in the southwest United States (N = 17) in order to determine whether
the cover task was too difficult. The task was scored by awarding 1 point for every
picture and sentence that was correctly identified as either new or previously
presented. The total possible score was 20 points for the picture identification and
20 points for the sentence identification. Their mean accuracy rates were 98% for
picture identification and 87% for sentence identification. Based on their feedback
after completing the task, three pictures were replaced.
Comprehension tests. There were two comprehension tests that were used for the

pretest and posttest respectively, and each test had 20 items consisting of 10 datives
and 10 distracters (all dative test items are provided in Appendix C). Each item
consisted of a short aural text (two or three sentences) followed by a comprehension
question that the learners answered by choosing between two pictures provided
on the answer sheet. The texts established an appropriate discourse context for
the dative items (i.e., the recipient/beneficiary as given information) or provided
enough information to facilitate inferencing for the distracter items. For the dative

Table 2. Example treatment task items

Item #

Picture

Aural Text

1

Man and woman looking at stack
of papers on desk

4

Man and woman looking at stack
of papers on desk

5

Woman standing near oven in
kitchen with her family

8

Woman standing near oven in
kitchen with her family

Mr. Smith is a popular teacher. Both his students and their parents
like him very much. This year he is retiring. So his students sent
him many cards.
Mary is a very good cook and she writes stories about cooking for
the newspaper. Last week she wrote about favorite foods. So
many readers sent her recipes.
Sandy writes cookbooks. She collects recipes and she makes them
with her family. Last month she asked her fans for some
suggestions. So many readers sent her recipes.
Sandy writes cookbooks. She collects recipes and she makes them
with her family. Last month she asked her fans for some
suggestions. So many readers sent her recipes.

Have you
seen this
picture
before?

Have you
heard the last
sentence
before?

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

430

sentences, both the recipient or beneficiary and the object undergoing transfer
were inanimate in order to eliminate the learners' ability to identify the function
of each noun phrase by relying on animacy. Double-object datives with inanimate
recipients are less frequent in naturally occurring talk than animate recipients
(Bresnan, 2007; Gries, 2003), although they occur more often in New Zealand
English than American English (Bresnan & Hay, 2008). Prior experimental studies
have reported that L1 and L2 English speakers rate double-object datives with
inanimate recipients as less acceptable than those with animate recipients but do
not categorically reject them (Gropen et al., 1989; Sawyer, 1996).
The occurrence of double-object datives with inanimate recipients was checked
in three corpora: the American conversation subcorpus (5,071,196 words) and
the Wall Street Journal subcorpus (1,807,855 words) of the Longman Grammar
of Spoken and Written Corpus (Biber et al., 1999) and the Louvain Corpus of
Native English Essays (324, 304 words). Five of the test verbs (i.e., save, offer,
show, mail, and sell) occurred with inanimate noun recipients (e.g., the company
estimated that the discounts on the products would save the clinics a combined $10
million a year from the Wall Street Journal subcorpus). Recipients expressed with
inanimate nouns can be interpreted as metonymically referring to people. In the
Wall Street Journal example, the clinics can be interpreted as referring to people
who work in the clinics. Half of the dative items on the comprehension tests had
recipients that could be interpreted as referring to people. Take, for example, the
item Tom took photographs in the park every Saturday. He saw in the newspaper
that a crime was committed in the park and they were looking for evidence. So Tom
showed the newspaper the photographs. Although inanimate, the noun newspaper
can be interpreted as referring to the people who work at a newspaper. For these
items, the inanimate nouns are not reversible (i.e., *Tom showed the photographs
the newspaper) because photograph cannot be interpreted as referring to humans.
However, each test also contained five items in which the inanimate recipient
referred to the actual object, such as the item, Mary was decorating her house for
Christmas, so she cut the Christmas tree some ribbons. The inanimate nouns in
these items are reversible if the discourse context is also manipulated (i.e., Mary
was decorating her house for Christmas. She made so many ribbons that she didn't
have anywhere to put them. So she cut the ribbons a Christmas tree).
The aural texts were recorded to audiocassettes by a female L1 speaker of
American English speaking slightly slower than natural speed, with brief pauses
(0.5 s) at clausal boundaries. Each item was separated by a 2-s pause so that
learners had time to select an answer choice. All 40 listening comprehension
items (dative items and distracters) were pilot tested with 35 native speakers of
American English who were undergraduate students at a regional university in
the southwest US. The purpose of the pilot test was to ensure that the native
speakers could identify the recipient, despite the infrequent occurrence of such
double-object datives in naturally occurring talk. They were enrolled in a required
first-year composition class and completed the tests during class time. The second
author explained that the listening tests were designed for use in a research project
with EFL learners, and that the researchers wanted to make sure that native English speakers could understand the instructions, pictures, and aural texts before
using the tests in Thailand. The comprehension tests were scored by awarding

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

431

one point for each dative item for which a learner correctly identified object
undergoing transfer of possession, with a total possible score of 10 points per
test. The undergraduate students scored 100% for every dative item. Thus, even
though the double-object datives were nonprototypical with inanimate noun recipients, the native English speakers did not have any difficulty differentiating
between the noun that was the object undergoing transfer of possession and the
noun that was the recipient. They provided feedback that some of the pictures on
the answer sheets were not clear, so those illustrations were replaced.
The comprehension tests were also administered to Thai EFL learners (n =
17) who were third- or fourth-year students studying bachelor degrees in English,
German, and French at the same university as the participants. The purpose of the
second pilot test was to ensure that the function of the noun phrases in the dative
items could be interpreted correctly by Thai EFL speakers. These students were
enrolled in advanced oral or written communication English courses, were taking
content courses in English (such as linguistics and literature), and had experience
living and studying in L2 environments outside Thailand. Therefore, they were
not considered for inclusion in the study and their performance was collected as
pilot data. The researcher administered the tests during the learners' regularly
scheduled classes, along with an auditory pattern discrimination test and a test of
nonverbal abilities that were being pilot tested for another research study. They
were told that the materials would be used in a research project with students at the
same university who were not as proficient in English, and their feedback about
the difficulty of the materials was requested. One of the comprehension tests was
administered first, followed by the auditory pattern discrimination test (15 min),
the nonverbal abilities test (30 min), and then, finally, the second comprehension
test. The learners' scores for dative items ranged from 7 to 10 on both tests, with
a mean score of 8.12 (SD = 1.12) on the first test and 8.59 (SD = 1.06) on the
second test. Despite the nonprototypical usage of the double-object dative, these
Thai EFL learners were able to determine which noun was the object undergoing a
transfer of possession and which noun was the recipient. They suggested that less
proficient Thai EFL learners might be unfamiliar with the vocabulary words for
the picture answer choices. Therefore, the procedure for administering the tests to
the participants was adjusted to include a vocabulary review.
Procedure

The data collection was carried out over a 2-week interval, with the comprehension
pretest administered during Week 1 (15 min), along with two tasks that were
administered for other purposes (an auditory pattern detection test and a sentencewriting activity). One week later, the learners completed the treatment task (15
min) and the comprehension posttest (15 min) along with another sentence-writing
activity. The order of presentation of the comprehension tests was counterbalanced.
The learners were told that the purpose of the research activities was to explore the
relationships among different types of memory (for sound and visual input) and
different types of L2 tasks (aural sentence comprehension and written sentence
production). The researcher explained the instructions for each task and answered
any clarification questions. For the listening tests, she elicited the appropriate

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

7

432
6.63

6
5.32
5
5.00
4
3

3.43
3.29

3.19

2
Balanced
Skewed first

1

Skewed random
0
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 1. Mean scores by group and time.

vocabulary words for the pictures provided as answer choices and wrote them on
the board. The audiocassettes with the aural texts were played on the equipment
that was available in each classroom, and the overhead projectors in the classrooms
were used to show the pictures for the treatment task.
RESULTS

The research question asked which input type was most effective at promoting
Thai EFL learners' comprehension of double-object dative constructions. A mixed
analysis of variance was carried out with time as a repeated factor (pretest and
posttest), treatment condition as a between-groups factor (balanced, skewed first,
and skewed random), and the sentence identification score as a covariate to account
for possible variation in the participants' attention during the cover task. The
mean scores by group and time are illustrated in Figure 1. The analysis of variance
revealed a significant effect for time, F (1, 74) = 20.24, p < .000, partial 2 = 0.25;
and group, F (2, 74) = 3.07, p = .029, partial 2 = 0.09, but no main or interaction
effects involving the sentence identification score. More importantly, there was a
significant interaction between time and group, F (2, 74) = 5.33, p = .007, partial
2 = 0.13, which was further explored by using Bonferroni adjustments. When
scores across time were compared for each treatment group separately, each group
scored significantly higher on the posttest than the pretest (p < .000). When group
scores were compared at each point in time, there were no significant differences
among the pretest scores. However, the posttest scores of the balanced group were
significantly higher than the skewed first group (p = .016) and the skewed random

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

433

group (p = .012), with no significant difference between the skewed groups (p =
1.00).
In order to determine whether the groups were performing above chance at the
posttest, separate one sample t tests against chance (50%) were carried out with
an adjustment for multiple comparisons (.05/3). The only group to perform above
chance at the posttest was the balanced group: balanced, t (24) = 4.73, p < .000;
skewed first, t (23) = .000, p = 1.00; and skewed random, t (30) = 1.15, p = .258.
DISCUSSION

To summarize the findings, balanced input was most effective for promoting
comprehension of double-object dative constructions. As indicated by the learners'
pretest scores, they incorrectly interpreted the first noun phrase after the lexical
verb as the object undergoing transfer, which corresponds to the function of direct
object noun phrases in English transitives, and the word order associated with
dative constructions in Thai. Whereas the treatment task facilitated comprehension
of the double-object dative at rates greater than chance (M of 6.63 out of 10) for the
balanced input group, learners in the two skewed input groups remained at chance
levels on the posttest. Similar to the skewed input conditions, balanced input had
low variability with only five lexical verbs occurring in all of the double-object
datives. However, unlike the skewed conditions, balanced input provided equal
token frequency for each lexical verb. In other words, repeated and equal exposure
to constructions created from a small set of lexical items appeared to be more
useful than a skewed distribution for these EFL learners.
An interesting question raised by the findings is what exactly the skewed and
balanced groups learned about the double-object dative construction during the
treatment task. As described previously, the types of dative constructions targeted
in the treatment and testing materials were not identical. Whereas the double-object
datives provided during the treatment task exemplified its most prototypical and
frequent form (human recipients expressed as pronouns), the datives targeted in
the test phase were its least prototypical and infrequent form (inanimate recipients
expressed as noun phrases). Having inanimate nouns in both the object and recipient slots for the test items reduced the participants' ability to deduce their functions
simply by relying on animacy cues (i.e., the recipient is typically human while
the object is generally inanimate). However, because the tests required transfer
of learning to a construction that was not presented during the treatment task,
determining the exact role of skewed and balanced input in L2 learning is difficult.
As anonymous reviewers pointed out, it is possible that skewed input facilitated
detection and abstraction of a narrow pattern, while balanced input facilitated
creation of a more general pattern. If the skewed groups associated the doubleobject dative with the combination of lexical verb + human/pronoun + object,
then this association would not facilitate comprehension of the lexical verb +
inanimate/noun + object items presented on the tests. However, if the balanced
group learned a more general pattern of lexical verb + recipient + object, then
this association would facilitate performance on the test items. Some insight
into what the skewed and balanced groups may have learned about the doubleobject dative construction is provided through a more detailed analysis of their

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

434

posttest performance. Although none of the recipients in the dative test items were
pronouns, half of them could be interpreted as metonymically referring to people,
such as people who work at a company, magazine, school, restaurant, shop, or
newspaper. If the skewed groups learned a narrow pattern with a human pronoun
recipient, then their performance on items that were metonymically human might
improve from pretest to posttest due to the similarity in animacy. In contrast, if
the balanced group formed a more general pattern, then their performance on
both item types (i.e., metonymically human and actual objects) should improve
from pretest to posttest. To explore this possibility, a post hoc comparison of each
group's pretest and posttest scores for the two item types was carried out using
paired samples t tests with an adjusted alpha level (.05/6 = .008). The skewed
groups showed significant improvement only for the items with metonymically
human recipients (p = .005 for skewed first and p < .000 for skewed random). In
contrast, the balanced group showed significant improvement for items in which
the recipient referred to both a human (p = .002) and an actual object (p < .000).
Because the study was not designed to test whether skewed and balanced input
are differentially effective at promoting the detection of narrow versus broad representations, respectively, the post hoc findings should be considered suggestive.
More robust support for the differential contribution of balanced and skewed input
to category formation is provided by recent work by Goldberg and colleagues
(Johnson & Goldberg, 2012). In an attempt to reconcile seemingly contradictory findings in support of both skewed and balanced input, they differentiated
between two distinct components of the generalization process: category formation and category extension. During category formation (referred to as vertical
generalization), learners must determine what constitutes an abstract category
by generalizing across multiple exemplars and recognizing what can and cannot
be classified as members of a given category. At the category extension phase
(referred to as horizontal generalization), learners must determine how broadly a
given category can be applied, such as the limits on its variability, complexity, and
abstractness.
Skewed and balanced input may contribute differently to these categorization
processes. When forming generalizations from individual exemplars, learners have
to make decisions about when an individual exemplar is restricted to a single construction versus when it can be generalized to a broader category. Skewed input
provides learners with lexically specific information about a construction, which
may promote understanding of that specific item but may hinder their ability to
generalize a pattern across more lexically diverse constructions. Research in statistical learning and artificial grammars (Wonnacott, Newport, & Tanenhaus, 2008)
has described the association between a particular verb and a specific construction
as entrenchment and has suggested that it may interfere with generalization and
subsequent use with new constructions (see also Ambridge, Pine, Rowland, &
Yong, 2008). The results of the present study suggest that the participants in the
skewed input condition may have been affected by the high-token frequency of a
single lexical verb. By presenting the same verb with high-token frequency, skewed
input may have made it more difficult for learners to recognize the double-object
datives with other lexical verbs as belonging to the same general category and may
have further restricted the generalizability of the more constrained category (i.e.,
lexical verb + human recipient + object) to a broader pattern (i.e., lexical verb +

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

435

any recipient + object). In contrast, balanced input may have provided the learners
with more verb-general patterns, which in turn may have increased their ability
to recognize it as more inclusive category, and potentially extend it to a broader
category (i.e., lexical verb + any recipient + object). Further support for this possibility comes from studies that have investigated the acquisition and processing
of verb-argument structures in artificial language learning (Reeder, Newport, &
Aslin, 2009, 2010). These experiments revealed that learners were more likely
to generalize across categories after exposure to contexts that were dense and
overlapping. Similarly Wonnacott et al. (2008) reported that learners were more
inclined to generalize after they had been exposed to language samples that presented contexts with a variety of verbs (i.e., balanced input in the present study).
There are several potential limitations of the study that warrant mention. As an
anonymous reviewer suggested, the participant pool may not have been ideal for
investigating the double-object dative construction because of their prior exposure
to English. With a mean of 11 years of language study in classroom contexts, it is
likely that the learners had some prior exposure to English double-object datives,
most likely through the occurrence of imperatives in teacher discourse (e.g., give
me your paper, tell me your answer). It is less likely, however, that they would
have been exposed to the types of constructions presented in the tests, because
double-object datives with an inanimate recipient/beneficiary and an inanimate
object undergoing transfer rarely occur in naturally occurring talk. Although it
was beyond the scope of the current study, future research might explore how
skewed and balanced input differentially impact category formation and extension
for learners with varying levels of prior knowledge. It might be expected that
learners with some existing knowledge of a construction would benefit from
balanced input as a way to promote category extension.
A related issue concerns the specific type of double-object dative construction that was targeted on the tests. Although infrequent and somewhat awkward,
double-object datives with inanimate recipients are attested forms (Bresnan, 2007;
Bresnan & Hay, 2008; Gries, 2003) that are not categorically rejected by native
speakers (Gropen et al., 1989; Sawyer, 1996). The pilot tests with native speakers
of English and more advanced Thai EFL learners indicated that both groups
could distinguish between the recipients and the objects undergoing transfer of
possession, which suggests that the construction is both comprehensible to native
speakers and learnable by EFL speakers. We aimed to reduce the unnaturalness of
the test items by embedding the double-object datives in discourse contexts that
established the recipient as known information and the object undergoing transfer
as new information. Although it is common to target decontextualized sentences in
empirical research, future studies might explore whether the processes of category
formation and expansion are affected by discourse contexts, such as by presenting
constructions with a balanced or skewed distribution embedded in more situated
language use, such as longer texts or conversations.
Because the study employed a pretest-immediate posttest design, it is not clear
whether the advantage of balanced input would persist over time. Researchers
have suggested that, over time, both types of input are equally effective for EFL
learners studying in classroom contexts (Year & Gordon, 2009). Clearly, future
studies that include delayed posttests will provide greater understanding of the
longer-term benefit of different input types for promoting comprehension of target

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

436

constructions. Particularly needed are studies comparing the longer-term impact
of input treatment activities in which skewed and balanced input features constructions that have either narrow or general representations. In addition, studies that
examine how input not only affects learners' ability to understand the meaning
expressed by target constructions but also influences their productive use of those
forms or guides their intuitions about the acceptability of those constructions
should also be carried out.
The current study was situated in a foreign-language context where all of the
learners share the same L1 and have very similar amounts and types of previous
exposure to English. Learners in foreign-language contexts whose primary exposure to the target language has been in formal educational settings with explicit
grammar teaching may be less likely to engage implicit learning mechanisms and
more inclined to rely on metalinguistic knowledge, which may help account for
divergence from the findings of L1 acquisition studies. Studies that have compared
the effectiveness of balanced and skewed input under different learning conditions
(McDonough & Trofimovich, in press) have found that the effectiveness of skewed
input may be limited to implicit learning contexts. In implicit learning contexts,
participants may approach the task less analytically, which creates multiple opportunities for them to form, test, and reformulate hypotheses about category
formation. In contrast, participants in explicit learning contexts may be more
likely to actively search for a repeated feature, which may lead them to focus on
a feature that is not relevant for category formation. Although the present study
did not instruct the learners to explicitly attend to the language patterns during
the treatment task, which was presented with a running-recognition cover task,
the participants were EFL learners in a classroom setting. Because of the formal
setting, it is possible that they could have been more oriented toward explicit
learning. Replication studies are needed involving EFL learners from a wide
variety of cultural and linguistic backgrounds as well as studies with L2 learners
in second language or multilingual contexts.
CONCLUSION

This study explored which type of input most effectively facilitated the comprehension of double-object datives in L2 English. The findings indicated that the
balanced input was more effective for promoting comprehension of the doubleobject dative construction when transfer of training to new items is required. Thus,
the findings suggest that balanced input may promote broader category generalization than skewed input. However, the findings do not warrant the conclusion that
skewed input is not beneficial for L2 acquisition. First, claims about the benefits
of skewed input were proposed for novel structures (Casenhiser & Goldberg,
2005; Goldberg et al., 2004, 2007), but learners in the current study were not
true beginners with zero prior exposure to double-object datives. It is possible
that L2 learners without any prior knowledge might find skewed input to be more
beneficial for initial detection of a new construction, particularly at the stage when
recognition of an abstract but constrained category is required. However, learners
in formal learning environments may be influenced by explicit learning strategies
that may impact their ability to extract the relevant pattern from skewed input.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

437

Clearly, many issues warrant further investigation before any conclusions about
the differential impact of balanced and skewed input on L2 learning can be drawn.
In particular, it is important for future studies to identify which types of input
are facilitative of comprehension over a longer time frame, and whether multiple
exposures to that input results in divergent findings.
APPENDIX A
Target verbs by material set

Phase

Verb

Overall Freq.
(per mill. words)

Occur. in
DOD (%)

Test set 1

Serve
Cut
Trade
Mail
Offer
Bake
Build
Write
Bring
Shoot
Average
Feed
Save
Sell
Ship
Promise
Cook
Paint
Read
Show
Throw
Average
Pass
Hand
Assign
Owe
Loan
Fix
Fry
Buy
Teach
Sing
Tell
Send
Average

25
182
18
75
31
15
49
251
333
39
102
39
69
95
14
14
60
50
345
278
110
107
59
137
7
28
14
49
12
283
74
39
933
190
152

10
1
4
2
20
6
3
6
4
1
5.7
2
8
15
1
14
4
2
2
28
2
7.8
15
7
11
62
11
10
8
6
35
2
68
18
21

Test set 2

Treatment

Note: DOD, double-object dative.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

438

APPENDIX B
Example dative items (treatment task)
Verb
Fix
Pass
Owe
Teach

Text

Picture

Tom is a chef. He works at a restaurant. He loves
to cook pastries and today his grandchildren
were visiting. So Tom fixed them an apple pie.
Mary and her daughter Jill went for a walk this
morning. They walked a long time and Jill got
thirsty. So Mary passed her a juice box.
Tommy is a clumsy boy. This morning he
accidentally broke a plant. His father was
angry. So Tommy owed him an apology.
These children play at the beach every day with
their grandmother. One day they got tired of
swimming. So she taught them a new game.

Chef standing in front of
two children holding a
pie
Woman holding a juice
box sitting on a fence
with a girl
Angry man cleaning up
a broken plant while a
sad child watches
Woman playing
tic-tac-toe in the sand
with four children

APPENDIX C
Dative items on tests
(bake) Chef Peter made a pumpkin pie but the center of the pie was flat. So he baked
the pie a top crust.
(bring) Steve needed to get supplies for his car because it wasn't working. So he
brought the car some oil.
(build) John's children were playing and broke some furniture, so John built the table
a leg.
(cook) Peter was an excellent chef, but he didn't like the food his wife prepared. One
day she made him a steak dinner, but he thought it was boring so he cooked the
steak a sauce.
(cut) Mary was decorating her house for Christmas, so she cut the Christmas tree
some ribbons.
(feed) Bob works at a technology center. He likes to design computer games, so he
fed his program some new graphics.
(mail) Angie wanted to be a photographer for Harper's Bazaar, so she mailed the
magazine some photographs.
(offer) Michelle was having trouble with the company, but her partner Tom was
doing okay. So he offered the company a loan.
(paint) Angie liked her garden and wanted to give it a name, so she painted the
garden a sign.
(promise) Susie made cookies for her children's lunch. Everyone at school thought
they were delicious. So Susie promised the school the recipe.
(read) Jim wanted to make an audio recording of an antique book his grandfather
had given him. So he read his computer the book.
(save) Joan was cleaning her house and found some historical photos. She didn't want
them but a local magazine wanted to publish them. So Joan saved the magazine
the photos.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

439

(sell) Mary was working at a party store around Christmas. A new company was
having a holiday party so she sold the company some decorations.
(serve) Jim is a health inspector and he discovered a dirty kitchen, so he served the
restaurant a warning.
(ship) John builds dollhouses for his daughter and her friends. He found some good
supplies at a store but it was far away, so he shipped the dollhouse some windows.
(show) Tom took photographs in the park every Saturday. He saw in the newspaper
that a crime was committed in the park and they were looking for evidence. So
Tom showed the newspaper the photographs.
(shoot) Susie lived on a farm and liked to play golf in her fields. One day she needed
to clean up the fields, so she shot her tractor the golf balls.
(throw) Steve was trying to make his apartment look nice. His arm chair had some
holes and he wanted to cover them. So he threw the chair some pillows.
(trade) Joan had too much ink but needed some paper, but the shop next door had
too much paper. So Joan traded the shop some ink.
(write) Bob was unhappy with city officials, so he wrote the newspaper a letter.

REFERENCES
Akhtar, N. (1999). Acquiring basic word order: Evidence for data-driven learning of syntactic structure.
Journal of Child Language, 26, 339-356.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., Rowland, C. F., & Young, C. R. (2008). The effect of verb semantic class
and verb frequency (entrenchment) on children's and adults' graded judgments of argumentstructure overgeneralization errors. Cognition, 106, 87-129.
Ambridge, B., Rowland, C., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Comparing different accounts
of inversion errors in children's non-subject wh-questions: What experimental data can tell us?
Journal of Child Language, 33, 519-557.
Arnold, E. J., Waswo, T., Losongco, A., & Ginstrom, R. (2000). The effect of structural complexity
and discourse status on constituent ordering. Language, 76, 28-55.
Baumann, J., & Culligan, B. (1995). Adapted general service list. Retrieved October 10, 2008, from
http://jbauman. com/aboutgsl.html
Bencini, G., & Goldberg, A. E. (2000). The contribution of argument structure constructions to sentence
meaning. Journal of Memory and Language, 43, 640-651.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). The Longman grammar of
spoken and written English. London: Longman.
Bley-Vroman, R., & Yoshinaga, N. (1992). Broad and narrow constraints on the English dative alternation: Some fundamental difference between native speakers and foreign language learners.
University of Hawai'i Working Papers in ESL, 11, 157-199.
Boyd, J. K., & Goldberg, A. E. (2009). Input effects within a constructionist framework. Modern
Language Journal, 93, 418-429.
Bresnan, J. (2007). Is syntactic knowledge probabilistic? Experiments with the English dative alternation. In S. Featherston & W. Sternefeld (Eds.), Studies in generative grammar (pp. 75-96).
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, R. H. (2007). Predicting the dative alternation. In G.
Bouma, I. Kraemer, & J. Zwarts (Eds.), Cognitive foundations of interpretation (pp. 69-94).
Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Science.
Bresnan, J., & Hay, S. (2008). Gradient grammar: An effect of animacy on the syntax of give in New
Zealand and American English. Lingua, 118, 245-59.
Bybee, J. (2006). From usage to grammar: The mind's response to repetition. Language, 82, 711-
733.
Bybee, J. (2008). Usage-based grammar and second language acquisition. In P. Robinson & N. Ellis
(Eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition (pp. 216-236). New
York: Routledge.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

440

Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E., & Theakston, A. (2007). What part of no do children not understand?
A usage-based account of multi-word negation. Journal of Child Language, 34, 251-282.
Campbell, A., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The acquisition of English dative constructions. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 22, 253-267.
Casenhiser, D., & Goldberg, A. E. (2005). Fast mapping between a phrasal form and meaning.
Developmental Science, 8, 500-508.
Chan, A. (2010). The Cantonese double object construction with `bei2' give in bilingual children: The
role of input. International Journal of Bilingualism, 14, 65-85.
Childers, J., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young children's acquisition of the
English transitive construction. Developmental Psychology 37, 739-748.
Collins, P. (1995). The indirect object construction in English: An informational approach. Linguistics
33, 35-49.
Ellis, N. (2006). Language acquisition as rational contingency learning. Applied Linguistics, 27, 1-24.
Ellis, N., & Cadierno, T. (2009). Constructing a second language: Introduction to the special section.
Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 7, 111-139.
Ellis, N., & Ferreira-Junior, F. (2009). Construction learning as a function of frequency, frequency
distribution, and function. Modern Language Journal, 93, 370-385.
Ferreira, F. (1996). Is it better to give than to donate? Syntactic flexibility in language production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 715-736.
Goldberg, A. E. (1992). The inherent semantics of argument structure: The case of the English
ditransitive construction. Cognitive Linguistics, 37, 37-74.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in language. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, A. E. (2009). The nature of generalization in language. Cognitive Linguistics, 20, 93-127.
Goldberg, A. E., & Casenhiser, D. M. (2008). Construction learning and second language acquisition.
In P. Robinson & N. Ellis (Eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language
acquisition (pp. 197-215). New York: Routledge.
Goldberg, A. E., Casenhiser, D. M., & Sethuraman, N. (2004). Learning argument structure generalizations. Cognitive Linguistics, 15, 289-316.
Goldberg, A. E., Casenhiser, D. M., & Sethuraman, N. (2005). The role of prediction in construction
learning. Journal of Child Language, 32, 407-426.
Goldberg, A., Casenhiser, D., & White, T. (2007). Constructions as categories of language. New Ideas
in Psychology, 25, 70-86.
Goldschneider, J., & DeKeyser, R. (2001). Explaining the "natural order of L2 morpheme acquisition"
in English: A meta-analysis of multiple determinants. Language Learning, 51, 1-50.
Gries, S. T. (2003). Towards a corpus-based identification of prototypical instances of constructions.
Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 1, 1-27.
Gries, S. T. (2005). Syntactic priming: A corpus-based approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
34, 365-399.
Groefsema, M. (2001). The real-world colour of the dative alternation. Language Sciences, 23, 525-
550.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., Goldberg, R., & Wilson, R. (1989). The learnability and acquisition of the dative alternation in English. Language, 65, 203-257.
Hawkins, R. (1987). Markedness and the acquisition of the English dative alternation by L2 speakers.
Second Language Research, 3, 21-55.
Hollmann, W. (2007). From language-specific constraints to implicational universals: A cognitivetypological view of the dative alternation. Functions of Language, 14, 57-78.
Inagaki, S. (1997). Japanese and Chinese learners' acquisition of the narrow-range rules for the dative
alternation in English. Language Learning, 47, 637-669.
Izumi, S., & Nishimura, A. (2002). Accuracy and explicit knowledge in second language performance:
The case of dative alternation for Japanese ESL learners. Sophia Linguistica: Working Papers
in Linguistics, 49, 161-189.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kidd, E., Lieven, E., Tomasello, M. (2006). Examining the role of lexical frequency in children's
acquisition of sentential complements. Cognitive Development, 21, 93-107.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

441

Kidd, E., Lieven, E., Tomasello, M. (2010). Lexical frequency and exemplar-based learning effects in
language acquisition: Evidence from sentential complements. Language Sciences 32, 132-142.
Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Children's first language acquisition from a usage-based perspective. In P. Robinson & N. Ellis (Eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language
acquisition (pp. 168-196). New York: Routledge.
Maguire, M. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Brandone, A. C. (2008). Focusing on the relation: Fewer exemplars facilitate children's initial verb learning and extension. Developmental
Science, 11, 628-634.
Marefat, H. (2005). The impact of information structure as a discourse factor on the acquisition of
dative alternation by L2 learners. Studia Linguistica, 59, 66-82.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. (2007). French children's use and correction
of weird word orders: A constructivist account. Journal of Child Language, 34, 381-409.
Mazurkewich, I. (1984). The acquisition of the dative alternation by second language learners and
linguistic theory. Language Learning, 34, 91-109.
Mazurkewich, I., & White, L. (1984). The acquisition of the dative alternation: Unlearning overgeneralizations. Cognition, 16, 261-283.
McDonough, K., & Kim, Y. (2009). Syntactic priming, type frequency, and EFL learners' production
of wh-questions. Modern Language Journal, 93, 386-398.
McDonough, K., & Trofimovich, P. (in press). Learning a novel pattern from balanced and skewed
input. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition.
Oh, E. (2010). Recovery from first-language transfer: The second language acquisition of English
double objects by Korean speakers. Second Language Research, 26, 407-439.
Park, H., & Zhang, L. (2002). Native vs. non-native knowledge of the effects of discourse status on
word order. In B. Skarabela, S Fish, & A. H. J. Do (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development (pp. 521-532). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla.
Reeder, P. A., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2009). The role of distributional information in linguistic
category formation. In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2564-2569). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Reeder, P. A., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2010). Novel words in novel contexts: The role
of distributional information in form-class category learning. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2063-2068). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Rowland, C. (2007). Explaining errors in children's questions. Cognition, 104, 106-134.
Sawyer, M. (1996). L1 and L2 sensitivity to semantic constraints on argument structure. In A. Stringfellow, D. Cahana-Amitay, E. Hughes, & A. Zukowski (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development (pp. 646-657). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla.
Snyder, W., & Stromswald, K. (1997). The structure and acquisition of the English dative construction.
Linguistic Inquiry, 28, 281-317.
Tanaka, S. (1987). The selective use of specific exemplars in second-language performance: The case
of the dative alternation. Language Learning, 37, 63-88.
Thepkanjana, K., & Uehara, S. (2008). The verb of giving in Thai and Mandarin Chinese as a case of
polysemy: A comparative study. Language Sciences, 30, 621-651.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Whong-Barr, M., & Schwartz, B. (2002). Morphological and syntactic transfer in child L2 acquisition of the English dative alternation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 579-
561.
Wolfe-Quintero, K. (1998). The connection between verbs and argument structures: Native speaker
production of the double object dative. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 225-257.
Wonnacott, E., Newport, E. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). Acquiring and processing verb argument
structure: Distributional learning in a miniature language. Cognitive Psychology, 56, 165-
209.
Wulff, S., Ellis, N., Romer, U., Bardovi-Harlig, K., & LeBlanc, C. (2009). The acquisition of tenseaspect: Converging evidence from corpora, cognition, and learner constructions. Modern Language Journal, 93, 354-369.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker: Skewed and balanced input

442

Yap, F., & Iwasaki, S. (1998). "Give" construction in Malay, Thai and Mandarin Chinese: A polygrammaticization perspective. Chicago Linguistic Society, 34, 421-437.
Year, J. (2009). Korean speakers' acquisition of the English ditransitive construction: The role of input
frequency and distribution. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia University.
Year, J., & Gordon, P. (2009). Korean speakers' acquisition of the English ditransitive construction:
The role of verb prototype, input distribution, and frequency. Modern Language Journal, 93,
399-417.

