J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28
DOI 10.1007/s10936-014-9317-3

The Separability of Morphological Processes from
Semantic Meaning and Syntactic Class in Production
of Single Words: Evidence from the Hebrew Root
Morpheme
Avital Deutsch

Published online: 5 October 2014
(c) Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract In the present study we investigated to what extent the morphological facilitation
effect induced by the derivational root morpheme in Hebrew is independent of semantic
meaning and grammatical information of the part of speech involved. Using the picture-
word interference paradigm with auditorily presented distractors, Experiment 1 compared
the facilitation effect induced by semantically transparent versus semantically opaque morphologically related distractor words (i.e., a shared root) on the production latency of bare
nouns. The results revealed almost the same amount of facilitation for both relatedness conditions. These findings accord with the results of the few studies that have addressed this
issue in production in Indo-European languages, as well as previous studies in written word
perception in Hebrew. Experiment 2 compared the root's facilitation effect, induced by morphologically related nominal versus verbal distractors, on the production latency of bare
nouns. The results revealed a facilitation effect of similar size induced by the shared root,
regardless of the distractor's part of speech. It is suggested that the principle that governs
lexical organization at the level of morphology, at least for Hebrew roots, is form-driven
and independent of semantic meaning. This principle of organization crosses the linguistic
domains of production and written word perception, as well as grammatical organization
according to part of speech.
Keywords Morphology and production * Picture-word-interference paradigm (PWI) *
Morphological processes in producing Hebrew words * Syntactic class in production

Introduction
Research in Hebrew as well as Arabic over the past 15 years has suggested that the architecture
of the mental lexicon of these Semitic languages is organized around morphological units,
in particular the root unit, which mediates processes of morphological decomposition during

A. Deutsch (B)
The School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91905 Jerusalem, Israel
e-mail: avital.deutsch1@mail.huji.ac.il

123

2

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

lexical access (e.g., Frost 2012; Frost et al. 2005). These two languages are distinguished by
having a morphologically unique non-concatenated derivational structure. This suggestion
was recently extended to the domain of production (Deutsch and Meir 2011). The present
study investigated the extent to which this fundamental morphological process induced by the
Hebrew root morpheme is independent of semantic meaning on the one hand and grammatical
information about syntactic class (i.e., part of speech) on the other hand, in mediating single
word production in Hebrew. The separability of morphological units from other linguistic
components may have important implications for models of production.
I will start with a brief description of the basic structure of Hebrew derivational morphology
emphasizing the specific characteristics which are of immediate relevance to the present
research.
In Hebrew, as in other Semitic languages, all verbs and the vast majority of nouns and
adjectives are composed of two derivational morphemes, roots and word-patterns.1 Roots
usually consist of three consonants embedded in phonological word-patterns to form words.
A word-pattern can be either a sequence of vowels or a sequence with both vowels and
consonants. For example, the root "n.Q.l" is interwoven with the nominal pattern "maCCuC"
(where the letter 'C' represents the position of the root consonants) to form the word /manQul/,
a lock, or with the verbal-pattern niCCaC to form the verb /ninQal/, was locked. This complex
structure constitutes the basic form (i.e., the stem) to which additional inflectional and/or
derivational morphemes--prefixes and or suffixes--can be attached.2 The root usually carries
the core meaning of the word, whereas the word-pattern determines the word's prosodic and
vocalic structure, and carries morpho-syntactic information (i.e., part of speech and verb
sub-categorization). In other words, grammatical features such as part of speech have an
explicit morphological manifestation in the word-pattern morphemes.3
The word-patterns have global semantic characteristics that shape the core meaning of
the root, such as instrument or profession for nouns, and reflexives or causation for verbs.
However, a word's specific meaning cannot necessarily be predicted by analyzing the two
morphemes independently. This is because the semantic characteristics, particularly of the
nominal pattern, are often ambiguous: a given word-pattern can usually denote more than
one semantic category, and specific semantic categories can be denoted by more than one
pattern. Another source of ambiguity is the roots themselves, as roots often have more than one
meaning. In the above example, one core meaning of the root "n.Q.l" is locking, but another
is connected with shoes, as in /hanQala/, footwear. In a synchronic linguistic perspective, this
characteristic of the root system sometimes leads to opacity in the semantic relations between
different words derived from the same root.
The role of the root morpheme in mediating the process of lexical access has been investigated extensively in the domain of written word perception. The main finding about the root
is that presenting a root morpheme in a masked condition or in parafoveal vision facilitates
the identification of a target word derived from this root (see Deutsch and Frost 2003 for a
review; see Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson 2005, for similar findings in Arabic). This holds
for both nouns and verbs (Frost et al. 1997; Deutsch et al. 1998).Furthermore, disrupting
the precise orthographical sequence of the root letters by transposing the location of two
1 There are some nouns in Hebrew that are not structured according to this typical Semitic structure as they

have a non-Semitic origin.
2 Although some Hebrew words are formed by the addition of derivational suffixes and prefixes, this is not

very common. Affixation can be applied both to complex basic Semitic structures as well as to words from
non-Semitic origin.
3 In fact there are a few word-patterns that can represent more than one part of speech. This occurs in the case
of participle forms, which can function grammatically as a nominal or a verbal form.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

3

adjacent root letters (i.e., the letter transposition effect in written word recognition) induces
a remarkable interference effect on written word recognition, in contrast to the limited cost
observed in European languages (Velan et al. 2013; Velan and Frost 2007, 2009, 2011).
This great sensitivity to the intactness of the root indicates that the reader's primary goal is
extracting the root morpheme. All these findings form the basis for the conceptualization
described above, which claims that the architecture of the mental lexicon in Hebrew is organized around the morphological units of roots, which mediate morphological decomposition
during lexical access (e.g., Frost 2012; Frost et al. 2005). Morphological facilitation effects
were also observed for verbal patterns in Hebrew and for verbal as well as nominal patterns
in Arabic. Thus, although the role of the root is very important in the architecture of the
mental lexicon for these languages, its interrelation with other derivational units, known as
word-patterns, is still an open issue.
Recently, as mentioned, the role of the root effect has been also demonstrated in production, using the Picture-word-interference (henceforth PWI) paradigm, in which participants
have to name pre-learned pictures, while a distractor word is presented (auditory or visually)
close in time to the picture to be named [i.e., the manipulation of Stimulus Onset Asynchrony
(SOA)]. In a series of five experiments, each conducted with a different SOA, Deutsch and
Meir (2011) found a robust facilitation effect within the time window of SOAs ranging from
-200 to +300 ms induced by a root shared by the name of the picture and the auditory distractor word. On the one hand, the time course of the effect distinguished it from a facilitatory
phonological effect, while, on the other, both its direction (i.e., inhibition) and its time course
distinguished it from an inhibitory semantic effect. The root effect was also demonstrated
by Kolan et al. (2011), using the same paradigm but with visually presented distractors at a
SOA of -100 ms. On the basis of these results, Deutsch and Meir (2011) suggested that the
same principle of organization--namely, root units--also holds for word production.
The findings in word production in Hebrew are in accord with main theories of lexical
access during speech production, which postulate explicit representation of morphological
units. A common postulation shared by this type of production model is that the process of
production involves two processes, each of them ascribed to a distinct level of representation.
One involves lemma retrieval, i.e., the selection of an abstract representation of the grammatical characteristics of the word, while the second involves word-form retrieval, i.e., the translation of the lemma into a morpho-phonological form (e.g., Dell 1986; Dell and O'Seaghdha
1992; Garrett 1988; Levelt et al. 1999; Roelofs 1997). Within this architectural structure the
representation of notional meaning is located at a pre-verbal, conceptual level. The notional
representations are linked to the lemmas and trigger the process of lemma selection during
production. Morphological units are explicitly represented as an intermediate level between
the lemmas and words' phonological structure (Dell 1986; Levelt et al. 1999; Roelofs 1997).
However, no explicit connections exist between semantically related lemmas (or word-forms
including morphological units). Morphological processes are independent processes, distinct
from both semantic processes (which are represented in a pre-verbal phase) and phonological
processes. According to these models, word production is a process of combining morphological units, whereas morphological influences on the process of production are apparently
ascribed to the form level, i.e. the lexical level of representation (e.g. Luttmann et al. 2011a, b).
In line with this theoretical framework, Deutsch and Meir (2011) suggested that the level of
morphological units in Hebrew includes root units that mediate the encoding of the lemma
into a phonological unit, i.e. the lexeme. Furthermore, they hypothesized that the same root
units that mediate the process of translating the written form into its phonological mental
representation in perception also mediate the mapping of the lemma onto its phonological
structure in production.

123

4

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

In the present study we focused on some specific characteristics of selecting the root morpheme when constructing phonological word forms in production. In particular we focused
on its interaction with other informational components, i.e., semantic and grammatical information. We considered the question of whether the process of selecting the root morpheme
in the course of single word production is affected by semantic structure (ascribed to the
conceptual pre-linguistic level) on the one hand (Exp. 1), and syntactic class information
of part of speech (ascribed to the lemma level) on the other hand (Exp. 2). By studying the
specific characteristics of the root effect for semantic involvement, we were able to follow
the same manipulation that had previously been used in the investigation of the root effect
in single word perception of written words in Hebrew. This gave us the opportunity to see
whether the characteristics ascribed to the root effect in perception would also occur in production. Analogous findings across the two domains of perception and production are of
special importance to further establish the ultimate purpose of taking the model proposed
for lexical organization and access according to morphological principles in the domain of
perception and generalizing it to word production (Deutsch and Meir 2011).
In the following we briefly describe the relevant data which form the motivation for the
current study with respect to semantic and grammatical information about parts of speech. We
present a short review of the contribution of semantic information to morphological processes
during lexical access and the effect of syntactic class information on word production.
The Contribution of Semantic Relations to Morphological Processes in Word Production
Morphemes are traditionally defined as the minimal meaningful units of a language. Accordingly, morphologically complex words are assembled from defined units that theoretically
construct their composite meaning. However, words have different degrees of semantic transparency, as exemplified above for root derivations in Hebrew. Semantically transparent words
are those whose meaning can actually be assembled from the meanings of their morphological constituents, whereas semantically opaque words have meanings that cannot be inferred
from the `sum' of these meanings.
A common finding in production studies is that semantically related word-pairs inhibit
production latency, at least in the PWI paradigm (e.g., Bloem and La Heij 2003; Humphreys
et al. 1995; Levelt et al. 1999; Starreveld and Heij 1996). In the model of the two stages
of processing (lemma and word-form selection) described above, this Inhibition is usually
ascribed to competition at the lemma level, caused by the activation of more than one lemma
by semantically related concepts (e.g., Abdel Rahman and Aristei 2010; Abdel Rahman
and Melinger 2009; Bloem and La Heij 2003; Levelt et al. 1999; Schriefers et al. 1990).4
In contrast, morphologically related word-pairs have been found to facilitate production
latency. Cross-language facilitation has been observed for singular-plural pairs (Zwitserlood et al. 2000, in German) compounds (in German: Dohmes et al. 2004; Gumnior et al.
2006; Luttmann et al. 2011a, b; Zwitserlood et al. 2002; in Dutch: Roelofs 1996),and complex derivational structures (in Dutch: Roelofs 1996; Roelofs and Baayen 2002; in German:
Zwitserlood et al. 2002; in Hebrew: Deutsch and Meir 2011; Kolan et al. 2011). This facilitation is ascribed to the activation of a common morphological constituent shared by the
context word and the target. The double activation of the same morphological unit, by the
context and the target stimuli, facilitates the process of composing the morpho-phonological
structure of the target.
4 An alternative approach (Costa et al. 2005; Janssen et al. 2008; Mahon et al. 2007) rejects lexical competition
models. This approach is discussed in "General Discussion".

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

5

A fundamental question is whether the link between lemmas and their morphological constituents is conditioned (or at least modulated) by a semantically transparent relation between
a word's meaning and its morphological constituents. This question is, however, independent
of the within the lemmas (and morphological units) architectural structure described above,
which does not posit connections between lemmas (or morphological units) that are semantically related. Instead, this question refers to the connections between the levels. If they do
indeed involve semantic relations, then the morphological effects should be modulated by
semantic similarity. This architecture is plausible, considering the fact that morphological
units and roots in particular, are semantically loaded. Thus, lexical organization according to
morphological constituents (particularly the roots) is most likely semantically driven. In other
words lemma--morpheme (root) connections reflect shared semantic meanings. However,
although morphemes (including roots) do carry semantic meaning, their semantic component
may not explicitly instantiated at the level of mapping the lemmas' abstract representation
onto a morpho-phonological word-form. In other words, the principle that governs lexical
organization at the level of morphology might be solely form-driven, independent of semantic
meaning. Consequently, the effect of morphology on lexical access may be unconditioned
and unconstrained by semantic notions. This accords with the autonomous linguistic theory
of morphology (see Aronoff 1994) and is explicitly assumed and implemented in the two
stages processing approach of the WEAVER++ model of production (Levelt et al. 1999;
Roelofs 1997).
An analogous question about lexical access during written word perception is a major
unsolved issue in this domain. On the one hand, some models claim that all apparent morphological effects in word recognition reflect pre-learned correlations between form and
meaning, rejecting an explicit representation of morphological units. This view is incorporated in distributed models of written-word recognition (e.g. Plaut and Gonnerman 2000). On
the other hand, localized representational models of word perception (e.g., Burani and Laudana 1992; Marslen-Wilson et al. 1994) posit an explicit level of morphological units which
mediates lexical access. However, these localized models differ about whether the role of morphological units in lexical organization and access depends on transparent semantic relations.
This question has been extensively investigated in the domain of lexical access during
single word perception, but only sparsely in the domain of single word production. In general, the findings obtained in perception, using a variety of priming procedures in various
languages, are equivocal (e.g., see Feldman 2000, for a review). In contrast, the few studies conducted in production revealed a more coherent picture, supporting an autonomous
view of morphology, and thus fit the models of production described above (Levelt et al.
1999; Roelofs 1997). The studies in production were carried out in two languages, German
(Dohmes et al. 2004; Gumnior et al. 2006; Luttmann et al. 2011a, b) and Dutch (Koester and
Schiller 2008; Roelofs and Baayen 2002), using different paradigms. In all these studies the
semantic contribution to the morphological effect was investigated by comparing the facilitation effect induced by semantically transparent versus semantically opaque morphologically
related words. As the present study made use of the PWI paradigm, only findings derived
from this paradigm will be detailed, although all the studies cited obtained similar results.
Applying this paradigm to compound words in German with an SOA of -100 ms, Dohmes
et al. (2004) found an almost identical facilitation effect for semantically transparent and
semantically opaque morphologically related distractors relative to unrelated distractors (see
also Koester and Schiller 2008). Similarly, morphologically complex verbs presented at the
same SOA (-100 ms) facilitated the production of simple verbs constituted from one of their
components, relative to unrelated distractors, regardless of semantic similarity (Luttmann
et al. 2011a). The same pattern was also observed for producing morphologically complex

123

6

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

nouns accompanied by semantically transparent or opaque complex distractors that shared
one component with the target (Luttmann et al. 2011b).
Experiment 1 of the present study investigated the contribution of semantic transparency
to morphological effects in production for Hebrew roots, comparing morphologically and
semantically related picture-distractor pairs to morphologically related but semantically
opaque pairs. In this way we added to the small amount of data in the literature, providing evidence from another language with morphological principles very different from those
of German and Dutch. To be sure, the root morpheme in Hebrew is never itself a word, and its
most fundamental characteristic, along with its consonantal structure, is that it carries the core
semantic meaning of its derivations. However, in line with our previous suggestion that the
root effect reflects the influence of a mediating process between the lemma level of representation and the phonological form (e.g., the models of two levels of processing), and in light of
previous findings in written word recognition in Hebrew, we predicted that the root facilitating
effect observed in production is neither conditioned nor affected by semantic similarity.
The Effect of Information About the Syntactic Class of a Part of Speech on Word Production
There is evidence that the grammatical characteristics of a word's part of speech affect
its production. This includes the behavior of neuropsychological patients, who may show
more prominent difficulties with a specific part of speech (e.g., Luzzatti et al. 2002) as well
as some experimental evidence, mostly derived from the PWI paradigm. Pechmann et al.
(2004), Pechmann and Zerbst (2002) have shown that the production latency for the target
words--the names of the pictures--is inhibited when the picture name and the distractor
word are of the same part-of-speech, compared to the latency when the picture name and the
distractor are of different parts of speech. These findings were observed in German (Pechmann
and Zerbst 2002) and English (Pechmann et al. 2004) and include the production of nouns
coupled with closed-class or adverbial distractors. Across experiments, the inhibition was
observed at a time window of -300 to 100 ms SOA, for written and auditorily presented
distractors. Most importantly, the inhibition effect was observed only when speakers had to
produce the picture name in a syntactic context, i.e., within a noun phrase or a sentence, but
not as a bare noun. (But see Janssen et al. 2010 for different results, which will be discussed
in "General Discussion".) Thus, it seems as if the mere process of word form retrieval can
proceed independently of grammatical information about the part-of-speech, given that no
syntactic processes are required at the moment of producing the target word. The effect of
the grammatical information about the part-of-speech on the process of production was also
investigated by Vigliocco and Vinson (2005). Crossing semantic similarity and syntactic class
of speech, in the PWI paradigm, they also observed an inhibition effect on production latency
of English verb forms coupled with written verb distractors, compared to the production of
verbs coupled with noun distractors. Furthermore, similarly to the findings of Pechmann et
al. (2004), Pechmann and Zerbst (2002) the inhibition was observed only when participants
had to name the picture using an inflected verbal form (i.e., a sentence fragment) but not
when they had to use an infinitive form. Thus, in accord with previous findings of Pechmann
et al. (2004), Pechmann and Zerbst (2002), Vigliocco and Vinson (2005) concluded that
the grammatical effects of parts of speech are manifested only when production entails the
construction of syntactic structure. Furthermore, as no interaction with semantic similarity
was observed, they concluded that the retrieval of semantic and grammatical information
about parts of speech reflects distinct processes.
In the present study we focused on the interrelation between grammatical characteristics
of part of speech and morphological processes of root selection. We investigated whether the

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

7

process of root selection in the course of mapping a lemma onto its morpho-phonological
form is modulated by the grammatical information of part of speech specification, which is
assumed to be part of a lemma's grammatical specification. As described above, a word's part
of speech is morphologically instantiated by its derivational word-pattern morpheme. Thus,
in light of the linguistic analysis of Hebrew morphological structure, where roots and wordpattern are two independent units, one of which carries mainly semantic information and
the other mainly grammatical information, we predicted that the process of root selection
should not be affected by the grammatical information about the word's part of speech.
Operationally, we predict that a similar facilitative root effect will appear between pair of
words of the same part of speech or different part of speech.
Thus, whereas Experiment 1 focused on the interrelation between the process of selecting
the root and semantic meaning, Experiment 2 focused on the interrelation between the process
of selecting the root and the grammatical information about part of speech. These two aspects
allow us to delineate the status of the root morpheme as a mediating unit of production,
independent of the semantic and syntactic systems.

Experiment 1
Semantic contributions to the root effect on lexical access in Hebrew were investigated in the
domain of word perception (Bentin and Feldman 1990; Frost et al. 1997, 2000). In particular,
using the masked priming paradigm (Frost et al. 1997) and the cross-modal priming paradigm
(Frost et al. 2000), the morphological effect between words with a transparent semantic
relation derived from the same root was compared with the effect for words derived from the
same root but without semantic similarity. Whereas semantic transparency did not affect the
size of the effect in masked priming paradigm, it did enhance the effect for a cross-modal
paradigm. However, a significant root effect was also evident for opaque pairs in the crossmodal paradigm. Similar findings were also observed for the root effect in Arabic based on
the masked priming paradigm (Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson 2005).
However, the contribution of semantic transparency to the observed root effect in production cannot be evaluated on the basis of previous experiments (Deutsch and Meir 2011;
Kolan et al. 2011). In these studies the semantic similarity between the pair of words derived
from the same root was not controlled. As described above, both studies revealed a facilitation effect for morphologically related pair of words, due to a common root. This fact
by itself indicate that the facilitation effect could not be reduced solely to semantic similarity, as semantic relatedness in this paradigm usually exerts an inhibitory influence (e.g.,
Schriefers et al. 1990; Damian and Martin 1999).5 Moreover, in Deutsch and Meir (2011)
a parallel inhibitory effect, with a distinct time window, was explicitly demonstrated for the
same target words when coupled with semantically related distractors; In line with previous
findings in Indo-European languages, the semantic relation induced inhibition at negative
SOAs, which vanished at a SOA = 100 ms. However, the mean rating score of semantic relatedness, based on a 1-7 scale of the morphologically related target-distractor pairs in Deutsch
and Meir (2011), revealed a clear semantic component, comparable to the rating of semantic
relatedness between targets and semantically related distractors. Thus, to assess whether the
root effect, although distinct from the semantic one, is modulated or even conditioned by
5 This generalization should be probably restricted to specific conditions of these experiments, which include

constrains on the parameters of the SOA and type of semantic relations between the distractor and the target,
i.e., pair of words which are members of the same semantic category and on the same hierarchical level (e.g.,
Abdel Rahman and Melinger 2009 for a review).

123

8

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

the semantic relation between words, the current study directly manipulated semantic transparency between target words and distractors, comparing morphologically related pairs of
words which are semantically transparent with morphologically related words with no apparent semantic similarity, as was done with semantic manipulations in perception in Hebrew
(Frost et al. 1997, 2000), and in production in other languages, as detailed above. The idea
that there is a semantic relation between words derived from the same root means that there
is a basic core feature that specifies the unique meaning of a shared concept to which various
other more specific concepts (mapped onto lemmas and words) might be related. For example, the core meaning of writing is represented by the root "k.t.b.", as used in such words
as /ktiba/, /katab/, /kataba/ and /miktab/,6 meaning the act of writing, a journalist, an article,
and a letter, respectively.
An SOA of -100 ms was chosen, as our previous study (Deutsch and Meir 2011) found
it to be sensitive to both semantic and morphological effects. Furthermore, this SOA has
also been used in previous studies (Dohmes et al. 2004; Luttmann et al. 2011a, b) which
manipulated semantic transparency within morphologically related pairs of words, using the
PWI paradigm.
Lastly, we would like to discuss the issue of phonological similarity. The PWI paradigm
was found to be sensitive to phonological similarity between targets and distractors. A critical
component for inducing phonological effects are shared first segments, at least the onset of
the first syllable (e.g., Damian and Martin 1999; Jescheniak and Schriefers 2001; Schriefers
et al. 1990). Morphological similarity always involves phonological similarity. However,
the phonological similarity between words sharing a root is often opaque, as the root is
embedded within the word-pattern, i.e. it is spread among different syllables. To minimize
effect of phonological similarity induced by first shared segments, the phonological similarity
between target and the various distractors was controlled so that none of the distractors (in
the current experiment as well as in Experiment 2) shared their onset with the target word.
Thus, the phonological similarity in the various related conditions was restricted to the three
root consonants, with the constraint that the target and the distractors did not share an onset.
The morphological root effect in the two morphologically related conditions (with or
without semantic similarity) was assessed relative to an unrelated condition, in a procedure
similar to the one we conducted in our previous study (Deutsch and Meir 2011), as well as
in some other studies that manipulated semantic similarity within morphologically related
pairs of words conducted in other languages (e.g., Zwitserlood et al. 2002; Luttmann et al.
2011a). A direct control for the phonological similarity inherent by a shared root, i.e., three
consonants, was used in Exp. 1A.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-six students at the Hebrew University, all native Hebrew speakers, took part in the
experiment for course credit or payment.
Stimuli and Design
The stimuli were 36 10-by-10-cm line drawings. The names of all the pictures had a complete
three-consonantal Hebrew root. Each picture was paired with 3 different spoken distractors,
6 The phonetic transliteration of these words is [ktiva], [katav], [katava] or [mixtav] as [v] and [b], as well as

[x] and [k] are allophones in a conditioned variation of /b/ and /k/ respectively.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

9

Table 1 Example of one set of stimuli in all 3 distractor conditions in Exp. 1 and 1A
Picture name

Morph.+ Sem.+ Related

Morph.+ Sem.- Related

Unrelated

/ " naQal/

/hanQala /

/manQul /

/hakdama/

"a shoe"

"footwear"

"a lock"

"introduction"

The root consonants are in bold

forming 3 conditions: (1) morphologically related, semantically transparent (M+S+)--the
distractor was derived from the same root as the target, and its meaning was semantically
related to that of the target; (2) morphologically related, semantically opaque (M+S-)--
the same morphological relation as in condition 1, but with no apparent semantic relation
within a pair; (3) unrelated--the distractor had no semantic, morphological or phonological
similarity with the target. An example of one set of stimuli is presented in Table 1. All
the words were nominal forms, including nouns, adjectives or participles.7 (There was one
exceptional distractor having a verbal form, `she entered'. Another 2 distractors had an
infinitive form `to view' and `to hoe'.) Morphologically related distractors shared only their
three root consonants with the picture name.8 None of the words in any of the conditions
shared its onset with the picture name.
A pre-test was conducted in which 10 participants were asked to judge the semantic
relatedness between the words in each pair on a scale of 1 (low) to 7 (high). The specific
instructions were: "Following is a list of word pairs. For each pair please indicate the degree
of closeness of the meanings of the two words." This procedure was run for the target picture
names paired with all the distractor conditions. Each target picture name appeared only once
(coupled with one of the distractor conditions) within each rating list. Each list also included
10 fillers of pairs of synonyms to increase the variability within the list. Only distractors that
got a score of at least 4 were included in the M+S+ condition (mean = 4.9), and only distractors
that scored at least 2 points below their semantically related counterpart were included in the
M+S- condition (mean = 1.9). The mean score for the unrelated condition was 1.32.
The frequency of the distractor words was estimated by asking subjects to rate the frequency of the distractor words on a 1-7 scale (1--rare, 7--very frequent). The rating lists
included 12 fillers (6 very frequent words and 6 very infrequent words) to create variability
within the rating list. Two rating lists were created, so that no list included two words derived
from the same root. Each list included 54 target words for rating, and was rated by 12 subjects.
The mean frequency of the distractor words was 5.0, 4.4 and 5.3 for the M+S+, M+S- and
unrelated conditions respectively. A one-way analysis of variance revealed a significant main
effect of distractor types [F(2, 70) = 4.43 MSE = 1.82, p < .05], which apparently reflects
the higher mean frequency of the unrelated condition compared to the morphological related
conditions. A paired t test revealed no significant difference between the mean frequency of
the two morphologically related conditions [t(35) = 1.64, p = .11].
The imageability of the distractor words was estimated by asking subjects to rate the
difficulty of constructing a mental image of the content of the word on a 1-7 scale (1--very
7 Participles in Hebrew have nominal as well as verbal morphological characteristics (see above footnote #3).

Many of them also function as adjectives. Adjectival forms (which are not participles in Hebrew) are regarded
as a sub-type of the nominal system. There are a few nominal patterns that may include forms that can denote
adjectives as well as nouns. In many cases the distinction between nouns and adjectives in Hebrew is not clear,
and the same form can function syntactically either as attributive adjectives or as nominal subjects.
8 In fact there were a few deviations: 5 distractors in the M+S+ condition shared 4 rather than 3 letters with
the picture, and one such case also appeared in the M+S- condition.

123

10

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

hard, 7--easy). Two rating lists were created, so that no list included two words derived from
the same root. Each list included 54 target words for rating, and was rated by 12 subjects. The
mean imageability of the distractor words was 5.42, 4.97 and 5.57 for the M+S+, M+S- and
unrelated conditions respectively. No significant difference between the various distractor
conditions was found [F(2, 70) = 1.57, p = .215].
Different subjects participated in each of the rating procedures. None of these subjects
participated in the experiment.
The distractors were recorded by a female native Hebrew speaker.
The complete list of stimuli is presented in Appendix 1.
A within-subject design was used for testing the effect of the distractor condition, so
that each participant saw all the pictures in all 3 conditions. The target-distractor pairs
were divided into 3 blocks, each containing all 36 pictures, with 12 pairs in each distractor
condition. The targets within each block were ordered randomly, with the constraint of
avoiding two successive trials with the same condition. The blocks were ordered in 3 different
ways. Each participant was tested with one of the 3 orders.
Procedure and Apparatus
The pictures were presented on a MicroScan 4GP/ADI monitor. The spoken distractors
were presented via Microsoft LifeChatLX-300 headphones connected to an Intel Celeron
computer. Each trial consisted of the presentation of a spoken distractor 100 ms before the
picture onset (SOA = -100). Each picture remained on the screen for 800 ms. There was
an ISI of 4,000 ms between the onsets of the pictures. The participants were instructed to
ignore the spoken word and name the pictures. The 3 blocks were presented successively,
with a short break between them. Naming latencies were monitored via a voice key. Response
accuracy was monitored manually by the experimenter.
The experiment started with a learning session in which the participant was given a booklet
including all the drawings and their names. Each participant was tested by the experimenter
after studying the names of the pictures. If necessary, participants were asked to go over
the booklet again. Only after all the pictures were named correctly did the experiment start.
There were 4 training trials, two before the first block and one before each successive block.
Results and Discussion
On 3.5 % of the trials the participant misnamed the picture and coded as an error, and in 13 %
of the trials the voice-key was incorrectly triggered. These two types of trials were discarded
from the RT analyses. Furthermore, trials with reaction times below 300 ms or above 2,000
ms were omitted (0.5 % of all responses). Outliers of 2.5 SD above or below the mean for
each participant were replaced by a cutoff value (mean  2.5 SD). These outliers constituted
2 % of all responses. The RTs for correct responses in the 3 experimental conditions were
averaged across subjects and across items, as reported in Table 2.
As can be seen in Table 2, the two morphologically related conditions showed almost the
same amount of facilitation (more than 30 ms, about 3 %) compared to the unrelated control condition. The RTs were subjected to one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) with the
distractor condition as a within variable for both subject (F1) and item (F2) analyses. These
analyses revealed significant main effects of distractor type for both subject and item analyses, F1(2, 70) = 18.6, MSE = 736, p < .001; F2(2, 70) = 4.4, MSE = 2,587, p < .05. Planned
comparisons between each of the morphologically related conditions and the control condition revealed a significant morphological effect for the M+S+ condition, F1(1, 35) = 22.6,

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

11

Table 2 Reaction times, relatedness effect and percentages of errors for naming picture targets in Experiment
1 and 1A
Morph.+, Sem.+,
Related

Morph.+, Sem.-,
Related

Unrelated

Phonological
control

982

-

Exp. 1
RT (ms)

950

948

Relatedness effect

32

34

% Errors

3.7

3.6

3.4

-

931

930

5.5

6.4

-

Exp. 1A
RT (ms)

909

907

Relatedness effect

22a 21b

24a 23b

% Errors

5.3

3.8

a Estimated relative to the `unrelated' distractor condition
b Estimated relative to the `phonological control' distractor condition

MSE = 1,652, p < .001; F2(1, 35) = 7.5, MSE = 4,526, p < .01, as well as for the M+S-
condition, F1(1, 35) = 22.5, MSE = 1,888, p < .001; F2(1, 35) = 5.0, MSE = 6,831, p < .05.
A two-tailed t test revealed that the morphological effect was similar for the semantically
transparent and opaque conditions, t1, t2 < 1.
No main effect of distractor condition was observed in either the subject or the item
analyses for the percentage of errors (F1, F2 < 1).
These results accord with the findings of the few previous studies that used the same
type of manipulation of semantic transparency in production in other languages--Dutch
and German--as well as studies of perception in Hebrew. We suggest that the root units
constitute an independent level of representation and processes, which is neither constrained
nor conditioned by semantic components.
However, a possible criticism might be that the almost identical facilitation effect observed
for the two morphologically related conditions relative to the unrelated condition reflects
phonological similarity between the target and the morphologically related distractors
induced by the shared root consonants, which is not present in the unrelated condition. This
claim seems implausible, as the shared root consonants are spread out over a complex word
structure. Consequently, the shared unit that appears in both the distractor and the target is not
phonologically salient, at least with spoken distractors, due to the syllabic structure that each
of these consonants is embedded in. In Exp. 1A we replicated the current experiment, but with
the addition of a phonological control condition in which the number of consonants shared
by the target name and the phonologically similar distractor was identical to the number of
consonants shared by the target name and the morphologically related distractors.

Experiment 1A
Methods
Participants
Thirty students at the Hebrew University, all native Hebrew speakers, took part in the experiment for course credit or payment. None of the participants had taken part in Experiment 1.

123

12

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Stimuli and Design
The stimuli were constructed from the same pictures used in Experiment 1. The experiment
included 4 distractor conditions, the 3 conditions of Experiment 1: (1) M+S+, (2) M+S-,
(3) unrelated; and a new phonological control condition. The phonological control condition
included words that had no semantic or morphological similarity with the target, but shared the
same number of consonants (usually 3) with the picture name as the morphologically related
distractors and the picture. All the words in the phonological control condition were nominal
forms, including nouns, adjectives or participles. (There were two exceptional distractors
having a verbal form, `she embroidered' and `he shamed'. Another 2 distractors had a plural
form, `periods' and `towers'.) None of the words had the same onset as the picture name. An
example of one set of stimuli is presented in Table 1.
The mean semantic relatedness between the picture names and the phonologically similar
distractors was 1.44, the mean frequency of the phonologically similar distractors was 5.0,
and their mean imageability was 4.7.
The complete list of the phonologically similar distractors is presented in Appendix 1.
The design and procedure were identical to those of Experiment 1, with the difference of
having 4 blocks of stimuli rather than 3.
Results and Discussion
One item (#18) was omitted from the analysis due to an error rate of over 50 % (probably
because of problems with the recordings of the distractors9 ). On 5.2 % of the trials the
participant misnamed the picture, so it was coded as an error, and in 3.6 % of the trials
the voice-key was incorrectly triggered. These two types of trials were discarded from the
RT analyses. Furthermore, trials with reaction times under 300 ms or above 2,000 ms were
omitted (0.4 % of all responses). Outliers of 2.5 SD above or below the mean for each
participant were replaced by a cutoff value (mean  2.5 SD). These outliers constituted
0.4 % of all responses. The RTs for correct responses in the 4 experimental conditions were
averaged across subjects and across items, as reported in Table 2.
As can be seen in Table 2, the two morphologically related conditions revealed almost
the same naming latency, replicating the results of Experiment 1. More importantly, the
two control distractor conditions--the unrelated and the phonologically similar condition--
yielded almost identical naming latency. The amount of morphological facilitation induced
by the morphologically related condition is about 22 ms (about 2.5 %), similar to the results
of Experiment 1.
The RTs were subjected to one-way ANOVA with the distractor condition as a within
variable for both subject (F1) and item (F2) analyses. These analyses revealed significant
main effects of distractor type for both subject and item analyses, F1(3, 87) = 6.2, MSE = 863,
p < .001; F2(3, 102) = 2.9, MSE = 2,410, p < .05.
Planned comparisons between each of the morphologically related conditions relative to
the unrelated control condition revealed a significant morphological effect for the M+S+
condition, F1(1, 29) = 7.9, MSE = 1,965, p < .01; F2(1, 34) = 5.1, MSE = 5,589, p < .05,
as well as for the subject analysis of the M+S- condition, F1(1, 29) = 8.3, MSE = 2,023,
p < .01. Item analysis for the M+S- condition did not reach statistical significance F2
(1, 34) = 2.8, MSE = 8,524, p > .05.
9 We recorded all the distractors for Exp. 1A to avoid differences in recording quality between the distractors

of the new phonological control condition and the other distractor conditions that were recoded for Exp. 1.The
recordings in all the experiments were made by the same woman.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

13

Planned comparisons between each of the morphologically related conditions relative to
the phonological control condition revealed a significant morphological effect for the M+S+
condition, F1(1, 29) = 9.0, MSE = 1,533, p < .01; F2(1, 34) = 6.6, MSE = 2,406, p < .05, as
well as for the M+S- condition, F1(1, 29) = 8.3, MSE = 1,984, p < .01; and marginal for
item analysis F2(1, 34) = 3.4, MSE = 3,675, p = .07.
No main effect of distractor condition was observed in either the subject or the item
analyses for the percentage of errors, F1(3, 87) = 2.6, MSE = 0.001, p > .05; F2(3, 102) = 1.8,
p > .05.
In sum, the results of the present experiment replicate the main findings of Exp. 1, but
relative to a phonological control condition, showing that the morphological root effect is not
affected by semantic similarity. The appearance of the facilitation effect when measured in
comparison with a phonological control condition eliminates the possibility that the observed
facilitation effect in Exp. 1 was simply due to phonological similarity. It is the morphological
meaning of the shared phonemes (i.e., the root consonants) that carries the facilitative effect.
Interestingly, there is no additive contribution of the simple phonological similarity of three
random consonants over the unrelated control condition. Indeed, facilitatory phonological
effects observed in the PWI paradigm seems to be structured and constrained by the words'
metrical structure and /or word's position of shared segments. The phonological effect, as
distinguished from the morphological root effect, was previously demonstrated in Hebrew as
well, between words sharing their first two segments (Deutsch and Meir 2011). The discussion
of the specific characteristics of a phonological effect is, however, beyond the scope of the
present study. In conclusion, the unrelated control condition seems to be a suitable baseline
condition for estimating the morphological root effect, at least with spoken distractors in the
PWI paradigm.
Lastly, we would like to mention an unexpected result: the lack of statistical significance
for the morphological facilitation effect in the item analysis for morphologically related but
semantically opaque distractors when measured in comparison with an unrelated condition.
We would like to consider this outcome as a random case, given that the morphological
effect was statistically significant across Exp. 1 and 1A in another 11 planned comparisons
(including both subject and item analyses).

Experiment 2
An assumption implicit in the claim that the lexicon is organized and words are accessed
via the root morpheme in Hebrew (as a typical example of lexical organization of nonconcatenated Semitic morphological systems) is that the root has a unique representation,
independent of grammar, which is shared by all words derived from it.This issue, however,
has never been addressed directly for the root effect in Hebrew. Furthermore, given the
assumption of a shared root representation for all words derived from a given root, there still
remains an open question of whether the process of selecting the root morpheme is modulated
by some other grammatical information denoted by the lemma, such as part of speech.
Previous research in Hebrew in the domain of written word perception showed a facilitation
root effect for both nouns (Frost et al. 1997) and verbs (Deutsch et al. 1998). These results
are derived from experiments using the masked priming paradigm, and constitute the basic
data on which the model for morphological de-composition of written word recognition is
based. However, in these experiments the targets were primed with words that are of the same
part of speech (nouns primed by nouns and verbs by verbs), so that the root effect was never
tested across word classes and was never directly compared in a within-stimulus paradigm.

123

14

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

A more direct comparison of root effects across parts of speech can be found in Bentin
and Feldman's (1990) study, also in the domain of written word perception. In that study
a facilitation effect of the same size was obtained for nominal and verbal forms primed by
words that shared the root with the target, regardless of whether they were from the same or a
different part of speech. This research, however, was based on a repetition priming paradigm,
and measured a long repetition priming effect via a lexical decision task. Unlike the masked
priming paradigm or the PWI paradigm, the long-term repetition priming paradigm does not
tap early processes of lexical access.
In the present experiment we compared the root effect obtained for nominal target words
(i.e., nouns depicting pictures) coupled with nominal distractors derived from the same root,
with the root effect obtained when the same target pictures were coupled with verbal distractors derived from the same root. For example, a picture associated with the word /naQal/,
a shoe, was coupled with a distractor which was either a noun or a verb, like /hanQala/,
footwear, or /ninQal/, was locked. (The root effect for a nominal or a verbal distractor was
estimated relative to an unrelated nominal or verbal control distractor that did not share the
root with the picture name.) In line with previous findings in other languages, we anticipated that a shared part-of-speech will interfere with production latency. Indeed previous
word-class effects were not observed with bare nouns. However, considering the structure of
Hebrew words, where word-class is morphologically instantiated in the word-pattern, we did
expect a word-class effect also with bare nouns. (This issue is further discussed in "General
Discussion".) However, the main focus of the present study was not the word class effect, but
rather the interaction of the root effect with grammatical information about parts of speech in
word production per se. Our main questions were (1) whether a root effect could be obtained
across word class, given a shared root, and (2) most interestingly, whether the size of the
effect is modulated by the grammatical characteristics of the part of speech. Demonstrating
the root effect across parts of speech is important to support the notion that there is a singular,
shared root unit that mediates the composition of all words derived from it. Furthermore, if
the mere process of root extraction is dissociated from retrieval of grammatical information,
no modulation of the size of the effect should be predicted by the distractor's part of speech.
Methods
Participants
Forty-two students at the Hebrew University, all native Hebrew speakers, took part in the
experiment for course credit or payment.

Stimuli and Design
The stimuli were 36 10-by-10-cm line drawings. The names of all the pictures had a complete
three-consonantal root. (Twenty pictures were the same ones that were used by Deutsch and
Meir 2011). Each picture was paired with two morphologically related distractors, i.e. words
derived from the same root as the target: a noun (condition 1) and a verb (condition 3).
Each of these conditions had its own morphologically unrelated control condition: a noun
control (condition 2) for a morphologically related noun distractor (condition 1), and a verb
control (condition 4) for a morphologically related verb distractor (condition 3). The unrelated
control distractors had no semantic, morphological (i.e., root or word-pattern) or phonological
(word's onset) similarity with the target word. As in Experiment 1, the picture word and the

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

15

Table 3 Example of one set of stimuli in all 4 distractor conditions of Exp. 2
Picture name

Morph. related
noun distractor

Unrelated noun
distractor

Morph. related
verb distractor

Unrelated verb
distractor

/ " naQal/

/hanQala /

/ hakdama/

/ninQal/

/ hitkarev/

"a shoe"

"footwear"

"introduction"

"was locked"

"came close"

The root consonants are in bold

distractors shared only the three root consonants.10 All the verb distractors in conditions 3
and 4 were verbal forms inflected on the basic third person, singular, past form. An example
of one set of stimuli is presented in Table 3. The complete list of stimuli is presented in
Appendix 2.
The frequency of the distractors was estimated with the same rating procedure described in
Exp. 1. Four rating lists were constructed, two including only the nominal distractors and their
unrelated control distractors (each of them included 18 morphologically related distractors
and 18 unrelated distractors) and the other two including only the verbal distractors and their
unrelated control distractors. As in Exp. 1 each rating list included fillers (9 infrequent and 9
very frequent) to create variability within the rating list. The mean frequency of the distractor
words was 5.1 and 5.8 for the noun and the noun-control conditions, and 4.9 and 5.6 for the
verb and verb-control conditions. Apparently the mean frequency of the related conditions
is lower than that of their unrelated control conditions for both the nominal and the verbal
distractors. A paired t test revealed that these differences were statistically significant in the
nominal [t(33) = 3.36, p < .05] and the verbal system [t(33) = 1.69, p < .05].11
The imageabilty of the distractor was estimated with the same rating procedure described
in Exp. 1. Four rating lists were constructed, as described above for the frequency rating
of Experiment 2. The mean Imageability score of the distractor words was 5.0 and 5.8 for
the noun and the noun-control conditions, and 5.2 and 5.3 for the verb and the verb-control
conditions. A two-way analysis of variance did not reveal any significant difference for either
the mean scoring of the two type of distractors--verbs versus nouns (F < 1)--or for the two
relatedness conditions--related versus unrelated [F(1, 33) = 2.53, MSE = 85.9, p > .05].
However, a significant interaction was observed [F(1, 33) = 4.83, MSE = 31.6, p < .05],
reflecting a significant difference between the related and unrelated conditions within the
nominal condition [t(33) = 2.168, p < .05], but no difference within the verbal distractors
(t < 1).
Different subjects participated in each of the rating procedure. None of these subjects
participated in the experiment.
The distractors were recorded by a female native Hebrew speaker.
A within-subject design was used for testing the effect of the distractor condition, so
that each participant saw all the pictures in all 4 conditions. The target-distractor pairs were
divided into 4 blocks, each containing all 36 pictures, with 9 pairs in each distractor condition.
The targets within each block were ordered randomly, with the constraint of avoiding two
successive trials with the same condition. The blocks were ordered in 4 different ways. Each
participant was tested with one of the 4 orders.
10 With the exception of 3 distractor words in the noun morphologically related condition that shared 4 rather
than 3 consonants with the target words.
11 The means refer to 34 items, as two items were omitted from the analyses; see the "Results" section.

123

16

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Table 4 Reaction times, relatedness effect and percentages of errors for naming picture targets in Exp. 2
Morph. related
noun distractor

Unrelated noun
distractor

RT (ms)

874

904

Relatedness effect

30

% Errors

3.5

Morph. related
verb distractor

Unrelated verb
distractor

844

884

40
4.1

2.5

4.2

Procedure and Apparatus
These were identical to those of Experiment 1, with the exception of having 4 instead of 3
blocks.
Results and Discussion
Two items (#13 and #19) were omitted from the analysis because there were too many naming
errors (more than 50 %). On 4 % of the trials the participant misnamed the picture and coded
as an error, and in 10 % of the trials the voice-key was incorrectly triggered. These two types
of trials were discarded from the RT analyses. Furthermore, trials with reaction times below
300 ms or above 2,000 ms were omitted (less than 0.01 % of all responses). Outliers of 2.5
SD above or below the mean for each participant were replaced by a cutoff value (mean 
2.5 SD). These outliers constituted 2.9 % of all responses. The RTs for the correct responses
in the 4 experimental conditions were averaged across subjects and across items, as reported
in Table 4.
The RTs were subjected to a two-way ANOVA with distractor type (noun, verb) and
condition (morphologically related, unrelated control) as a within variable for both subject
(F1) and item (F2) analyses. These analyses revealed significant main effects of distractor type
for both subject and item analyses, F1(1, 41) = 46.3, MSE = 566, p < .001; F2(1, 33) = 11.9,
MSE = 2,115, p < .001, as well as of distractor condition, F1(1, 41) = 64.6, MSE = 791,
p < .001; F2(1, 33) = 17.0, MSE = 2,677, p < .001. No interaction was observed between
the two factors, F1(1, 41) = 2.8, MSE = 411, p > .05; F2(1, 33) = 1.2, MSE = 1,755, p > .05.
Planned comparisons for each of the distractor type revealed a significant morphological
facilitation effect for the noun distractors, F1(1, 41) = 27.6, MSE = 1,342, p < .001; F2(1,
33) = 4.2, MSE = 6,668, p < .05, and the verb distractors, F1(1, 41) = 63.5, MSE = 1,063,
p < .001; F2(1, 33) = 30.6, MSE = 2,197, p < .001.
Analyses of percentage of errors revealed a significant main effect of distractor condition
for subject analysis, F1(1, 41) = 5.0, MSE = 0.001, p < .05, and marginal in the item analysis,
F2(1, 33) = 3.9, p = .057. No main effect of distractor type (F1, F2 < 1) or an interaction
effect (F1(1, 41) = 2.1, MSE = 0.001, p > .005; F2(1, 33) = 1.2, p > .005 between the two
factors was observed.
The results of the present experiment showed that the production latency for a target word
is delayed (by about 25 ms) in the presence of a distractor word which is the same part of
speech as the target word, compared to a distractor that is a different part of speech. Thus
the production latency of a noun target is longer when it is coupled with a noun distractor
than when it is coupled with a verb distractor. These results are similar to previous findings
observed with the same paradigm in English and German. However, unlike the previous
cases, the influence of part of speech in Hebrew was observed in producing single words not

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

17

embedded in a phrasal or sentential context. We elaborate on this divergence of the findings
in Hebrew from those in English and German in "General Discussion".
Before concluding we would like to mention the syntactic class effect in general. Recently,
Janssen et al. (2010) claimed that the word-class syntactic effect observed in the PWI paradigm can in fact be explained within the domain of semantics, supporting a single-layer
model of production which postulates that the main linguistic factor that affects production
latency is semantic (see also "General Discussion"). In particular they discuss the semantic
feature of `distractor imageability'. This suggestion is based on the finding that distractor
imagebility affects naming latencies in the PWI paradigm, so that the naming latency for
pictures is faster in the presence of highly imageable distractors than less easily imageable
ones (Lupker 1979). This interpretation of the syntactic-class effect cannot be applied to
the present results, however, as no difference in imageability rating was found for the noun
versus the verb distractors.
In this regard we would like to discuss a significant difference in imageabilty ratings
that was observed within the nominal set of distractors. Unlike the two types of related
distractors in Experiment 1 and the verbal distractors in the current experiment, where the
related and unrelated distractors were equated on imageability, in this set of stimuli (noun
and noun-control) the mean imageabilty rating for the unrelated condition was significantly
higher than that for the related condition. In line with the finding that naming latency with
more easily imageable distractors may be slower than with less easily imageable ones, it
might be argued that the facilitatory effect observed for the nominal distractors is anchored
in semantic effect of imageabilty. But this does not seem reasonable, given that in other five
cases in the current study a facilitatory effect was observed even though the imageabilty
ratings were equalized, undermining the suggestion that the root effect reflects nothing more
than an imageability effect. However, inspection of the rating data revealed one item that was
apparently rated very high on imageabilty in the unrelated noun condition--the distractor
[pesel], meaning a statue. We conducted a post-hoc analysis omitting this stimulus (across
all distractor conditions). After this item was omitted, the mean imageabilty rating was 5.0
and 5.7 for the noun and the noun-control conditions, and 5.2 and 5.3 for the verb and
verb-control conditions, with no significant difference between the related and unrelated
control noun distractors [t(32) = 1.9, p > .05]. However, the pattern of naming latency did
not change, and was 874 and 907 for the noun and the noun-control conditions, and 843 and
882 for the verb and verb-control conditions, respectively. (A two-way analysis of variance
revealed significant main effects of distractor type in both subject and item analyses, F1
(1, 41) = 51, MSE = 615, p < .001; F2(1, 32) = 15.1, MSE = 1,939, p < .001, and distractor
condition, F1(1, 41) = 63, MSE = 846, p < .001; F2(1, 32) = 16.5, MSE = 2,750, p < .001.
No interaction was observed between the two factors, F1, F2 < 1.
Considering the main question of the present experiment, a reliable facilitatory root effect
was observed in the production of nominal form coupled with a noun or verb distractor. This
effect was not modulated by the distractor's part of speech. In other words, the effect of the
root is neither restricted to a grammatical class of part-of-speech, nor affected by the words'
belonging to different parts of speech.

General Discussion
This study investigated the extent to which the morphological influence of the root morpheme on single word production in Hebrew is independent of both semantic information
and grammatical specification of part of speech. The results of Experiment 1 revealed an

123

18

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

almost identical facilitation effect induced by a shared root for semantically transparent and
opaque pairs of words. These results accord with the few previous findings in production in
other languages, as well as findings in Hebrew in written-word perception. The results of
Experiment 2 indicated that the influence of the root on production crosses the grammatical
classification of part of speech; providing information about the relevant root via a word that
shares the root with the target word facilitates the production of nominal targets, regardless
of whether the root is embedded in a verbal or a nominal form. Furthermore, although information about part of speech seemed to affect production (as revealed by a significance main
effect of distractor type), the part of speech information did not interact with the process of
root selection.
We first discuss the implications of the independence of the root from semantic information, and then the implications of its independence from grammatical information about parts
of speech. We conclude by suggesting that the root units constitute a general, semantics-free
principle of lexical organization that operates across the domains of production and writtenword perception, and across grammatical characteristics of parts of speech.
As noted above, the results of Experiment 1 accord with previous findings in written word
perception, all leading to the conclusion that morphological units exhibit an independent
level of representation and process, which is neither constrained nor conditioned by semantic
components. As noted in the Introduction, this type of theorizing is in line with the linguistic
perspective of the autonomous role of morphology, and is one of the fundamental assumptions
of the two-stage theory of production (Levelt et al. 1999) and the WEAVER++ computerized
model (Roelofs 1997).
Morphemic effects in the absence of semantic similarity challenge alternative approach
of a single layer of representation (Bonin and Fayol 2002; Caramazza 1997; Caramazza
et al. 2001; Janssen et al. 2008). According to this view, morphologically complex forms
are stored in full-form representations and do not involve a compositional morphological
process, at least not at the level of derivational morphology (Janssen et al. 2008). This
approach denies the notion that morphemic units are combined during production, and regards
apparent morphological effects as having a semantic origin. Analogously, a similar theoretical
debate about the explicit representation of morphological units has also been taking place in
the domain of written word perception, between localist models that posit an explicit level
of representation of morphological units and distributive connectionist models that ascribe
morphological effects to meaning-form correlations. In an attempt to accommodate previous
findings from Hebrew in written word perception, Plaut and Gonnerman (2000) suggested
that, in a morphologically rich language such as Hebrew, the usual form-meaning relations
are extended to semantically opaque cases. This suggestion was supported by a simulation
that showed morphological effects in Hebrew even for semantically opaque pairs of words.
Although this suggestion is plausible, it seems that the absence of a semantic similarity
effect on the manifestations of morphological effects accords better with localist models.
The current results seem to further oppose a connectionist explanation such as that offered
by Plaut and Gonnerman by providing evidence that an autonomous morphological process
unaffected by semantic components also occurs in production.
The fact that the root effect is not sensitive to semantic manipulation across the domains
of single word perception and production strengthens our previous suggestion that shared
root units mediate lexical access in both perception and production (Deutsch and Meir 2011).
We hypothesized that the roots are located at the word-form/lexeme level and mediate the
mapping of the abstract lemma representation into the lexeme's phonological form during
production. (For a detailed description see Deutsch and Meir 2011.) The fact that the morphological effect is independent of any semantic contribution seems to indicate that these

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

19

morphological units operate solely on the basis of form. We therefore suggest that all lemmas
that share a root unit are connected to it, irrespective of the core meaning that the root unit
or the complex lexeme may represent (see Fig. 1). Importantly, a similar claim for a shared
morphological representation of morphological units (other than a Semitic root) across the
domains of production and written word perception was recently suggested by Luttmann et
al. (2011a). Their suggestion is based on findings showing a similar pattern of morphological
effects in German, obtained in production with the PWI paradigm, and in perception with
the cross-modal priming paradigm for written-word identification. Importantly, however, a
shared level of representation for perception and production at the word-form level (including
morphological and phonological representations) deviates from the architecture of the twostage model for production, which postulates a distinct networks specified for production
and perception (Levelt et al. 1999).
Although the present results fit models claiming that there is an autonomous morphological
level of presentation, such as the two-stage theory of lexical access (Levelt et al. 1999)
and the computerized WEAWER++ model (e.g., Roelofs 1997), they might deviate from
these models in another aspect, namely the feed-forward architecture postulated by these
models. According to a feed-forward, uni-directional model, the net facilitation effect for
semantically transparent relations might be weaker than for semantically opaque ones, due
to the opposing inhibition effect resulting from competition at the lemma level induced by
the semantic activation of related concepts (as discussed in the Introduction). Accordingly,
competition at the Lemma level (induced by the conceptual level) precedes the morphological
process of root selection, so that an inhibitory semantic process is added to the following
facilitatory, autonomous morphological process (see also Luttmann et al. 2011b for a similar
discussion). This outcome was not observed, however, either in the current experiment or in
previous studies using the PWI paradigm in other languages (Dohmes et al. 2004; Luttmann
et al. 2011a, b). An alternative architecture to feed-forward models, which might fit better
with the present results, is an interactive approach positing bi-directional links between the
various levels, at least between the lemma and word form level (e.g., the restricted interaction
account, Rapp and Goldrick 2000). A possible architecture within this approach would posit
competition at the lemma level, which is induced by the root level, due to bi-directional links
between the roots and the lemma level. (These links are illustrated by the dashed arrows in
Fig. 1.) This competition would affect all root derivations, semantically transparent as well
as semantically opaque pairs of words. Accordingly, the activation of a root by the distractor
may activate all lemmas to which it is connected, irrespective of semantic transparency,
resulting in competition at the lemma level analogous to the competition for semantically
related pairs at this level that is triggered by the conceptual level. If so, the observed net effect
of response latency might also include an inhibitory component for morphologically related
but semantically unrelated pairs, which is induced by a different source--the morphological
level of the roots (rather than the conceptual level which is the source of the inhibition in the
case of semantically transparent condition). The inhibition at the lemma level is presumably
overridden by the facilitation effect induced by the root, which operates solely on the form
level. The postulation of feedback between the morphological and lemma level of presentation
deviates from the feed-forward account of Levelt's and the WEAWER++ models, and may
fit with an interactive type of model, as suggested above. This issue, however, is a subject for
future research.
The results of Experiment 2 provide evidence for a common root morpheme that applies
across words of different parts of speech. On the basis of these results we would like to
suggest that the principle of lexical organization according to the morphological unit of the

123

20

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Fig. 1 The locus of the root units and their connections with the lemmas' representations in the mental
organization of the Hebrew lexicon and the processes involved in production

root is above other principles of organization, such as lexical organization according to the
grammatical specification of part of speech (see Fig. 1).
In fact the results of Experiment 2 indicate that information about the part of speech is
extracted from the distractor and affects the process of production, as was revealed by a main
effect of type of distractor (verbs vs. nouns). In line with previous findings in production,
commonality in part of speech between pair of words inhibits production latency. This interference is usually ascribed to competition between words linked via a common grammatical
feature (e.g. Dell 1986; Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson 1997; Levelt et al. 1999). However, this
competitive process does not seem to affect the process of selecting the root morpheme, as
no interaction between the two processes was observed. Accordingly, we suggest that the
process of root selection is an independent process that is not influenced by other processes
of grammatical specification that take place in the lexicon.
Before concluding, we would like to mention the difference observed between the results
of Experiment 2 and previous studies that investigated the part of speech effect on production
with the PWI paradigm. As noted above, the part of speech effect in previous studies was
observed when participants had to produce the target word within a syntactic context (but
see Janssen et al. 2010). This was not the case, however, in the present study, where the
interference effect between two words of the same part of speech was observed in the context
of producing bare nouns. The representation of grammatical features (such as part of speech
specification or gender) within models of production is usually ascribed to nodes denoting
that feature, and to which all lemmas sharing the specific feature are attached (e.g. Dell 1986;
Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson 1997; Levelt et al. 1999). One suggested explanation for the
overt manifestation of grammatical effects only in the context of producing syntactic structure

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

21

is that although grammatical features are activated (via spreading activation) in the course
of lemma selection, they are not selected unless the information is needed for constructing a
syntactic structure (e.g., Schriefers and Jescheniak 1999 with regards to gender specification).
Thus no interference induced by lemmas sharing a common grammatical feature is observed.
In Hebrew, however, since grammatical features like part of speech are inherent feature of
the word-pattern morphemes, part-of-speech information is inevitably expressed in selecting
the morphological building block of a word-patterns in the course of lexical access. Thus
considering this unique Semitic structure of words, the appearance of the part of speech
effect in the context of producing bare nouns is very plausible. However, it should be noted
that the manner by which part of speech is represented and selected was not the focus of the
present research. Furthermore, the effect of word-pattern on production, although already
demonstrated for nominal patterns (only under the condition of semantic transparency; see
Kolan et al. 2011) needs to be established more solidly. Only after these issues are resolved
can the above suggestion concerning the interrelation between the representation of part of
speech information and the morphological word pattern be further investigated.
In conclusion, we suggest that the roots constitute an abstract, a-modal, semantics-free and
grammar-free representation of lexical units, which form a general principle of organization of
the mental lexicon. The roots' independent status fits the claim of morphological autonomy in
models of production such as the two-stage theory (Levelt et al. 1999) and the WEAWER++
model (Roelofs 1997). Thus, although roots have semantic meaning, mental organization
according to root units is form--rather than meaning-driven. This lexical organization crosses
linguistic domains (production and written word perception), as well grammatical principles
of lexical organization according to parts of speech. The process of root selection in the
course of production is dissociated from any other grammatical processes of defining words'
parts of speech that take place in the course of production.
Acknowledgments This research was supported by a grant from the Israeli Science Foundation (#179/09)
to Avital Deutsch. I thank Roni Pener-Tessler, Tamar Malinovitch, Dana Zahar and Yaara Lador for their
extensive help in constructing the materials and excellent assistance in running the experiments.

123

22

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Appendix 1
Phonetic transcription and English translation of picture names and distractor names in all
conditions, and phonemic transcription of the root shared by the picture name and the morphologically related distractors In Experiment 1 and 1A. In parentheses are the mean ratings
of semantic relatedness between the picture name and each of morphologically related conditions, as well as between the picture name and the unrelated distractor.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

23

123

24

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Appendix 2
Phonetic transcription and English translation of picture names and distractor names in all
conditions, and phonemic transcription of the root shared by the picture name and the morphologically related distractors in Experiment 2.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

25

1
2
3
4

123

26

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

References
Abdel Rahman, R. A., & Aristei, S. (2010). Now you see it.. and now again: Semantic interference reflects
lexical competition in speech production with and without articulation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
17, 657-661.
Abdel Rahman, R. A., & Melinger, A. (2009). Semantic context effects in language production: A swinging
lexical network proposal and review. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(5), 713-734.
Aronoff, M. (1994). Morphology by itself. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bentin, S., & Feldman, L. B. (1990). The contribution of morphological and semantic relatedness to repetition priming at short and long lags: Evidence from Hebrew. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 42A, 693-711.
Bloem, I., & La Heij, W. (2003). Semantic facilitation and semantic interference in word translation: Implications for models of lexical access in language production. Journal of Memory and Language, 48,
468-488.
Bonin, P., & Fayol, M. (2002). Frequency effects in the written and spoken production of homophonic picture
names. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 14, 289-313.
Boudelaa, S., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (2005). Discontinuous morphology in time: Incremental masked priming
in Arabic. Language and Cognitive Processes, 20, 207-260.
Burani, C., & Laudana, A. (1992). Units of representation of derived words in the lexicon. In R. Frost & L.
Katz (Eds.), Advances in Psychology: Orthography, Phonology, Morphology, and Meaning (pp. 27-44).
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are there in lexical access? Cognitive Neuropsychology,
14, 177-208.
Caramazza, A., Miozzo, M., Costa, A., & Bi, Y. (2001). The whole-word frequency effect: Implications for the
representations of homophones. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27, 1430-1450.
Costa, A., Alarion, F. X., & Caramazza, A. (2005). On the categorical nature of the semantic interference
effect in the picture-word interference paradigm. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 125-131.
Damian, M. F., & Martin, R. C. (1999). Semantic and phonological codes interact in single word production.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 345-361.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence production. Psychological Review,
93, 283-321.
Dell, G. S., & O'Seaghdha, P. G. (1992). Stages of lexical access in language production. Cognition, 42,
287-314.
Deutsch, A., & Frost, R. (2003). Lexical organization and lexical access in a non-concatenated morphology:
Mapping the mental lexicon. In J. Shimron (Ed.), Language processing and acquisition in languages of
semitic, root based, morphology (pp. 165-186). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Deutsch, A., Frost, R., & Forster, K. (1998). Verbs and nouns are organized and accessed differently in the
mental lexicon: Evidence from Hebrew. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 1238-1255.
Deutsch, A., & Meir, A. (2011). The role of the root morpheme in mediating word production in Hebrew.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 26, 716-744.
Dohmes, P., Zwitserlood, P., & Bolte, J. (2004). The impact of semantic transparency of morphologically
complex words on picture naming. Brain and Language, 90, 203-212.
Feldman, L. B. (2000). Are morphological effects distinguishable from the effects of shared meaning and
shared form? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1431-1444.
Frost, R. (2012). Towards a universal model of reading. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 35, 263-279.
Frost, R., Deutsch, A., Gilboa, O., Tannenbaum, M., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (2000). Morphological priming:
Dissociation of phonological, semantic and morphological factors. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1277-1288.
Frost, R., Forster, K. I., & Deutsch, A. (1997). What can we learn from the morphology of Hebrew? A masked
priming investigation of morphological representation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 23, 829-856.
Frost, R., Kugler, T., Deutsch, A., & Forster, K. I. (2005). Orthographic structure versus morphological
structure: Principles of lexical organization in a given language. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 1293-1326.
Garrett, M. F. (1988). Processes in language production. In F. J. Newmeyer (Ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge
survey (Vol. 3). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gaskell, M. G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1997). Integrating form and meaning: A distributed model of speech
perception. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 613-656.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

27

Gumnior, H., Bolte, J., & Zwitserlood, P. (2006). A chatterbox is a box: Morphology in German word production. Language and Cognitive Processes, 21, 920-944.
Humphreys, G. W., Lloyd-Jones, T. J., & Fias, W. (1995). Semantic interference effects on naming using a
postcue procedure: Tapping the links between semantics and phonology with pictures and words. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 961-980.
Janssen, N., Bi, Y., & Carammaza, A. (2008). A tale of two frequencies: Determining the speed of lexical access
for Mandarin Chinese and English compounds. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23, 1191-1223.
Janssen, N., Melinger, A., Mahon, B. Z., Finkbeiner, M., & Caramazza, A. (2010). The word class effect
in picture-word interference paradigm. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology., 63, 1233-
1246.
Jescheniak, J. D., & Schriefers, H. (2001). Priming effects from phonologically related distractors in picture-
word interference. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 371-382.
Koester, D., & Schiller, N. O. (2008). Morphological priming in overt language production: Electrophysiological evidence from Dutch. NeuroImage, 42, 1622-1630.
Kolan, L., Leikin, M., & Zwitzerlood, P. (2011). Morphological processing and lexical access in speech
production in Hebrew: Evidence from picture-word interference. Journal of Memory and Language, 65,
286-298.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-38.
Luttmann, H., Zwitserlood, P., & Bolte, J. (2011a). Sharing morphemes without sharing meaning: Production
and comprehension of German verbs in the context of morphological relatives. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65, 173-191.
Luttmann, H., Zwitserlood, P., Bohl, A., & Bolte, J. (2011b). Evidence for morphological composition at the
form level in speech production. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 2011(23), 818-836.
Lupker, S. J. (1979). The semantic nature of response competition in the picture-word interference task.
Memory & Cognition, 7, 485-495.
Luzzatti, C., Raggi, R., Zonca, G., Pistarini, C., Contardi, A., & Pinna, G. D. (2002). Verb-noun double
dissociation in aphasic lexical impairment: The role of word frequency and imageability. Brain and
Language, 81, 432-444.
Mahon, B. Z., Costa, A., Peterson, R., Vargas, K. A., & Caramazza, A. (2007). Lexical selection is not
by competition: A reinterpretation of semnatic interference and facilitation effects in the picture-word
interference paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 33, 503-
535.
Marslen-Wilson, W., Tyler, L. K., Waksler, R., & Older, L. (1994). Morphology and meaning in the English
mental lexicon. Psychological Review, 101, 3-33.
Pechmann, T., Garrett, M., & Zerbst, D. (2004). The time course of recovery for grammatical category information during lexical processing for syntactic construction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 723-728.
Pechmann, T., & Zerbst, D. (2002). The activation of word class information during speech production. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 233-243.
Plaut, D., & Gonnerman, L. M. (2000). Are non-semantic morphological effects incompatible with a distributed
connectionist approach to lexical processing? Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 445-486.
Rapp, B., & Goldrick, M. (2000). Discreteness and interactivity in spoken word production. Psychological
Review, 107, 460-499.
Roelofs, A. (1996). Serial order in planning the production of successive morphemes of a word. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 854-876.
Roelofs, A. (1997). The WEAVER model of word-form encoding in speech production. Cognition, 64, 2490-
284.
Roelofs, A., & Baayen, H. (2002). Morphology by itself in planning the production of spoken words. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 132-138.
Schriefers, H., & Jescheniak, J. D. (1999). Representation and processing of grammatical gender in language
production: A review. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 575-6000.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A. S., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1990). Exploring the time course of lexical access in language
production: Picture-word interference studies. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 86-102.
Starreveld, P. A., & La Heij, W. (1996). Time-course analysis of semantic and orthographic context effects in
picture-naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 896-918.
Velan, H., Deutsch, A., & Frost, R. (2013). The flexibility of letter position flexibility: Evidence from eye movements in reading Hebrew. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human, Perception and Performance,
39, 1143-1152.

123

28

J Psycholinguist Res (2016) 45:1-28

Velan, H., & Frost, R. (2007). Cambridge University versus Hebrew University: The impact of letter transposition on reading English and Hebrew. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 913-918.
Velan, H., & Frost, R. (2009). Letter-transposition effects are not universal: The impact of transposing letters
in Hebrew. Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 285-302.
Velan, H., & Frost, R. (2011). Words with and without internal structure: What determines the nature of
orthographic and morphological processing? Cognition, 118, 141-156.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., & siri, S. (2005). Semantic similarity and grammatical class in naming actions.
Cognition, 94, B91-B100.
Zwitserlood, P., Bolte, J., & Dohmes, P. (2000). Morphological effects on speech production: Evidence from
picture naming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 563-592.
Zwitserlood, P., Bolte, J., & Dohmes, P. (2002). Where and how morphologically complex words interplay
with naming pictures. Brain and Language, 81, 358-367.

123

