J. Child Lang. 41 (2014), 861-889. f Cambridge University Press 2013
doi:10.1017/S0305000913000275

Acquisition of the polarity sensitive item renhe ` any '
in Mandarin Chinese*
AIJUN HUANG
Soochow University, China and Macquarie University, Australia
AND

STEPHEN CRAIN
Macquarie University, Australia
(Received 7 November 2012 - Revised 2 March 2013 - Accepted 10 May 2013 -
First published online 24 July 2013)

ABSTRACT

The present study investigated Mandarin-speaking children's
acquisition of the polarity sensitive item renhe `any ' in Mandarin
Chinese. Like its English counterpart any, renhe can be used as a
negative polarity item (NPI), or as a free choice (FC) item, and both
the distribution and interpretation of renhe are governed by the same
syntactic and semantic constraints as English any. Using a Truth Value
Judgment Task, the present study tested five-year-old Mandarinspeaking children's comprehension of FC renhe in sentences containing
the modal word neng ` can', and tested children's comprehension of NPI
renhe in sentences containing the temporal conjunction zai_zhiqian
` before '. Most children demonstrated knowledge of the interpretation
of both FC renhe and NPI renhe despite a paucity of relevant adult
input. Like adults, however, Mandarin-speaking children do not use
[*] This project was supported, in part, by the Australian Research Council Centre of
Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders (CE110001021) <http://www.ccd.edu.au>,
and by the Macquarie University Research Excellence Scholarships (MQRES). We
would thank Nobuaki Akagi, Francesco-Alessio Ursini, Likan Zhan, Peng Zhou, Patrick
Chu, and especially Thomas Hun-tak Lee and Rosalind Thornton for their valuable
comments and useful suggestions as this work progressed. Some of the findings from the
present paper were presented at the Fifth International Conference on Formal
Linguistics (ICFL 5) and Beijing Language and Culture University (BLCU). We would
like to thank the audience on these occasions for their questions and comments. We
would also express our sincere thanks to Liqun Gao and his students for their assistance
in conducting the experiments in BLCU. We are also grateful for Thomas Hun-tak Lee
for giving permission to access to the BJCELA corpus, and Margaret Ka-yan Lei,
Xiawei Duan, and Xiaoxu Zhang for their help in searching the longitudinal data in this
corpus. Address for correspondence : Aijun Huang, School of Foreign Languages,
Soochow University, Jiangu Province, China. e-mail : ajhuang@suda.edu.cn

861

HUANG AND CRAIN

renhe frequently in ordinary conversation, due to the availability of
alternative colloquial expressions (wh-pronouns) that also convey
children's intended meanings.

INTRODUCTION

In English, the expression any is prohibited in simple positive sentences
such as (1). By contrast, any is licensed in two linguistic contexts. First, any
is licensed in downward entailing linguistic contexts, such as in negative
statements, in the antecedent of conditionals, and in the restriction
(roughly, the subject NP) of the universal quantifier (e.g., Baker, 1970 ;
Giannakidou, 1998 ; Klima, 1964 ; Ladusaw, 1980). In these contexts, any is
assigned an existential reading, and is referred to as a negative polarity item
(NPI). The use of any as an NPI is illustrated in (2).
(1) *John ate any apples.
(2) John did not eat any apples.
The expression any can also be used as a free choice item. Free choice any
is licensed in generic or intentional contexts, such as in sentences with
imperatives and modals (e.g., may, can, will), as illustrated in (3). Free
choice any can either be assigned a universal reading, as in (3a), or an
existential reading, as in (3b).
(3) a. Any clerk can help you.
b. Press any key.
The distributional and interpretative properties of English any are typical of
polarity sensitive items, and various syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic
principles have been postulated to account for these properties (e.g., Baker,
1970 ; Carlson, 1980, 1981 ; Chierchia, 2006 ; Davison, 1980 ; Fauconnier,
1975 ; Giannakidou, 1998, 2001 ; Horn, 2000, 2005 ; Kadmon & Landman,
1993 ; Klima, 1964 ; Krifka, 1995 ; Ladusaw, 1980 ; Vendler, 1967). Previous
studies of the acquisition of English any have found that English-speaking
children command both the distributional and interpretive properties of any
by around age four (O'Leary, 1994 ; O'Leary & Crain, 1994 ; Song, 2003 ;
Thornton, 1995). The findings on the acquisition of English any invite us
to ask whether the acquisition of polarity sensitive items follows the same
developmental path in historically unrelated languages, such as Mandarin
Chinese.
Renhe is the Mandarin Chinese equivalent of English any. Like any,
Mandarin renhe is prohibited in simple affirmative statements such as (4).
Also like English any, renhe can be used as a negative polarity item, as in
(5), and as a free choice (FC) item, as in (6). Moreover, when renhe is an
862

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

NPI, it is assigned an existential reading, like English any, and when renhe
is a FC item, it can be assigned both a universal reading, as in (6a), and an
existential reading, as in (6b).
(4) *Zhangsan kanjian le renhe ren
ASP any
person
Zhangsan see
` Zhagnsan saw anyone.'
(5) Zhangsan mei kanjian renhe ren
any person
Zhangsan NEG see
` Zhangsan did not see anyone.'
(6) a. Zhangsan neng pa
shang renhe yi ke shu
Zhangsan can climb up
any one CL tree
` Zhangsan can climb up any one of the trees. '
b. Qing gei wo renhe yi zhang pai
card
please give me any one CL
` Please give me any one of the cards. '
The present study investigated the acquisition of renhe by Mandarinspeaking children. There were two experiments. One examined children's
comprehension of FC renhe, and the other examined children's
comprehension of NPI renhe. The main finding was that Mandarin-speaking children exhibited adult-like command of renhe in both experiments,
in keeping with the observation, based on previous research, that young
English-speaking children demonstrate awareness of the linguistic properties
of any.
The paper is organized as follows. First we introduce the basic
linguistic properties of renhe. Then we provide a literature review on the
acquisition of English any. Following the literature review, we report two
experimental studies we designed to assess Mandarin-speaking children's
comprehension of renhe. Experiment 1 examined children's interpretation
of FC renhe in sentences with the modal verb neng `can '. Experiment 2
examined children's interpretation of NPI renhe in the scope of the
temporal conjunctive zai_zhiqian ` before '. In the concluding section, we
discuss why Mandarin-speaking children, like adults, do not often produce
renhe.
Linguistic properties of renhe
Like English any, renhe in Mandarin Chinese is not tolerated in simple
affirmative sentences (cf. (4)). Mandarin renhe is licensed in two linguistic
contexts. First, as a negative polarity item, renhe is licensed in downward
entailing contexts (Ladusaw, 1980). Downward entailing contexts license
inferences from general terms (e.g., animal) to specific terms (e.g., monkey).
863

HUANG AND CRAIN

To illustrate, negation (e.g., not) is downward entailing. The statement John
did not see an animal contains the general term animal, and we can replace
this general term with a more specific term monkey, salva veritate. So, if the
statement John did not see an animal is true, it follows that the statement
John did not see a monkey is also true. Other downward entailing linguistic
contexts include the antecedent of conditionals, negative predicates like
deny and prevent, the temporal conjunction zai_zhiqian ` before', and many
other linguistic constructions (see Hsiao, 2002 ; Kuo, 2003 ; Wang & Hsieh,
1996). Examples are given in (7).
(7) a. Zhangsan mei kanjian renhe ren
any person
Zhangsan NEG see
` Zhagnsan did not see anyone.'
b. Ruguo you renhe ren

[Negation]

qifu ni,

qing gaosu wo
[Antecedent of conditionals]
if
have any person bully you please tell
me
` If anybody bullies you, please let me know. '
c. Ta fandui wo zuo renhe shiqing
[Negative predicates]
he prevent me do any thing
` He prevents me from doing anything. '
d. Xiaolaohu zai renhe xiao dongwu zhiqian pao dao
Tigger
at any little animal before run to
le zhongdian
[Before]
ASP finish line
` Tigger ran to the finish line before any of the other little animals. '
As noted earlier, Mandarin renhe can also function as a free choice item. FC
renhe is licensed in generic or intentional contexts, such as in sentences with
modals and ones with imperatives. FC renhe receives an existential reading
in (8), and it receives a universal reading in (9).
(8) Qing xuan renhe yi zhang pai
card
Please pick any one CL
` Please pick any card. '
(9) Women yao dadao renhe yi ge diren
we
will beat any one CL enemy
` We will defeat any enemy ! '
The variation between NPI and FC meanings for Mandarin renhe shows
that these meanings are evoked by properties of their licensors. In (10a),
the licensing operator neng is an ability modal word. Consequently, renhe
receives a universal reading. This sentence is false if there is even one big
tree that Zhangsan cannot climb. By contrast, renhe is assigned an existential
reading in (10b), where it is licensed by the permission modal word neng.
864

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

The speaker of (10b) is asserting that Zhangsan is permitted to take any
one of the apples, but he is not being given permission to take all of them
(cf. Vendler, 1967).
(10) a. Zhangsan neng pashang renhe da shu
Zhangsan can climb-up any big tree

` Zhangsan can climb up any big tree. '
b. Zhangsan neng nazou renhe pingguo
Zhangsan can take any apple
` Zhangsan can take any apple. '
We have chosen to analyze English NPI any and Mandarin NPI renhe
as existential quantifiers which are interpreted within the scope of their
licensors (cf. Carlson, 1980 ; Chierchia, 2006 ; Ladusaw, 1980 ; Kadmon &
Landman 1993). An alternative analysis was advanced by Quine (1960 :
138-40) (cf. Shimoyama, 2011). The alternative is to analyze these
expressions as universal quantifiers that obligatorily take scope over their
licensors. In our view, there are strong empirical arguments in favor of the
existential account. First, the wide-scope universal account generates
the incorrect interpretation of sentences like (11) (see Carlson, 1980). On
the universal account, example (11) would mean that `for every pet, Mary
decided not to marry a man who has that pet '. However, if NPI renhe is
interpreted as an existential quantifier under negation, then (11) receives the
correct meaning, which can be paraphrased as ` Mary decided not to marry a
man who has even a single pet'.
(11) Mali jueding bu jiagei chiyou renhe chongwu de nanren
De man
Mary decide NEG marry have any pet

` Mary decided not to marry a man who has any pet. '
We will present just one further argument. The existential interpretation
of NPI renhe is rendered explicit when it appears with negation in the
antecedent of conditional statements, as illustrated in (12) and (13), which
are instructions one frequently hears on airplanes. Both examples have the
same meaning, regardless of the word order of renhe and negation (bu).
They are instructions to passengers to inform the flight attendant
if ANYTHING/SOMETHING was not understood. These sentences are not
instructions that are limited to people who failed to understand everything
(i.e., EVERY >NOT). As (12) and (13) also indicate, renhe can be replaced
by the existential yixie ` some' without a change in meaning. Because
Mandarin yixie is a positive polarity item, like English some, it is not
expected to be interchangeable with a universal quantifier, on the widescope universal account, contrary to the facts.
865

HUANG AND CRAIN

(12) Ruguo ni bu mingbai
wo gei ni jieshi guo de
if
you NEG understand I to you explain ASP De
renhe/yixieshiqing, qing gaosu wo
any/some thing
please tell
me
` If you do not understand anything/something I have explained to
you, please tell me. '
(13) Ruguo you renhe/ yixie wo gei ni jieshi guo dan
If
have any/some
I to you explain ASP but
ni bu mingbai
de shiqing, qing gaosu wo
you NEG understand De thing, please tell
me
` If there is anything/something I have explained to you that you do
not understand, please tell me. '

Domain widening
In a seminal study, Kadmon and Landman (1993) argue that English any
extends the domain of quantification that would otherwise be the denotation
of the accompanying common noun used as a bare plural. Both NPI any
and FC any are argued to invoke the domain widening effect. Let us
consider NPI any first using example (14).
(14) a. I don't have potatoes.
b. I don't have any potatoes.
Sentence (14a) is true even if I have a few rotten potatoes in my back
yard. This is because in a context of utterance, the domain of quantification
associated with the common noun (i.e., potatoes) includes typical potatoes
(i.e., cooking potatoes), but leaves out atypical potatoes (e.g., rotten
potatoes). However, when any is added, as in (14b), the sentence is no
longer true if I have a few rotten potatoes. The denotation of potatoes,
when combined with any, is extended to include both typical and
atypical potatoes. This semantic function of any is known as `domain
widening '.
A similar domain widening effect is manifested in the use of FC any, as
illustrated in (15).
(15) a. An owl hunts mice.
b. Any owl hunts mice.
Example (15a) is true even if there are some sick owls which do not hunt
mice. These sick owls are legitimate exceptions to the indefinite an owl in
(15a). By contrast, the use of any in (15b) extends the set of owls that
count, so even sick owls are included as part of the widened domain of
quantification in sentence (15b).
866

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

Turning to renhe in Mandarin Chinese, renhe exhibits similar domain
widening properties, both as an NPI and as a FC. Consider NPI renhe first,
as in (16). Like the corresponding English sentences in (14), the use of NPI
renhe in (16a) makes all kinds of potatoes relevant in the domain of
quantification. So if I have some rotten potatoes, (16a) but not (16b) can be
taken as a true description of my situation.
(16) a. Wo mei you malingshu
NEG have potato
I
` I don't have potatoes.'
b. Wo mei you renhe malingshu
I
NEG have any
potato
` I don't have any potatoes. '
In a similar vein, FC renhe in (17b) widens the extension of the common
noun maotouying ` owl ', such that even sick owls are relevant to the rule
that owls hunt mice. Such domain widening effect is absent in sentences
containing plain common nouns such as maotouying, as in (17a).
(17) a.

Maotouying zhua laoshu
Owl
hunt mouse
` An owl hunts mice. '
b. Renhe maotouying dou zhua laoshu
any
owl
all hunt mouse
` Any owl hunts mice. '

Freedom of choice
If I say to you (18) when I offer a basket of apples, you may ask the question
in (19).
(18) Pick one apple.
(19) Which one ?
By contrast, if I substitute FC any for one in (20), the question Which one?
fails to make sense. This is because when I use FC any, this indicates that it
doesn't matter which apple is selected. When a speaker uses FC any, the
hearer has ` unrestricted liberty of individual choice ' (Vendler 1967 : 132).
(20) Pick any apple.
Another meaning associated with FC any is illustrated in (21) (from
Jennings, 1994 ; cited in Horn, 2005). In this sentence, the continuation
of any after a plain indefinite a bicycle does not give rise to a semantic
redundancy ; rather any strengthens the freedom of choice.
(21) I am looking for a bicycle, any bicycle that works.
867

HUANG AND CRAIN

This brings us to the universal reading associated with FC any. If
I declare (22), I convey that, no matter which person you select from
the domain of quantification, I can beat that person. This gives rise to a
universal reading for (22) (Bolinger, 1960 ; Giannakidou, 2001 ; Horn, 2000,
2005 ; Tovena & Jayez, 1999 ; Vendler, 1967).
(22) I can beat any one of you.
Turning to Mandarin Chinese, the freedom of choice meaning is attested
in sentences containing FC renhe. Like its English counterpart (20), (23)
conveys the speaker's intention that the hearer can pick any apple that he
fancies. Therefore, it would be redundant for (23) (Pick any apple) to be
followed by the question (24b) (Which one?). By contrast, with the plain
indefinite yi ge pingguo ` one-CL-apple ', as in (24a), the freedom of choice
meaning is missing, as verified by the fact that it is felicitous to follow (24a)
with the question (24b).
(23) Tiao renhe yi ge pingguo
pick any one CL apple
` Pick any apple. '
(24) a. Tiao yi ge pingguo
pick one CL apple
` Pick one of the apples. '
b. Na
yi ge ?
which one CL
` Which one ? '
To sum up, renhe in Mandarin Chinese can be used as a negative polarity
item and as a free choice item, just like its English counterpart any.
Renhe is restricted in distribution ; its interpretation is dependent on its
licensing operator. Both NPI renhe and FC renhe invoke domain-widening
effects. Before we discuss the acquisition of Mandarin renhe, it will be
useful to review the findings of previous research on the acquisition of
English any.

THE ACQUISITION OF ENGLISH ANY

In the literature, it is reported that English-speaking children exhibit
adult-like syntactic and semantic knowledge of NPI any. In an experimental
study, O'Leary (1994) (see also O'Leary & Crain, 1994) reports that four- to
five-year-old English-speaking children, like adults, did not produce NPI
any in positive contexts ; these children only allowed any in negative
contexts. In particular, in a Truth Value Judgment task with an elicitation
component, eleven children (age range : 4; 4-5;4) were presented with
two types of target sentence. These sentences, uttered by a puppet, were
868

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

incorrect descriptions of stories acted out by one of the two experimenters.
The first type of target sentence contained the NPI anything and the
expected adult-like response was to use a positive polarity item (PPI) such
as something ; NPIs are not allowed in this situation. An example is given in
(25a). By contrast, the other type of target sentence, as illustrated in (25b),
contained the PPI some/something. In this case, an adult-like response would
be to replace the PPI with an NPI.
(25) a.

b.

Type 1
Story : Two of the Ninja turtles did not get any toy from
Santa, but the third one got a ball from Santa.
Puppet : None of the Ninja Turtles got ANYTHING from Santa.
Adult-like response : No, this one got SOMETHING from Santa.
Type 2
Story : None of the three friends had presents for Gonzo.
Puppet : Only one of the friends had some presents for Gonzo.
Adult-like response: No, none of the friends had ANYTHING
for Gonzo.

It was found that children never produced NPIs in response to Type 1
sentences in (25a), even though NPIs were produced by the puppet in the
immediately preceding discourse. This finding constitutes compelling
evidence in support of the claim that English-speaking children are aware
of the distributional constraints of the NPIs any/anything. On the other
hand, children were found to use PPIs like some or something in their
responses to Type 2 sentences in (25b). Apparently, PPIs were initially used
to provide the meaning of the corresponding NPIs, though this is not our
concern here (see Crain 2012 ; Goro & Akiba 2004a, 2004b).
In another elicited production study, Song (2003) found that
English-speaking children are well aware of the distributional constraints
of NPI any. This study tested whether children conform to a
subject-object asymmetry with regard to the distribution of any. In
particular, any is not allowed in subject position, which is syntactically
higher than the sentential negation, as shown in (26a). Alternatively,
negative pronouns are used in subject position, as in (26b). By contrast, any
can occur in object position, i.e., inside the scope of the sentential negation,
as shown in (26c). A negative pronoun is also possible in object position, as
shown in (26d).
(26) a. *Anyone didn't meet John.
b. Nobody met John.
c. John didn't meet anyone.
d. John met nobody.
869

HUANG AND CRAIN

Taking advantage of the subject-object asymmetry of NPI any, Song (2003)
tested three- to five-year-old English-speaking children in their use of NPI
any in two test conditions (the Subject Condition and the Object
Condition). In the Subject Condition, a picture was shown to the child and
the investigator, but this picture was hidden from the third person. In this
picture, there are two animal characters but neither of them are doing the
activity described by the test sentence. In a typical trial, a picture showed
two rabbits under a tree and no one is on the tree. The investigator told the
child ` Tell her (the third person) WHO is climbing the tree right now '.
Under this condition, children, like adults, were observed to use sentences
containing negative pronouns in the targeted subject position, e.g.,
NOBODY (or NO ONE) is climbing the tree, to respond the experimenter's
request. No children produced an any sentence in the Subject Condition.
In the Object Condition, the child and one experimenter were presented
with a picture showing an animal character doing something other than the
activity described by the test sentence. For instance, in a typical trial the
child and the investigator were shown a picture of a monkey sitting far away
from some toys and a bag. The investigator then said to the child : `Tell her
(the third person) WHAT the monkey is touching right now.' Under this
condition, younger children (three- to four-year-olds) preferred to use
negative pronouns in the targeted object position (The monkey is touching
NOTHING), while older children (five-year-olds) tended to used any (The
monkey is not touching ANYTHING). The percentage of using any in the
Object Condition increased with age (31% of the time in three-year-olds,
and 45 % of the time in four-year-olds, and 57% of the time in five-yearolds). In short, the experimental findings reported in Song (2003) show that
English-speaking children observe the subject-object asymmetry in their
use of NPI any. This indicates that the distributional constraints of NPI
any are already in place in young English-speaking children.
Moreover, English-speaking children distinguished some subtle differences
in meaning when any interacts with negation. Using a comprehension
methodology, Thornton (1995) presented children with questions like (27).
(27) a. Did any of the turtles not buy an apple ?
b. Didn't any of the turtles buy an apple ?

(any >not)
(not >any)

In (27a), any takes scope over negation (any >not), so the question asks if
there are turtles that did not buy an apple. In (27b), by contrast, negation
takes scope over any (not >any), so this question asks if there are or are not
turtles that bought apples. Using a Truth Value Judgment task, Thornton
tested ten children ranging in age between 3;6 and 4 ;11. In a scenario, two
of the three turtles bought an apple, but the third one did not. In response
to (27a), children correctly pointed to the third turtle 93 % of the time,
saying ` This one didn't ! ' On the other hand, in response to (27b), children
870

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

correctly pointed to the two turtles that had bought apples 85% of the time,
saying ` These two did ! ' In short, Thornton (1995) offers convincing data
showing English-speaking children are sensitive to subtle difference in
meaning arising from interaction between negation and any (see also
Musolino, 1998).
To summarize, English-speaking children have a good command of the
syntactic and semantic properties of any by the time they are four years old.
Children have been found to be sensitive to the licensing conditions of any,
including knowledge about the linguistic contexts in which any can NOT
appear (O'Leary, 1994 ; O'Leary & Crain, 1994 ; Song, 2003). In the
absence of negative evidence, children's command of such `negative '
linguistic facts has been used by several researchers to argue for an innateness
account of the acquisition of negative polarity items (cf. Crain, 1991 ; Crain
& Pietroski, 2001, 2002 ; Marcus, 1993 ; Pinker, 1984). If this account is on
the right track, we are led to expect children to be sensitive to the licensing
properties of the corresponding polarity sensitive items in other languages,
including the NPI renhe in Mandarin Chinese.
EXPERIMENTS

The present study investigates Mandarin-speaking children's understanding
of the polarity sensitive item renhe. We examined their comprehension of
renhe in two linguistic contexts. One was in sentences containing the (ability)
modal word neng ` can', and the other was in sentences containing the
temporal connective zai_zhiqian ` before '. When renhe appears in sentences
with the modal word neng, it is assigned a ` free choice' (universal) interpretation by adult Mandarin speakers. On the other hand, when renhe appears in
the scope of the downward entailing operator zai_zhiqian, it is assigned an
(existential) interpretation, as a negative polarity item. Two experiments were
conducted to see whether Mandarin-speaking children assign these different
interpretations to the same lexical item renhe in the two linguistic contexts.
EXPERIMENT 1 : ACQUISITION OF FREE CHOICE
RENHE
METHOD

Experiment 1 investigated Mandarin-speaking children's comprehension of
FC renhe in sentences containing the ability modal word neng `be able to,
can'. The experiment contrasted minimal pairs of sentences with renhe and
ones without renhe. A typical minimal pair is illustrated in (28) and (29) :
(28) Gongfuxiongmao neng
tuidong ren he yige chezi
Kung-Fu-Panda be-able-to push
any one CL car
` Kung-Fu-Panda is able to push any one of the cars. '
871

HUANG AND CRAIN

(29) Gongfuxiongmao neng
tuidong yi ge chezi
Kung-Fu-Panda be-able-to push
one CL car
` Kung-Fu-Panda is able to push one of the cars. '
In (28), renhe appears in combination with the ability modal word neng.
Here renhe invokes a ` free choice' reading. Suppose there are three cars. No
matter which of these three cars is on offer, Kung-Fu-Panda is able to push
that car. The sense of free choice attributed to renhe thus gives rise to
a universal reading. Let us refer to these sentences as the ` any-one' type
of sentence. In (29), without renhe, the indefinite common noun yi ge chezi
` one-CL-car ' appears. Therefore, the sentence simply means that
Kung-Fu-Panda is able to push one of the cars. We call this second type the
` one ' sentences. The only difference between the two types of the sentence
is the presence versus the absence of renhe. When renhe is present, the
sentences receive a universal reading ; when renhe is absent, the sentences
receive an existential reading. We exploited this difference in meaning in
order to assess Mandarin-speaking children's awareness of the semantic
contribution of FC renhe.
Participants
We tested fifty-five Mandarin-speaking children between the ages of 4;5
and 6;3, with a mean age of 5 ;4. The children were recruited from the
kindergarten affiliated to Beijing Language and Culture University
(BLCU), Beijing. In addition, twenty Mandarin-speaking adults were tested
as the control group. The adults were postgraduate students from BLCU.
Procedures
We used the Truth Value Judgment Task (Crain & Thornton, 1998). The
task involves two experimenters. One experimenter acts out and narrates a
story using toys and props, and the other experimenter plays the role of a
puppet, who watches the story alongside the child. At some point in each of
the stories, the puppet tells the child what he thinks happened in the story.
The child's task is to judge whether or not the puppet's description of the
story was right or wrong. If the child informs the puppet that he was wrong,
then the child is asked to explain what had really happened in the story.
When the child judges that the puppet accurately described what had taken
place, the child is instructed to reward the puppet by feeding him
something he likes to eat, say, a strawberry. Sometimes the puppet doesn't
pay close attention, however, and says the wrong thing. In that case, the
child is instructed to give the puppet something to remind him to pay
closer attention, some food that he doesn't like as much, say a pepper.
872

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

These procedures make it fun for children to play the game, and they
encourage children to attend to the puppet's statements.
The child participants were introduced to the task individually and were
tested individually. There was a brief warm-up at the beginning of the test
session to ensure that the child could perform the task. In addition, each
child was given two practice trials before the formal test session. Each
practice trial was divided into two parts. At the end of each part, a simple
sentence was produced by the puppet. One sentence was obviously true and
was expected to evoke a ` Yes' response from the child participant, and the
other one was obviously false, and was expected to evoke a negative `No '
response from the child participant.
The twenty adult participants were tested on the same stories, but using
pictures. The adults were asked to indicate on an answer sheet whether
the puppet was right or wrong. As with the child participants, the adult
participants were asked to provide a justification if they judged that the
puppet had offered an inaccurate description of the story. Practice trials
were also given to the adult participants at the beginning of the session.
Test conditions
There were four test conditions, corresponding to the four parts of each
story. In the actual testing, the story consisted of two competitions between
two animal characters. For the ease of exposition, here we just use one
animal character (Kung-Fu-Panda) and one competition (Car-pushing) to
illustrate. In the next section, we provide a representative trial that was used
in the actual testing sessions.
In Condition 1, Kung-Fu-Panda pushed a small car but failed with a
medium-sized car and a large car. This scenario is followed by a ` one '
sentence, Gongfuxiongmao neng tuidong yi ge chezi `Kung-Fu-Panda can
push one of the cars'. This sentence is a true description of the scenario
for adults. Condition 2 used the array of objects as Condition 1, and
Kung-Fu-Panda performed the same actions as in Condition 1, but the
story was followed by an ` any-one' sentence, i.e., Gongfuxiongmao neng
tuidong renhe yi ge chezi ` Kung-Fu-Panda was able to push any one of the
cars'. This sentence constitutes an incorrect description of the scenario for
adults. In short, Condition 1 and Condition 2 employed the same situations,
and the test sentences differed only in the presence or absence of renhe.
In combination, these two conditions allow us to assess Mandarin-speaking
children's understanding or lack of understanding of the semantic
contribution of renhe.
Condition 3 and Condition 4 both used the ` any-one' type of sentence,
but these conditions differed in the events that were acted out. In Condition
3, Kung-Fu-Panda pushed two cars, but failed to push the third one.
873

HUANG AND CRAIN
TABLE

1. Four test conditions and expected adult-like responses

Conditions

Sentence type

Condition
Condition
Condition
Condition

` one' sentences
` any-one' sentences
` any-one' sentences
` any-one' sentences

1
2
3
4

success
success
success
success

with
with
with
with

Scenarios

Adult-like
response

one out of three objects
one out of three objects
two out of three objects
all of three objects

YES
NO
NO
YES

In Condition 4, Kung-Fu-Panda successfully pushed all three of the cars.
Therefore, if children assigned the universal reading to the targeted
` any-one ' sentences in these two conditions, they were expected to reject the
puppet's statements in Condition 3, but accept the puppet's statements in
Condition 4.
The number of ` Yes' and ` No ' responses was counterbalanced, with two
` Yes ' responses (in Condition 1 and Condition 4) and two `No ' responses
(in Condition 2 and Condition 3). The four test conditions and the adultlike responses are summarized in Table 1. We adopted a within-subject
design, testing all four conditions with each participant.
Materials
There were three test stories for each participant. These stories exhibited
the same overall pattern of events. In particular, each story consisted of two
competitions between two animal characters. This allows us to divide the
story into four distinct parts, each corresponding to one test condition.
To illustrate, in a typical trial, Kung-Fu-Panda and Grasshopper have
a car-pushing competition and a fence-jumping competition. In each
competition, the two animals each had a chance to try three different
objects. The puppet was invited to comment on the animal's performance
immediately after each trial.
In the first part of the story, we introduced two animal characters,
Kung-Fu-Panda and Grasshopper. Both claim they were the most powerful
person in the world. So they decided to have a car-pushing competition.
Grasshopper took his turn first, and he only pushed one small car, failing
with the other two bigger cars. Then the puppet was invited to comment
on Grasshopper's performance. The puppet produced a ` one' sentence, as
shown in (30). This represents an instance of Condition 1.
(30) Zhameng
neng
tuidong yi ge chezi
Grasshopper be-able-to push
one CL car
` Grasshopper was able to push one of the cars. '
Expected adult-like response: ` Yes. '
874

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

After the puppet produced the test sentence (30), the child was invited to
judge whether the puppet said it right or wrong. This concluded the first
part of the story.
Now it is Kung-Fu-Panda's turn. This started the second part of the
story. Kung-Fu-Panda tries the three cars, and eventually he pushes
the smallest car and the medium-sized car, but fails to push the biggest car.
The narration of the story paused at this point, and the puppet produced an
` any-one' sentence, as in (31). The child was invited to make a judgment.
The second part represents an instance of Condition 3.
(31) Gongfu Xiongmao neng
tuidong renhe yi ge chezi
Kung-Fu-Panda be-able-to push
any one CL car
` Kung-Fu-Panda was able to push any one of the cars.'
Expected adult-like response : ` No, he only pushed two cars. '
Grasshopper fails in the first competition, so he proposes to have a
fence-jumping competition. This introduced the third and fourth parts
of the story. These parts were conducted in a similar way to the first two
parts. In Part 3, Kung-Fu-Panda only jumps over a low fence, failing
with the other two higher fences. The puppet produced an ` any-one '
sentence, as in (32). This represents a scenario for Condition 2. In Part 4,
Grasshopper jumps over all the fences without any trouble. The puppet
produced an ` any-one' sentence, as in (33). This represents a scenario for
Condition 4.
(32) Gongfu xiongmao neng
tiaoguo
renhe yi ge zhalan
Kung-Fu-Panda be-able-to jump-over any one CL fence
` Kung-Fu-Panda was able to jump over any one of the fences. '
Expected adult-like response: ` No, he only jumped over one fence. '
(33) Zhameng
neng
tiaoguo
renhe yi ge zhalan
Grasshopper be-able-to jump-over any
one CL fence
` Grasshopper was able to jump over any one of the fences.'
Expected adult-like response : ` Yes. '
In addition to the four test sentences, there were two filler sentences in
each story. One was obviously true (34), and the other was obviously false
(35). They were produced before or after a test sentence. For instance, (34)
was produced in the third part of the story, followed by the test sentence
(32). (35) was produced in the first part of the story, after the test sentence
(30). The filler sentences were used to obscure the pattern of study, and to
check children's attention.
(34) Gongfu xiongmao zhi tiaoguo
le zui ai de zhalan
Kung-Fu-Panda only jump-over ASP most low DE fence
` Kung-Fu-Panda only jumped over the lowest fence. '
875

HUANG AND CRAIN

(35) Zhameng
tuidong le na ge zui da de chezi
ASP that CL most big DE car
Grasshopper push
` Grasshopper pushed the biggest car. '
To sum up, three stories were presented in the main session. Each story
contained four test sentences, plus two filler sentences. Together, each child
received eighteen sentences, including twelve test sentences and six filler
sentences. Half of the sentences were expected to receive ` Yes' responses
and the other half ` No ' responses. The eighteen sentences were presented
in a pseudo-random order. The whole experimental session took about
15-20 minutes, and was audio-recorded.
RESULTS
Fifty-one of the 55 children produced appropriate responses in the practice
trials, and hence were included for the data analysis. The other 4 children
were excluded from the actual tests either because they experienced difficulty
in understanding the task in the practice trials, or they always said `Yes' in
the practice trials. We report the findings according to the remaining
participants' performance in each test condition. The car-pushing and
fence-jumping story is used again to illustrate how the participants
responded in the experiment.
In Condition 1, Grasshopper managed to push the smallest car and the
puppet produced a ` one' sentence i.e., Zhameng neng tuidong yi ge chezi
` Grasshopper was able to push one of the cars'. In this condition, the child
participants accepted the target sentences 100% of the time (153/153 trials),
on a par with the adults' total acceptances of the target sentences (100 % of
the time, 60/60 trials).
In Condition 2, Kung-Fu-Panda jumped over the lowest fence but not
the other two fences, and the puppet produced an ` any-one' sentence, i.e.,
Gongfu xiongmao neng tiaoguo renhe yi ge zhalan `Kung-Fu-Panda was able
to jump over any one of the fences '. In this condition, children rejected the
target sentences 83 % of the time (127/153 trials). They informed the puppet
that Kung-Fu-Panda had only jumped over one fence (the lowest one). The
adult participants rejected the test sentences 100 % of the time (60/60 trials).
A Mann-Whitney test shows no significant difference between the child
group and the adult group in this condition (Z=1.994, p=.076).
In Condition 3, Kung-Fu-Panda pushed the smallest car and the
medium-sized car, but not the biggest car. The puppet produced an
` any-one ' sentence i.e., Gongfu Xiongmao neng tuidong renhe yi ge chezi
` Kung-Fu-Panda was able to push any one of the cars'. In this condition,
children rejected the ` any-one ' sentences with an appropriate justification
at 82 % of the time (125/153 trials). In justifying their rejections of the
puppet's statements, these children said that Kung-Fu-Panda only pushed
876

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE
TABLE

2. Summary of the child and adult responses

Response type
` Yes' responses in Condition 1
` No' responses in Condition 2
` No' responses in Condition 3
` Yes' responses in Condition 4

Children
100% (153/153 trials)
83% (127/153 trials)
82% (125/153 trials)
83% (127/153 trials)

Adults
100%
100%
100%
100%

(60/60
(60/60
(60/60
(60/60

trials)
trials)
trials)
trials)

two cars (i.e., the smallest car and the medium-sized car), and he failed to
push the largest car. The adult group rejected the ` any-one ' sentences in
this condition 100 % of the time (60/60 trials). A Mann-Whitney test shows
that the children are no different from the adults in their rejections of the
` any-one' sentences in this condition (Z=2.117, p=.053).
In Condition 4, Grasshopper jumped over all of the three fences, and the
puppet produced an ` any-one ' sentence, i.e., Zhamen neng tiaoguo renhe yi ge
zhalan ` Grasshopper was able to jump over any one of the fences '. In this
condition, children accepted the test sentence 83% of the time (127/153
trials). Adults accepted the test sentences 100 % of the time (60/60 trials). A
Mann-Whitney test shows no significant difference between the children's
and adults' acceptances of the target sentences in this condition (Z=1.996,
p=.053).
Based on the children's response and their corresponding justifications
in the four test conditions, we conclude that Mandarin-speaking children
assigned a universal reading to the any-one sentences, in contrast with the
existential reading they assigned to the one sentences. The child and adult
data are summarized in Table 2.
An examination of the individual child data reveals that the child
participants were consistent in their responses across the four test
conditions. In particular, 42 out of the 51 children accounted for the
majority of the acceptances/rejections of the target sentences listed in
Table 2. These children accepted the target sentences in Condition 1 and in
Condition 4, but rejected the target sentences in Condition 2 and in
Condition 3.
On the other hand, the remaining 9 children exhibited a distinct pattern
of response. These children appeared not to understand the lexical meaning
of renhe, and they seemed to ignore renhe when they encountered the
` any-one' sentences in Condition 2, Condition 3, and Condition 4. More
specifically, these 9 children accepted both the ` one ' sentences in Condition
1, and the ` any-one' sentences in Condition 2. On the other hand, these
children rejected the ` any-one' sentences in Condition 3, and informed the
puppet that Kung-Fu-Panda can push two cars, not one. In Condition 4,
these children antithetically rejected the ` any-one' sentences, on the
grounds that Grasshopper jumped over three fences, not one. Taken
877

HUANG AND CRAIN

together, the responses and justifications offered by the 9 children suggested
that they did not process renhe. Among the 9 children, only 3 were under
five years old ; the other 6 children were five years old or above.
To sum up, most of the five-year-old Mandarin-speaking children we
tested behaved like adults in their comprehension of FC renhe in the sentences containing the ability modal word neng `can'; this finding invites us
to conclude that by the time they reach five, Mandarin-speaking children
generally understand FC renhe when renhe interacts with some external
operator like the ability modal word neng ` can'.

EXPERIMENT 2 : ACQUISITION OF THE NEGATIVE
POLARITY ITEM RENHE
METHOD

Experiment 2 investigated Mandarin-speaking children's comprehension
of NPI renhe. The linguistic context we chose contains the temporal
conjunction zai_zhiqian ` before'. As discussed earlier, renhe is interpreted
as an NPI in this linguistic context. Consider (36).
(36) Xiaoma zai renhe yi ge xiao dongwu zhiqian you dao le
Horse at any one CL little animal before swim to ASP
zhongdian
finish line
` Horse swam to the finish line before any of the other animals.'
In (36), the nominal phrase renhe yi ge xiao dongwu `any-one-CL-littleanimal ' is embedded in the scope of zai_zhiqian. This sentence states that
Horse swam to the finish line before any of the other little animals.
Participants
We interviewed 37 Mandarin-speaking children. The children ranged in age
between 4 ;5 and 6 ;3, with a mean age of 5;1. They were recruited from the
kindergarten affiliated to Beijing Language and Culture University. In addition, we tested 20 Mandarin-speaking adult controls. The adults were
postgraduate students who attended BLCU.
Methodology
As in Experiment 1, a variant of the Truth Value Judgment Task was
employed in the present experiment (Crain & Thornton, 1998 ; Goro &
Akiba, 2004a, 2004b). A difference between this experiment and
Experiment 1, however, was that the test sentences in this experiment were
878

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

presented at the end of the story. The child participants were introduced to
the task and tested individually. After a brief warm-up, each child was given
one practice trial before the formal test session. On the practice trial,
the puppet produced two simple sentences. The temporal connective
zai_zhiqian was embedded in one of the sentences, as shown in (37) below.
The sentence was a false description of the story, as what really happened is
that Donald Duck arrived at the garden before Mickey.
(37) Milaoshu zai Tanglaoya
zhiqian dao
da le huayuan
Mickey at Donald Duck before arrive at ASP garden
` Mickey arrived at the garden before Donald Duck. '
The other sentence was a true description of the practice trial. These
control trials were used to verify that children could answer both `Yes' and
` No' correctly and that they had no difficulty understanding zai_zhiqian
when it appeared alone. Only the child participants who passed the practice
trial could proceed to the main session.
A test story was designed for the formal test session. This story was about
a swimming challenge among a group of animals. Crocodile and Frog were
the champions of the swimming competitions in the two previous years.
This year they would be challenged by eight animals, including Horse,
Goose, Sea Dragon, Sea Lion, Whale, Dolphin, Pig, and Penguin. Each of
the eight animals had a chance to challenge Crocodile and Frog, so this
challenge consisted of eight rounds of competitions, acted out by one
experimenter. Big Bird was the judge in this challenge.
Before the competitions started, Big Bird announced a reward system to
the challengers : if an animal came in first, beating both Crocodile and Frog,
the animal would receive a gold medal. If an animal came in second, beating
one of the former champions, either Crocodile or Frog, but not both of
them, then the animal would receive a silver medal. If, unfortunately, an
animal did not beat either Crocodile or Frog, the animal would receive a
dark cross (a symbol of failure in Chinese culture).
In the first round of competition, the challenger was Horse. He swam to
the finish line before Frog, but after Crocodile. Since Horse got second
place, Big Bird gave Horse a silver medal. The other seven competitions
were conducted in a similar way except in one aspect. Starting from the
second round of competition, the child participant was invited to help
Big Bird present a reward to the animal characters, after he was shown how
to do this in the first round of competition. This practice enhanced the
child's understanding of the reward system, and encouraged interaction
between child and experimenter. In the end, three animals (Sea Dragon,
Whale, and Penguin) got a gold medal, three animals (Horse, Sea Lion, and
Dolphin) got a silver medal, and two animals (Goose and Pig) got a dark
cross.
879

HUANG AND CRAIN

Fig. 1. The last scene of the sample story in Experiment 2.

When the competitions concluded, the eight challengers lined up in a
row, with their reward in front of them. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
The reward served as a reminder to the child of the order in which the
animals had come (gold medal for the first place, silver medal for the
second place, and dark cross for the third place). Next, the puppet, played
by another experimenter, talked to the child about what he thought about
all of the challengers' performance in the competitions. Starting from the
first competition, the puppet considered each animal in turn. He first
mentioned the color of the medal in the lead-in sentence and then
commented on the challenger's performance by using the renhe target
sentence. In particular, when reporting the performance of the three gold
medalists, the puppet used the sentence (38), where X represents Sea
Dragon, Whale, or Penguin. This constitutes the `gold-medal ' condition.
Since the animals in question got the first place, (38) is a true description of
the competitions in question.
Gold-medal condition
(38) Lead-in sentence
X na le jinpai.
Na zai zhe ci bisai
zhong,
X get ASP gold medal then in this CL competition middle
` X got a gold medal. So in this competition, '
Test sentence
X zai renhe yi ge xiao dongwu zhiqian you dao
X at any one CL little animal before swim to
le zhongdian
ASP finish line
` X swam to the finish line before any of the other little animals. '
(X=Sea Dragon/Whale/Penguin)
880

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

Moreover, when the puppet reported the performance of the three silver
medalists, he produced the sentence (39), where X represents Horse, Sea
Lion, or Dolphin. This condition is called the ` silver-medal ' condition. In
these three competitions, the animals in question got the second place, so
the test sentence in (39) is a false description of the competitions.
Silver-medal condition
(39) Lead-in sentence
X na le yinpai.
Na zai zhe ci bisai
zhong _
X get ASP silver medal then in this CL competition middle
` X got a silver medal. Then at this competition _ '
Test sentence
X zai renhe yi ge xiao dongwu zhiqian you dao le zhongdian
X at any one CL little animal before swim to ASP finish line
` X swam to the finish line before any of the other little
animals. '(X=Horse/Sea Lion/Dolphin)
To recap, three of the renhe test sentences in the gold-medal condition
described contexts in which the referent of the subject NP (e.g., Sea
Dragon) came first, and three of the renhe test sentences in the silver-medal
condition described contexts in which the referent of the subject NP (e.g.,
Horse) came second. We expected that if children understood NPI renhe in
this context, they would judge the renhe sentence to be a true description
of the story in the gold-medal condition, but a false description in the
silver-medal condition.
The test sentences were interspersed with two filler sentences, which did
not contain renhe or zai_zhiqian, as shown in (40) and (41). Both were used
by the puppet to describe the dark cross cases. (40) is a true statement and
(41) is a false statement. The filler trials were included to provide variety in
the task, and to ensure that children remained aware of the task.
Fillers
(40) Xiao'e na le heicha.
Na zai zhe ci bisai
zhong,
Goose get ASP dark-cross then in this CL competition middle
xiao'e you de zui man
Goose swim DE most slow
` Goose got a dark cross. In this competition, Goose was the
slowest one. '
(41) Xiaozhu na le heicha.
Na zai zhe ci bisai
zhong,
Pig
get ASP dark-cross then in this CL competition middle
xiaozhu you de zui kuai
Pig
swim DE most quick
` Pig got a dark cross. In this competition, Pig was the fastest one. '
881

HUANG AND CRAIN

In total, the children responded to eight items in this task (three test
sentences in the gold-medal condition, three test sentences in the silvermedal condition and two filler sentences). The test sentences and fillers
were administered in a pseudo-random order. As in Experiment 1, if the
child informed the puppet that he was wrong, then he was asked to explain
` what really happened '. The entire testing session, including the warm-up,
the practice trial, and the test trials and fillers, lasted about 15 minutes.
The adult controls received the same practice trial and test trials, but not
the warm-up. The adults were tested on the same story, using pictures. As
we did with the child participants, the adult participants were asked to give
a justification if they judged the puppet to be wrong.
RESULTS

Consider first the results from the gold-medal condition. In this condition,
the adult controls accepted the renhe sentences 100 % of the time (60/60
trials). Children also overwhelmingly accepted the renhe sentences in the
gold-medal condition (99% of the time, 110/111 trials). There was no
significant difference between the child group and the adult group in their
acceptances of the target sentences (Mann-Whitney test, Z=0.735, p=.462).
In the silver-medal condition, the adult controls rejected the renhe
sentences 100% of the time. Like adults, children rejected the renhe
sentences in this condition 92 % of the time (102/111 trials). No significant
difference was found between the child group and the adult group in their
rejections of the target sentences (Mann-Whitney test, Z=0.239, p=.811).
In justifying their rejections of the puppet's statements, both adults and
children indicated that the relevant animal character did not get the first
place, or the animal character was in second place. For example, one child
said Yinwei xiaoma de le yinpai, you bi ta kuai de `Because Horse got a silver
medal. Someone was quicker than him', when he responded to the test
sentence Xiaoma zai renhe yige xiao dongwu zhiqian you dao le zhongdian
` Horse swam to the finish line before any of the other little animals '.
To conclude, Mandarin-speaking children correctly accepted the renhe
sentences in the adult-true condition (the gold-medal condition) and
rejected the renhe sentences in the adult-false condition (the silver-medal
condition). Therefore, this experiment shows that Mandarin-speaking
children as young as five years old understood NPI renhe when it is
embedded in NPI-licensing contexts like sentences containing the temporal
conjunction zai_zhiqian.
CONCLUSION

The present study reported two experiments investigating five-year-old
Mandarin-speaking children's comprehension of FC renhe and NPI renhe.
882

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

In the FC renhe experiment (Experiment 1), FC renhe was tested in sentences
containing the ability modal word neng ` can'. We compared children's
comprehension of minimal pair sentences, i.e., sentences with FC renhe and
ones without FC renhe. Most of the children we tested were found to be
able to differentiate these two types of sentence ; they correctly assigned the
universal reading to sentences containing FC renhe, in contrast with
the existential reading they assigned to sentences containing indefinites
(without renhe). In the NPI renhe experiment (Experiment 2), renhe was
tested in sentences with the temporal conjunction zai_zhiqian `before '.
Children correctly assigned the NPI reading to renhe in this context,
accepting the renhe sentences in the adult-true condition and rejecting
the renhe sentences in the adult-false condition. The finding is then that
five-year-old Mandarin-speaking children behaved like adults in their
comprehension of NPI renhe and FC renhe.
The findings that Mandarin-speaking children as young as five years
old understand FC renhe and NPI renhe are consistent with the innateness
account of the acquisition of polarity items (O'Leary, 1994; O'Leary &
Crain, 1994). The innateness account contends that the linguistic knowledge
of polarity items is part of children's a priori knowledge of Universal
Grammar. This account maintains that children master a rich and highly
structured system of linguistic knowledge on the basis of minimal input
data (cf. Crain, 1991 ; Crain & Pietroski, 2001; Crain & Thornton, 1998).
The alternative experience-based account (e.g., Tomasello, 2000, 2003)
would seem less plausible in the case of the acquisition of the polarity
sensitive item renhe. According to the experience-based account, children's
linguistic knowledge is largely based on their experience. In the case of
renhe, however, there is little, if any, input available to Mandarin-speaking
children. Renhe is generally restricted to the formal register of Mandarin
Chinese, so it is infrequently used in spoken Mandarin. Attesting to this is a
report by Zhang (2010 : 37), who found not a single token of renhe in the
Chinese Coco Corpus (a spoken Chinese corpus) (note that Zhang does not
mention the corpus size).
We anticipated, therefore, that renhe would be infrequent in child-directed
speech. To verify this, we examined three Mandarin Chinese corpora from
the CHILDES database, including the Beijing (2) corpus and the Zhou (1)
and Zhou (2) corpora (MacWhinney, 2000), and the Beijing Early Language
Acquisition (BJCELA) corpus built by Thomas Hun-tak Lee and colleagues. All four corpora contain transcripts of conversations between adults
and individual children between ages one and six, and these four corpora
contain a total of 686,559 adult utterances.1 There was not a single adult
[1] The corpus size and the child age information of each of the four corpora are as follows.
In the Beijing (2) corpus, there are ten children aged between 1;9 and 2;2, and the total

883

HUANG AND CRAIN

utterance containing renhe in the entire corpora. Obviously children must
encounter at least some instances of renhe, or they would perform at chance
on the experiments we reported. However, the absence of renhe in these
corpora clearly establishes the fact that renhe is highly infrequent in the
input to children, thereby undermining the experience-based account of
children's performance.
In view of both the poverty of the stimulus and the early competence of
linguistic knowledge of renhe, it seems reasonable to suppose that
Mandarin-speaking children's knowledge of polarity item renhe is part of
children's innate endowment of linguistic knowledge. This invites us to ask
how children acquire the meaning of renhe, despite the paucity of input.
Here is a sketch of an answer. Innately, children know that certain words
in the speech stream will be associated with the existential quantifier,
represented by the symbol 9 in classical logic. It turns out that one such
word is renhe. The question is how the child figures this out. Let us suppose
that the child knows the meanings of several of the remaining words that
make up the sequences of words the child encounters. These words include
Mali ` Mary ', mei ` not ', chi ` eat ', and pingguo `apple ', and so on, but they
do not include the meaning of renhe. Suppose further, however, that
the child encounters a sequence of familiar words, which surround the
unfamiliar word renhe. One such experience would be the sequence : Mali
mei chi renhe pingguo. We must suppose, further, that the child can tell that,
in the present circumstance, the speaker intends to convey the message that
Mary did not eat any of the apples. So, the child knows the intended
meaning (` Mary did not eat any of the apples '), and knows that the words
surrounding renhe combine to mean that Mary did not eat __ apples. A child
in this situation can infer that the semantic contribution of renhe is roughly
equivalent to a class of expressions that have the meaning associated with 9
in classical logic, which include a single, any, one, and the like. Further
experience will be required to enable the child to narrow down the meaning
of renhe to a more specific meaning, one that is associated with the polarity
item, rather than expressions that are close in meaning.
One may ask, further, how children figure out the domain widening effect
that existential renhe contributes to sentences, over and above the bare
plural alone (i.e., Mary does not eat apples). Following Kadmon and
Landman (1993), we would suggest that statements with renhe often follow
statements with a bare plural, as a way of extending the set of entities that is
usually associated with the bare plural NP. For example, in response to a
number of adult utterances is 34,529. In the Zhou (1) corpus, there are fifty children
aged between 1;2 and 4, and the total number of adult utterances in is 8,643. In the Zhou
(2) corpus, there are 140 children aged between 3 and 6, and the total number of adult
utterances is 37, 593. In the BJCELA corpus, there are four children aged between 0;10
and 2;6, and the total number of adult utterances is 605,794.

884

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

speaker's assertion Mary does not eat apples, the hearer may inquire whether
Mary eats apples in a fruit salad. In response, the speaker may add the
existential ` any' (renhe) (i.e., Mary does not eat any apples), so as to exclude
apples of any kind, even apples in a fruit salad. Children who experience
such dialogues could be expected to glean the ` domain widening ' nature of
polarity sensitive items like renhe.
As a final note in this paper, we wish to highlight a production/
comprehension asymmetry observed in Mandarin-speaking children's
acquisition of renhe. That is, while Mandarin-speaking children
understand renhe, as our experiments have shown, they produce few
instances of renhe. The paucity of renhe in child speech is verified by a
survey of five child speech corpora, including four Mandarin Chinese corpora from CHILDES (i.e., Beijing 2, Zhou 1, Zhou 2, and Chang), and the
BJCELA corpus. There is no child utterance of renhe in these corpora.
We assume that the low frequency of renhe in spoken Chinese is
correlated to a typological feature of Mandarin Chinese. In particular,
wh-pronouns in Mandarin Chinese function as polarity sensitive items
(Cheng, 1991, 1994 ; Huang, 1982 ; Li, 1992 ; Lin, 1996, 1998). Particularly
in spoken Chinese, Mandarin speakers tend to use wh-pronouns to convey
meanings that are similar to Chinese renhe or English any. For instance,
the basic semantic properties of renhe, including domain widening
and freedom of choice, can be conveyed by sentences containing whpronouns (Lin, 1996 : 107-11). This is illustrated in (42) and (43).
Consider (42) first. Speaker A asks whether there are some children's
books. Speaker B replies with a dou-conditional containing the indefinite
wh-pronoun shenme ` what ', i.e., Women zheli shenme shu dou you `No
matter what (kind of) book you want, we have it here '. Speaker B's
response implies that a wide range of books is available, including those
(e.g., adult books) which are previously regarded as irrelevant in speaker A's
utterance. This is the domain-widening effect in the sense of Kadmon and
Landman (1993), as discussed earlier. The shenme sentence is semantically
equivalent to the corresponding renhe sentence Women zheli renhe shu
dou you.
(42) A. Nimen zheli you-mei-you xiaohaizi kan de shu?
you
here have-NEG-have children read DE book
` Do you have books for children to read here ? '
B. Women zheli shenme (= renhe) shu dou you
We
here what
any
book all have
` No matter what (kind of) book you want, we have it here. '
(43) a. Wo shenme(= renhe) dongxi dou keyi mai gei ni
I
what
any
thing all can buy to you
` No matter what you want, I can buy it for you. '
885

HUANG AND CRAIN

b. Buguo ni zhi neng xuen yi-yang
but
you only can choose one-kind
` But you can only choose one. '
Now consider example (43). Example (43a) expresses the idea that I can
buy you any one of the things you like, though not necessarily everything
you fancy. This freedom of choice reading becomes transparent when (43a)
is followed with the continuation (43b) (Lin, 1996 : 107-08). Again, a
similar meaning is conveyed by the corresponding renhe sentence.
Since Mandarin-speaking children can resort to sentences containing
wh-pronouns to express meanings similar to sentences containing renhe,
they do not need to use renhe in their speech. Indeed, in the five corpora
we used to check the production of renhe, children use wh-pronouns,
particularly, the wh-pronoun shenme ` what ', to substitute for the use of
renhe, as illustrated in (44)-(48). (44)-(47) show the NPI use of shenme, and
(48) shows the FC use of shenme.
(44) Mei you shenme
(3;06 from Beijing 2 corpus)
NEG have what
` Nothing exists. '
(45) Shenme ye mei you
(ZTX 02 ;01;12 from Fan, 2012)2
What
also NEG have
` Nothing exists here. '
(46) Wo shenme dou de bu zhao le (ZHZ 02;04 ;11 from Fan, 2012)
I
what
all get NEG ASP ASP
` I did not get anything. '
(47) Wo neng-bu-neng suibian
da
yi ge shenme dongxi a
(5;5 from Zhou 2 corpus)
thing Q
I
can-NEG-can randomly make one CL what
` Can I just randomly build up anything ? '
(48) Ni suibian
hua shenme (5 ;5 from Zhou 2 corpus)
you randomly draw what
` You can draw anything (you like). '
The data above show that Mandarin-speaking children start using
wh-pronouns as polarity sensitive items as young as two years old; a variety
of linguistic structures was employed to express both the NPI use and the
FC use of wh-pronouns. Moreover, previous studies report that, by the
time they reach age four, Mandarin-speaking children use wh-pronouns as
polarity items at a nearly adult-like level (Li & Tang, 1991).3
[2] Fan (2012) uses the BJCELA corpus.
[3] A similar production/comprehension asymmetry is attested in English-speaking children's acquisition of any. It is reported that English-speaking children do not often

886

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

Considering the abundance of indefinite wh-pronouns in the input, it is
reasonable to ask whether Mandarin-speaking children could acquire the
linguistic properties of renhe on analogy with wh-pronouns such as shenme.
In our view, this is unlikely for several reasons. First, there are linguistic
contexts that license wh-pronouns but not renhe, and vice versa (Hsiao,
2002 ; Kuo, 2003). Examples are provided in (49) and (50).
(49) Qing an renhe/* shenme jian
please press any
what
button
` Press any button. '
(50) Ta haoxiang mai le shenme/* renhe dongxi
he seem
buy ASP what
any thing
` He seems to have bought something. '
There is a second difference between renhe and wh-pronouns. These expressions sometimes receive different interpretations in the same linguistic
contexts. For instance, simple negative sentences with renhe only permit a
` none ' reading, as in (51a). By contrast, simple negative sentences with the
wh-pronoun shenme ` what ' can receive an ` insignificance ' reading, in addition to a ` none ' reading. This is shown in (51b) (Huang, 2013).
(51) a. Zhangsan mei jian renhe ren
Zhangsan NEG meet any person
` Zhangsan did not meet any person. '
(` None ' reading)
b. Zhangsan mei jian shenme ren
Zhangsan NEG meet what
person
i. ` Zhangsan hardly met any person. ' (` Insignificance' reading)
ii. ` Zhangsan did not meet any person. '
(` None ' reading)
In short, although there are some overlapping properties between renhe and
wh-pronouns, as discussed above, renhe and wh-pronouns differ in both
distribution and interpretation. Renhe and wh-pronouns belong to two
distinct types of polarity sensitive items in Mandarin Chinese (Hsiao, 2002 ;
Huang, 2013 ; Kuo, 2003), and should be acquired separately by Mandarinspeaking children.
To conclude, Mandarin-speaking children understand both FC renhe and
NPI renhe by the age of five, although they do not often produce renhe.
These findings give support to the innateness account of acquisition of
polarity items. We attribute the paucity of renhe in child speech to the
produce any, for both FC any and NPI any (Tieu, 2010a, 2010b), but they have no
problem in their comprehension of any (Musolino, 1998; Thornton, 1995). To substitute
for the uses of NPI any, younger English children tend to use negative pronouns like no
one, nobody (Song, 2003). For instance, younger children in the study of Song (2003)
preferred to use the sentence The rabbit is putting NOTHING on the table instead of the
sentence The rabbit is not putting ANYTHING on the table.

887

HUANG AND CRAIN

availability of alternative expressions (wh-pronouns) that convey the
intended polarity meanings.

REFERENCES
Baker, C. L. (1970). Double negatives. Linguistic Inquiry 1(2), 169-86.
Bolinger, D. (1960). Linguistic science and linguistic engineering. Word 16, 374-91.
Carlson, G. (1980). Polarity any is existential. Linguistic Inquiry 11(4), 799-804.
Carlson, G. (1981). Distribution of free choice any. In C. Masek, R. Hendrick & M. Miller
(eds.), Papers from the Seventeenth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society,
8-23. Chicago : University of Chicago Press.
Cheng, Lisa L.-S. (1991). On the typology of wh-questions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Cheng, Lisa L.-S. (1994). Wh-words as polarity items. Chinese Languages and Linguistics 2,
197-234.
Chierchia, G. (2006). Broaden your views : implicatures of domain widening and the
` logicality' of language. Linguistic Inquiry 37, 535-90.
Crain, S. (1991). Language acquisition in the absence of experience. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 14, 597-650.
Crain, S. (2012). The emergence of meaning. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Crain, S. & Pietroski, P. (2001). Nature, nurture and Universal Grammar. Linguistics and
Philosophy 24, 139-85.
Crain, S. & Pietroski, P. (2002). Why language acquisition is a snap. Linguistic Review 19(1/
2), 163-83.
Crain, S. & Thornton, R. (1998). Investigations in Universal Grammar : a guide to experiments
on the acquisition of syntax and semantics. Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press.
Davison, A. (1980). Any as universal or existential. In J. van der Auwera (ed.), The semantics
of determiners, 11-34. London : Croom Helm.
Fan, L. (2012). The interrogative and non-interrogative use of Mandarin wh-words in
children at early age. TCSOL Studies 45(1), 85-95.
Fauconnier, G. (1975). Pragmatic scales and logical structure. Linguistic Inquiry 6,
353-75.
Giannakidou, A. (1998). Polarity sensitivity as (non)veridical dependency. Amsterdam : John
Benjamins.
Giannakidou, A. (2001). The meaning of free choice. Linguistics and Philosophy 24, 659-735.
Goro, T. & Akiba, S. (2004a). The acquisition of disjunction and positive polarity in
Japanese. In V. Chand, A. Kelleher, A. Rodriguez & B. Schmeiser (eds), West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics 23, 251-64. Somerville, MA : Cascadilla Press.
Goro, T. & Akiba, S. (2004b). Japanese disjunction and the acquisition of positive polarity.
In Y. Otsu (ed.), Proceedings of the 5th Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics, 243-54.
Tokyo : Hituzi Syobo.
Horn, L. R. (2000). Any and (-)ever : free choice and free relatives. Proceedings of Israeli
Association for Theoretical Linguistics 15, 71-111.
Horn, L. R. (2005). Airport '86 revisited : toward a unified indefinite any. In G. N. Carlson
& F. J. Pelletier (eds.), Reference and quantification : the Partee effect. Stanford, CA : CSLI.
Hsiao, S.-Y. (2002). Negative sensitivity in Chinese : a comparative study of Mandarin
Chinese and Holo Taiwanese. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, National Tsing Hua
University.
Huang, A. J. (2013). Insignificance is significant : interpretation of the wh-pronoun shenme
` what' in Mandarin Chinese. Language and Linguistics 14(1), 1-45.
Huang, C. T. James. (1982). Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar.
Unpublished dissertation, MIT.
Jennings, R. E. (1994). The genealogy of disjunction. New York : Oxford University Press.
Kadmon, N. & Landman, R. (1993). Any. Linguistics and Philosophy 16, 353-422.

888

ACQUISITION OF THE POLARITY SENSITIVE ITEM RENHE

Klima, E. S. (1964). Negation in English. In J. Fodor & J. Katz (eds.), The structure of
language, 246-323. Englewood Cliffs, NJ : Prentice Hall.
Krifka, M. (1995). The semantics and pragmatics of polarity items. Linguistic Analysis 25,
209-57.
Kuo, C. M. (2003). The fine structure of negative polarity items in Chinese. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California.
Ladusaw, W. (1980). Polarity sensitivity as inherent scope relations. New York : Garland
Publishing.
Li, A. (1992). Indefinite wh in Mandarin Chinese. Journal East Asian Linguistics 1, 125-55.
Li, Y. M. & Tang, Z. D. (1991). Hanzu ertong wenju xitong xide tanwei [An investigation of
question sentences in Mandarin-speaking children]. Wuhan : Middle China Normal
University.
Lin, J.-W. (1996). Polarity licensing and wh-phrase quantification in Chinese. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Lin, J.-W. (1998). On existential polarity wh-phrases in Chinese. Journal of East Asian
Linguistics 7, 219-55.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : tools for analyzing talk, 3rd edn. Mahwah,
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Marcus, G. F. (1993). Negative evidence in language acquisition. Cognition 46, 53-85.
Musolino, J. (1998). Universal Grammar and the acquisition of semantic knowledge : an
experimental investigation into the acquisition of quantifier-negation interaction in
English. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland.
O'Leary, C. (1994). Children's awareness of polarity sensitivity. Unpublished MA thesis,
University of Connecticut.
O'Leary, C. & Crain, S. (1994). Negative polarity items (a positive result) positive polarity
items (a negative result). Paper presented at the 1994 Boston University Conference on
Language Development.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language development. Cambridge, MA : The
MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press.
Shimoyama, J. (2011). Japanese indeterminate negative polarity items and their scope.
Journal of Semantics 28, 413-50.
Song, M. S. (2003). The first and second language acquisition of negative polarity items in
English and Korean. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Hawai'i.
Thornton, R. (1995). Children's negative questions : a production/comprehension
asymmetry. In J. Fuller, H. Han & D. Parkinson (eds.), Proceedings of ESCOL, 306-17.
Ithaca, NY : Cornell University Press.
Tieu, L. S. (2010a). On the tri-ambiguous status of any : the view from child language. In
D. Lutz & N. Li (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Semantics and Linguistic Theory Conference,
19-37. Morrill : CLC Publications.
Tieu, L. S. (2010b). The acquisition of NPI any in English : a case study. In K. Franich,
L. Keil, K. Iserman & J. Chandlee (eds.), Online supplement to the Proceedings of the
34th Boston University Conference on Language Development.
Tomasello, M. (2000). First steps toward a usage-based theory of language acquisition.
Cognitive Linguistics 11(1/2), 61-82.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language : a usage-based theory of language acquisition.
Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press.
Tovena, L. & Jayez, J. (1999). Any : from scalarity to arbitrariness. In F. Corblin, D. Godard & J.
Marandin (eds.), Empirical issues in formal syntax and semantics, 39-57. The Hague : Thesus.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY : Cornell University Press.
Wang, Y.-F. & Hsieh, M.-L. (1996). A syntactic study of the Chinese negative polarity item
renhe. Cahiers de Linguistique-Asie Orientale 25, 35-62.
Zhang, D. (2010). Hanyu duogongneng yufa xingshi de yuyitu shijiao [Multifunctional
Chinese grammatical categories in Semantic Map Model perspective]. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.

889

