J. Child Lang. 41 (2014), 543-574. f Cambridge University Press 2013
doi:10.1017/S0305000913000068

Syntactic generalization with novel intransitive verbs*
MELISSA KLINE
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
AND

KATHERINE DEMUTH
Macquarie University, Australia
(Received 6 January 2012 - Revised 6 August 2012 - Accepted 3 January 2013 -
First published online 3 April 2013)
ABSTRACT

To understand how children develop adult argument structure, we
must understand the nature of syntactic and semantic representations
during development. The present studies compare the performance of
children aged 2 ; 6 on the two intransitive alternations in English :
patient (Daddy is cooking the food/The food is cooking) and agent (Daddy
is cooking). Children displayed abstract knowledge of both alternations,
producing appropriate syntactic generalizations with novel verbs. These
generalizations were adult-like in both FLEXIBILITY and CONSTRAINT.
Rather than limiting their generalizations to lexicalized frames, children
produced sentences with a variety of nouns and pronouns. They also
avoided semantic overgeneralizations, producing intransitive sentences
that respected the event restrictions and animacy cues. Some generated
semantically appropriate agent intransitives when discourse pressure
favored patient intransitives, indicating a stronger command of the
first alternation. This was in line with frequency distributions in
child-directed speech. These findings suggest that children have
early access to representations that permit flexible argument structure
generalization.
INTRODUCTION

What do young children understand about the syntax of sentences they
hear and speak ? While controversy remains active, evidence from multiple
methodologies is beginning to converge on the conclusion that children are
[*] Address for correspondence : Melissa Kline, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology - Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, United States. e-mail : mekline@mit.edu

543

KLINE AND DEMUTH

capable of abstract syntactic generalization by the age of three, and perhaps
much sooner (Brooks & Tomasello, 1999 ; Bunger & Lidz, 2004 ; Conwell &
Demuth, 2007 ; Demuth, Moloi & Machobane, 2010 ; Fisher, Gertner, Scott
& Yuan, 2010 ; Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva & Shimpi, 2004 ; Snedeker &
Thothathiri, 2008). The production of novel sentences has been critical in
the debate over the nature of early syntactic representations. Under a LATE
GENERALIZATION view (Tomasello, 2000, 2005), children's early syntactic
representations are based around individual lexical items rather than
abstract linguistic categories (e.g., kicker KICKS kick-ee). This changes
when children begin to notice similarities in the structure and semantics
of individual ` islands' and generalize toward something more like an
adult verb category. Under an EARLY GENERALIZATION view (cf. Fisher,
2002), children are able to represent abstract relationships such as
subject-verb-object in sentences from very early in development. This view
predicts that children should be able to extend what they know about one
verb to others which appear in the same construction.
Implicit in the debate over the development of syntactic representations
is the related question of the nature of early SEMANTIC representations.
Under a late generalization approach, semantic parallels may help the
child begin to build larger and more abstract categories of sentence
constructions. Early generalization approaches tend to assume that young
children not only have structural information available to them, but
also semantic expectations about these structures - when children
hear a novel verb in a familiar sentence, they prefer certain scenes over
others (Naigles, 1990). Under both theories, understanding exactly what
expectations children have about the meanings of verbs in different
constructions is critical for understanding how their developing grammars
operate.
Children's ability to produce novel verbs in new sentences has long been
considered a strong test for abstract representations. While a few studies
have suggested that this ability is present before the age of three, several
critical questions remain. First is the extent or abstractness of their
syntactic representations. The specific generalizations that children in these
studies make have been argued not to reflect truly abstract representations.
For instance Tomasello (2000) discounts transitive sentences that two- to
three-year-old children produced without a subject, or with pronouns in
place of full nouns, because such sentences might rely on `weak schemas '
or lexicalized frames such as He__it that facilitate comprehension and allow
for limited generalization (Abbot-Smith, Lieven & Tomasello, 2004, 2008).
Clarifying the flexibility of children's generalization thus remains an
important area of study.
Much work also remains to clarify the semantic content of children's
representations above the level of the word. Adult language is characterized
544

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

by systematic semantic regularities in the verbs that may appear in
particular sentence frames (Levin, 1993). To reach adult-like competence,
children must not only be able to generalize a newly learned verb to a new
syntactic frame, but also to constrain this generalization to semantically
appropriate verbs. While studies of children's novel verb comprehension
and ratings of novel verbs have taken advantage of syntax/semantics
associations (cf. Ambridge, Pine, Rowland & Young, 2008; Naigles, 1996),
relatively little is known about children's use of event information in their
own generalizations. Children must learn to constrain verb alternations
to appropriate event types, limiting their generalizations to appropriate
syntax-semantics links.
Finally, different syntactic structures may become available at
different points in development. The syntactic alternations examined in
novel-verb production studies have been numerous, but comparisons
between structures have been hampered by widely varying experimental
paradigms ranging from single-session studies to long-term training studies
involving six to eight visits (Abbot-Smith et al., 2004 ; Akhtar &
Tomasello, 1997 ; Brooks & Tomasello, 1999 ; Childers & Tomasello, 2001 ;
Conwell & Demuth, 2007 ; Dodson & Tomasello, 1998 ; Olguin &
Tomasello, 1993 ; Tomasello & Brooks, 1998). By conducting parallel
studies with different syntactic alternations and comparing children's
generalization to patterns in child-directed speech, we can begin to
understand how emerging syntactic structures reflect learning from
the input.

Transitive/Intransitive alternations
Young children's acquisition of intransitive sentences provides an
opportunity to explore all of these themes. English has two types of
intransitive verbs, which differ on both structural and semantic grounds.
This presents a considerable challenge : children must learn to distinguish
between two constructions with identical ` NP V ' surface structure. The
PATIENT INTRANSITIVE, or unaccusative, is exemplified by verbs like break
and drop (Perlmutter, 1978) :
(1) Kim is dropping the box
(2) The box is dropping
(3) *Kim is dropping
This alternation is also known as the causal/inchoative alternation, and
accordingly the semantics of the transitive variations indicate that the effect
or event taking place with the patient of the transitive is brought about by
the subject of the sentence.
545

KLINE AND DEMUTH

In contrast, AGENT INTRANSITIVE verbs are those which alternate with the
transitive in another way, and include verbs like eat and paint :
(4) Kim is painting the box
(5) Kim is painting
(6) *The box is painting
Many of the intransitive verbs which participate in this kind of alternation
with the transitive can be classed as omitted-object intransitives : the sentence
Kim is painting means that she is painting some unspecified object.
While the linguistic concepts of unaccusativity and unergativity have
broader syntactic implications, we focus here on the learning problem that
children face in deciding which argument of the transitive to preserve in the
intransitive. For this reason we refer to the two types of intransitives as
` agent ' and ` patient ' intransitives for the remainder of the paper. This
syntactic difference is reflected by differences in the semantic entailments of
the verbs : paint describes the action taken by Kim (the agent), whereas drop
describes the result - the motion of the box (the patient). Critically, children
must come to recognize that these apparently identical constructions are
distinct. To use intransitive verbs in an adult-like way, children must learn
the structural representations and semantic constraints that characterize
each construction.
Intransitive verb alternations thus provide an important avenue for
exploring how and when young children's abstract representations develop.
While the initial evidence for constrained, island-base representations
comes from Tomasello's (1992) diary study, making inferences about
syntactic creativity from naturalistic speech is challenging. For instance, a
study of the Manchester corpus (cf. Lieven, Behrens, Speares & Tomasello,
2003) reports much less flexible verb use than a similar diary study by
Naigles, Hoff, and Vear (2009), which found that the majority of verbs
studied were used in multiple frames within the first ten usages. The dense
focus on a smaller set of verb types or the exact definition of a syntactic
frame may account for the greater flexibility found by Naigles et al. (2009).
Perhaps more critically, diary studies can establish the range of utterances
that children produce in naturalistic settings, but cannot fully relate these
utterances to the input children may have received for those verbs. For this
reason, experimental studies with entirely novel verbs have been critical
in this area.
The semantic contrast between agent and patient intransitive alternations
has been used in multiple comprehension studies to examine children's
abstract knowledge of intransitive verbs. Bunger and Lidz (2004) found that
two-year-old children mapped a novel verb participating in the patient
intransitive alternation with the ` result' component of a causative event :
after learning that The girl's pimming the ball/The ball's pimming referred to
546

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

a girl bouncing a ball with her hand, they looked longer at a ball bouncing
on its own than to a girl patting an immobile ball. In contrast, when children
of the same age heard a novel verb in the agent intransitive alternation
(The boy is pimming the ball/The boy is pimming), they associated the novel
verb with the agent's action rather than the outcome of the event (Bunger &
Lidz, 2008). More recent studies have found that children can make
inferences about transitive and intransitive verb meaning even when
sentences are presented in isolation and must be mapped to a subsequent
novel event (Arunachalam & Waxman, 2010 ; Scott & Fisher, 2009 ; Yuan &
Fisher, 2009). Together these results suggest that children are able to use
the semantic content predicted by abstract verb frames to distinguish
between possible verb meanings.
Evidence from comprehension methodologies suggests that young children
use abstract syntactic knowledge in a variety of tasks. Because these studies
rely on children using semantic regularities to guide their processing of
the relevant syntactic structures, they also provide an important source of
evidence that children are aware of these mappings. However, less is known
about whether such representations are sufficient for guiding adult-like
syntactic production.
Abbot-Smith et al. (2004) have made the important point that abstract
representations need not be all-or-none : children may possess `weak
schemas ' that support limited generalization but are not fully adult-like. In
addition, these syntactic representations may not be sensitive to the same
semantic restrictions as adults.
Several production studies have examined transitive/patient intransitive
alternations (Abbot-Smith et al., 2004; Childers & Tomasello, 2001 ;
Tomasello & Brooks, 1998). Tomasello and Brooks (1998) presented two
groups of children (ages 2; 0 and 2; 6) with one verb in a patient intransitive
frame (The car's pilking) and one in a transitive frame (Elmo's meeking the
car.) Only a few of the children aged 2 ; 0 made generalizations to new
frames, while over half of those aged 2 ; 6 made generalizations of some kind.
Tomasello and Brooks argue that the difference in generalization between
the older and younger children provides evidence for gradually developing
abstract verb schemas. However, although only a few of the children aged
2; 0 in Tomasello and Brooks (1998) produced generalizations, they also
produced fewer utterances overall. In fact, the PROPORTION of creative
utterance tokens to modeled utterances was similar in both age groups
x12 % for the younger children and 10 % for the older group. If the younger
children had been given more time to use these verbs in the experimental
context, it is reasonable to expect that more of them would have used verbs
in a novel frame.
Other studies have suggested that the majority of children aged 2 ;6 can
generalize across the transitive/patient intransitive alternation after training
547

KLINE AND DEMUTH

with known verbs (Abbot-Smith et al., 2004 ; Childers & Tomasello, 2001).
In particular, Childers and Tomasello (2001) point out that children may
begin with representations of pronoun-based sentence frames like He___it
in addition to ` verb islands ' like ___ kick ___ (Lieven, Pine & Rowland,
1998). These pronoun frames might then facilitate abstract representations
by highlighting similarities between verbs in the input. Childers and
Tomasello (2001) gave children aged 2; 6 three sessions of exposure to a
series of sixteen novel transitive verbs paired with novel events, using either
only noun models or a mix of nouns and pronouns. Children who were
trained using both noun and pronoun models significantly outperformed
children who heard only noun models on a generalization task.
In contrast to the transitive/patient intransitive alternation, there has
been relatively little research on children's generalizations with agent
intransitive verbs. While no novel-verb production studies have explicitly
addressed the transitive/agent intransitive alternation, some evidence
can be drawn from studies of argument omission and addition (Akhtar &
Tomasello, 1997 ; Olguin & Tomasello, 1993). The children in these studies
(aged 2; 0 and 3; 0-3 ; 6) were taught novel verbs in sentences that omitted
the subject or object (resulting in subjectless sentences like Kradding Cookie
Monster ! and agent intransitive sentences like Mickey's pilking !). Each child
was exposed to a series of novel verbs over several weeks of training, and the
experimenters observed whether children ever added arguments to the
input they heard for each verb, either spontaneously or in response to
neutral questions like What happened ?
Two-year-olds did not tend to add omitted arguments to the novel verbs
(Olguin & Tomasello, 1993), but the three-year-olds' results were somewhat
more complex (Akhtar & Tomasello, 1997). In particular, three-year-olds
sometimes produced intransitives with the patient of the action as the
subject. The caused-motion scenes used in this study may be described with
either type of intransitive (e.g., The box is dropping vs. Kim is pushing). In
order to understand what children know about the two intransitive alternations separately, it will be necessary to explore children's generalization
behavior across different event/intransitive pairings. The present studies
thus aim to examine children's awareness of these two types of intransitives.
Motivation for the present studies
The present studies were designed to discover whether children below
the age of three can not only represent but also USE abstract syntactic
representations to produce adult-like generalizations, providing the first direct
comparison between the two intransitive alternations. Comprehension studies
have suggested that children below the age of three may distinguish between agent and patient intransitive structures (Bunger & Lidz, 2004, 2008 ;
548

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

Naigles, 1996). The present studies test whether these children can also
access these syntactically and semantically distinct representations in
production. We also explore the TYPES of generalizations children make,
with particular attention to the flexibility of their generalizations, and to
whether these sentences respect adult-like semantic constraints.
Study 1 explores the input frequency of the syntactic constructions under
examination. The relative frequency of different syntactic structures in the
input has been shown to influence the timing of acquisition - for instance,
relatively late acquisition of the passive by English-speaking children
initially may be influenced in part by its infrequent use in child-directed
speech (Demuth, 1989 ; Gordon & Chafetz, 1990; Kline & Demuth, 2010).
This corpus analysis thus provides a baseline for interpreting the studies
that follow.
Two production studies were conducted to examine the extent and
flexibility of children's productivity with novel intransitive verbs. Study 2
involved the PATIENT INTRANSITIVE alternation (Joey's pilking the sock/The
sock's pilking), and Study 3 examined children's production of verbs that
participate in the AGENT INTRANSITIVE alternation (Joey's gorping the sock/
Joey's gorping). In both studies, the event types chosen for the novel verbs
create constraints on the allowable syntactic structure. Study 2 features
verbs of caused sound-emission, which describe events that may allow either
agent or patient intransitive alternations. In contrast, Study 3 used verbs of
contact which could only support agent intransitives. This allowed us to
examine whether children respect semantic constraints in the sentences they
produce with novel intransitive verbs. If children do not represent the
two constructions as syntactically separate, their behavior was expected to
be similar in both studies ; if they are aware of the distinct constraints on the
two separate syntactic alternations, then their generalization patterns were
expected to follow adult constraints.
In addition to examining these semantic constraints, we also analyze the
specific generalizations that children make in Studies 2 and 3. Lieven et al.
(1998) propose that young children have access to verb-general pronoun
schemas such as He___it in addition to verb-specific frames. Childers and
Tomasello (2001) show that training with pronoun exemplars improves
novel-verb comprehension and generalization performance. One natural
prediction from the pronoun-frame hypothesis is that children might
initially succeed with generalizing novel verbs into an existing pronoun
schema, before acquiring the ability to represent a fully abstract transitive
construction. If children do rely on pronoun schemas for early generalization,
we would expect to see an over-representative number of pronouns in their
grammatical generalizations. Analyses of noun and pronoun usage by the
experimenter and participants were therefore conducted in order to evaluate
the flexibility of children's generalizations.
549

KLINE AND DEMUTH

STUDY 1 - INTRANSITIVE VERBS IN
CHILD-DIRECTED SPEECH
Before examining how young children use transitive and intransitive verbs,
it is important to establish how these constructions are used in adult speech.
Adult speech both provides the input that children use in language learning,
and constitutes the endpoint of acquisition that children must reach.
In addition to analyzing the overall frequency of these constructions, the
present study also explores what evidence young children have for how
verbs alternate between transitive and intransitive frames. It is possible
that verbs that MAY appear in multiple syntactic contexts are in fact attested
in only one in child-directed speech. Conwell and Morgan (2007) found
that words like play and drop, which can be used as either nouns or verbs,
tend to be restricted to a single category in speech to children. Any
difference between the two alternations was expected to influence how
well children would perform in the novel-verb production experiments
(Studies 2 and 3).

METHODS

Database
Maternal speech was analyzed from the six children in the Providence
Corpus (Demuth, Culbertson & Alter, 2006 ; see CHILDES database :
http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/). The data included bimonthly audiovisual
recordings of spontaneous speech between mothers in southern New
England and their one- to three-year-old children. These recordings
represent naturalistic conversations in a variety of interactions (mealtimes,
playtime, etc.) between mother and child, which were recorded in the
families' homes for about one hour every two weeks for the duration of the
study. For each child, all maternal utterances were examined from two 2- to
3-hour samples when the children were aged 2;0 and 2;6 (26 hours total).
This provided a measure of the input children hear both at and before the
age tested in Studies 2 and 3.

Coding
We first identified the verbs used in sentences in which a full transitive
or intransitive frame was overtly available. A modified version of the
criteria used by Scott and Fisher (2006) was used to identify verbs that
had potential transitive and intransitive frames. To do this, the data
were part-of-speech tagged using the MOR and POST utilities of the
CLAN software (MacWhinney, 2000). Then, all maternal utterances
were matched against a general NP-V-(NP) template, allowing for
550

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

intervening adjectives, adverbs, and function words such as tense markers
and auxiliary verbs.
All utterances were then checked by hand to catch mis-tagged
sentences and remove instances that were not simple declarative transitive
or intransitive frames. Questions were not included in this analysis since
they involve movement of arguments or auxiliaries. Verbs had to occur
in the context of an independent clause : I help Daddy cook was not
counted as an intransitive instance of cook. No restrictions were placed on
the length or type of the NP in either subject or object position : The food
you brought is cooking and I'm cooking the food you brought counted as
intransitive and transitive instances of cook. Verbs that had any arguments
besides agent and patient noun phrases were not included (e.g., all
ditransitive frames as well as other arguments in sentences like You're
making me crazy).
All remaining verb tokens were then marked as transitive, agent
intransitive, or patient intransitive. The classification of verbs as agent or
patient intransitive was made on a token-by-token basis, since some verbs
appeared in both constructions (e.g., Daddy's cooking/The food's cooking).
These decisions were based on discourse context.

RESULTS

From 7,744 maternal utterances in these transcripts, a total of 2,557 verbs
(1,270 at 2; 0 and 1,287 at 2 ; 6) belonged to one of the three frame types. No
distributional differences were found in the speech to children at the two
age groups, so all further analysis is reported together. Calculating by verb
token, transitive verbs were significantly more common than either type of
intransitive (patient intransitive : X2 (1, N=2,135)=1,323.45, p<.001,
Q=.79; agent intransitive : X2 (1, N=2,330)=947.72, p<.001, Q=.64). The
same pattern was found calculating by verb type : transitives were more frequent than either intransitive (patient intransitive : X2 (1, N=285)=80.00,
p<.001, Q=.53 ; agent intransitive : X2 (1, N=328)=35.56, p<.001,
Q=.33). Agent intransitives were also significantly more frequent than
patient intransitives, calculating both by token (X2 (1, N=649)=58.59,
p<.001, Q=.30) and type (X2 (1, N=177)=10.45, p<.005, Q=.24). These
results are summarized in Figure 1.
In terms of raw frequencies, it appears that child-directed speech
provides more evidence for the agent intransitive construction. However, it
is also important to consider how verbs in each intransitive construction
alternate with the transitive. Hearing such alternations may help children to
learn the structural relationships between these grammatical constructions.
For this measure, frequencies were normalized by the total number of agent
or patient intransitive verbs (rather than total transitive verbs), to avoid
551

KLINE AND DEMUTH

2500

Verb Tokens

2000

1908

1500

1000
422

500

227

0
Transitive

Patient Intransitive
Frame Type

Agent Intransitive

250
218

Verb Types

200
150

110
100
67

50
0
Transitive

Patient Intransitive
Frame Type

Agent Intransitive

Fig. 1. Frequency of transitive, patient intransitive, and agent intransitive verbs in speech
directed to two-year-olds, by token (top) and type (bottom).

confounds from the difference in the two intransitive base rates. Thus,
this analysis examined whether a child who heard the sentence You're
painting heard all instances of the verb paint in similar agent intransitive
sentences, or if they also heard this verb in transitive sentences like
I'm painting the paper. The parallel analysis was conducted for patient
intransitive verbs.
This measure could only sensibly be calculated on a within-subjects
level - cumulative verb counts could not be used, as each child might
have heard particular verbs in different sets of frames. In other words,
pooling the input from all parents for this measure would have made it
552

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

Productive Verb Types (%)

50%

*

*
40%

30%
20%
10%
0%
Alex

Ethan

Lily

Naima

Violet

William

Child
Patient intransitive

Agent intransitive

Fig. 2. Percent of patient intransitive and agent intransitive verb types in speech directed to
two-year-olds that ALSO occurred in a transitive frame.

impossible to distinguish the situation where Parent A used a verb
only transitively and Parent B used it only intransitively from the
situation where both Parent A and Parent B used the verb in both
frames. The AVERAGE number of verb types in each category that alternated
with the transitive was therefore used to compare the productivity of
agent versus patient intransitives across children. Averaging across input
to all children, 34 % of agent intransitives were also used in transitive
frames. In contrast, only 12% of patient intransitives also appeared as
transitives. Thus, in addition to being more frequent, agent intransitive
verbs were more likely to be used in transitive/intransitive alternations
than patient intransitives were. This difference was not significant for
the group average (Fisher's exact test, N=48.8, p=.17, Q=.25). However,
input to all six children showed the same trend, with two input
samples reaching significance (Fisher's exact test, Naima: N=45, p<.05,
Q=.35; William : N=40, p<.05, Q=.42). These results are summarized
in Figure 2.

DISCUSSION

This corpus study reveals several patterns in children's exposure to transitive,
agent intransitive, and patient intransitive frames. Transitive frames were
significantly more frequent than either type of intransitive. Agent intransitive
frames (e.g., Kim is painting) were also significantly more common than
patient intransitive frames (The box is dropping). Furthermore, the majority
553

KLINE AND DEMUTH

of verbs found in the patient intransitive occurred ONLY in that frame, while
the verbs used in the agent intransitive were often used in transitive frames
as well.
These results suggest that the input that children hear may more strongly
facilitate acquisition of agent intransitive alternations. In addition to raw
frequency differences, hearing the same verb used in multiple frames could
also help children notice the structural relationship between alternating
forms.
Of course, many other factors may influence the course of acquisition.
However, these corpus results establish that there is at least one factor,
input frequency, which puts children on an uneven footing with respect to
the two intransitive alternations. It is possible that this imbalance might
lead children to generalize at an earlier age with agent intransitives, or
might increase their likelihood of spontaneously making agent-intransitive
alternations when verb semantics make it available.
The following two studies looked at the types of generalizations children
aged 2; 6 make with novel intransitive verbs. In particular, we explore
whether their syntactic generalizations are FLEXIBLE with respect to referents
and noun/pronoun usage, and whether they are distinct and CONSTRAINED
with respect to adult-like semantic mappings.
STUDY 2 - CHILDREN'S TRANSITIVE/PATIENT
INTRANSITIVE ALTERNATIONS
The goal of Study 2 was to evaluate whether and to what extent children
aged 2; 6 make productive generalizations across the transitive/patient
intransitive alternation (Kim is dropping the box/The box is dropping). This
study also provided a base for comparison with the less-studied transitive/
agent intransitive alternation (Study 3).
The present study moves beyond the caused-motion events most
commonly used in previous work. For this study, the stimuli were novel
verbs of sound emission caused by an agent. Examples of English verbs of
this type are like honk or rustle. This is a semantic class commonly described
using patient intransitives like The paper rustled (Abbot-Smith et al., 2004 ;
Levin, 1993). However, it is important to bear in mind that the emission of
sound is not the only interpretation of a verb used to describe this type of
event. Because the events in this study were always caused by an agent
performing a stereotyped action, a listener who heard a new transitive verb
(Joey's tamming the boot) might reasonably infer that the verb tam referred
to the agent's action (e.g., Kim squeezed (the tube) until toothpaste came out).
In addition, the class of sound emission verbs has been subject to
multiple syntactic and semantic analyses; for instance, they have been
classified both as semantically unaccusative and as unergative (Levin &
554

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

Rappaport Hovav, 2005 ; Perlmutter, 1978). Their syntactic behavior is also
not uniform in English or in other languages such as Northern East Cree
(Johansson & Brittain, 2012) : some verbs lack transitive usages (e.g., glow,
squeak), while others can participate in the agent intransitive alternation, as
in Kim honked (her horn) at the jaywalker. Folli and Harley (2008) suggest
that the class of emission verbs may be characterized by semantic agents
which are inanimate but possess internal characteristics allowing the sound
to be produced. The semantic markedness of inanimate but causally capable
participants might relate to the varying patterns of syntactic realization for
this class. However, although the class of sound emission verbs exhibits
syntactic diversity, the presence of additional patient intransitive verbs and
the discourse context used in Study 2 (e.g., using focus questions such as
What happened with the sock?) encouraged generalization to patient, rather
than agent, intransitives. The events used in this study also provided a basis
for comparing children's generalization ability with this variable class of
verbs to a class of actions that is felicitous ONLY with transitive/agent
intransitive alternations (Study 3).
We expected that many children would use the novel verb in unmodeled
frames, using English constructions that are appropriate to the discourse
and scenes they saw. If children have adult-like abstract knowledge about
this alternation, they should be able to use a novel verb in either patient
intransitive or transitive frames (when given felicitous event, linguistic, and
discourse contexts). While each verb was presented in only one syntactic
frame, all children heard one verb in the transitive alternation and one in
the patient intransitive alternation. The presence of both sentence types in
the same experimental setting has been shown to increase rates of syntactic
generalization (Brooks & Tomasello, 1999).
However, if children lack this knowledge, they might only use the novel
verbs in the form they hear modeled, or might make generalizations limited
to existing pronoun schemas. Childers and Tomasello (2001) observed in a
novel verb training study that children produced proportionally MORE
pronouns than the experimenters during test sessions. One reason for this
might be that the experimenter showed multiple enactments and descriptions
of events with the same participants before asking the child to produce the
novel verb, a context that makes pronouns very felicitous. The present
study's test phase was much briefer and included frequent participant
switches in demonstrations. If children's early syntactic generalizations
draw on their familiarity with frequent frames like (He___it), they might
still produce more pronouns when using novel verbs in new syntactic
frames. However, if the distribution of pronouns and nouns depends on the
discourse context, we might expect children in this study to use similar
proportions of pronouns as the adult experimenter's models.
555

KLINE AND DEMUTH
METHODS

Participants
Sixteen children (2 ; 5-2 ; 7, mean age 2; 5.27, 9 girls) were recruited
from Rhode Island birth records, advertisements, and a local preschool.
Twenty additional children were excluded from the analysis for failure to
cooperate or produce the target words in any sentence frame (14), vocabulary
sizes below the 5th percentile on the short form of the MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory - IIA (MMCDI; Fenson, Pethick,
Renda, Cox, Dale & Reznick, 2000) (3), experimenter error (2), and
parental interference (1). The average raw MCDI score for the children
included in the analysis was 82 (average percentile 47 %), while the score for
the children excluded (apart from those dropped for low MCDI scores) was
80, average percentile 49 %. There was no significant difference in the
MCDI percentile scores between the two groups, excluding children who
were dropped for low CDI (t(30)=0.20, p=.58, 1-tailed; Cohen's d=.07).
Gender was not significantly related to whether children met the inclusion
criteria (Fisher's exact test, N=36, p=.50, Q=.16), and there was no
difference in age between the two groups (907.6 vs. 912.8 mean days old,
t(30)=1.06, p=.85, 1-tailed, Cohen's d=.39). All children who participated
received a picture book or a T-shirt at the end of the session.
Stimuli
Stimuli and verb presentation were designed both to encourage
generalization to new syntactic frames, and to ensure that the utterances
produced were fully interpretable. The two novel actions in this study were
both sound-emission verbs. A toy plastic castanet was sewn inside a brightly
colored sock; pilking referred to the event of tapping the sock with a hand to
produce the noise. Tamming was used to refer to an infant-sized rain boot
emitting a squeaking noise when stepped on by an agent. A hand puppet
(Joey, a boy in a striped shirt and jeans) was also used to provide an
additional agent for the novel actions. All test sessions were recorded using
a tripod-mounted video camera and a floor microphone. Sessions were
transcribed and tagged with movie clips using the CLAN software package
(MacWhinney, 2000).
Procedure
After completing the MacArthur MCDI, the parent and child were invited
into the test room. Parents were asked to keep their own speech to a minimum
and avoid use of the novel verbs. The session began with approximately
five minutes of book reading with the experimenter ; the child was invited
to name animals in a lift-the-flap book and describe the scenes.
556

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

The experimenter then introduced the puppet (Joey) and invited the child
to interact with it. Finally, the experimenter brought out the sock and the
boot, revealing that ` these ones are special ', demonstrating both sound
emission actions without using the novel verbs and giving the child the
opportunity to do the same.
Next, the child participated in a training sequence for each verb.
Every child heard one verb in the transitive and one in the patient
intransitive, with syntax/event pairing and order of presentation counterbalanced across children. The training sequence for each novel verb began
with the experimenter bringing out the toy corresponding to the verb,
demonstrating and labeling the action (e.g., Look, this is called pilking),
and then describing the action using the novel verb in the appropriate
sentence frame (e.g., Joey's pilking the sock). The agent of the action was
varied according to the child's interests (e.g., the child him/herself, their
parent, the experimenter, or the puppet Joey). The experimenter continued
to model the verb in the appropriate frame, eliciting production (e.g., Tell
me what's happening) and repetition (Say, I'm pilking the sock) from the
child. Noun and pronoun referents were alternated freely in a naturalistic
fashion, such that children heard both noun and pronoun models for
all events (e.g., Look, Joey's pilking the sock. He's pilking it ! Do you want
another turn now ? <Child>, you're pilking it !) This continued until
children had heard at least twelve sentence models of the novel verb, or up
to twenty-four for children who were reluctant to produce the verbs (mean
14.2 models). The training sequence was then repeated with the second
verb and toy.
At test, the first toy was brought out again. The experimenter invited
the child to demonstrate the relevant action, and elicited bare repetitions
of the verb to make sure that the child remembered the name of the action.
The child then saw the event using three different actors again chosen
according to the child's interest (e.g., the child, Joey, the experimenter).
For each, they were asked neutral questions (e.g., Tell me what's happening)
and then ` switch' questions (e.g., What's happening with the sock?) to
encourage a change of focus on the event and a generalization to a new
syntactic frame. Children heard both types of prompt for each actor ;
prompts were repeated when the child replied with an off-topic response
or did not use the novel verb (means : 3.3 neutral questions ; 3.5 switch
questions).
After the first action had been tested with the three actors, the testing
procedure was repeated with the second verb, using the appropriate switch
question. The switch questions and target generalizations for the two verbs
presented in this experiment are summarized in Table 1. Finally, the child
was allowed to engage in free play with both toys, with the experimenter
giving only bare models of the two novel verbs (e.g., Wow, pilking !) The
557

KLINE AND DEMUTH
TABLE

1. ` Switch ' questions used to encourage generalization of novel verbs
across the transitive/patient intransitive alternation (Study 2)

Adult model
Joey's pilking the sock.
(Transitive)
The sock's pilking.
(Patient intransitive)

Switch question

Target generalization

What's happening
with the sock?
What's Joey doing
with the sock?

The sock's pilking.
(Patient intransitive)
Joey's pilking the sock.
(Transitive)

entire procedure (warm-up, training, test, and free play) took approximately
20 minutes to complete.
Coding
All child utterances containing novel verbs were coded as transitive
(agent-verb-patient or verb-patient), patient intransitive (patient-verb),
agent intransitive (agent-verb), or other (bare utterances as well as a few
novel noun and adjective uses like I want the pilk sock and Where's the
pilk ?). Only transitive and intransitive utterances (of either type) were
analyzed. Four of the sixteen children's data were re-transcribed by a second
coder who was blind to the experimental hypothesis. Accuracy was compared
over all multiword utterances judged by either coder to contain a novel
verb. Reliability at the level of argument structure was at 93 % (n=25 out of
27) ; disagreements were resolved by discussion.
In addition, all experimenter and child utterances containing a novel verb
were transcribed to allow for an analysis of possible pronoun schemas in
children's speech. All of these utterances were coded to reflect whether they
had a noun or pronoun in subject and object position, and the nature of the
referent in subject position (first, second, third (person), third (object),
subject omitted).
RESULTS

The majority of children produced each verb at least once in the original
(modeled) frame. Twelve of the 16 produced a modeled transitive verb and
13 produced a modeled patient intransitive verb. In addition, 9 out of
16 children made generalizations, producing at least one verb in a syntactic
structure that the experimenter had NOT modeled. The results for each verb
frame are summarized in Figure 3 (each column shows the stacked histogram
of responses for all children). There were a total of 22 generalizations
produced by children in this experiment. All but one of these generalizations
included the subject, and 12 of the 22 contained at least one lexical noun
phrase. A list of all generalizations made in Study 2 is given in the
` Appendix '.
558

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

16
Number of Children

14
12
10

13
12

8

9

6

7

4

5

2
0
Produced modeled
from

Produced
generalization

Transitive Model

Produced modeled
from

Produced
generalization

Produced any
generalization

Patient Intransitive Model

Fig. 3. Number of children producing utterances following the adult model (transitive or
patient intransitive), compared to the number producing generalizations. The rightmost bar
shows the number of children who made at least one generalization.

Because the verbs used in this study were potentially felicitous in agent
intransitive constructions, it was predicted that children might make
generalizations to both types of intransitive. Six of the nine children who
made syntactic generalizations spontaneously produced AGENT intransitives
such as Joey's pilking, which had not been modeled with either verb. In
comparison, four of the nine generalizing children produced the expected
patient intransitives.
The average raw MCDI scores for the children in this study ranged
between 45 and 100, with an average of 82. There was no significant
difference between MCDI scores of children who made generalizations and
children who did not (42nd vs. 52nd percentile, t(14)=0.696, p=.75,
1-tailed, Cohen's d=.37), nor was there a significant difference between
numbers of male and female generalizers (Fisher's exact test, N=16,
p=.61, Q=.17).
Utterance analysis
Considerable debate has centered on the question of `weak schemas ', a type
of abstract syntactic representation that can support syntactic processing
only during tasks with low demands on the child (Abbot-Smith et al.,
2008). In particular, generalization to existing frequent pronoun frames like
He___it might support generalization before the child is able to make other
types of syntactic alternations with novel verbs. As mentioned above, over
half of children's utterances in the present study used at least one noun.
However, both this result and previous characterizations of children's
559

KLINE AND DEMUTH

speech are difficult to interpret without comparison to the experimenter's
models.
We therefore first examined the tendency of children to produce
sentences with themselves as the referent. Such sentences are guaranteed to
include at least one pronoun (no children referred to themselves in the third
person), and it is important to separate this factor from a tendency to avoid
possible noun referents in general. To establish this baseline, we ask
whether children use an elevated number of first-person referents with
transitive novel verbs relative to the adult experimenter. We restrict the
analysis to transitive utterances since first person referents are not used
with patient intransitives ; subject-drop sentences were excluded since the
referent could not always be conclusively determined. Children produced
a significantly higher proportion of first-person sentences than the
experimenter : 54 % of the children's utterances (21/39) had a first person
referent, compared to 27 % (64/238) for the experimenter (X2(1, N=277)=
10.21, p<.002, Q=.19). However, this finding may simply reflect the facts
of the experiment : during the four training `turns' children were always
allowed to take a second turn performing the action, which they usually
desired to do. In addition, children asked to perform actions themselves
much more frequently than they dictated that another person take a turn.
Thus, the children were describing more events (or potential events) in
which a first person pronoun was the appropriate subject.
To explore whether children's generalizations are biased toward pronouns
(possibly indicating limited generalization), we then examined the distribution of pronouns and nouns in third-person sentences. For this analysis,
we compared the percentage of novel-verb sentences containing at least one
noun in experimenter, child conservative, and child generalization sentences
(see Table 2). There was no significant difference in the number of
sentences with lexical nouns between children's conservative vs. generalized
sentences (Fisher's exact test, N=52, p=.29, Q=.20); the difference
between children's generalizations and adult novel verb sentences was also
non-significant (Fisher's exact test, N=308, p=.75, Q=.04). Furthermore,
these non-significant differences actually trend in the OPPOSITE direction,
with a high proportion of children's generalizations including full nouns.
This analysis suggests that children are not limited to pronoun schemas in
this task.
Comparison with previous studies
The design of the present study was most similar to that of Tomasello and
Brooks (1998), which tested the transitive/patient intransitive alternation
with caused motion scenes. Although fewer children in the present study
produced an unmodeled sentence with either of the novel verbs, they were
560

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS
TABLE

2. Third-person, novel-verb sentences containing at least one full noun
(Study 2)
Experimenter
utterances

Sentences with nouns
Sentences without nouns
(pronoun only)
% Sentences with nouns

176
122

Child,
conservative
19
23

59%

45%

Child,
generalization
7
3
70%

also given fewer linguistic models and a shorter window of time in which
to generalize. They were also given many fewer direct discourse prompts
to shift to a new syntactic frame - six questions per verb in the present
study as compared to twenty-five to thirty in the paradigm used by
Tomasello and Brooks. Overall, Tomasello and Brooks recorded a total
of 512 novel verb tokens from children aged 2; 6, while the present study
recorded 89.
However, despite the shorter training, the percent of children's novel
verb uses that were generalizations was similar to that found in Tomasello
and Brooks' study. For the verb modeled in a transitive frame, 10% of the
utterances in Tomasello and Brooks (1998) were generalizations to an
unmodeled frame, compared to 16 % in the present study. For the verb
modeled in the patient intransitive frame, significantly more novel
generalizations were produced in the present study : 9% of children's
utterances in Tomasello and Brooks (1998) were in an unmodeled frame,
compared with 31% in the data presented here. These ratios suggest that
children's tendency to generalize novel verbs may be comparable across
differences in semantic category, exposure, and opportunities to produce
generalizations.
DISCUSSION

The results of this study confirmed our predictions : the majority
of children aged 2 ; 6 generalized to an unmodeled syntactic frame. This
finding constitutes evidence in favor of children's early access to abstract
syntax, and is in line with patterns found by Tomasello and Brooks (1998).
In addition, these results call into question concerns about the flexibility
of children's generalizations. Tomasello (2000) discounted the majority
of creative transitive utterances from Tomasello and Brooks (1998)
because the sentences did not include a subject (e.g., Pilking Big Bird).
In the present study, only one child produced a single novel transitive
utterance without a subject. This difference may be due to the different
discourse pressures in the two studies : children in Tomasello and
561

KLINE AND DEMUTH

Brooks (1998) heard many more questions which even in adult speech are
felicitously answered with a truncated form (e.g., What is Joey doing with
the boot ? Tamming it.)
In addition, a close analysis of children's productions addresses concerns
about children's use of pronouns in novel verb generalization. While children
were more likely than adults to produce sentences with first-person
referents, over half of children's generalizations used at least one full noun.
Within third-person productions (where nouns are possible in both subject
and object position), there was no difference in noun frequency between the
experimenter's utterances and children's generalizations. These findings
suggest that by 2; 6 children's representations are robust enough to allow for
flexible and adult-like generalization.
The results of this study also provide evidence that children may be
aware of some of the abstract syntax/semantics regularities that exist in
English. First, children's ability to generalize across the transitive/patient
intransitive alternation is not limited to caused-motion verbs, but extends to
verbs of emission as well. While Abbot-Smith et al. (2004) established that
children aged 2; 6 could generalize with verbs of emission after extensive
training with known verbs, the present results show that children can do this
after only brief exposure to novel verbs. Furthermore, the fact that children
made generalizations to both patient intransitive and agent intransitive
frames suggests that they are already aware of the types of constructions
that can be used with such scenes.
In Study 1, the corpus study of child-directed speech revealed that
children around the age of 2; 0-2 ; 6 hear fewer patient intransitives than
agent intransitives. The results of Study 2 are in line with this, suggesting
that children aged 2; 6 may have an easier time generalizing to agent
intransitive frames. Although they heard no such constructions with either
novel verb in this experiment, six children used one of the novel verbs in
an agent intransitive frame. Despite discourse conditions favoring patient
intransitives, children's agent intransitive representations were robust
enough that several produced (semantically appropriate) sentences of that
type instead.
However, these results alone are also consistent with the analysis that
children do not distinguish clearly between patient and agent intransitives,
or do not respect semantic restrictions on each alternation. Study 3 tests
children's knowledge of abstract structure with an event class that permits
only agent intransitives. If young children treat these two alternations
separately and use verb semantics to constrain syntactic generalizations,
their use of novel verbs should be limited to agent intransitive alternations
alone. On the other hand, if children do not represent the two types of
intransitives as separate structures with differing semantic restrictions, their
generalizations should be very similar to those in Study 2.
562

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

STUDY 3 - CHILDREN'S TRANSITIVE/AGENT
INTRANSITIVE ALTERNATIONS
The goal of Study 3 was to investigate how children's generalizations with
agent intransitive/transitive alternations (Kim is painting/Kim is painting the
box) compared with the patient intransitive alternations examined in
Study 2. While this alternation is critical for understanding how children
come to successfully represent transitive and intransitive verbs in an
adult-like way, it has not been tested in novel-verb production studies. As
in Study 2, if children at age 2 ; 6 have abstract knowledge about the relevant
syntactic structures, they should be able to generalize novel verbs from
one frame to another. Study 1 found that the agent intransitive alternation
is more frequent than the patient intransitive alternation in the input.
Since children aged 2; 6 showed strong evidence of generalization with the
less frequent patient intransitive alternation in Study 2, we predicted that
they would do the same in Study 3 with agent intransitives.
In addition, Study 3 allows an analysis of how children use the semantics
of a verb to constrain its generalization. The stimuli in the present
experiment involved novel ` contact' events on a single salient object, which
would allow for either an activity verb analysis (describing the actor's action),
or an implicit-object intransitive analysis (Broman Olsen & Resnik, 1997 ;
Resnik, 1996). On the other hand, these events could not be described by a
patient intransitive construction - the patient of the event is not permanently
affected by the action, and does not undergo a change of state (Bunger &
Lidz, 2004). If children are aware of this regularity, they should ONLY make
intransitive generalizations to agent intransitive frames (e.g., Joey's pilking
and not The sock's pilking).
METHODS

Participants
The participants in this study were a new set of sixteen children recruited
from Rhode Island birth records, advertisements, and a local preschool,
aged between 2; 5 and 2 ; 7, mean age 2; 6.2, eight girls and eight boys.
Twelve additional children were excluded from the analysis due to
uncooperativeness or failure to produce the target words in any sentence
frame (10) or experimenter error (2). The average raw MCDI score for the
children included in the analysis for this study was 81 (average percentile
53%), while the average score for the children excluded was 68 (average
percentile 29%). There was a significant difference in MCDI scores
between these two groups (t(25)=1.95, p<.05, 1-tailed ; Cohen's d=.78).
However, the MCDI scores of the children aged 2;6 included in Studies 2
and 3 were not significantly different (t(30)=0.48, p=.64, 2-tailed; Cohen's
d=.18). Gender was not significantly related to whether children met the
563

KLINE AND DEMUTH
TABLE

3. ` Switch ' questions used to encourage generalization of novel verbs
across the transitive/agent intransitive alternation (Study 3)

Adult model
Joey's gorping the sock.
(Transitive)
Joey's gorping.
(Agent intransitive)

Switch question

Target generalization

What's Joey doing?

Joey's gorping.
(Agent intransitive)
Joey's gorping the sock.
(Transitive)

What's Joey doing
with the sock?

inclusion criteria in Study 3 (Fisher's exact test, N=27, p=1, Q=.04), and
there was no difference in age between the two groups (911.7 vs. 907.4 mean
days old, t(25)=0.71, p=.24, 1-tailed, Cohen's d=.28). All children who
participated received a picture book or a T-shirt at the end of the session.
Stimuli
The two novel actions in this study described instrument-mediated contact
between agent and patient. Gorping referred to using a large brightly
colored feather on a stick to brush an object (a sock). Meeking described a
bubble wand suspended from a pivot swinging down to tap a toy boot. The
sock and boot were identical to those used in Study 2, but did not contain
noise-makers. The actions were designed to leave the patient unaffected,
with the verbs referring to the ongoing action by the agent.
Procedure
The design for this study paralleled that used in Study 2. Each child heard
one verb in a transitive frame (e.g., Joey's gorping the sock) and one in
an agent intransitive frame (Joey's meeking). Counterbalancing, agent and
patient participants, and use of pronouns were identical to Study 2. The
same warm-up procedure was also used for this experiment, with a slight
variation in introducing the experimental materials. Children first saw
and named the sock and boot, and then saw and had the opportunity
to manipulate the ` two cool machines' described above. The training
and test procedures proceeded as in Study 2. The `switch ' questions used to
encourage generalization across the transitive/agent intransitive alternation
are shown in Table 3.
Coding
All child utterances containing one of the novel verbs was coded as transitive
((agent)-verb-patient), patient intransitive (patient-verb), agent intransitive
(agent-verb), or other (bare utterances as well as noun and adjective uses
564

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

16

Number of Children

14
12
10

8

16

16

6
10

4

7

5

2
0
Produced modeled
from

Produced
generalization

Transitive Model

Produced modeled
from

Produced
generalization

Produced any
generalization

Agent Intransitive Model

Fig. 4. Number of children producing utterances matching the adult model (transitive or
agent intransitive), compared to the number producing generalizations. The rightmost bar
shows the number of children who made at least one generalization.

like I want the meeking one). Only transitive and intransitive utterances were
analyzed. One child (who also made correct generalizations) produced four
unmodeled transitive utterances that referred to the incorrect action ; these
were excluded from the generalization count. Experimenter and child
utterances were coded to allow for discourse and pronoun/referent analysis
as in Study 2.
Data from four children were re-transcribed by a second coder who
was blind to the experimental condition. Accuracy was compared over all
multiword utterances that were judged by either coder to contain a novel
verb. Reliability (at the level of argument structure) was at 96% (n=49 out
of 51). Disagreements were resolved by discussion.

RESULTS

Children's patterns of generalization are summarized in Figure 4. All 16
children produced both verbs in the modeled frame. As predicted, the
majority of children (10 out of 16) also produced at least one novel verb in a
syntactic structure that the experimenter had NOT modeled for that verb.
Out of 26 total generalized utterances, 6 were produced without a subject
(e.g., Gorping the sock). However, all four of the children who produced
these sentences also generalized to full (subject-verb-object) transitive
frames. In addition, 19 of the creative utterances used at least 1 noun. A full
list of the generalizations produced in Study 3 is given in the `Appendix '.
The average raw MCDI scores for the children in this study ranged
between 52 and 100, with an average of 81. There was no significant difference
between MCDI scores of children who made generalizations and children
565

KLINE AND DEMUTH
TABLE

4. Third-person, novel-verb sentences containing at least one full noun
(Study 3)
Experimenter
utterances

Sentences with nouns
Sentences without nouns
(pronoun only)
% Sentences with nouns

Child,
conservative

Child,
generalization

60
98

7
38

1
8

62%

84%

89%

who did not (62nd vs. 37th percentile, t(14)=1.47, p=.08, 1-tailed, Cohen's
d=.79), nor was there a significant difference between numbers of male and
female generalizers (Fisher's exact test, N=16, p=.61, Q=x.26).

Utterance analysis
We again analyzed the specific generalizations that children produced to
address the types of representations that might underlie their productivity
with the novel verbs. In line with Study 2, we first examined novel-verb
transitive sentences produced by the experimenter and by the participants
to compare the prevalence of first-person subjects ; it is important to separate
this factor from a general tendency to avoid noun arguments. As in Study 2,
children produced a significantly higher proportion of first-person sentences
compared to the experimenter : 51% of children's utterances (36/71) had
a first person referent, compared to 31 % (70/225) for the experimenter
(X2(1, N=296)=8.18, p<.01, Q=.16).
To explore whether children's generalizations are biased toward
pronouns, we therefore examine the distribution of pronouns and nouns in
third-person sentences. Again, we use as our measure the percentage of
third-person sentences containing at least one full noun (see Table 4).
There was no significant difference in the number of noun-phrase sentences
between children's conservative and generalized sentences (Fisher's exact
test, N=54, p=1, Q=.05); the difference between children's generalizations
and ADULT novel verb sentences was also non-significant, with children using
slightly more sentences with nouns (Fisher's exact test, N=167, p=.16,
Q=.13). Thus, we do not find evidence for weak schemas or pronoun-based
frames in children's generalizations.
Comparison with Study 2
Based on the input frequency patterns found in Study 1, we predicted
that children would show clearer evidence of generalization with the
566

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

agent intransitive alternations tested in the present study. Approximately
the same numbers of children made syntactic generalizations in Studies 2
and 3 (Fisher's exact test, N=32, p=1, Q=.06). However, in Study 2
(transitive/patient intransitive alternation), six children produced at least
one agent intransitive, even though they had NEVER heard that frame with
either novel verb. In contrast, the children in Study 3 NEVER produced
patient intransitives (Fisher exact test, N=32, p<.05, Q=.48). Patient intransitives would have been anomalous in Study 3, akin to a sentence like
The picture is painting. This suggests that by age 2 ;6 children may have an
awareness of syntactic restrictions with different classes of intransitive
verbs.

DISCUSSION

The results of this study confirmed our initial prediction : the majority of
children aged 2; 6 were able to generalize across the transitive/agent
intransitive alternation with a novel verb. In addition, the findings of
Studies 2 and 3 suggest that children may be aware of semantic restrictions
on syntactic generalization. Children in Study 2 (patient intransitives) were
willing to describe sound emission events with agent intransitives, even
though these constructions were never modeled or elicited by the
experimenter. In contrast, children in Study 3 (agent intransitives) never
spontaneously used patient intransitives to describe the contact events.
These alternation patterns reflect the way such events are treated in adult
English speech, and suggest that children treat patient and agent intransitives as separate constructions with separate semantic constraints.
The results also support the conclusion that children are more inclined to
perform alternations with the agent intransitive, in accord with the input
frequency patterns found in Study 1. Recall from Study 2 that children
produced agent intransitives even in conditions specifically designed to elicit
patient intransitives. This suggests that the transitive/agent intransitive
alternation relationship is easier for children to represent. Study 3 confirms
that children make generalizations robustly with this alternation, using a
variety of noun and pronoun arguments.
The agent intransitive verb that children heard in this study had at least
two possible semantic analyses - He's gorping could describe the agent's
movement (e.g., swinging the bubble wand pivot), yielding an activity
intransitive verb that in English usually does not participate in the transitive
alternation. On the other hand, He's gorping could refer to the contact event
involving the object (e.g., toy boot). The event was repeated with varying
agents and a constant object, which is consistent with Resnik's (1996)
information-theoretic account of the implicit object intransitive - the object
may be dropped because it can be inferred from the verb. Independent
567

KLINE AND DEMUTH

corpus evidence suggests that young children are aware of selectional
restrictions on this kind of transitive/agent intransitive alternation (Medina,
2007). The fact that children did produce transitive sentence alternations
suggests that they learned from the pattern of events they saw; we might
predict that children would produce fewer transitive utterances if the pattern of events did not support this implicit-object analysis.
Study 3 provides clear evidence of children's willingness to alternate
creatively between transitive and agent intransitive structures. The majority
of children were able to use a novel verb in an un-modeled form after participating in only a single session, using events in a semantic category
(` contact ' events) that has not previously been used to test children's
production. These findings add to converging evidence from observation,
comprehension, and production studies that children as young as 2;6 have
access to abstract syntactic representations which allow for very flexible
generalizations. These results also suggest that children may be using
syntax-semantic linkages to constrain their generalizations. Further research
will be necessary to clarify how children's syntactic generalizations are
guided by input frequency, semantics, and other sources of information.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

The present studies make several new contributions to the investigation of
children's knowledge of abstract linguistic structure. Specifically, the findings
presented here highlight the fact that children must learn to generalize over
and distinguish between two types of abstract transitive-intransitive
alternations (patient intransitives Kim is dropping the box/The box is dropping
and agent intransitives Kim is painting the box/Kim is painting). This
contrast has not been addressed in any other developmental production
study. In addition, we provide an analysis of the specific generalizations and
conservative utterances that children produce, which allows for exploration
of the range and productivity in children's syntactic generalizations.
Study 1 established that children aged 2;0-2 ;6 hear both intransitive
constructions, but that they hear agent intransitives more often than patient
intransitives. In addition, the majority of verb types in patient intransitive
frames appeared ONLY in that construction, whereas agent intransitive verbs
were more likely to be used in transitive sentences as well. These patterns
clarify the evidence that children have available for acquiring these
constructions, and identify differences in input frequency which may
influence acquisition.
Study 2 confirmed previous findings that children aged 2;6 can generalize
between transitive and patient intransitive novel verbs after hearing the
verb modeled in only one frame (Abbot-Smith et al., 2004 ; Childers &
Tomasello, 2001 ; Tomasello & Brooks, 1998). Children produced both
568

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

patient and agent intransitives, though the latter were never modeled with
any novel verbs in this study. Critically, these intransitives were semantically
appropriate : at least some sound emission verbs (like honk) can appear in
agent intransitive frames (I honked (my horn) at the jaywalker), and the
contrasting manners of action (highlighting the agents' causative roles) in
this study may have supported this interpretation. Analysis of children's
generalizations also revealed no effects of high-frequency pronoun schemas
(Childers & Tomasello, 2001).
Study 3 extended evidence for the syntactic productivity of children aged
2; 6 to a new structure : agent intransitive verbs. Children's production
of this construction had previously been examined only incidentally for
two- and three-year-olds by Olguin and Tomasello (1993) and Akhtar and
Tomasello (1997). Study 3 established that the majority of children aged
2; 6 were able to generalize to or from the agent intransitive construction.
This study thus supports the conclusion that at least as early as 2;6, the
majority of children are capable of manipulating the abstract structure
required to comprehend and produce these sentences. An utterance analysis
parallel to Study 2 established that children's generalizations were as flexible
as their conservative productions, without limitation to particular referents
or pronoun frames.
A possible objection to the results of Studies 2 and 3 is that children aged
2; 6 have already moved away from initial lexically based constructions.
A number of studies have found that more children in older age groups
generalize a newly learned verb to an un-modeled frame (cf. Abbot-Smith
et al., 2004 ; Childers & Tomasello, 2001; Tomasello & Brooks, 1998).
However, these results are complicated by the fact that younger children
also tend to produce fewer utterances overall. It is still possible that the
present studies miss an earlier period of grammatical conservatism. If this is
the case, it is nevertheless critical to establish the extent and nature of
schema formation and growth as it relates to other aspects of language
acquisition.
Taken together, the findings from Studies 2 and 3 also allow for insight
into how toddlers may use semantics to guide syntactic generalization with
English intransitive verbs. Children in Study 3 (the agent intransitive
condition) only generalized between the two modeled constructions, never
producing inappropriate patient intransitives. In contrast, children in Study
2 sometimes generalized to semantically appropriate AGENT intransitive, in
addition to the patient intransitive. These patterns are consistent with the
idea that children recognize distinct correspondences between syntactic
structure and event semantics for the two different alternations (i.e., that
patient intransitive verbs are not used to describe contact events). This
interpretation suggests that abstract syntax-semantics links may be
available to these children.
569

KLINE AND DEMUTH

However, it is also possible that the differences in generalization resulted
solely from the presence of different types of intransitive in each experiment :
although Studies 2 and 3 were not designed as priming studies, there is
some evidence that children are sensitive to the other sentence structures
they have recently heard when making syntactic generalizations with novel
verbs (Brooks & Tomasello, 1999). Study 1 suggests a possible developmental
advantage for agent intransitive verbs. If agent intransitive representations
are more robust, this advantage may have partially overridden the effect
of the presence of patient intransitives, leading to the observed mixed
generalization in Study 2. If this interpretation is correct, the different
patterns of generalization observed in Studies 2 and 3 still point toward
children representing agent and patient intransitives as separate abstract
structures that affect patterns of generalization.
The degree to which children use semantic information to constrain verb
generalization remains an open question, and a critical area of research for
understanding language development. Ongoing studies are beginning to
clarify the richness of the semantic content that young children link to their
early abstract syntactic representations (Kline, Snedeker & Schulz, 2011).
In addition to adding to the evidence that children as young as 2;6 rely on
robust abstract representations to produce syntactic alternations, the present
studies point toward the ways that these syntactic representations interact
with the semantics of events. Despite their surface similarity, children treat
these two alternations differently, and their patterns of generalization are in
accord with adult semantic restrictions. It will remain to be seen how these
cues interact as children make creative syntactic generalizations.
The present studies also show the value of directly measuring children's
performance on comparable syntactic generalizations. Such comparisons
can reveal what children may know about semantic regularities, and can
begin to establish the relative ages at which they make creative generalizations with different constructions. Any differences discovered can further
guide our understanding of the course and nature of language acquisition.
REFERENCES
Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2004). Training 2; 6-year-olds to produce
the transitive construction : the role of frequency, semantic similarity and shared syntactic
distribution. Developmental Science 7(1), 48-55.
Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2008). Graded representations in the
acquisition of English and German transitive constructions. Cognitive Development 23(1),
48-66.
Akhtar, N. & Tomasello, M. (1997). Young children's productivity with word order and
verb morphology. Developmental Psychology 33(6), 952-65.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., Rowland, C. F. & Young, C. R. (2008). The effect of
verb semantic class and verb frequency (entrenchment) on children's and adults'
graded judgements of argument-structure overgeneralization errors. Cognition 106(1),
87-129.

570

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

Arunachalam, S. & Waxman, S. R. (2010). Meaning from syntax : evidence from 2-yearolds. Cognition 114(3), 442-46.
Broman Olsen, M. & Resnik, P. (1997). Implicit object constructions and the (in)transitivity
continuum. In K. Singer, R. Eggert & G. Anderson (eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, 327-36. Chicago, IL : Chicago Linguistics
Society.
Brooks, P. J. & Tomasello, M. (1999). Young children learn to produce passives with nonce
verbs. Developmental Psychology 35(1), 29-44.
Bunger, A. & Lidz, J. L. (2004). Syntactic bootstrapping and the internal structure of
causative events. In A. Brugos, L. Micciulla & C. Smith (eds.), Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, 74-85. Boston, MA :
Cascadilla Press.
Bunger, A. & Lidz, J. L. (2008). Thematic relations as a cue to verb class : 2-year-olds
distinguish unaccusatives from unergatives. In J. Tauberer, A. Eilam & L. MacKenzie
(eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Penn Linguistics Colloquium, 43-56. Philadelphia,
PA : Penn Working Papers in Linguistics.
Childers, J. B. & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young children's
acquisition of the English transitive construction. Developmental Psychology 37(6), 739-48.
Conwell, E. & Demuth, K. (2007). Early syntactic productivity : evidence from dative shift.
Cognition 103, 163-79.
Conwell, E. & Morgan, J. (2007). Resolving grammatical category ambiguity in acquisition.
In H. Caunt-Nulton, S. Kulatilake & I. Woo (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development, 117-28. Boston, MA : Cascadilla Press.
Demuth, K. (1989). Maturation and the acquisition of the Sesotho passive. Language 65(1),
56-80.
Demuth, K., Culbertson, J. & Alter, J. (2006). Word-minimality, epenthesis, and coda
licensing in the acquisition of English. Language & Speech 49, 137-74.
Demuth, K., Moloi, F. & Machobane, M. (2010). 3-Year-olds' comprehension, production,
and generalization of Sesotho passives. Cognition 115(2), 238-51.
Dodson, K. & Tomasello, M. (1998). Acquiring the transitive construction in English : the
role of animacy and pronouns. Journal of Child Language 25(3), 605-22.
Fenson, L., Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J. L., Dale, P. S. & Reznick, J. S. (2000). Short
form versions of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories. Applied
Psycholinguistics 21, 95-115.
Fisher, C. (2002). Structural limits on verb mapping : the role of abstract structure in
2.5-year-olds' interpretations of novel verbs. Developmental Science 5(1), 55-64.
Fisher, C., Gertner, Y., Scott, R. M. & Yuan, S. (2010). Syntactic bootstrapping. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews : Cognitive Science 1, 143-49.
Folli, R. & Harley, H. (2008). Teleology and animacy in external arguments. Lingua 118(2),
190-202.
Gordon, P. & Chafetz, J. (1990). Verb-based versus class-based accounts of actionality
effects in children's comprehension of passives. Cognition 36(3), 227-54.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M. & Shimpi, P. (2004). Syntactic priming in young children.
Journal of Memory and Language 50, 182-95.
Johansson, S. & Brittain, J. (2012). The lexical semantics of Northern East Cree verbs of
emission : a unified analysis of -piyi. Paper presented at the 86th Annual Meeting of the
Linguistic Society of America.
Kline, M. & Demuth, K. (2010). Factors facilitating implicit learning : the case of the
Sesotho passive. Language Acquisition 17(4), 220-34.
Kline, M., Snedeker, J. & Schulz, L. (2011). Children's comprehension and production
of transitive sentences is sensitive to the causal structure of events. In L. Carlson,
C. Holscher & T. Shipley (eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 2538-43. Austin, TX : Cognitive Science Society.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations : a preliminary investigation. Chicago :
University of Chicago Press.

571

KLINE AND DEMUTH

Levin, B. & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005). Argument realization (Research Surveys in
Linguistics). Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Lieven, E., Behrens, H., Speares, J. & Tomasello, M. (2003). Early syntactic creativity : a
usage-based approach. Journal of Child Language 30(2), 333-67.
Lieven, E., Pine, J. & Rowland, C. F. (1998). Comparing different models of the
development of the English verb category. Linguistics 36, 4-40.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : tools for analyzing talk, 3rd ed. Mahwah,
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Medina, T. N. (2007). Learning which verbs allow object omission : verb semantic selectivity
and the implicit object construction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD.
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of Child Language
17(2), 357-74.
Naigles, L. (1996). The use of multiple frames in verb learning via syntactic bootstrapping.
Cognition 58, 221-51.
Naigles, L., Hoff, E. & Vear, D. (2009). Flexibility in early verb use : evidence from a
multiple-N diary study. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 74(2),
1-112.
Olguin, R. & Tomasello, M. (1993). Twenty-five-month-old children do not have a
grammatical category of verb. Cognitive Development 8(3), 245-72.
Perlmutter, D. (1978). Impersonal passives and the unaccusative hypothesis. In J. Jaeger
(ed.), Proceedings of the 4th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 157-89.
Berkeley, CA : University of California Press.
Resnik, P. (1996). Selectional constraints : an information-theoretic model and its
computational realization. Cognition 61, 127-59.
Scott, R. M. & Fisher, C. (2006). Automatic classification of transitivity alternations
in child-directed speech. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (eds.), Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 2129-34. Austin, TX : Cognitive Science
Society.
Scott, R. M. & Fisher, C. (2009). Two-year-olds use distributional cues to interpret
transitivity-alternating verbs. Language and Cognitive Processes 24(6), 777-803.
Snedeker, J. & Thothathiri, M. (2008). What lurks beneath : syntactic priming during
language comprehension in preschoolers (and adults). In I Sekerina, E. Fernandez &
H. Clahsen (eds.), Developmental psycholinguistics : on-line methods in children's language
processing, 251-315. Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs : a case study of early grammatical development. Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2000). Do young children have adult syntactic competence? Cognition 74,
209-53.
Tomasello, M. (2005). Constructing a language : a usage-based theory of language acquisition.
Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. & Brooks, P. J. (1998). Young children's earliest transitive and intransitive
constructions (syntactic development). Cognitive Linguistics 9(4), 379-95.
Yuan, S. & Fisher, C. (2009). ` Really? She blicked the baby?' : two-year-olds learn
combinatorial facts about verbs by listening. Psychological Science 20, 619-26.

572

SYNTACTIC GENERALIZATION WITH NOVEL INTRANSITIVE VERBS

APPENDIX : GENERALIZATIONS MADE BY CHILDREN
IN STUDIES 2 AND 3
Each letter indicates a single participant (e.g. all (A) sentences were spoken
by the same child.)

STUDY 2

Generalizations from transitive model (He's VERBing it).
This one tam (A)
I'm tamming (B)
It's tamming (C)
I tam (D, r2)
I'll tam (E)
I say Mommy pilk (F)
I pilk (G)
Generalizations from patient-intransitive model (It's VERBing).
Sally's pilking (A)
I pilk it (E)
I pilk you Mom (E) Child pressing noisemaker on mother's knee
I pilking this (E)
I pilk that sock (E)
I show my Daddy pilk that thing (E)
I tam boot (G)
I tam the boot (G)
Tam the boot (G)
Joey tamming (G, r2)
Joey tam the boot (G)
He's tamming it (H)
He's pilking it (I)

STUDY 3

Generalizations from transitive model (He's VERBing it).
I'm gorping (J, r2)
Mommy gorping (K)
I'm gorping (L)
You gorping (M)
Mommy's meeking (N)
My Mommy wants to meek (N)
Generalizations from agent-intransitive model (She's VERBing).
Meeking this boot (L)
Mommy meeking the boot (L)
573

KLINE AND DEMUTH

I'm meeking the boot (L, r2)
You're meeking the boot (L)
She's gorping the sock (N)
Gorping it (O)
He's gorping it (O)
Gorping sock (O)
Gorping the sock (O)
Tommy gorp that (P)
I gorping that (Q)
Meeking the boot (R, r3)
I'm meeking that boot (R)
That boy meeking the boot (R)
Joey's meeking the boot (S)
Meeking the boot (S)

574

