Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Effects of criterion level on associative memory: Evidence
for associative asymmetry q
Kalif E. Vaughn , Katherine A. Rawson
Kent State University, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 27 June 2013
revision received 3 March 2014
Available online 21 May 2014
Keywords:
Human memory
Human learning
Criterion learning
Associative memory
Associative symmetry

a b s t r a c t
A wealth of research has established that retrieval practice promotes subsequent memory,
particularly when the retrieval attempt is successful. Furthermore, the number of successful retrievals during practice (i.e., criterion level) dramatically influences final test performance. For example, Vaughn and Rawson (2011) had participants learn Lithuanian-
English word pairs via test-restudy practice until they were correctly recalled. Despite
retrieval practice always occurring in the forward direction during practice (A - ?), performance increased as a function of criterion level both on final forward (A - ?) and backward
(? - B) cued recall tests. Importantly, the performance gain across criterion levels appeared
asymmetric, as the gains were much larger in the forward versus backward cued recall
direction. However, one potential explanation for the observed asymmetry in criterion
level effects is that the materials strongly favored forward cued recall, as retrieving Lithuanian versus English is inherently more difficult for native English speakers. The present
experiments utilized English-English pairs to more appropriately investigate whether
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are symmetric or asymmetric. Across
experiments, results from recall and recognition tests indicated that criterion level effects
on associative memory are asymmetric. Advantages in forward versus backward cued
recall could not be attributed to differences in cue memory or target memory, indicating
differences in forward and backward associative memory.
O 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
A wealth of research has demonstrated that testing
enhances memory, often more than an equivalent amount
of studying (e.g., for recent reviews, see Dunlosky, Rawson,
Marsh, Nathan, & Willingham, 2013; Roediger & Butler,
2011). However, the effectiveness of testing depends on
many factors, including the type of test format used and
q
The research reported here was supported by a Collaborative Award
from the James S. McDonnell Foundation 21st Century Science Initiative
in Bridging Brain, Mind and Behavior.
 Corresponding author. Address: Kent State University, Department of
Psychology, P.O. Box 5190, Kent, OH 44242-0001, United States. Fax: +1
330 672 3786.
E-mail address: kvaughn4@kent.edu (K.E. Vaughn).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2014.04.004
0749-596X/O 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

the retention interval between practice and final test (see
Roediger & Karpicke, 2006 for a review). Another key factor
influencing the effectiveness of testing is retrieval success.
Testing enhances memory to a greater degree when the
retrieval attempt is successful versus unsuccessful (e.g.,
Carrier & Pashler, 1992). Additionally, the effectiveness of
successful retrieval practice is influenced by the number
of successful retrievals during practice (i.e., criterion level).
Recently, studies have investigated the effects of criterion
level on subsequent memory (e.g., Pyc & Rawson, 2009;
Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011; Vaughn & Rawson, 2011).
Across these studies, the general finding is that memory
is substantially enhanced with higher versus lower criterion levels (i.e., final test performance increases as the
number of correct recalls during practice increases). In

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

the current research, we explored the nature of criterion
level effects on subsequent memory, with particular focus
on the gains in associative memory. To what extent is the
effect of criterion level on associative memory symmetric
(i.e., increasing criterion level produces similar gains in
the forward and backward associations for cue-target
word pairs) or asymmetric (i.e., increasing criterion level
produces stronger gains in either the forward or backward
association for cue-target word pairs)?
Although previous research has established that memory performance increases as criterion level increases, only
one recent study has explored the nature of criterion level
effects. Vaughn and Rawson (2011) had participants learn
Lithuanian-English word pairs. After the word pairs had
been presented for an initial study trial, participants completed practice cued recall tests until they correctly
retrieved the word pairs a pre-assigned number of times
(from one to five). Importantly, the practice cued-recall
tests always occurred in the forward direction (i.e., participants were shown the Lithuanian word and retrieved the
English translation). The final test phase assessed forward
cued recall (the same test format used during practice)
and backward cued recall (i.e., participants were shown
the English word and retrieved the Lithuanian translation).
Despite practicing only forward cued recall, performance
increased as criterion level increased for both forward
and backward cued recall. Although performance
increased in both cued recall directions, performance gains
were much greater in the forward versus backward direction (gains of 35% versus 12%, respectively). The discrepancy in performance gains between forward and
backward cued recall raises an interesting theoretical
question: Are the effects of criterion level on associative
memory symmetric or asymmetric?
Basis for predicting asymmetric effects of criterion level on
associative memory
Several theoretical accounts support the prediction that
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are
asymmetric (i.e., forward and backward links are encoded
and strengthened independently and thus need not be
equivalent). For example, according to the transfer appropriate processing framework (TAP; Morris, Bransford, &
Franks, 1977), performance on a final test will be maximized when the initial tests and final tests require similar
cognitive operations. If individuals practice in the forward
direction, TAP would predict that performance on the final
test will be maximized when individuals are again tested
in the forward direction.
Although theories proposed to explain the benefits of
retrieval practice in particular are silent on associative
symmetry, reasonable extensions follow given the mechanisms proposed by these theories. For example, according
to the elaborative retrieval hypothesis (ERH; e.g., Carpenter,
2009), attempting retrieval from a cue word activates
related semantic information that can be encoded along
with the retrieved target, which in turn can later serve
as additional pathways to retrieve the target information.
For instance, testing on the word pair morning - light

15

(morning - ?) may activate associates of the cue word
(e.g., breakfast, shower, commute, tired), all of which can
be used later in the service of retrieving the target information (e.g., light). Presumably, the information activated
during testing may be more strongly associated with the
word serving as the cue (e.g., morning) versus the target
(e.g., light), suggesting that the effects of criterion level
on associative memory will be asymmetric (favoring forward versus backward associative memory).
Similarly, the mediator effectiveness hypothesis (MEH;
e.g., Pyc & Rawson, 2010) states that retrieval practice benefits memory by promoting the use of more effective mediators (i.e., information linking cues to targets). For example,
keyword mediators commonly involve words that share
phonetic similarities to a particular cue in a cue-target
word pair (e.g., wing for the Swahili-English word pair
wingu - cloud). The mediator wing can then be used to link
the mediator to the target word (e.g., birds have wings and
fly in the clouds; wingu - wing - cloud). Importantly, these
verbal mediators are likely to function asymmetrically (e.g.,
wingu elicits wing, but cloud does not elicit wing due to lack
of phonetic similarity). If the benefits of testing occur due to
more effective mediator use and these mediators tend to
link cue-target information asymmetrically, the implication is that the effects of criterion level on associative memory will be asymmetric (again favoring forward versus
backward associative memory).
For clarification purposes, although both ERH and
MEH support the prediction that the effects of criterion
level on associative memory will be asymmetric, the
underlying mechanisms driving this prediction differ
somewhat between the two accounts. Both accounts
would attribute the difference in forward versus backward associative memory across criterion level to differences in the directionality of semantic information
added to the nominal cue-target stimulus. However, the
accounts differ regarding how and when this semantic
information is added to the nominal cue-target stimulus.
According to ERH, the additional semantic information is
activated during a retrieval attempt, and reflects a more
automatic and implicit process. In contrast, MEH assumes
a more strategic process in which participants are consciously selecting keywords as part of a metacognitive
control strategy to learn the words (which would likely
occur during restudy that takes place after a retrieval
attempt; for evidence, see Pyc & Rawson, 2012). Nonetheless, these accounts are not mutually exclusive, and
either or both mechanisms could contribute to asymmetric associations.
Another relevant account comes from basic research on
associative memory. According to the independent association hypothesis (IAH; Wolford, 1971), two elements in episodic memory are associated with two unidirectional links:
one linking the two elements in a forward direction, and
the other linking the two elements in a backward direction.
Importantly, these separate unidirectional links can be
enhanced independently of each other, such that learning
in one direction can occur independently of learning in
the other direction (e.g., greater learning in the forward
versus backward direction).

16

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Basis for predicting symmetric effects of criterion level on
associative memory
In contrast, according to the associative symmetry
hypothesis (ASH; Asch & Ebenholtz, 1962), two elements
in episodic memory are associated with one bidirectional
link (i.e., the same connection links two elements in a forward and backward direction). Importantly, the bidirectional link dictates that learning in one direction cannot
occur independently of learning in the other direction
(e.g., learning in the forward direction equally enhances
memory in the backward direction). Thus, ASH would
assume that the effects of criterion level on associative
memory would be symmetric (in contrast to expectations
that reasonably follow from the elaborative retrieval
hypothesis, mediator effectiveness hypothesis, and IAH).
The expectation that the effects of criterion level on
associative memory are symmetric is also supported by
the available empirical evidence on associative symmetry.
Given the voluminous literature pertaining to associative
symmetry, an exhaustive review is beyond the scope of
the present article. Fortunately, Kahana, (2002) recently
reviewed the literature and concluded that the weight of
the evidence heavily favors associative symmetry. This is
not to say that there are no prior studies reporting evidence that appeared to demonstrate associative asymmetry (typically involving a demonstration of differences in
forward versus backward cued recall). However, limitations of the methods used in these studies preclude clear
interpretation of these outcomes. In particular, Kahana
(2002) discusses two major methodological factors which
need to be accounted for in order to evaluate associative
symmetry. The first methodological issue concerns the
extent to which the cue and target words have a similar
number of pre-existing associates. Words with a higher
number of pre-existing associates may produce more
interference during cued recall, decreasing the chance of
successfully retrieving the lesser associated word within
the word pair (e.g., if the number of pre-existing associates
is greater for a target word than for a cue word, the cue
word would be more difficult to retrieve during backward
cued recall due to more interference from other associates
of the target).
There are several ways to minimize concerns over differences in pre-existing associations, including drawing
items from the same class of stimuli (e.g., using noun-
noun word pairs) and then counterbalancing assignment
of the items to be cues and targets (e.g., A-B and B-A).
Many prior studies violate one or both of these important
prerequisites (e.g., Bartling & Thompson, 1977; Gallup &
Wollen, 1968; Levy & Nevill, 1974; Lockhart, 1969) making
it difficult to interpret their results with respect to associative symmetry. To foreshadow, in all of the current experiments, we minimized these concerns by using unrelated
noun-noun word pairs and by counterbalancing assignment of words to serve as either the cue or target during
practice (e.g., ``queen-journal'' and ``journal-queen'').
The second methodological issue concerns accounting
for differences in item accessibility, because items with
higher accessibility are more easily retrieved during cued
recall (e.g., higher levels of item accessibility for target

versus cue words would benefit forward versus backward
cued recall). The key here is that cued recall measures
are not pure measures of associative memory. Performance
on a cued recall test reflects associative memory and also
reflects memory for the information being directly
retrieved. For instance, performance on a final forward
cued recall test reflects both associative memory and target memory. Likewise, performance on a final backward
cued recall test reflects both associative memory and cue
memory. Accordingly, associative symmetry cannot be
adequately evaluated solely by comparing forward versus
backward cued recall, because any differences may reflect
differential accessibility of targets versus cues rather than
associative asymmetry.
There are several ways to minimize concerns over differences in item accessibility, such as including measures
to assess both cue and target accessibility and/or implementing a procedure to equate cue and target accessibility
(e.g., additional exposure to cue or target words, depending
on which items have lower accessibility). However, many
prior studies did not measure cue or target accessibility
and/or made no attempt to equate cue or target accessibility (e.g., Caplan, Glaholt, & McIntosh, 2006; Giurintano,
1972; Newman & Campbell, 1971; Wollen, 1968; Wollen
& Allison, 1968). For example, many studies involved participants practicing in a forward direction (e.g., A - ?) followed by subsequently demonstrating superior forward
versus backward cued recall (e.g., Gallup & Wollen, 1968;
Giurintano, 1972; Lockhart, 1969). However, no measures
of target or cue accessibility were included, and item
accessibility differences likely arose due to differential
strengthening of items during practice. Forward cued recall
practice presumably enhances memory strength for the
target word in addition to strengthening the cue-target
association. If so, the demonstrated advantage of forward
versus backward cued recall may have reflected greater
target accessibility rather than associative asymmetry. To
foreshadow, we minimized these concerns by including
measures of cue and target accessibility in all experiments
and by pre-exposing cues to equate cue and target accessibility in Experiment 4.
In sum, much of the prior evidence for associative
asymmetry is not readily interpretable due to one or more
of these methodological limitations. In contrast, numerous
studies have shown evidence suggesting associative symmetry (e.g., Asch & Ebenholtz, 1962; Ekstrand, 1966;
Mandler, Rabinowitz, & Simon, 1981; Murdock, 1962a,
1962b, 1965, 1966; Newman & Campbell, 1971). For example, Murdock (1962b) found similar forward and backward
cued recall performance regardless of presentation rate
(i.e., 1 s or 3 s of study time per paired associate), retention
interval (recall started 0-10 s after the last displayed
paired associate), or number of presentations (i.e., paired
associates were presented either one, two, or three times
during practice). More recent studies have also concluded
in favor of associative symmetry (e.g., Carpenter, Pashler,
& Vul, 2006; Jones & Pashler, 2007; Sommer, Rose, &
Buchel, 2007; Yang et al., 2013).
With that said, Kahana (2002) notes that ``Even if forward and backward recall are equivalent on average, this
does not strictly imply symmetry'' (p. 823). As outlined

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

above, forward and backward cued recall are not pure
measures of associative memory but also reflect target
memory or cue memory as well. Thus, the prior studies
demonstrating similar levels of forward and backward
recall do not definitively indicate associative symmetry in
the absence of evidence that also indicates similar levels
of target and cue memory. Furthermore, Kahana (2002)
acknowledged that ``It is possible that forward and backward associations reveal their asymmetries in other experimental situations'' (p. 835), which may be the case when
information is learned to varying criterion levels. Thus,
the extent to which the effects of criterion level on associative memory are symmetric remains an open question.

Overview of current research
In sum, although the goal of the current work was not to
competitively evaluate the various theoretical accounts
described above, these accounts do support different
expectations for how criterion level may affect associative
memory. Furthermore, although the bulk of the empirical
evidence favors associative symmetry (Kahana, 2002),
some interpretive difficulties remain, and none of this
research involved criterion level manipulations (the condition of primary interest here). Outcomes of the only criterion level study that included relevant measures (Vaughn
& Rawson, 2011, described above) suggested that the
effects of criterion level on associative memory are asymmetric. However, the study by Vaughn and Rawson
(2011) was not originally designed to evaluate associative
symmetry, and not surprisingly, the materials used violated the aforementioned methodological conditions necessary to evaluate associative symmetry. For example,
the number of pre-existing associates differed between
cue and target words, as Lithuanian versus English words
have a lower number of pre-existing associates for native
English speakers. Furthermore, performance on free recall
and recognition measures suggested poorer item accessibility for cue words than for target words. Given these
methodological limitations, the results of Vaughn and
Rawson (2011) only provide suggestive evidence at best
for associative asymmetry.
In the present experiments, we minimized concerns
over potential differences in the number of pre-existing
associates and pre-experimental item accessibility by
using pairs of concrete English nouns (i.e., the same stimulus category) and by counterbalancing the assignment of
the two words in each pair to serve as the cue versus the
target (e.g., either ``queen-journal'' or ``journal-queen'').
Regarding item accessibility, we also estimated differences
in overall item accessibility by examining the effects of criterion level on separate measures of target memory and
cue memory in addition to forward and backward cued
recall. During practice, participants learned English-English word pairs to criterion via forward cued recall practice
(A - ?). Criterion level (i.e., the number of correct recalls)
ranged from one to five. The practice phase for a given participant ended when all the items had reached their preassigned criterion level. The final test occurred one week
later. During the final test, we administered forward and

17

backward cued recall measures, as well as measures of
cue memory and target memory (described further below).
To evaluate the extent to which criterion level effects on
associative memory are symmetric, we evaluated patterns
of forward and backward cued recall performance while
also considering levels of target memory and cue memory.
To revisit, cued recall measures are not pure measures of
associative memory, and thus performance on a cued recall
test reflects associative memory and also reflects memory
for the information being directly retrieved. Accordingly,
equivalent gains on the forward versus backward cued
recall tests would not necessarily indicate symmetry unless
the gains for target memory and cue memory were also
equivalent. Likewise, greater performance on the forward
versus backward cued recall tests would not necessarily
indicate asymmetry if greater gains for target memory versus cue memory were also observed. Thus, evidence that
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are
symmetric would involve either (1) equivalent gains in forward and backward cued recall and equivalent gains in target memory and cue memory, or (2) greater gains on the
forward versus backward cued recall test and greater gains
for target memory versus for cue memory. Any other combination of outcomes would indicate that the effects of criterion learning on associative memory are asymmetric
given that the differences in forward versus backward cued
recall would not be attributable to differences in target versus cue memory. If differences in forward versus backward
cued recall cannot be attributed to differences in target or
cue memory, then these differences must reflect differences
in associative memory.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants and design
One-hundred three undergraduates participated for
course credit. Criterion level during practice (1, 2, 3, 4, or
5 correct recalls) was a within-participant manipulation.
Recall and recognition test formats were betweenparticipant manipulations. First, participants were assigned
to one of four recall groups via blocked randomization.
Second, within each recall group, assignment to one of
three recognition groups was counterbalanced across
participants.
Materials
Materials included 50 unrelated English-English word
pairs (e.g., queen-journal), divided into five lists of ten
pairs. The cue-target pairs had zero forward and zero
backward associative strength (Nelson, McEvoy, &
Schreiber, 2004). Which word served as the cue versus
the target was approximately counterbalanced across participants. List assignment to criterion level was approximately counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure
Participants first read instructions detailing the experiment. Instructions informed participants that during the

18

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

learning phase, they would study and take practice tests on
English-English word pairs until they had correctly
recalled them anywhere from 1 to 5 times. Participants
were also informed that there would be a final test over
the word pairs after a one-week delay; however, participants were not informed about the format of the final test
(i.e., participants were simply told ``you will take a final
test of your memory for the items you learn today'' but
were given no specific information that they would be
completing either a cued recall or free recall test followed
by a recognition test). These instructions were consistent
for each experiment reported within this manuscript.
Word pairs were presented for initial study in random
order one at a time via computer for 10 s each. The word
on the left was always presented in blue font under the
heading ``cue word,'' whereas the word on the right was
always presented in red font under the heading ``target
word.'' After all items were studied once, the practice
phase began. During practice trials, participants were
shown a cue word (always presented in blue font on the
left) and had up to 8 s to type in the corresponding target.
This test format represents forward cued recall (A - ?) and
was the only cued recall test format used during practice.
After incorrect responses, the cue and target were restudied for 4 s. The item was then placed at the end of the list
for another practice trial later. If a response was correct but
the item had not yet reached its assigned criterion, it was
placed at the end of the list for another practice trial later.
Items were dropped from practice once they reached their
pre-assigned criterion. Session 1 ended when all items
reached criterion or after 75 min had elapsed. We excluded
data for ten participants who did not reach at least 75% criterion for all items during the allotted time in Session 1.
In Session 2 seven days later, participants completed
one of four recall tests, depending on group assignment.
For the two cued recall groups, items were presented one
at a time and presentation order was randomized anew
for each participant. For the group of participants who
completed forward cued recall, cues were presented in
blue font on the left, and participants were instructed to
type in the corresponding target (e.g., queen - ???). For
the group of participants who completed backward cued
recall, targets were presented in red font on the right and
participants were instructed to type in the corresponding
cue (e.g., ??? - journal). For the group who completed free
recall of cues, participants were instructed to recall as
many cue words as possible and were reminded that these
were the words that had been presented in blue on the left
side of the screen during Session 1. For the group who
completed free recall of targets, participants were
instructed to recall as many target words as possible and
were reminded that these were the words that had been
presented in red on the right. In all four groups, participants had an unlimited amount of time to type in their
responses.
After the recall test, participants completed their
assigned recognition test. The cue recognition test consisted of the 50 previously learned English cue words randomly mixed with 50 novel English words. Similarly, the
target recognition test consisted of the 50 previously
learned English target words randomly mixed with 50

novel English words. The associative recognition test consisted of 50 English-English word pairs. Twenty-five of
the English cues were paired correctly with their corresponding English targets, with five correct pairs from each
criterion level. The remaining 25 English cues were paired
incorrectly with an English target from another pair from
the same criterion level. Participants were informed that
all pairs contained words they had studied earlier and that
they were to indicate whether the English cue was paired
with its corresponding English target.1
Results
To revisit, evidence that the effects of criterion level on
associative memory are symmetric would involve either
(1) equivalent gains in forward and backward cued recall
and equivalent gains in target memory and cue memory,
or (2) greater gains on the forward versus backward cued
recall test and greater gains for target memory versus for
cue memory. First, consider forward versus backward cued
recall performance (see Fig. 1). A 2 (type of cued recall
test)  5 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA revealed a
main effect of criterion level, F(4, 172) = 11.55, MSE = 1.80,
p < .001, gp2 = .21, replicating previous research (e.g.,
Vaughn & Rawson, 2011). The overall performance difference between forward versus backward cued recall
approached significance, F(1, 43) = 3.60, MSE = 13.75,
p = .065, gp2 = .08. Qualitatively, greater overall criterion
level gains emerged for forward versus backward cued
recall (22% versus 11%, as measured via the net performance gain from criterion level 1 to criterion level 5); however, this interaction did not reach significance,
F(4, 172) = 1.50, MSE = 1.80, p = .206, gp2 = .03. When
including only the two extreme criterion levels (criterion
level 1 and criterion level 5) in a 2 (type of cued recall
test)  2 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA, the interaction approached significance, F(1, 43) = 3.97, MSE = 1.76,
p = .053, gp2 = .08.
Although we are primarily interested in determining if
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are
asymmetric, a difference at any criterion level would be
sufficient for showing asymmetry. For instance, for Criterion 5 items, performance was greater on the forward cued
recall test (M = 35.5%) versus the backward cued recall test
(M = 22.4%) [t(43) = 1.96, p = .029, d = .60]. This provides
additional evidence that high levels of retrieval success
may produce asymmetric gains in associative memory.
Did the same pattern obtain for target memory versus
cue memory? To evaluate target and cue memory, we
included both free recall and recognition measures. Outcomes on the free recall tests are plotted in Fig. 1. A 2 (type
of free recall test)  5 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA
revealed a main effect of criterion level, F(4, 184) = 6.38,
1
We included the associative recognition test to confirm that criterion
learning enhanced associative memory. Across three experiments, associative recognition increased across criterion levels: F(4, 120) = 3.54, MSE = .04,
p = .009, gp2 = .11 (Experiment 1); F(4, 100) = 2.04, MSE = .04, p = .095,
gp2 = .08 (Experiment 2); F(4, 92) = 4.00, MSE = .05, p = .005, gp2 = .15
(Experiment 3). However, associative recognition is not informative with
respect to diagnosing whether the gains in associative memory were
symmetric or asymmetric, so we do not discuss these outcomes further.

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

19

Fig. 1. Mean final test performance as a function of criterion level and final test format in Experiment 1 (left column) and Experiment 2 (right column).
Performance is reported in percentages, and error bars report standard error of the mean.

MSE = .85, p < .001, gp2 = .12. The overall performance difference between target memory versus cue memory was
not significant, F(1, 46) = 1.96, MSE = 3.54, p = .168,
gp2 = .04. Paralleling the pattern in cued recall, we
observed greater qualitative gains in target memory versus
cue memory (11% versus 6%); however, the interaction
between criterion level and recall test format was not significant [F < 1]. When including only the two extreme criterion levels (criterion level 1 and criterion level 5) in a 2
(type of cued recall test)  2 (criterion level) mixed factor
ANOVA, the interaction approached significance,
F(1, 46) = 3.54, MSE = .75, p = .066, gp2 = .07; for Criterion
5 items, performance was greater for target memory
(M = 16.9%) versus cue memory (M = 10.0%) [t(46) = 1.71,
p = .047, d = .51].
Next, consider performance on the recognition tests of
cue and target memory. For each individual, we calculated

corrected recognition as percentage of hits minus percentage of false alarms (hits and false alarms are reported in
Table 1). Mean corrected recognition for each test is
reported in Fig. 1. To maintain counterbalanced assignment of participants in each recall group to the recognition
tests, some participants necessarily were exposed to information on the recall test that would facilitate performance
on the recognition test. Accordingly, we excluded data
from seven individuals who completed forward cued recall
followed by cue recognition and from eight participants
who completed backward cued recall followed by target
recognition. A 2 (type of recognition test)  5 (criterion
level) mixed factor ANOVA revealed a main effect of criterion level, [F(4, 180) = 8.02, MSE = .01, p < .001, gp2 = .15],
and a main effect of recognition test format,
[F(1, 45) = 9.47, MSE = .22, p = .004, gp2 = .17]. However,
unlike the pattern observed in the free recall data, the

20

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Table 1
Mean percentage of hits and false alarms as a function of criterion level and type of recognition test in Experiments 1-3.
Hits for criterion level N

False alarms

1

2

3

4

5

Cue recognition
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3

61.7 (3.8)
58.9 (4.8)
57.2 (4.7)

73.3 (3.4)
71.6 (4.0)
66.4 (4.8)

76.3 (3.8)
74.2 (3.8)
70.8 (5.6)

76.7 (3.7)
84.2 (3.3)
82.0 (4.6)

74.6 (4.6)
80.5 (3.5)
76.8 (4.9)

15.8 (1.7)
16.1 (3.0)
11.6 (2.0)

Target recognition
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3

81.3 (3.6)
80.0 (4.4)
75.8 (2.9)

89.1 (3.8)
85.8 (4.8)
85.3 (3.2)

87.8 (4.1)
88.9 (3.5)
90.5 (2.9)

90.0 (3.6)
94.2 (2.9)
93.2 (2.3)

89.6 (3.6)
90.0 (3.2)
93.7 (2.4)

12.0 (2.3)
15.6 (3.1)
12.3 (2.5)

gains observed across criterion levels actually favored cue
memory versus target memory (15% versus 9%), although
the interaction between type of recognition test and criterion level was not significant, (F < 1). Including only the
two extreme criterion levels (criterion level 1 and criterion
level 5) in a 2 (type of cued recall test)  2 (criterion level)
mixed factor ANOVA, the interaction was not significant,
(F < 1). Thus, the free recall and recognition measures of
cue and target memory yielded somewhat different patterns. One possibility is that these two measures are differentially susceptible to the influence of associative memory
(considered further in Experiment 2).
In sum, a marginal difference in gains favored forward
versus backward recall in cued recall and target versus
cue memory in free recall. These results suggest that the
effects of criterion learning on associative memory are
symmetric. However, the pattern of gains on the recognition measures provides some preliminary evidence against
associative symmetry, as there were not greater gains in
target recognition versus cue recognition (with a trend in
the opposite direction). Experiment 2 further explored
whether the effects of criterion level on associative memory are symmetric or asymmetric.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to overcome three potential
concerns with the free recall tests used in Experiment 1.
First, performance was approaching the floor, limiting
interpretability. Second, output monitoring may have
caused participants to incorrectly withhold responses due
to uncertainty regarding whether the recalled word represented a cue or target. To improve free recall performance
and eliminate any potential confusion, we combined the
free recall of cues and free recall of targets into a single free
recall test for all words (i.e., participants were instructed to
recall all the words, regardless of whether they were cues
or targets).
Third, and most important, the patterns observed in
free recall may have been influenced by associative memory. When searching memory for targets, an individual
may intentionally or unintentionally retrieve some of the
cue words and then use the associative links to access
the associated targets. Similarly, individuals attempting
to retrieve cue words may recall target words and use
the associative link to access the cues. However, if the
associative link is weaker in the backward direction,

participants would be less likely to access cue words from
retrieved targets than targets from retrieved cues. Given
that the free recall tests for cues and targets were administered between-participants in Experiment 1, we cannot
evaluate the potential influence of associative memory on
the free recall measures. Administering the free recall test
within-participants in Experiment 2 permits secondary
analyses to explore this possibility (described further
below).
Method
Eighty-seven undergraduates participated for course
credit. The materials, design, and procedure were identical
to Experiment 1, except for one difference pertaining to the
free recall groups. In Experiment 2, we administered only
one free recall test, in which participants were instructed
to recall as many English words as possible (i.e., both cues
and targets). We excluded data for five participants who
did not reach at least 75% criterion for all items within
the allotted time during Session 1.
Results
To revisit, evidence that the effects of criterion level on
associative memory are symmetric would involve either
(1) equivalent gains in forward and backward cued recall
and equivalent gains in target memory and cue memory,
or (2) greater gains on the forward versus backward cued
recall test and greater gains for target memory versus for
cue memory. First, consider forward versus backward cued
recall performance (see Fig. 1). A 2 (type of cued recall
test)  5 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA revealed a
main effect of criterion level [F(4, 200) = 22.82,
MSE = 1.87, p < .001, gp2 = .313]; the main effect of test type
was not significant, F(1, 50) = 1.87, MSE = 24.29, p = .178,
gp2 = .036. Of greatest interest, the interaction was significant, F(4, 200) = 2.51, MSE = 1.87, p = .043, gp2 = .048. Thus,
the same qualitative pattern as in Experiment 1 emerged,
with greater gains in forward versus backward cued recall
(31% versus 16%). These results would suggest that the
effects of criterion level on associative memory are asymmetric, unless the same pattern is observed for target
memory versus cue memory.
Free recall of cues and free recall of targets is reported
in Fig. 1. A 2 (type of free recall test)  5 (criterion level)
mixed factor ANOVA revealed a main effect of criterion

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

level, F(4, 116) = 9.89, MSE = 1.48, p < .001, gp2 = .25. The
overall performance difference between target recall and
cue recall was significant, F(1, 29) = 4.95, MSE = .972,
p = .034, gp2 = .15. However, in contrast to the pattern in
cued recall, the interaction was not significant (F < 1). The
gains across criterion level for target memory and cue
memory were similar (14% versus 11%).
One possibility is that the recall of target words interfered with their recall of cue words. If participants had
greater access to target information in memory, those
items may have been recalled first in their recall output.
If so, then the cue words would receive greater output
interference and thus be more difficult to recall as compared to the targets. To examine this, we divided each participant's recall output into quartiles. Then, we calculated
the proportion of target words recalled within each quartile. Results of a one-way ANOVA suggested that the proportion of targets recalled was approximately the same
across each quartile (55%, 58%, 57%, and 62%, respectively;
F < 1), suggesting minimal output interference.
As foreshadowed above, we also conducted secondary
analyses of free recall to explore the extent to which associative memory may have influenced free recall of targets
and cues. First, we identified cases in which participants
recalled both the cue word and target word of a given word
pair (e.g., recalling both `queen' and `journal' for the word
pair queen-journal). Next, we determined the number of
cases in which the cue and target were recalled adjacently
(e.g., `queen' followed immediately by `journal') versus
non-adjacently (e.g., other items were recalled between
`queen' and `journal'). A significantly greater number were
recalled adjacently versus non-adjacently, (2.53 versus
0.88), t(29) = 3.76, p = .001, suggesting that associative
memory contributed to free recall (cf. associative chaining
effects on free recall of word lists; Kahana, 2002). Importantly, was the influence of associative memory on free
recall symmetric or asymmetric? Of the cue words
recalled, 36.2% were followed immediately by their associated target, whereas only 22.3% of recalled targets were
followed immediately by their associated cue,
t(25) = 1.80, p = .042, suggesting that associative memory
had an asymmetric influence on free recall of targets versus free recall of cues. In contrast, an associative symmetry
account would reasonably have predicted an equivalent
likelihood of traversing from cue to target as from target
to cue, given the assumption of one bidirectional link.
Outcomes on the recognition tests (reported in Fig. 1)
provide further evidence that the effects of criterion level
on associative memory are asymmetric. As in Experiment
1, we calculated corrected recognition as percentage of hits
minus percentage of false alarms. (For reasons noted in
Experiment 1, we excluded data from ten individuals
who completed forward cued recall followed by cue recognition and from eight participants who completed backward cued recall followed by target recognition). A 2
(type of recognition test)  5 (criterion level) mixed factor
ANOVA revealed a main effect of criterion level
[F(4, 144) = 15.12, MSE = .01, p < .001, gp2 = .11] and a main
effect of recognition test format [F(1, 36) = 6.07, MSE = .16,
p = .019, gp2 = .14]. Importantly, the gains with criterion
level were not greater for target memory versus cue

21

memory (the interaction was not significant, F < 1.47).
Indeed, the gains observed across criterion level numerically favored cue memory versus target memory (25% versus 14%).
In sum, Experiment 2 provided stronger evidence that
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are
asymmetric. First, we observed greater gains in forward
versus backward cued recall, but similar gains in target
memory versus cue memory as measured via free recall.
Furthermore, secondary analyses showed that free recall
was influenced by associative memory (more adjacent versus non-adjacent pairs were recalled), and that this influence was asymmetric (more word pairs were recalled
from cue-to-target versus target-to-cue). Second, the recognition measures showed numerically greater gains for
cue memory versus target memory. Thus, the greater gains
in forward versus backward cued recall cannot easily be
attributed to greater gains in target memory versus cue
memory, implying asymmetric gains in associative
memory.
Experiment 3
The conclusion that the effects of criterion level on associative memory are asymmetric rests in part on the consistent finding that the recognition measures did not show
greater gains in target versus cue memory, which is problematic for an associative symmetry interpretation given
consistently greater qualitative gains in forward versus
backward cued recall. However, a potential methodological
concern is that the recall tests always preceded the recognition tests. To ensure that the pattern of recognition was not
qualitatively influenced by the preceding recall test, we
only administered recognition tests in Experiment 3.
Method
Seventy-two undergraduates participated for course
credit. Materials, design, and procedure were identical to
Experiment 1 and 2, except that there were no recall tests.
Instead, participants only completed a recognition test,
either cue recognition or target recognition (or associative
recognition; see Footnote 1). We excluded data for four
participants who did not reach at least 75% criterion for
all items during Session 1.
Results
Corrected recognition is reported in Fig. 2 (hits and false
alarms are reported in Table 1). A 2 (type of recognition
test)  5 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA on corrected
recognition revealed a main effect of criterion level,
F(4, 168) = 20.23, MSE = .02, p < .001, gp2 = .33, as well as a
main effect of recognition test format, F(1, 42) = 9.12,
MSE = .16, p = .004, gp2 = .18. As in the previous experiments, the interaction between type of recognition test
and criterion level was not significant (F < 1), and the
numerical trends favored cue memory versus target memory (25% versus 18%). These results replicate Experiments 1
and 2 and provide additional evidence suggesting that the

22

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Method

Fig. 2. Mean final recognition performance as a function of criterion level
and recognition test format in Experiment 3. Performance is reported in
percentages, and error bars report standard error of the mean.

effects of criterion level on associative memory are asymmetric, as the gains were not greater for target memory
versus cue memory.
Experiment 4
The conclusion that the effects of criterion level on
associative memory are asymmetric rests in part upon
the consistent finding that the effects of criterion level
did not differ for cue and target recognition (and were
numerically greater for cues). However, a potential concern is that the absence of an interaction between criterion
level and recognition performance may reflect scale dependency (e.g., Loftus, 1978). In brief, recognition performance
presumably reflects the state of an underlying memory
representation. Although test performance and the underlying memory representation are assumed to be monotonically related, the specific function relating these two is not
known (e.g., linear, curvilinear, sigmoidal). If the function
is not linear, then more caution is needed when interpreting interactions or the lack thereof when comparing test
performance in two conditions that are at different parts
of the scale. For example, 15% improvements in the lower
versus upper parts of the performance scale (e.g., from
5% to 20% versus from 80% to 95%) may not necessarily
reflect the same degree of improvement in the underlying
memory representations. In contrast, comparisons that
involve overlap of performance at some point on the scale
support more confident conclusions about the underlying
memory representations.
Accordingly, the purpose of Experiment 4 was to minimize concerns about scale-dependency by including conditions in which cue and target recognition were at similar
levels on the performance scale. Specifically, to boost cue
memory, we implemented a pre-exposure condition for
half of the cue words, in which cues were presented for initial study prior to criterion learning of the word pairs. In
both the pre-exposure and no-pre-exposure conditions,
we expected better forward versus backward cued recall
performance (as observed in Experiments 1 and 2). Importantly, Experiment 4 also established that there are no differences between gains in target memory versus cue
memory, even when cue recognition and target recognition
performance are at similar parts of the scale.

One hundred fifteen undergraduates participated for
course credit. Materials, design, and procedure were identical to Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. First,
due to the increase in the number of possible conditions
with the addition of the pre-exposure manipulation, we
eliminated two intermediate criterion levels from the initial learning session to simplify the design and to maintain
a reasonable number of items in each remaining condition.
Thus, participants correctly recalled items one, three, or
five times. Second, to equate the number of items assigned
to each criterion level and pre-exposure condition, we
reduced the number of items from 50 word pairs to 48
word pairs (i.e., 6 lists of 8 word pairs). Assignment of list
to pre-exposure condition and criterion level was approximately counterbalanced across participants. Third, we
administered a pre-exposure phase at the beginning of
the experiment in which the cue words from half of the
word pairs (24 cue words) were presented for an initial
study trial one at a time for 4 s each. After the first block
of pre-exposure trials, the procedure was repeated for
two additional blocks of pre-exposure trials. Presentation
order was randomized during each block of pre-exposure
trials. Finally, given evidence from Experiment 2 that free
recall of cues and targets was influenced by associative
memory, we eliminated the free recall tests. We excluded
data for one participant who did not reach at least 75% criterion for all items during Session 1.
Results
Cued recall outcomes are reported in Fig. 3. A 2 (preexposure or no-pre-exposure)  2 (type of cued recall
test)  3 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA revealed a
main effect of criterion level [F(2, 114) = 85.16,
MSE = 1.32, p < .001, gp2 = .60] and a significant 2-way
interaction between type of cued recall test (forward versus backward) and criterion level [F(2, 114) = 8.89,
MSE = 1.32, p < .001, gp2 = .14]. Thus, the same qualitative
pattern as in Experiments 1 and 2 emerged, with greater
gains in forward versus backward cued recall (32% versus
16%). There was no main effect for pre-exposure condition
[F(1, 57) = 1.40, MSE = 1.31, p = .242, gp2 = .02] nor any
interactions involving pre-exposure condition [Fs < 1.41].
These results replicate Experiments 1 and 2 by showing
greater gains in forward versus backward cued recall.
Corrected recognition outcomes are reported in Fig. 4
(hits and false alarms are reported in Table 2). A 2 (preexposure or no-pre-exposure)  2 (type of recognition
test)  3 (criterion level) mixed factor ANOVA revealed a
main effect of criterion level [F(2, 106) = 39.41, MSE = .02,
p < .001,
gp2 = .43] and pre-exposure condition
[F(1, 53) = 4.57, MSE = .03, p = .037, gp2 = .08]. Additionally,
the interaction between pre-exposure condition and type
of recognition test was significant [F(1, 53) = 5.64,
MSE = .03, p = .021, gp2 = .10], as well as the interaction
between pre-exposure condition and criterion level
[F(2, 106) = 5.37, MSE = .02, p = .006, gp2 = .09]. There was
also a significant 3-way interaction [F(2, 106) = 4.76,
MSE = .02, p = .010, gp2 = .08] (all other Fs < 3.62). To

23

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Fig. 3. Mean final cued-recall performance as a function of criterion level, type of cued recall test, and pre-exposure condition in Experiment 4. Performance
is reported in percentages, and error bars report standard error of the mean.

Fig. 4. Mean final recognition performance as a function of criterion level, type of recognition test, and pre-exposure condition in Experiment 4.
Performance is reported in percentages, and error bars report standard error of the mean.

Table 2
Mean percentage of hits and false alarms as a function of criterion level and type of recognition test in Experiment 4.
Hits for criterion level N
1

3

5

False alarms

Cue recognition
No pre-exposure
Pre-exposure

56.9 (4.8)
77.8 (3.6)

78.2 (3.5)
83.3 (3.2)

83.8 (3.3)
88.9 (2.4)

12.2 (2.1)
12.2 (2.1)

Target recognition
No pre-exposure
Pre-exposure

78.1 (3.1)
77.7 (3.9)

87.1 (3.2)
87.9 (2.3)

89.7 (2.8)
93.3 (2.1)

11.6 (1.7)
11.6 (1.7)

Note: False alarm rates in each condition are identical because only one set of lures was used.

explore the 3-way interaction, we conducted separate 2
(type of recognition test)  3 (criterion level) ANOVAs for
the pre-exposure and no pre-exposure conditions. The interaction between type of recognition test (cue versus target)
and criterion level was significant in the no-pre-exposure
condition [F(2, 106) = 5.10, MSE = .02, p = .008, gp2 = .09],
but not in the pre-exposure condition [F < 1]. These results
confirm greater gains for cue memory versus target memory
on the recognition measures in the no-pre-exposure condition (26% versus 11%) and no significant difference in gains
in the pre-exposure condition (11% versus 15%), neither of
which is consistent with a symmetry account.

In sum, Experiment 4 showed once again that gains
were greater in forward versus backward cued recall.
Importantly, gains favored forward versus backward cued
recall regardless of whether cue memory and target memory gains were equivalent (in the pre-exposure condition)
or whether gains were greater for cue versus target
memory (in the no pre-exposure condition). Therefore,
the difference in forward versus backward cued recall
performance cannot be attributed to differences in cue
memory or target memory, providing additional evidence
that the effects of criterion level on associative memory
are asymmetric.

24

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

General discussion
A wealth of research has established that successful
retrieval practice enhances subsequent memory, with
recent research establishing monotonic increases in
memory as criterion level increases (e.g., Vaughn &
Rawson, 2011). The current work explored the nature of
criterion level effects on subsequent memory, with particular focus on the gains in associative memory across
criterion levels. Across experiments, the overall pattern
of results weighed against symmetric associative gains
under conditions of criterion learning and instead indicate that the effects of criterion level on associative
memory are asymmetric.
Although these outcomes indicate associative asymmetry and are consistent with the original findings of Vaughn
and Rawson (2011), these results diverge from the common finding of associative symmetry within the associative memory literature (see Kahana, 2002). We discuss
two possible factors which may have contributed to these
diverging results. First, we utilized a one-week retention
interval, whereas most prior studies investigating associative symmetry used shorter delays between initial learning
and final tests. One plausible explanation is that differences between forward and backward associative links
may not be readily apparent on short retention intervals
but may emerge after a delay. This possibility is consistent
with assumptions of the bifurcated distribution model
(BDM; Kornell, Bjork, & Garcia, 2011). According to BDM,
items gain memory strength from testing (i.e., successful
retrieval) as well as from re-exposure (i.e., restudying the
items). Items gain the most memory strength when they
are tested and correctly recalled, whereas items gain no
memory strength when they are tested and not correctly
recalled. As such, tested items become bifurcated in memory (with items correctly recalled having high memory
strength and items not correctly recalled having low memory strength). Items that are only restudied gain a moderate amount of memory strength (i.e., more strength than
would occur after a failed test but less strength than would
occur after a correct test) and are represented by a normal
distribution of memory strength (i.e., a non-bifurcated distribution). Items are assumed to be correctly recalled on a
final retention test if they have sufficient memory strength
to cross the recall threshold. BDM was originally proposed
to explain why performance differences between testing
versus restudy often do not emerge after a short retention
interval or even favor restudied items (e.g., Hogan &
Kintsch, 1971; Thompson, Wenger, & Bartling, 1978).
According to BDM, after short retention intervals, the intermediate levels of memory strength for many restudied
items is sufficient to cross the recall threshold. However,
all items lose memory strength at an equal rate over time
(i.e., an equal rate of forgetting occurs for both restudied
and tested items). As such, at longer retention intervals,
restudied items may no longer have sufficient memory
strength to cross threshold, in contrast to tested items that
accrued high levels of memory strength from successful
retrieval practice (e.g., Wheeler, Ewers, & Buonanno,
2003). By extension to the present research, one possibility

is that forward associations accrue large increments in
memory strength from successful retrieval practice,
whereas backward associations accrue only modest increments in memory strength during restudy. If so, both forward and backward associations may be sufficiently
strong to cross threshold after a short delay, whereas the
stronger forward associations would be favored at a longer
retention interval.
Second, prior research on associative symmetry has
typically involved a fixed number of practice trials rather
than criterion learning, which is the condition of interest
here. With a fixed number of trials, some items will not
be correctly recalled during practice (likely the most difficult items) and many items will only be correctly recalled
once. By comparison, forward and backward cued recall for
Criterion 1 items in the current experiments tended to be
similar, suggesting that evidence for associative asymmetry may only emerge with higher levels of retrieval success.
As reviewed earlier, the bulk of prior research on associative memory suggests associative symmetry. Of the few
studies that did suggest associative asymmetry, it is interesting to note that these studies involved overlearning
(e.g., Giurintano, 1972; Waugh, 1970; Wollen, Fox, &
Lowry, 1970). Interpretation of these outcomes require
some caution because they did not equate or include measures of target and cue accessibility, but their findings are
consistent with the current outcomes. One plausible explanation why associative asymmetry may only emerge with
higher levels of retrieval success pertains to item difficulty.
With a relatively low criterion level (e.g., Criterion 1), items
correctly recalled on the final cued recall test may consist
primarily of easier items. Difficult items are presumably
recalled more frequently at higher versus lower criterion
levels (contributing to the increases in overall recall
observed at higher criterion levels). One possibility is that
differences in forward and backward associative strength
are relatively minimal for easy items, but these differences
become more apparent for difficult items. If so, as the proportion of difficult items contributing to recall increases
across criterion levels, a difference between forward and
backward cued recall would also be expected to emerge
at higher criterion levels. Of course, this account is speculative, but it does suggest interesting directions for future
research.
In addition to addressing the theoretical question concerning the nature of criterion level effects on associative
memory, the current outcomes also have important implications for testing effect theories more generally, in that
they impose potential constraints on theories explaining
the benefits of retrieval practice. As mentioned above, the
mediator effectiveness hypothesis and the elaborative
retrieval hypothesis make no explicit claims about associative symmetry, but extensions reasonably follow from both
accounts. As outlined earlier, the mediator effectiveness
hypothesis attributes the benefits of retrieval practice to
generating more effective mediators. According to the
elaborative retrieval hypothesis, retrieval practice activates related semantic information which can later serve
as additional retrieval cues to access targets. Both theories
appear to be able to account for associative asymmetry

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

results. For instance, mediators tend to be asymmetric,
often linking a cue word to a particular target word via
phonetic similarity (e.g., wingu - wing - cloud). Testing
memory in a backward direction (e.g., cloud - ?) would
presumably not activate the previously generated mediator due to lack of phonetic similarity (e.g., wing would
likely not be activated when cued with cloud). Likewise,
semantic information activated during testing (e.g., morning breakfast, shower, commute, tired light), would likely
only be reactivated during a forward test of memory
(e.g., morning - ?) and not necessarily during a backward
test of memory (e.g., light - ?). Again, although these two
accounts are silent with respect to associative symmetry,
both accounts appear to be able to readily account for findings of associative asymmetry (e.g., a consistent advantage
for forward versus backward cued recall).
In contrast, it is less obvious how other retrieval practice theories can account for the patterns of associative
asymmetry demonstrated here. In particular, descriptive
strength-based models that do not posit underlying
explanatory mechanisms are less well equipped to account
for the current outcomes. For instance, according to the
retrieval effort hypothesis (Pyc & Rawson, 2009), retrieval
success boosts subsequent memory to a greater extent
when successful retrieval involves more versus less effort.
However, this hypothesis is a descriptive account that does
not explain what effort reflects nor why it improves memory, and thus it is not well equipped to explain why criterion level has asymmetric effects on associative memory.
Thus, this account is silent concerning differential gains
in forward versus backward associative memory without
further specification of the underlying mechanisms that
give rise to the patterns described by these accounts.
In conclusion, the overall pattern of results across four
experiments converges on the theoretical conclusion that
the effects of criterion level on associative memory are
asymmetric. The current work represents an important
foundation for future research to further explore the nature of criterion level effects in particular and the memorial
consequences of criterion learning more generally.

References
Asch, S. E., & Ebenholtz, S. M. (1962). The principle of associative
symmetry. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 106,
135-163.
Bartling, C. A., & Thompson, C. P. (1977). Encoding specificity: Retrieval
asymmetry in the recognition failure paradigm. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 3, 690-700.
Caplan, J. B., Glaholt, M. G., & McIntosh, A. R. (2006). Linking associative
and serial list memory: Pairs versus triples. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 1244-1265.
Carpenter, S. K. (2009). Cue strength as a moderator of the testing effect:
The benefits of elaborative retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 1563-1569.
Carpenter, S. K., Pashler, H., & Vul, E. (2006). What types of learning are
enhanced by a cued recall test? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13,
826-830.
Carrier, M., & Pashler, H. (1992). The influence of retrieval on retention.
Memory & Cognition, 20, 633-642.
Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan, M. J., & Willingham, D. T.
(2013). Improving students' learning with effective learning
techniques: Promising directions from cognitive and educational
psychology. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 14, 4-58.

25

Ekstrand, B. R. (1966). Backward associations. Psychological Bulletin, 65,
50-64.
Gallup, G. G., Jr, & Wollen, K. A. (1968). Asymmetry of SR and RS
associations with the direction of recall equated. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 7, 345-347.
Giurintano, S. L. (1972). Directionality of associations in paired-associate
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 95, 463-464.
Hogan, R. M., & Kintsch, W. (1971). Differential effects of study and test
trials on long-term recognition and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 10, 562-567.
Jones, J., & Pashler, H. (2007). Is the mind inherently forward looking?
Comparing prediction and retrodiction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 295-300.
Kahana (2002). Associative symmetry and memory theory. Memory &
Cognition, 30, 823-840.
Kornell, N., Bjork, R. A., & Garcia, M. A. (2011). Why tests appear to
prevent forgetting: A distribution-based bifurcation model. Journal of
Memory and Language, 65, 85-97.
Levy, C. M., & Nevill, D. D. (1974). BA learning as a function of degree of AB
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102, 327-329.
Lockhart, R. S. (1969). Retrieval asymmetry in the recall of adjectives and
nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 79, 12-17.
Loftus, G. R. (1978). On interpretation of interactions. Memory & Cognition,
6, 312-319.
Mandler, G., Rabinowitz, J. C., & Simon, R. A. (1981). Coordinate
organization: The holistic representation of word pairs. The
American Journal of Psychology, 94, 209-222.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels of processing
versus transfer appropriate processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 16, 519-533.
Murdock, B. B. Jr, (1962a). The serial position effect of free recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 64, 482-488.
Murdock, B. B. Jr, (1962b). Direction of recall in short-term memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1, 119-124.
Murdock, B. B. Jr, (1965). Associative symmetry and dichotic presentation.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 4, 222-226.
Murdock, B. B. Jr, (1966). Forward and backward associations in paired
associates. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71, 732-737.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (2004). The University of
South Florida free association, rhyme, and word fragment norms.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 402-407.
Newman, S. E., & Campbell, R. T. (1971). AB and BA performance as
functions of test instructions and reading order. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 88, 57-59.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2009). Testing the retrieval effort hypothesis:
Does greater difficulty correctly recalling information lead to higher
levels of memory? Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 437-444.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2010). Why testing improves memory:
Mediator effectiveness hypothesis. Science, 330. 335-335.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2012). Why is test-restudy practice beneficial
for memory? An evaluation of the mediator shift hypothesis. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38,
737-746.
Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2011). Optimizing schedules of retrieval
practice for durable and efficient learning: How much is enough?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140, 283-302.
Roediger, H. L., III, & Butler, A. C. (2011). The critical role of retrieval
practice in long-term retention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15,
20-27.
Roediger, H. L., III, & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). The power of testing memory:
Basic research and implications for educational practice. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 1, 181-210.
Sommer, T., Rose, M., & Buchel, C. (2007). Associative symmetry versus
independent associations in the memory for object-location
associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 33, 90-106.
Thompson, C. P., Wenger, S. K., & Bartling, C. A. (1978). How recall
facilitates subsequent recall: A reappraisal. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4, 210-221.
Vaughn, K. E., & Rawson, K. A. (2011). Diagnosing criterion-level effects on
memory: What aspects of memory are enhanced by repeated
retrieval? Psychological Science, 22, 1127-1131.
Waugh, N. C. (1970). Associative symmetry and recall latencies: A
distinction between learning and performance. Acta Psychologica, 33,
326-337.
Wheeler, M., Ewers, M., & Buonanno, J. (2003). Different rates of forgetting
following study versus test trials. Memory, 11, 571-580.
Wolford, G. (1971). Function of distinct associations for paired-associate
performance. Psychological Review, 78, 303-313.

26

K.E. Vaughn, K.A. Rawson / Journal of Memory and Language 75 (2014) 14-26

Wollen, K. A. (1968). Effects of maximizing availability and minimizing
rehearsal upon associative symmetry in two modalities. Journal of
experimental psychology, 77, 626-630.
Wollen, K. A., & Allison, T. S. (1968). Latency and frequency of SR and RS
associations as a function of recall time. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 7, 895-899.

Wollen, K. A., Fox, R. A., & Lowry, D. H. (1970). Variations in asymmetry as
a function of degree of forward learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 86, 416-419.
Yang, J., Zhao, P., Zhu, Z., Mecklinger, A., Fang, Z., & Li, H. (2013). Memory
asymmetry of forward and backward associations in recognition
tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 39, 253-269.

