J. Child Lang. 41 (2014), 634-657. f Cambridge University Press 2013
doi:10.1017/S030500091300010X

The impact of phonological neighborhood density on
typical and atypical emerging lexicons* $
S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S
University of Canterbury, New Zealand
(Received 5 April 2012 - Revised 3 September 2012 - Accepted 10 January 2013 -
First published online 25 September 2013)

ABSTRACT

According to the Extended Statistical Learning account (ExSL;
Stokes, Kern & dos Santos, 2012) late talkers (LTs) continue to use
neighborhood density (ND) as a cue for word learning when their peers
no longer use a density learning mechanism. In the current article,
LTs expressive (ACTIVE) lexicon ND values differed from those of
their age-matched, but not language-matched, TD peers, a finding that
provided support for the ExSL account. Stokes (2010) claimed that
LTs had difficulty abstracting sparse words, but not dense, from the
ambient language. If true, then LTs' receptive (PASSIVE), as well as
active lexicons should be comprised of words of high ND. However,
in the current research only active lexicons were of high ND. LTs'
expressive lexicons may be small not because of an abstraction deficit,
but because they are unable to develop sufficiently strong phonological
representations to support word production.
INTRODUCTION

Word learning in children is the focus of many research efforts in
developmental science, but the mechanisms that underpin typical lexical
development are not well understood, and those of slower learners even less
so. Stokes and colleagues recently reported that the statistical characteristics
of words in the ambient language play a significant role in lexical learning in
toddlers (Stokes, 2010 ; Stokes, Kern & dos Santos, 2012 ; Stokes, Bleses,
Basboll & Lambertsen, 2012). This research has examined the distributions
of word frequency (WF) and neighborhood density (ND) in emerging
lexicons. The methods employed were similar to those of prior studies, such
that only monosyllabic words from the language-relevant versions of the
MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory (Fenson et al.,
[*] Address for correspondence : University of Canterbury - Communication Disorders,
Private Bag 4800 Christchurch, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand. E-mail : stephanie.
stokes@canterbury.ac.nz

634
[$] The original version of this article was published with the incorrect author name. A
notice detailing this has been published and the error rectified in the online and print
PDF and HTML copies.

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

1993) were included, and the ND and WF values of each of these words
were derived from the relevant adult ambient language (e.g., Storkel, 2009).
Average ND and WF values were calculated for each child. For English(N=220), French- (N=208), and Danish- (N=894) speaking children
respectively, the three reports showed that children's small expressive
lexicons were comprised of words that had many phonologically related
words (phonological neighbors) in the ambient language, while children
with average or large expressive lexicons had significantly lower average
ND values than the small lexicons. ND accounted for 47 %, 53%, and 39%
of the variance in total expressive vocabulary size for English- (Stokes,
2010), French- (Stokes et al., 2012b), and Danish- (Stokes et al., 2012a)
speaking children respectively. WF accounted for 14 %, 9%, and 3% of the
variance in expressive lexicon size. Given the relatively weak findings for
WF in these prior studies, the impact of WF is not discussed further in this
article.
One conclusion from these findings is that ND may contribute to learning
mechanisms that are harnessed to create an expressive lexicon. Words of
high ND, those that come from phonologically dense portions of the adult
language (dense words), place lower demands on children's working memory systems than words of lower ND, words that come from phonologically
sparse portions of the adult language (sparse words). That is, dense words
are comprised of phonological strings that are repeated across many words,
as words of high ND, by definition, share onset (CV#, such as cat, cap),
rhyme (#VC, such as cat, hat), or consonants (C#C, such as cat, cot).
These repeated strings become more familiar than the less frequently
repeated phoneme strings of sparse words, and are therefore less taxing on
young children's working memory abilities. Children may establish lexical
representations for dense words more easily than sparse words because the
phonological forms of dense words are more readily held in working
memory (Hoover, Storkel & Hogan, 2010). If the working memory abilities
of late talkers (LTs) are not as well developed as that of their typically
developing (TD) age-matched peers (Stokes & Klee, 2009a, 2009b) then
late LTs may have greater difficulty forming representations for words from
sparse portions of the ambient language (Stokes, 2010).
Late talkers
To explore the effects of statistical input cues on lexicon size, Stokes and
colleagues (2010, 2012b) split their samples by the size of the expressive
lexicons, at one standard deviation below the mean for age, to yield a group
of children with small lexicons relative to those of their same-age peers (late
talkers). Stokes and colleagues suggested that these children's expressive
lexicons were small relative to those of their peers because they had
635

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

Fig. 1. Representation of interconnecting phonological networks for the words bird, bed,
and ball.

difficulty abstracting sparse words from the ambient input, unlike their
same-age peers, who, after learning more dense words than sparse words at
the onset of lexical development, quickly begin to learn sparse words too.
The authors' reasoning was as follows. Typically developing children used
the cues provided from dense words to facilitate word learning in the early
stages of building a lexicon, but rapidly shifted to process sparse words too.
This occurs with increased experience of, and familiarity with, overlapping
phonological neighborhoods. For example, the phonological neighborhood
for the word bird includes heard, bud, birth, bad ; the word birth includes
the neighbors both, burn, worth ; the word worth includes the neighbors
whirl, with, word (see Figure 1 for an example of a phonological network).
While bird has 31 neighbors, birth has 19, and worth has 16. As experience
increases and the phonological network widens, the likelihood of learning
636

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

sparse words increases. In contrast, late talkers were more reliant on the
frequent, familiar strings of dense words, developing a learning mechanism
that learned dense words, and failing to make the phase shift to abstracting
sparse words from the input. The Extended Statistical Learning (ExSL)
theory was proposed to account for these results. The ExSL account suggests that LTs continue to use dense word cues for word learning beyond
the period when their more able peers had shifted to learning less dense
words. Essentially, LTs continue to use one learning mechanism when
another would be more productive.
If the ExSL account is correct, the lexical statistical characteristics of LTs'
expressive lexicons should resemble those of younger, typically developing
children. This has not been directly tested. Further, if the source of the
problem is difficulty with ABSTRACTING words from sparse portions of the
input language, then we would expect that LTs' receptive lexicons, as well
as their expressive lexicons, would be comprised of words from dense
neighborhoods. However, reports of the effects of neighborhood density on
adult word processing in word recognition tasks suggest that this view is
problematic.
Neighborhood density effects on word processing
Word recognition. The results of word recognition studies suggest that
adults are better able to recognize words from sparse neighborhoods than
dense. For example, Vitevitch (2002a) reported that adults responded faster
to words with a sparse onset than words with a dense onset, in a word
recognition task. This effect can be explained within a model of spreading
activation (e.g., Dell, 1986). When a dense word (the target) occurs in the
input, all the stored words that fall within the target word's phonological
neighborhood, and thus share phonological components of the target word,
are also activated, by spreading activation. For example, activation of the
onset /kae/ will activate all words sharing that onset because activation of
the phonological components spreads to activate the complete lexical representation for the target word and its neighbors, for example, cat, can, cap,
and catch. Activation of the lexical representation creates a reverse activation back to the phonological components, and so dense words benefit
from multiple activations during processing (e.g., Chen & Mirman, 2012).
The resulting effect on word recognition is slower recognition of dense
words than sparse words, as lexical competitors must be inhibited before
word recognition occurs. Therefore, sparse words, with fewer phonological
neighbors, are processed faster during input processing because of fewer
competition effects.
Word production. The inhibitory effect of dense words is not seen in word
production ; rather, dense words are produced faster by adults and with
637

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

fewer errors than sparse words (Goldrick, Folk & Rapp, 2010 ; Vitevitch,
2002b). Retrieval of a dense word for production activates multiple words
that share the target word's phonological components, so activating the
lexical representation for cat will also activate the onset of can, cap, catch,
etc. Spreading activation may have an effect on the target by strengthening
the phonological and lexical representation of dense, but not sparse, words,
as a product of phonological-lexical interaction (Scarborough, 2012 ; Yao,
2011). The net effect would be facilitated activation of the target word form
during word production.
Implications for emerging lexicons
Toddlers are remarkably good at recognizing the labels of newly encountered novel form-referent mappings in recognition tasks administered
five minutes after exposure, and the effect is maintained several days later
(e.g., Munroe, Baker, McGregor, Docking & Arculi, 2012). However,
while toddlers can immediately imitate an experimenter's novel label for a
novel referent, they are remarkably poor at naming novel referents even
one minute after hearing the novel word form. Children can recognize a
novel object-label mapping to which they have been exposed, but cannot
produce that same label when asked to label the object. Munroe et al.
(2012) concluded that these children had encoded the necessary acousticphonetic representations to permit word recognition, but not word
production.
We can assume then that children are able to form sufficient phonological
and lexical representations for heard words from limited exposures. If so,
we might expect that toddlers are able to do so for all words, not just words
from dense portions of the input language. Sparse words can be recognized
just from their onsets (McMurray, Samelson, Lee & Tomblin, 2010)
because there are few lexical competitors, so toddlers' representations for
sparse words need not be robust for input processing. Therefore, the difficulty for LTs is likely not with ABSTRACTING sparse word forms to establish
lexical representations, but rather with activating the correct word form for
sparse words for word production. The assumption here is that a sparse
word form may be activated for receptive processing, but not expressive
processing. This may occur because of weaker lexical representations for
sparse words than dense words. Therefore, children's receptive lexicons
should not show a preference for dense words over sparse words, but words
from dense neighborhoods in the input may become part of the EXPRESSIVE
lexicon earlier than sparse words. Words strings that were heard and
produced more frequently by children would be accessed and produced
more easily, placing fewer demands on working memory than low-density
words, because of stronger lexical representations. Dense words in the
638

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

memory store would be easily accessed for word production, because
retrieving a dense word form would be easier than retrieving a sparse word
form, given the working memory constraints mentioned previously. The
impact would be that any word that is experienced, whether from dense
or sparse portions of the input, could be understood by the child, but
only dense words would be spoken by the child. Some words could be
UNDERSTOOD by the child, but NOT SAID (presumably sparser words), while
others would be understood AND said (presumably denser words). This
potential difference in receptive and expressive lexicons had been overlooked by Stokes and colleagues. These authors studied the neighborhood
density effects in children's expressive lexicons only.
ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons
To explore the hypothesis that sparse words are part of the receptive
lexicons (understood, but not said) while expressive lexicons are comprised
of dense words, these lexicons need to be defined as separate entities.
Presumably, words that speakers say are also words that they understand,
but there are other words that are understood, but are not spoken.
Researchers (mostly in the field of bilingualism) have coined the terms
ACTIVE LEXICON and PASSIVE LEXICON to represent the former and the latter
respectively (e.g., Yuen & Murphy, 2010). We see an implementation of
this idea in the Oxford Communicative Development Inventory (OCDI ;
Hamilton, Plunkett & Schafer, 2000). The OCDI vocabulary checklist is a
British communicative development inventory that was modeled on the
MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory (Fenson et al.,
1993). The Oxford BabyLab website (http://babylab.psy.ox.ac.uk/research/
oxford-cdi) describes the checklist as an instrument for gauging children's
receptive and expressive vocabulary size using parent report. The 416 items
are words that children aged 0 ; 11 to 2; 02 are likely to UNDERSTAND, or
UNDERSTAND AND SAY. Table 1 shows some items from the animal section of
the checklist. As is shown, parents are required to indicate whether
their child shows understanding of a given word only, or whether they
understand and say it. A tally of these separate columns yields an estimation
of a child's PASSIVE and ACTIVE LEXICONS respectively.
It is important to understand that the PASSIVE lexicon is mutually
exclusive of the ACTIVE lexicon. The PASSIVE lexicon is comprised of words
that the child understands, but the parent believes the child has not said.
The ACTIVE lexicon is comprised of words that are said and understood by
the child. Checking off the items in Table 1 illustrates the principle. Words
can only be checked off once, either as understood (PASSIVE lexicon), or
understood and said (ACTIVE lexicon). Thus each word can only be coded as
either in the ACTIVE or PASSIVE lexicon.

639

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S
TABLE

1. Examples of words in the animal section of the Oxford
Communicative Development Inventory (Hamilton et al., 2000)

Animals

U

U/S

animal
bear
bee
bird
bunny/rabbit
butterfly
cat

O
O
O
O
O
O
O

O
O
O
O
O
O
O

NOTE :

horse
kitten
lamb
lion
monkey
mouse
owl

U

U/S

O
O
O
O
O
O
O

O
O
O
O
O
O
O

U indicates understands; U/S indicates understands and says.

Hypotheses
Using this definition of ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons, the following
hypothesis is proposed. Words that children produce in the earliest stages
of vocabulary learning come from dense portions of the adult lexicon for
two reasons. First, the phonological composition of words from dense
neighborhoods is recurring in the input (having many onset, rhyme, or
consonant neighbors). Perceptual experience with these repeated strings
may bias the learning mechanism, through spreading activation, to stimulate the formation of strong, well-formed phonological representations for
dense words. Second, saying words repeatedly (i.e., many tokens of one
type) increases the child's experience with the phonological form, which in
turn generates stronger, or better-formed phonological representations.
Subsequently, the child retrieves representations for dense words in word
production more easily than representations for sparse words. Nonetheless,
it may be that the infant or toddler does understand words from sparse
portions of the adult lexicon. The first hypothesis then is that words in the
PASSIVE lexicon come from sparser portions of the adult lexicon. This is
proposed because once a dense word enters the PASSIVE lexicon, it should
transition from a PASSIVE to an ACTIVE status more quickly than sparse
words. Dense words become available for production rapidly, and sparse
words do not. To test this hypothesis, the density values in TD children's
ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons are compared. Further, if the use of density cues
plays a role across the period of early word learning, then we should expect
to find the same relationships in the lexicons of children at 1;6 and 2;0.
Next, we consider how the lexical statistical properties of ACTIVE and
PASSIVE lexicons may differ for LTs. The Extended Statistical Learning
account (Stokes et al., 2012b) proposed that the problem is one of continuing to use an early successful statistical learning cue when a different
mechanism is required for further lexical learning. If the ExSL theory is
640

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

correct, then LTs' ACTIVE lexicons will have higher mean ND values than
the lexicons of their age-matched peers, but the mean ND values should
be similar to those of their language-matched peers. This is a testable
hypothesis that requires a comparison of the lexicons of LTs with those of
their age-matched and language-matched peers. LTs are usually identified
between 1; 6 and 2 ; 6, with the first indicators being late onset and slow
growth of using words, and/or a late onset and slow growth of using twoword combinations (Thal, 2000). Quantitative criteria for defining LTs
vary. One metric is less than 50 words, and/or no two-word combinations at
2; 0 (Thal, 2000). A second metric is a vocabulary size at or below the 10th
(Dale, Simonoff, Bishop & Plomin, 1998), 16th (Bishop, Holt, Line,
D. McDonald, S. McDonald & Watt, 2012), or 20th (Jones & Smith, 2005)
percentile for age on the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development
Inventory. As there is no consensus for the cut point, the 16th percentile on
the OCDI was used here, and these children will be referred to as LTs.
The density values in the ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons of LTs are compared
with those of their language-matched (younger) peers to test the second
hypothesis.
Methodological concerns
Before turning to the aims and research questions of the current study,
three methodological issues are addressed. First, the current study seeks to
provide evidence for or against the ExSL account that was founded on the
finding that ND was a strong predictor of vocabulary size in prior studies.
It may be tempting to explain these findings for ND as a mathematical
inevitability, whereby small lexicons are comprised of dense words because
there is more opportunity for dense words to occur. The causal direction
from small lexicons to high ND versus from high ND to small lexicons is
currently unresolved. If the former were true, then small PASSIVE, as well as
small ACTIVE, lexicons should show the same pattern. This premise was
tested in the current research. The density values of large and small PASSIVE
lexicons were compared.
Second, some readers may question the decision to use ND values
generated from adult databases. This issue was addressed at some length in
Stokes et al. (2012b), and an elegant explanation for why adult databases are
appropriate for these studies is found in Gierut and Dale (2007). The theory
under scrutiny in the current study warrants the use of adult density values.
We are concerned with the words that children hear (some of which they
come to say), that is, the words of the ambient language, making it is
sensible to use calculations from adult lexicons to test the theory.
Third, it is important to point out that there is no absolute value attributed to dense versus sparse neighborhoods in this work. Each word in the
641

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

ambient language has a density value, derived from adult corpora, and each
child's word was coded for that density value. A mean ND value was then
generated for each child's lexicon, for use in statistical analyses. Differences
in mean density values for small and large lexicons were analyzed. Betweengroup differences are comparisons of the average ND values for groups.
Research aims and questions
The current research has three aims. The first aim is to explore the ND
characteristics of the ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons of children at 1 ;6 and 2;0.
Finding that small ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons both have high average
densities would support the claim that children with small lexicons have
difficulty ABSTRACTING sparse words from the input. Finding that ACTIVE
lexicons had significantly higher density scores than PASSIVE lexicons would
provide support for the hypothesis that the strength of phonological
representations of dense words may result in dense words becoming part of
the ACTIVE lexicon more readily than sparse words. Research question one
is : ` Is there a significant difference between mean ND values in toddlers '
ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ?' Lexicons at 1; 6 and 2;0 were examined.
The second aim is to determine if the ND characteristics in the ACTIVE
and PASSIVE lexicons of LTs differ from those of younger TD languagematched peers. If so, then this would provide evidence against the ExSL
account and would suggest instead that LTs learn differently, not just later.
If the language-matched groups do not differ on these properties, then this
provides support for the ExSL account. Two research questions arise: Is
there a significant difference between LTs and TD age-matched children in
the ND values of their ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ? Is there a significant
difference between LTs and TD language-matched children in the ND
values of their ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ?
The third aim was to determine whether the effects for ND reported in
prior work for expressive lexicons could have occurred as a mathematical
inevitability. If yes, then the hypothesis is that small PASSIVE lexicons will
have significantly higher mean ND values than large PASSIVE lexicons, as has
been found for expressive lexicons. The current study also compared the
mean ND values in ACTIVE lexicons in children at 1 ;6 and 2 ;0 to extend
previous findings to a younger age group.

METHOD

Participants
A database of vocabulary scores from 325 children was downloaded from
the Oxford University Baby Lab Website (http://babylab.psy.ox.ac.uk/
research/oxford-cdi). The children were from the Oxford region of the
642

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

United Kingdom (Hamilton et al., 2000). Tallies were generated for ACTIVE
and PASSIVE lexicons for each child. An inclusion criterion was that the
core (see below) ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons of each child had to exceed
20 words. The cut point of 20 words was set because lexicons smaller than
21 words yield heteroscedastic, and thus meaningless, results in subsequent
analyses. This inclusion criterion yielded a sample of 203 children,
aged 1; 02-2; 03. In order to address all research questions two ages were
selected for analysis, children at 1 ; 06 (1 ; 05-1;06) and 2;00 (1;11-2 ;0),
yielding 68 children in the younger group and 52 children in the older
group (total N=120). This decision made the data amenable to betweengroup comparisons, avoiding the linearity assumptions of regression,
and ensured that any confound between age and rate of development was
avoided.
Data coding
The OCDI checklist consists of 416 words in categories of animal sounds,
animals, vehicles, toys, food and drink, body parts, clothes, furniture
and rooms, outside, household items, people, games and routines, action
words, descriptive words, question words, pronouns, prepositions, and
quantifiers (Hamilton et al., 2000). Parents checked off the words their child
understands (PASSIVE lexicon), or understands and says (ACTIVE lexicon),
and the database also provides tallies for the total combined lexicon.
Related research has examined nouns only (Storkel, 2004; Zamuner 2009)
or nouns, verbs, and adjectives (Stokes, 2010). For the current research 210
monosyllabic nouns, verbs, and adjectives were included to center the
analysis on words unlikely to be context based (` people') or function words,
and to allow coding of each word with phonological ND values. This list is
referred to as the set of core words. Selecting core words means that
the following categories on the OCDI were not included : animal sounds,
people, games and routines, question words, pronouns, prepositions, and
quantifiers.
De Cara and Goswami's (2002 ; n.d.) calculations of ND for British
English were used in this study. The reference database was 4,086
monosyllables derived from the 17.9 million words of the CELEX database
(Baayen, Piepenbrock & Gulikers, 1995). Two definitions of ND were
used by de Cara and Goswami (2002), but only one is used here, to align
our findings with previous research. The chosen metric is the commonly
used +/x one phoneme substitution, addition, or deletion (Ph+/x1
metric; e.g., Charles-Luce & Luce, 1990), where hat and bat would be
rhyme neighbors, but not hat and splat. ND values were entered for each
child for each CDI word and an average ND value was generated for each
child.
643

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S
TABLE

OCDI expressive
OCDI receptive
OCDI total lexicon
Core ACTIVE lexicon
Core PASSIVE lexicon
Total core lexicon
ND of ACTIVE lexicons
ND of PASSIVE lexicons
Age

2. Descriptive statistics at 1 ; 6

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

SD

K-S statistic

41
46
110
21
21
57
21.21
17.14
1; 05

307
293
400
159
145
195
34.05
24.16
1; 07

107.84
126.40
234.24
55.63
65.57
121.21
26.79
20.26
1; 06

60.26
55.33
69.62
32.95
29.41
35.13
2.98
1.57
;01

0.02*
0.32 n.s.
0.41 n.s.
1.34 n.s.
0.82 n.s.
0.84 n.s.
0.60 n.s.
0.76 n.s.
-

NOTE : SD=standard deviation. OCDI - Oxford Communicative Development Inventory
(Hamilton et al., 2000). ND=phonological neighborhood density. Total lexicon=combined
total of ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons. See text for definitions of core lexicon and ND. K-S test
is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of a normal distribution. n.s. indicates a non-significant
result.

RESULTS

Descriptive results
The mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum scores for
OCDI expressive lexicon size, OCDI receptive lexicon size, and OCDI
total lexicon size, as well as the descriptive statistics for the core lexicons
(ACTIVE and PASSIVE) size, ND values for core ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons,
and Age are presented in Tables 2 (at 1; 6) and 3 (at 2;0). These tables
include the results of Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of normalcy for all
variables.
Figure 2 shows the relative contribution of core ACTIVE and core PASSIVE
lexicon size to total core lexicon size at 1; 6 and 2;0. At 1;6, there was no
significant difference between the size of the ACTIVE and PASSIVE core
lexicons (paired samples t-test : t(67)=1.59, p>.05, d=.32). The OCDI is a
finite set of words, and at 1; 6, children, on average, can say about half of the
monosyllabic OCDI words that they know. At 2;0, the core ACTIVE lexicon
was larger than the PASSIVE lexicon (t(51)=4.29, p<.001, d=1.10). At 2 ;0,
children, on average can say almost two-thirds of the OCDI monosyllabic
words that they know.
To answer research questions 1 and 2, first a 2 (group)r2 (age)r2
(lexicon) MANOVA with repeated measures on the last variable was run.
The children who scored at or below the 16th percentile for age on the
OCDI expressive score (not the core scores) were coded as LTs, yielding
13 children at 1 ; 6, and 9 children at 2; 0. The lexicon variable was the mean
ND values of the ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons. Bonferroni corrections were
applied to pairwise comparisons.
644

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

Fig. 2. Contribution of

PASSIVE

and

lexicon size to total core lexicon size at 1; 6
and 2; 0.

ACTIVE

Question 1
Is there a significant difference between mean ND values in toddlers'
ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ? There was a significant main effect for lexicon
(F(1,116)=184.98, p<.001, partial g2=.62), with higher ND scores in
ACTIVE (Mean=26.00, SE=.28, CI=25.44-26.55) than PASSIVE (Mean=
20.45, SE=.20, CI=20.05-20.84) lexicons, with age (1;6 and 2;0) and
group status (LT and TD) collapsed. The effect size was large. There
was a significant main effect for age (F(1,116)=7.04, p=.009, partial
g2=.06), with higher ND values for younger (Mean=23.57, SE=.17,
CI=23.23-23.90) than older children (Mean=22.87, SE=.20, CI=
22.48-23.27). The effect size was small. There was no significant
agergroup interaction (F(1,116)=.01, p=.92).
645

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S
TABLE

OCDI expressive
OCDI receptive
OCDI total lexicon
Core ACTIVE lexicon
Core PASSIVE lexicon
Total core lexicon
ND in ACTIVE lexicons
ND in PASSIVE lexicons
Age

3. Descriptive statistics at 2 ; 0

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

SD

51
52
140
27
22
80
21.60
17.64
1; 11

310
274
403
159
128
196
31.87
26.17
2; 01

184.15
121.19
305.35
97.88
60.37
158.25
23.94
20.70
2; 00

70.40
55.81
57.22
37.98
30.05
26.67
2.25
1.75
;01

K-S statistic
0.78
0.11
0.53
1.34
0.61
0.68
1.32
0.91
-

n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

NOTE : SD=standard deviation. OCDI - Oxford Communicative Development Inventory
(Hamilton et al., 2000). ND=phonological neighborhood density. Total lexicon=combined
total of ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons. See text for definitions of core lexicon and ND. K-S test
is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of a normal distribution. n.s. indicates a non-significant
result.

Fig. 3. Mean neighborhood density values for active and passive lexicons at 1; 6 and 2; 0.

There was a significant two-way interaction of lexicon by age
(F(1,116)=4.84, p=.03, partial g2=.04), indicating that the results for the
younger and older children patterned differently for ND in ACTIVE and
646

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

Fig. 4. Mean neighborhood density values for active and passive lexicons for typical
developers and late talkers.

lexicons. The difference between the ND values for the ACTIVE and
lexicons was larger at 1; 6 than at 2 ; 0 (Tables 2 and 3, Figure 3 ;
mean difference=6.45 and 4.65 at 1 ; 6 and 2; 0, respectively).

PASSIVE
PASSIVE

Question 2
Is there a significant difference between LTs and TD AGE-MATCHED
children in the ND values of their ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ? There was a
significant main effect for group (F(1,116)=43.57, p<.001, partial g2=.27),
with higher ND values for the LTs (Mean=24.08, SE=.24, CI=
23.62-24.55) than the TDs (Mean=22.35, SE=.11, CI=22.14-22.58)
overall (collapsed for age). There was a significant two-way interaction
between group and lexicon (F(1,116)=19.85, p<.001, partial g2=.15 ;
Figure 4). The LTs had a greater difference between the ND values of
the ACTIVE versus PASSIVE lexicons than the TDs (Figure 4; mean difference=7.37 and 3.73 for LTs and TDs, respectively).
There was no significant group by age by lexicon interaction
(F(1,116)=.71, p=.40), indicating that at both 1 ;6 and 2; 0 the differences
between the LTs and the TDs patterned in the same way.
647

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

Fig. 5. Contribution of PASSIVE and ACTIVE lexicon size to total CORE lexicon size for
typical developers and late talkers at 1; 6 and 2; 0.

Question 3
Is there a significant difference between LTs and TDs in the number of
words that they say, of all words that they know ? At 1;6 the LT total core
lexicon size (ACTIVE plus PASSIVE core lexicons) is not significantly different
from that of their TD peers (independent samples t-test : t(66)=1.48,
p=.15, d=.48 ; mean number of words for TDs and LTs is 124 and 108,
respectively ; Figure 5).
However, there was a significant difference between LTs and TD children in the percentage of the total core words attributed to the ACTIVE
lexicon. The TD children expressed 50 % of the monosyllabic words that
they knew, while the LTs only expressed 25% (independent samples t-test,
equal variances not assumed : t(38.99)=8.30, p<0.001, d=1.74, mean difference=.25, CI=0.19-0.31). At 1; 6, LTs did not differ from TD children
in overall core lexicon size, but they had significantly fewer words in their
ACTIVE lexicons which were comprised of words from denser portions of the
648

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

ambient language. This fits with the conventional way of categorizing LTs
as those who say significantly fewer words than their age-matched peers.
Of all the monosyllabic core words that children know, at 1;6, on average,
they can say about half of them, with this figure increasing to about
two-thirds at 2; 0. There was no significant difference between LTs and
TD children in core monosyllabic lexicon size at 1;6. However, at 2;0, the
total monosyllabic lexicon size of the TD children was larger than that
of the LTs (t(50)=3.29, p=.002 ; d=1.06; mean number of words for
TDs and LTs was 163 and 134, respectively ; mean difference=29.46,
CI=11.48-47.44). At 2 ; 0, there was a significant difference between LTs
and TD children in the percentage of the total core monosyllabic lexicons
attributed to the ACTIVE lexicon. The TD children expressed 67 % of the
monosyllabic words that they knew, while the LTs only expressed 32%
(t(50)=7.10, p<.001, d=2.87). At 2 ; 0, LTs had significantly smaller core
lexicons than their TD age-matched peers, and significantly fewer words in
their ACTIVE lexicons, which were comprised of words from denser portions
of the ambient language.
Given the surprising result that at 1; 6 the total CORE lexicon size does not
differ between TD and LTs, the analysis was repeated by including all
of the words on the OCDI. The total OCDI scores (all words, including
multisyllabic) were divided into ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons. At 1 ;6, there
was no significant difference in the size of the ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons
(t(67)=1.66, p>.05, d=.41), with means of 108 and 126 for ACTIVE and
PASSIVE lexicons respectively (Figure 6). At 2 ; 0, the ACTIVE lexicon was
larger than the PASSIVE lexicon (t(51)=4.00, p<.001, d=1.21), with means
of 184 and 121, respectively. Note that these checklists are of a finite size
so it is inevitable that PASSIVE lexicons will become smaller than ACTIVE
lexicons with age.
At 1; 6, the TD children expressed 50 % of the OCDI words that they
knew, while the LTs only expressed 27 % (Figure 7 ; independent samples
t-test: t(66)=5.55, p<0.001, d=2.02, mean difference=.23, CI=0.17-0.29).
At 2; 0, the TD children expressed 65% of the OCDI words that they
knew, while the LTs only expressed 33 % (independent samples t-test :
t(50)=6.77, p<0.001, d=2.63, mean difference=.32, CI=0.23-0.42). The
findings from the monosyllabic samples reflect the distributions of the total
OCDI scores.
Question 4
Is there a significant difference between LTs and TD LANGUAGE-MATCHED
children in the ND values of their ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons ? The nine
LT children at 2; 0 were matched on ACTIVE lexicon size with nine TD
children aged 1 ; 6 (six children's lexicons were exact matches, and the other
649

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

Fig. 6. Contribution of

PASSIVE

and

lexicon size to total OCDI lexicon size at 1; 6
and 2; 0.

ACTIVE

three were within one point, e.g., 29 and 30 words). ACTIVE lexicon size
was chosen as the matching metric because expressive vocabulary size is
the variable usually used to categorize LT and TD children. There was
no significant difference between LTs and TD children in the mean ND
values in ACTIVE (independent samples t-test : t(16)=1.40, p>.05, d=.66)
or PASSIVE lexicons (equal variances not assumed : t(9.44)=.71, p>.05,
d=.33).
Question 5
Do large PASSIVE lexicons differ from small PASSIVE lexicons in mean ND
values ? The median PASSIVE lexicon size was identified at 1 ;6 and 2 ;0.
Lexicon sizes above the medians were categorized as large lexicons, and
those below the median, small lexicons. At 1;6, there was no significant
650

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

Fig. 7. Contribution of PASSIVE and ACTIVE lexicon size to total OCDI lexicon size for typical
developers and late talkers at 1; 6 and 2; 0.

difference in mean ND values between large and small PASSIVE lexicons
(independent samples t-test : t(66)=1.64, p>.05, d=.40). The mean
ND values for small and large PASSIVE lexicons were 19.94 and 20.56,
respectively. At 2; 0, there was no significant difference in mean ND values
between large and small PASSIVE lexicons (equal variances not assumed :
t(42.16)=2.05, p>.05, d=.56). The mean ND values for small and large
lexicons were 21.15 and 20.20, respectively.
Do large ACTIVE lexicons differ from small ACTIVE lexicons in mean ND
values ? The median ACTIVE lexicon size was identified at 1; 6 and 2;0.
Lexicon sizes above the medians were categorized as large lexicons, and
those below, small lexicons. At 1; 6, there was a significant difference in
mean ND values between large and small ACTIVE lexicons (independent
samples t-test, equal variance not assumed : t(51.34)=3.92, p<.001,
d=1.09, mean difference=2.57, CI 1.25-3.88). At 2;0, there was a significant difference in mean ND values between large and small ACTIVE lexicons
(independent samples t-test, equal variance not assumed : t(28.54)=6.02,
p<.001, d=2.25, mean difference=2.88, CI=1.90-3.86). Mean ND values
651

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

for the small and large ACTIVE lexicons were 27.08 and 24.51, respectively,
at 1 ; 6, and 25.38 and 22.49, at 2; 0. The effect sizes were large.

Summary of the results
1. Mean ND values were significantly higher in the ACTIVE than the
PASSIVE lexicons at both 1 ; 6 and 2; 0.
2. Mean ND values were significantly higher in LTs' lexicons than TD
age-matched children's lexicons for ACTIVE, but not PASSIVE lexicons at
both 1; 6 and 2; 0. At 1 ; 6, LTs did not differ from TD children in
overall core lexicon size, but they had significantly fewer words in their
ACTIVE lexicons (25% versus 50 %), which were comprised of words from
denser portions of the ambient language. At 2 ;0, LTs had significantly
smaller core lexicons than their TD age-matched peers, and the proportion of words in their ACTIVE lexicon was smaller (32 % versus 67 %),
which were comprised of words from denser portions of the ambient
language.
3. The LTs at 2; 0 were language-matched with TD children at 1 ;6.
There was no significant difference in mean ND values between LT
lexicons and their language-matched TD peers' lexicons.
4. At both 1; 6 and 2; 0, small lexicons had significantly higher ND values
than large lexicons, for the ACTIVE, but not the PASSIVE lexicons.

DISCUSSION
ACTIVE,

but not PASSIVE, lexicons are comprised of words from
dense neighborhoods
The first hypothesis was that words in the PASSIVE lexicon come from
sparser portions of the adult lexicon. The assumption was that at any given
time, the PASSIVE lexicon must be comprised of dense and sparse words, but
once dense words enter the PASSIVE lexicon, they should transition from a
PASSIVE to an ACTIVE status more quickly than sparse words ; dense words
become available for production rapidly, and sparse words do not. In this
study, children's lexicons were split into two mutually exclusive categories
of ACTIVE lexicons (the words understood and said by the child) and PASSIVE
lexicons (only those words understood by the child, but not said) to explore
whether or not the mean neighborhood density values in children's ACTIVE
and PASSIVE lexicons were significantly different. ACTIVE lexicons had significantly higher mean ND values than PASSIVE lexicons. It is noteworthy
that the minimum ND score of the ACTIVE lexicon sits above the mean ND
value of the PASSIVE lexicons (Tables 2 and 3), indicating marked differences
between the ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons, as reflected in the large effect sizes.
652

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

Words that become available for production are predominantly dense,
while sparse words remain in the PASSIVE lexicon presumably because
phonological representations for sparse words are not robust enough to
facilitate word retrieval for production. This explanation would account for
why children's ACTIVE lexicons are comprised of words from dense phonological neighborhoods. In this way, it is assumed that all words that a child
understands have some degree of lexical representation, even if that
representation is partial. Gating tasks show that listeners do not have to hear
all of a phonological form to identify a word, as anticipatory mechanisms
achieve recognition before the entire word is heard (McMurray et al., 2010).
However, the phonological representation must be completely retrieved for
accurate word production. By this logic, words in an ACTIVE lexicon must
have complete, well-formed phonological representations for accurate word
production, whereas words in a PASSIVE lexicon could be less well-formed.
The strength of phonological representations of dense words may result in
dense words becoming part of the ACTIVE lexicon more readily than sparse
words.
Words of high ND in the ambient language generate strong phonological
representations for recurring syllable structures, because words of high ND
by definition share onset (CV#, such as cat, cap), rhyme (#VC, such as cat,
hat), or consonants (C#C, such as cat, cot) and the repeated processing of
these combinations lays down strong and robust word form representations
that are easily accessed in word production. These strong representations
are presumably more easily accessed because they are more easily held
in working memory (Hoover et al., 2010) and/or have a higher resting
activation state than weaker phonological representations (Scarborough,
2012). The phonological representations for sparse words may be fuzzy,
making retrieval of word forms more difficult in production.
At 1; 6, regardless of whether we consider monosyllabic lexicons or total
lexicons, TD children's ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons were of a similar size.
At 2; 0, the ACTIVE lexicons were larger than the PASSIVE lexicons. This
difference between 1; 6 and 2; 0 may reflect children's increasing ability to
develop stronger phonological representations to facilitate word production
as lexicon size increases. Note that this is a conjecture, as the current
study was cross-sectional, not longitudinal. Further work using longitudinal
datasets is required.
Late talkers and the Extended Statistical Learning account
The current findings do not support Stokes' (2010) proposal that LTs have
difficulty abstracting sparse words from the input language. Rather, children understand words from dense AND sparse portions of the input lexicon.
LTs' total lexicon size was similar to that of TD AGE-MATCHED children, but
653

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

the LTs had smaller ACTIVE lexicons, and higher ND values in their ACTIVE,
but not PASSIVE lexicons. It seems that only the densest words were available
for production in LTs. If so, this is the first finding that points directly to a
possible reason for why LTs are slower to learn to talk. The TD children's
ACTIVE lexicons were 50% of the total lexicon at 1 ;6, and 67% of the total
lexicon at 2 ; 0. However, for LT children the difference in ACTIVE lexicon
size at 1; 6 and 2; 0 was minimal (25 % and 32%). At 2;0, LTs had smaller
total lexicons than their TD peers. This finding is consistent with the
Extended Statistical Learning account that proposed that while TD children began to add words from sparse portions of the ambient language to
their ACTIVE lexicons, LT children did not.
When LANGUAGE-MATCHED with their TD peers, LTs' mean ND values
do not differ, for both ACTIVE and PASSIVE lexicons. According to the ExSL
account, LTs continue to use the cues from dense words when their TD
peers have adopted learning mechanisms that enable them to produce sparse
words (Stokes et al., 2012b). The implication is that the lexicons of LT
children at 2 ; 0 should resemble those of TD children at 1; 6, and in the
current analysis they do, providing support for the ExSL. It seems that
LTs employ statistical cues in the same way as their younger TD peers.
Fact or artifact ?
Finally, this research tested the claim that prior results for high ND values
in small expressive lexicons were mathematically inevitable. If the claim
were true, then small PASSIVE lexicons would also have higher mean ND
values than large PASSIVE lexicons. This claim was not supported. Rather,
when small and large lexicons were identified using a median split of lexicon
size, small ACTIVE lexicons had higher mean ND values than large ACTIVE
lexicons, but there was no difference in mean ND values between large and
small PASSIVE lexicons.
Implications
This research has provided a clear way forward to test a set of hypotheses
about children who are LTs. The first hypothesis, as Stokes (2010) suggested, is that lexically targeted intervention for LTs could be effective.
The words that are spoken by the child could form a base set from which
phonological neighbors could be identified and targeted as branching words
to increase the ACTIVE lexicon size. For example, first the clinician would
choose a high-density word that the child is known to say as a base word.
Then, given that there is a greater proportion of rhyme neighbors (e.g., bat,
cat) in English than lead or consonant neighbors (Zamuner, 2009) several
rhyme neighbors of the base word would be selected from those likely to be
654

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

relevant to toddlers. These words would be introduced to the child via play,
with the child imitating the clinician's production of the neighbors. Once
the child had learned to say a neighbor (e.g., hat), then the base word could
shift, and another set of rhyme neighbors selected, particularly to avoid the
development of a limited number of neighborhoods. With careful planning,
sets of neighbors could be chosen to gradually introduce words from sparser
neighborhoods.
The second hypothesis is that LTs continue to struggle to develop
representations for sparse words across time. While their typically
developing peers move beyond reliance on recurring phonological strings in
the input to form phonological representations that are strong enough to
allow for word production, the LTs do not. This hypothesis should be
tested in longitudinal datasets.
The third hypothesis is that these children fail to develop sufficiently
robust phonological representations for words of average to low phonological neighborhood density for word production. In a severe case, it is
possible that only words from the densest portions of the ambient language
would form robust representations, and therefore ACTIVE lexicons would
be very small. If so, a logical question is whether LTs use gesture to
encode words that are known, but are not produced verbally. If so, not only
would there be further evidence of a phonological encoding deficit, but
these words would be good targets for interventions designed to increase
children's spoken lexicons by a gradual shift from gestured to spoken
words.
Limitations and further research
An inevitable limitation in the current work is that the instrument used to
determine the children's lexicons was a parent report instrument. While the
validity of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories has
been established (e.g., Dale, Bates, Reznick & Morisset, 1989), HoustonPrice, Mather and Sakkalou (2007) reported that parents underestimated
the size of their children's receptive lexicons. This means that not only is
the size estimate potentially inaccurate, but so too is the list of specific
words that children understand. The current work could be improved upon
with respect to the data source. First, the current findings should be
replicated with other children, and across other ages. Second, testxretest
receptive lexicon data might be useful. Third, an additional means for
measuring word knowledge should be used to verify the words in children's
receptive lexicons. Candidates are electrophysiological measures (Mills,
Coffey-Corina & Neville, 1997) and preferential looking measures (e.g.,
Houston-Price et al., 2007), as well as behavioral observations during play
sessions within clinics or laboratories.
655

S T E P H A N I E F. S T O K E S

A second limitation is that only neighborhood density was explored in this
research. The research set out to examine whether or not what we know
about how dense and sparse word are processed in word recognition and
word production could shed light on why late talkers are late, and so density
was the variable of choice. However, it might be that phonotactic
probability, or frequency-weighted densities, may yield similar results, or
different results at different age points (e.g., Storkel, 2009).
A third limitation is that the children with fewer than 21 words in
their lexicons were excluded from the analysis in order to use parametric
statistics to address the research questions. Future work should consider
alternative statistical procedures or analysis of individual variation to allow
inclusion of these children.

CONCLUSION

This research has unveiled a unique characteristic of children's emerging
lexicons, one that potentially sheds light on why late talkers are late. The
results indicate a probable point of vulnerability in the learning mechanisms
of children who are slow to develop an expressive lexicon.

REFERENCES
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The CELEX Lexical Database
(CD-ROM). Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Bishop, D. V. M., Holt, G., Line, E., McDonald, D., McDonald, S. & Watt, H. (2012).
Parental phonological memory contributes to prediction of outcome of late talkers from 20
months to 4 years : A longitudinal study of precursors of specific language impairment.
Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders 4, 1-12.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity neighborhoods of words in young
children's lexicons. Journal of Child Language 17, 205-15.
Chen, Q. & Mirman, D. (2012). Competition and cooperation among similar representations : toward a unified account of facilitative and inhibitory effects of lexical neighbors.
Psychological Review 119, 417-30.
Dale, P. S., Bates, E., Reznick, J. S. & Morisset, C. (1989). The validity of a parent
report instrument of child language at twenty months. Journal of Child Language 16,
239-49.
Dale, P. S., Simonoff, E., Bishop, D. V. M. & Plomin, R. (1998). Genetic influence on
language delay in two-year-old children. Nature Neuroscience 1, 324-28.
De Cara, B. & Goswami, U. (2002). Similarity relations among spoken words : The special
status of rimes in English. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 34,
416-23.
De Cara, B. & Goswami, U. (n.d. ). Statistical analysis of similarity relations among spoken
words : Evidence for the special status of rimes in English. Retrieved from <http://portail.
unice.fr/jahia/page12414.html>.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence production.
Psychological Review 93, 283-321.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E., Hartung, J. P. _ Reilly, J. S.
(1993). MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories : User's guide and technical
manual. Baltimore : Brookes.

656

NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY IN EMERGING LEXICONS

Gierut, J. A. & Dale, R. A. (2007). Comparability of lexical corpora : Word frequency in
phonological generalization. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics 21, 423-33.
Goldrick, M., Folk, J. R. & Rapp, B. (2010). Mrs. Malaprop's neighborhood : Using word
errors to reveal neighborhood structure. Journal of Memory and Language 62(2), 113-34.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K. & Schafer, G. (2000). Infant vocabulary development assessed
with a British communicative development inventory. Journal of Child Language 27,
689-705.
Hoover, J. R., Storkel, H. L. & Hogan, T. P. (2010). A cross-sectional comparison of the
effects of phonotactic probability and neighborhood density on word learning by preschool
children. Journal of Memory and Language 63, 100-16.
Houston-Price, C., Mather, E. & Sakkalou, E. (2007). Discrepancy between parental report
of infants' receptive vocabulary and infants' behavior in a preferential looking task. Journal
of Child Language 34, 701-24.
Jones, S. S. & Smith, L. B. (2005). Object name learning and object perception : A deficit in
late talkers. Journal of Child Language 32, 223-40.
McMurrary, B., Samelson, V. M., Lee, S. H. & Tomblin, J. B. (2010). Individual differences in online spoken word recognition : Implications for SLI. Cognitive Psychology 60,
1-39.
Mills, D. L., Coffey-Corina, S. & Neville, H. J. (1997). Language comprehension and
cerebral specialization from 13 to 20 months. Developmental Neuropsychology 13, 397-445.
Munroe, N., Baker, E., McGregor, K., Docking, K. & Arculi, J. (2012). Why word learning
is not fast. Frontiers in Psychology 3(41), 1-10.
Nakagawa, S. (2004). A farewell to Bonferroni : The problems of low statistical power and
publication bias. Behavioral Ecology 15(6), 1044-45.
Scarborough, R. (2012). Lexical similarity and speech production : Neighborhoods for
nonwords. Lingua 122, 164-76.
Stokes, S. F. (2010). Neighborhood density and word frequency in toddlers. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 53, 670-83.
Stokes, S. F., Bleses, D., Basboll, H. & Lambertsen, C. (2012a). Statistical learning in
emerging lexicons : The case of Danish. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
55, 1265-73.
Stokes, S. F., Kern, S. & dos Santos, C. (2012b). Extended statistical learning as an account
for slow vocabulary growth. Journal of Child Language 39(1), 105-29.
Stokes, S. F. & Klee, T. (2009a). Factors that influence vocabulary development in
two-year-old children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 50, 498-505.
Stokes, S. F. & Klee, T. (2009b). The diagnostic accuracy of a new test of early nonword
repetition for differentiating late talking and typically developing children. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 52, 872-82.
Storkel, H. L. (2004). Do children acquire dense neighborhoods ? An investigation of
similarity neighborhoods in lexical acquisition. Applied Psycholinguistics 25, 201-21.
Storkel, H. L. (2009). Developmental differences in the effects of phonological, lexical and
semantic variables on word learning by infants. Journal of Child Language 36, 291-321.
Thal, D. J. (2000). Late-talking toddlers : Are they are risk? San Diego : San Diego State
University Press.
Vitevitch, M. S. (2002a). Influence of onset density on spoken-word recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology : Learning, Memory, and Cognition 28, 270-78.
Vitevitch, M. S. (2002b). The influence of phonological similarity neighborhoods on speech
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning, Memory, and Cognition 28,
735-47.
Yao, Y. (2011). Effects of neighborhood density on pronunciation variation. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Yuen, Y. L. & Murphy, V. A. (2010). Vocabulary knowledge and growth in immersion and
regular language-learning programmes in Hong Kong. Language and Education 24, 215-38.
Zamuner, T. S. (2009). The structure and nature of phonological neighborhoods in
children's early lexicons. Journal of Child Language 36, 3-21.

657

