Applied Psycholinguistics 35 (2014), 225-241
doi:10.1017/S0142716412000379

Older sibling influences on the
language environment and language
development of toddlers in bilingual
homes
KELLY BRIDGES
New York University and Nathan Kline Institute
ERIKA HOFF
Florida Atlantic University
Received: November 15, 2010

Accepted for publication: January 10, 2012

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Kelly Bridges, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development, Department of
Communicative Sciences and Disorders, New York University, 665 Broadway, 9th Floor, New York,
NY 10012. E-mail: kab516@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
Two separate studies examined older siblings' influence on the language exposure and language
development of US-born toddlers who were being raised in bilingual homes. The participants in Study
1 were 60 children between 16 and 30 months who had heard English and another language at home
from birth; 26 had older siblings, and 34 did not. The participants in Study 2 were 27 children, assessed
at 22 and 30 months, who had heard English and Spanish from birth; 14 had school-aged older siblings,
and 13 did not. Both studies found that older siblings used English more in talking to the toddlers than
did other household members and that toddlers with older siblings were more advanced in English
language development. Study 2 also found that the presence of a school-aged older sibling increased
mothers' use of English with their toddlers and that toddlers without a school-aged older sibling were
more advanced in Spanish than the toddlers with a school-aged older sibling. These findings contribute
to a picture of the complex processes that shape language use in bilingual homes and cause variability
in young children's bilingual development.

Children who are exposed to two languages vary widely in the bilingual proficiency
they achieve. Some become fully bilingual; others become far more competent
in one language than the other. The varied patterns of bilingual competency that
characterize young children in dual language environments are not well understood, and there have been calls recently from several sources for research to
investigate sources of variability in bilingual development (Center for Early Care
and Education Research, 2010; Hammer, Miccio, & Rodriguez, 2004; McCardle
& Hoff, 2006). Because children's early oral language skills have consequences
(c) Cambridge University Press 2012 0142-7164/12 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

226

for their later academic achievement (e.g., Miller et al., 2006; Morrison, Connor,
& Bachman, 2006), and because the number of children entering school from
bilingual homes is increasing in many regions of the world (Garcia & Jensen,
2009; Scheele, Leseman, & Mayo, 2010), understanding the factors that create
variability in bilingual development is a pressing need.
The variable outcomes of dual language exposure also pose an explanatory challenge for theories of language acquisition. Maturational factors cannot explain the
within-child differences in the rate of language development that bilingual children
often display. In contrast, theories that accord a substantial role to input in language
acquisition are consistent with the robust finding that the relative amount of input
children receive in each of their languages predicts the relative rate of development
in those languages (David & Wei, 2008; De Houwer, 2009; Gathercole, 2007;
Gathercole & Hoff, 2007; Gathercole & Thomas, 2009; Hoff et al., 2011; Parra,
Hoff, & Core, 2011; Pearson, Fernandez, Lewedeg, & Oller, 1997; Place & Hoff,
2011). Although this finding that relative amount of exposure predicts balance in
bilingual development points to input as a source of variability, it leaves many
questions about input unanswered. Some evidence suggests that different sources
and contexts of input may have different effects (Place & Hoff, 2011; Vagh, Pan,
& Mancilla-Martinez, 2009), but very little research has addressed this question.
Moreover, findings that variable patterns of language exposure create variability in
bilingual development move the question of explaining bilingual development to
questions about what factors shape dual language exposure. In that regard, some
studies have identified parents' immigration status and number of native heritage
language speakers in the household as influences (Hakuta & D'Andrea, 1992;
Ishizawa, 2004; Place & Hoff, 2011), but many questions remain.
The aim of this study was to examine the influence of older siblings on language
use in bilingual homes and on the language acquisition of young toddlers in those
homes. The role of siblings in bilingual development has been discussed in several
case studies of bilingual children (Caldas, 2006; Wang, 2008; Yip & Matthews,
2007). These reports suggest that language use in sibling interaction does not
necessarily follow the same pattern as parents' dual language use, that older
siblings have a greater influence on the language used in sibling interaction than
does a younger child, and that the language of sibling interaction is typically
the dominant language in the larger environment. For example, in describing the
French-English bilingual development of his children in the English-dominant
environment of the United States, Caldas (2006) reported that both parents spoke
only French at home to their youngest (twin) children, but that their oldest child,
who spoke English more than French, addressed his siblings in English.
Anecdotal reports from bilingual parents in the United States concur with this
description. An older sibling, they say, brings English into the home and reduces the
use of the heritage language. There are several reasons why this might be the case.
Children from bilingual homes who use English at school may be more proficient
in English than in the heritage language and prefer to use it for that reason (Jia
& Aaronson, 2003; Kohnert, 2002). Moreover, at least among Spanish-English
bilingual children in the United States, English is clearly the language of peer
interaction among school-aged children (Oller & Eilers, 2002), and children may
extend this preference to language use with their siblings at home.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

227

While the influence of older siblings may be to diminish the use and acquisition
of the heritage language, older siblings may at the same time have salutary effects
on the English language development of young children. In some immigrant
families, for instance, the first child to enter school may be the first English
speaker in the household and may be more proficient in English than the parents.
This potentially makes older siblings a source of input that supports younger
children's English language development, but the evidence from the literature
on sibling effects is mixed in its implications. Research has documented that
older siblings have significant roles in the upbringing of young children and are
significant sources of language input in many cultures (Zukow-Goldring, 2002).
In contrast, the speech older children address to toddlers differs from the mothers'
child-directed speech in ways that suggest it may be a less rich model from which
to learn (Hoff-Ginsberg & Krueger, 1991), which is consistent with the evidence
that the rate of language development is not as rapid in later-born children as in
firstborns (Bates, 1975; Hoff, 2006; Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998; Huttenlocher, Waterfall,
Vasilyeva, Vevea, & Hedges, 2010).
Two studies presented here investigated the influence of older siblings on the language environments and language development of bilingually developing toddlers.
The first study investigated the influence of an older sibling on 16- to 30-month-old
children's exposure to and acquisition of English in a sample of toddlers living in
homes in which both English and another language were used. In that study, the
second languages varied, and only English use and development were the focus of
study. The second study investigated the influence of having a school-aged older
sibling in a separate sample of children assessed at 22 and 30 months who lived
in Spanish-English bilingual homes, which allowed investigating older sibling
influence on bilingual toddlers' development of both their languages.
STUDY 1

In Study 1, the parents of 60 toddlers living in bilingual homes provided information about language use in the home and about their children's English
language development. The hypothesis that older siblings are a significant source
of language-advancing English input yielded three predictions: (a) that toddlers
with older siblings would hear more English at home, on average, than toddlers
without older siblings, (b) that toddlers with older siblings would have higher English vocabulary scores than toddlers without older siblings, and (c) that toddlers'
English skills would be positively related to the relative amount of English their
older siblings used in talking to them.
Method
Participants. The parents (58 mothers, 2 fathers) of 60 children (36 boys, 24 girls)

participated in this study. For all children, according to parent report, two different
languages were used in the home in direct interaction with the child. All the target
children were between 16 and 30 months old (M age = 22.54 months, SD =
3.94). According to parent identification, 31 children were Hispanic, 7 European
American, 7 African American, 1 Asian, and 14 were described as being of another

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

228

ethnicity. All participants reported having children who were healthy, full-term,
and born in the United States. All families were residing in South Florida. The
language other than English was Spanish in 22 homes; other second languages
included Portuguese, Creole, Hebrew, French, and others, all in small numbers.
Twenty-six of the toddlers (15 boys, 11 girls) had one or more older siblings;
34 (21 boys, 13 girls) were firstborn or only children. The two groups of toddlers
were comparable in terms of their mean age and their parents' level of education.
The mean age of the toddlers with older siblings was 21.89 months (SD = 4.31);
the mean age of the toddlers without older siblings was 23.03 months (SD =
3.62). Among the toddlers with older siblings, 50% of mothers and 52% of fathers
had at least a college degree; among the toddlers without older siblings 62% of
mothers and 55% of fathers had at least a college degree. Among those with an
older sibling, 52% had two parents who were native speakers of a language other
than English; among those without older siblings, 26% had two parents who were
native speakers of a language other than English. Other evidence suggests that
parents who are native speakers of another language use English less in talking
to their children (Place & Hoff, 2011); this difference between the two groups of
children would work against the present hypothesis.
Procedure. Participants were recruited through fliers at local day-care centers

and programs for young children and by word of mouth. When contact with a
parent was made, a trained research assistant ascertained that inclusion criteria for
the study were met (i.e., the child was exposed to two languages, was born in the
United States, had no major medical or health problems, had no obvious signs of
developmental delay).
An extensive interview about home language use was conducted in English
with a parent who was a source of English input for the target child. In the
course of the interview, estimates of the percentage of time English was used
in the household overall and estimates of the percentage of time English was
used in sibling-to-sibling conversation were obtained. The validity of this method
of estimating children's language exposure in bilingual households is supported
by findings from a separate study that parent estimates provided in interviews
are highly correlated with measures of language use obtained from 7-day diary
records kept by mothers following the Language Diary procedure developed by
De Houwer and Bornstein (2003; Place & Hoff, 2011).
The parent also filled out the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development
Inventory: Words and Sentences--Short Form (CDI). The CDI short form is
a standardized checklist of 100 common words for children between 16 and
30 months, with established reliability and validity (Fenson et al., 2000). It yields
a raw vocabulary score and percentile scores based on a norming sample of more
than 1,000 children. Because the children in the present sample differed in age,
percentile scores were used.
Results

The mean use of English in the home for toddlers with and without older siblings,
the mean use of English in sibling interaction for those toddlers who had an

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

229

Table 1. Study 1 means (standard deviations) for use of English in the
home and English vocabulary percentile scores for toddlers with and
without older siblings

Measure
English portion (%) of overall
home language use
English portion (%) of language
use in sibling interaction
Toddler's English vocabulary
percentile score

Toddlers With No
Sibs (n = 34)

Toddlers With
Sibs (n = 26)

59.29
(27.41)

66.69
(27.88)
75.46a
(30.63)
31.34b
(26.14)

20.74
(20.38)

a
Significantly greater than English portion of overall home language use
for these participants.
b
Significantly greater than English vocabulary percentile scores for
toddlers with no school-aged siblings.
*p < .05 (one tailed).

older sibling, and the mean CDI vocabulary percentile for both groups of toddlers
are presented in Table 1. Two comparisons addressed the hypothesis that older
siblings increase toddlers' exposure to English. Reported overall use of English in
the homes of toddlers with and without older siblings was compared and was not
significantly different. Reported use of English in sibling interaction was compared
to reported use of English overall, with the finding that mean use of English in
sibling conversation was significantly greater than mean household use, t (25) =
1.93, p = .03, one tailed, 2p = 0.13. To address the effect of older siblings
on toddlers' English development, mean CDI percentile scores were compared,
with the finding that toddlers with older siblings had significantly higher English
vocabulary scores than those without older siblings, t (58) = 1.77, p = .04, one
tailed, d = 0.45.
Two analyses tested the hypothesis that use of English with older siblings
predicted toddlers' English skills. First, toddlers with older siblings were grouped
according to whether they used only English in sibling interaction (n = 11) or both
English and another language (n = 14), and the English vocabulary percentiles of
those groups were compared. (There was one participant who was reported to hear
only a language other than English in sibling interaction.) Among these toddlers
who all had older siblings, those who were reported to hear only English from
their older siblings had a mean vocabulary percentile of 45.45 (SD = 27.88), while
those who were reported to hear English and another language from their older
siblings had a mean English vocabulary percentile of 22.14 (SD = 20.07). This
difference was significant, t (23) = 2.43, p = .01, one tailed, d = 1.16. Second, the
correlation between reported percentage of English usage in sibling conversation
and toddler English vocabulary was calculated; it was positive and significant,
r (n = 26) = .36, p = .04, one tailed.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

230

Discussion

Study 1 findings support the hypothesis that older siblings are an important source
of English language exposure for young children in bilingual homes and have a
significant influence on their English language development. According to parent
report, toddlers' conversations with their older siblings were more likely to occur
in English than were the toddlers' conversations with others. The toddlers who had
older siblings were more advanced for their age in English than toddlers without
older siblings. Within the group of toddlers who had an older sibling, those whose
siblings used English more were more advanced in English, which also attests to
the influence of siblings. These findings are consistent with arguments from the
literature on monolingual children that siblings can serve as sources of languageadvancing input (Zukow-Goldring, 2002).
Although the foregoing findings are internally consistent and support the hypothesis that older children draw bilingual homes toward greater use of English
than toddlers do, the study has limitations. The hypothesis of sibling effects really
applies to siblings who have school or preschool experiences in English outside
the home, but because the data were collected for another purpose, information
on the age and activities of the older siblings was not available. A second limitation of this study is that only English vocabulary was examined as an outcome.
Study 2 was designed to address these limitations by comparing toddlers with older
school-aged siblings to toddlers with no older siblings by assessing vocabulary
and grammatical development and by assessing the toddlers' development in both
languages they were learning. Study 2 also made use of longitudinal data to assess
the stability of effects of older siblings on toddlers' language environments and
language development.
STUDY 2

Method
Participants. The participants were 27 children who were being raised in
Spanish-English bilingual homes and whose mothers were native speakers of
Spanish. In all families, the mothers were the primary caregivers. These participants were a subset of children selected from a larger study of early language
development in children in Spanish-English bilingual homes. In that study, all
children had been exposed to both languages since birth and the less-frequently
heard language constituted at least 10% of their language exposure. Only those
with native Spanish-speaking mothers were selected in order to have a sample of
children for whom a Spanish-dominant language environment was possible; for
13 of the children (7 who had older siblings and 6 who did not), the father was also
a native Spanish speaker. Fourteen of the children had one or more siblings at least
6 years old; 13 had no siblings who were 6 or older. Of the 14 with school-aged
older siblings, 10 had one older sibling (mean age = 6.67 years), and 4 had two
older siblings (mean age = 7.38 years). Of the 13 with no school-aged siblings, 3
had an older sibling who was 3 years old (one of these also had a twin who was not
included in these analyses); 5 had younger, infant siblings; 5 were only children. All
of the school-aged siblings attended English-only schools. All mothers described

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

231

themselves as bilingual. Four of the children with school-aged siblings attended
English-only childcare, 1 attended Spanish-only childcare, 2 attended bilingual
childcare, and 7 did not attend childcare. Three of the children with no schoolaged siblings attended English-only childcare, 1 attended bilingual childcare, and
9 did not attend childcare. There was no significant association between sibling
status and type of childcare. In the group with school-aged siblings, 10 were boys,
and 4 were girls; in the group with no school-aged siblings, 7 were boys, and 6
were girls. All children were full-term and healthy at birth, had normal hearing,
and showed no evidence of communicative delay at the time of study entry (22
months) using a standardized screening instrument (Squires, Potter, & Bricker,
1999). The parents were highly educated: 26 of the mothers had at least a college
degree, and 1 had a 2-year degree; 21 of the fathers had at least a college degree,
2 had 2-year degrees, and 4 had high school degrees.
Procedure. Subjects were recruited through advertisements in local magazines

aimed at parents of young children, through electronic announcements, through
contact with parents at library programs and preschools, and by word of mouth.
In the initial contact, typically by telephone, a fully bilingual researcher explained
the study in the language used by the caregiver and determined that the child was
full-term or nearly full-term and healthy at birth, had no serious medical problems,
and had begun to speak. At 22 months, caregivers completed the Ages and Stages
Questionnaire (Squires et al., 1999) in their preferred language.
When the children were 22 and 30 months, the caregivers were administered
a Home Language Environment Questionnaire, which was an elaborated version
of the interview about home language use conducted with parents in Study 1.
Caregivers also completed the long forms of the CDI (Fenson et al., 1993) and
El Inventario del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicatives (Jackson-Maldonado
et al., 2003). These inventories are caregiver-report instruments that yield measures
of vocabulary and grammatical development. The reliability of both instruments
as a means of assessing vocabulary and grammatical development has been established against samples of spontaneous speech in monolingual and bilingual
populations (Fenson et al., 1993; Jackson-Maldonado et al., 2003; Marchman &
Martinez-Sussmann, 2002). The visits were conducted in the participants' homes
or, if the caregiver chose, in a laboratory playroom on campus. Approximately
85% of visits were conducted in the participants' homes. At approximately 60% of
the assessments for the bilingual children, the same caregiver filled out the Spanish
and English inventories; 40% of the time a different caregiver completed the two
instruments. If a different family member completed one of the instruments, it was
left with the primary caregiver and mailed in by the participant or picked up by
the examiner at the next visit.
Measures. The language inventories yielded raw vocabulary scores based on
words the children had been heard to produce and also yielded two measures of
grammatical development: (a) a grammatical complexity score based on 37 items
in which a pair of utterances is presented, one grammatically more advanced
than the other, and the caregiver indicates which sounds more like her child's
speech, and (b) the mean length of the longest three utterances (MLU3) the child

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

232

has been heard to produce, calculated in morphemes for both languages and
excluding utterances that included words from both languages. The English and
Spanish versions of these inventories are not direct translations, but rather are
independently developed and normed against monolingual English- and Spanishspeaking populations. Estimates of the English proportion of total home language
use, including all sources of child-directed speech, and of mothers' and siblings'
use of English in talking to the toddler were obtained from the mothers' responses
to the Home Language Environment Questionnaire.
Results
Effects of older siblings on toddlers' dual language exposure. The means for the

measures of English language exposure for toddlers with and without school-aged
older siblings are presented in Figure 1. The effect of having an older, schoolaged sibling on English use in the home was assessed in a 2 (Sibling Status)
x 2 (Age) mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) with percentage of English in
the home as the outcome variable. The effect of Sibling Status was significant;
in homes with an older sibling who attended school, English was used a greater
percentage of the time than in homes without an older child who attended school
F (1, 25) = 8.47, p = .007, 2p = 0.25. Because English exposure was measured
as a percentage of total exposure, wherever English exposure was greater Spanish
exposure was necessarily less. There was no significant effect of Age and no
significant Sibling Status x Age interaction. A 2 (Sibling Status) x 2 (Age)
mixed ANOVA with percentage of English in mothers' speech addressed to the
toddler as the outcome revealed that mothers who also have older, school-aged
children use English in talking to their toddler more than mothers who do not have
an older child who attends school. The effect of Sibling Status on mothers' use of
English was significant, F (1, 25) = 5.80, p = .02, 2p = 0.19. Within the group of
children who had an older, school-aged sibling, separate t tests compared the use
of English by mothers and siblings at 22 and 30 months. Both comparisons revealed
significant differences: in talking to toddlers, older siblings spoke proportionately
more English than mothers did, t (11) = 1.86, p < .05, one tailed at 22 months
and t (12) = 1.79, p < .05 one tailed at 30 months. (The ns differ from each other
and from analyses of other measures because of missing data on this variable.)
Effects of older siblings on toddlers' bilingual development. The means for the

toddlers' English and Spanish vocabulary are presented in Figure 2. A 2 (Sibling
Status) x 2 (Age) x 2 (Language) mixed ANOVA assessed the effect of having an
older, school-attending sibling on the toddlers' acquisition of English and Spanish
vocabulary. There was no main effect of Sibling Status averaged across Language,
F (1, 25) < 1; that is, toddlers with and without school-aged siblings did not differ
in total language knowledge. There was a significant main effect of Age, F (1, 25) =
72.14, p < .001, 2p = 0.74; children grew in vocabulary knowledge between 22
and 30 months. There was a significant Age x Language interaction, F (1, 25) =
6.81, p = .015, 2p = 0.21; on average, children's English vocabularies grew more
than their Spanish vocabularies. Central to the hypothesis of the present study,
there was a Sibling Status x Language interaction, F (1, 25) = 7.49, p = .011,

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

233

Figure 1. Study 2 mean levels of overall English use in the home, mean English use in mothers'
child-directed speech, and mean English use in older siblings' child-directed speech for children
in Spanish-English bilingual homes at 22 and 30 months. [A color version of this figure can
be viewed online at http://journal.cambridge.org/aps]

2p = 0.23; the children with older siblings were more advanced in English than
Spanish while the children without older siblings were more advanced in Spanish
than in English. The three-way Age x Sibling Status x Language interaction was
not significant.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

234

Figure 2. Study 2 mean productive vocabulary scores in English and Spanish at 22 and 30
months for toddlers with and without older siblings. [A color version of this figure can be
viewed online at http://journal.cambridge.org/aps]

The means for toddlers' grammatical complexity score and MLU3 are presented
in Figure 3 and Figure 4. Because these measures are not comparable across
languages, separate analyses were conducted for each measure in English and
Spanish. There were significant main effects of Age on both measures in both
languages, revealing that the children were progressing in acquiring the grammar
of English and Spanish during the period from 22 to 30 months, Fs (1, 25) for
grammatical complexity in English, grammatical complexity in Spanish, MLU3
in English and MLU3 in Spanish = 20.30, 15.68, 88.58, and 27.38, respectively,

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

235

Figure 3. Study 2 mean productive grammatical complexity scores in English and Spanish at
22 and 30 months for toddlers with and without older siblings. [A color version of this figure
can be viewed online at http://journal.cambridge.org/aps]

all ps < .001, 2p = 0.49, 0.39, 0.78, and 0.52, respectively. The effects of Sibling
Status on grammatical complexity in English and in Spanish were significant as
one-tailed tests, F (1, 25) = 2.91, p = .10, 2p = 0.11 for English and F (1, 25) =
3.78, p = .06, 2p = 0.13 for Spanish. The Sibling Status x Age interaction was not
significant with English grammatical complexity as the outcome measure but was
significant (again, by a one-tailed criterion) with Spanish grammatical complexity
as the outcome, F (1, 25) = 3.52, p = .07, 2p = 0.12. The toddlers without
school-aged siblings made greater gains in Spanish between 22 and 30 months than

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

236

Figure 4. Study 2 mean length of longest utterances in English and Spanish at 22 and 30
months for toddlers with and without older siblings. [A color version of this figure can be
viewed online at http://journal.cambridge.org/aps]

did the toddlers who had school-aged siblings. Although the pattern of differences
in MLU3 was like the pattern of differences in grammatical complexity, the only
significant effect on MLU3 in either language was the effect of age. There was no
significant effect of Sibling Status nor Sibling Status x Age interaction on MLU3
in either language.
Discussion

The findings of Study 2 revealed effects of having an older sibling who attends
school on the language experience and language development of toddlers in

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

237

bilingual homes. At 22 and 30 months, the toddlers with older, school-aged siblings heard more English than the toddlers without school-aged siblings. Two
factors contributed to this effect: the school-aged siblings used English more than
the mothers did, but the mothers who had school-aged children also used English
more than mothers in households with no school-aged children, even when talking
to the toddler.
These differences in language experience had predictable effects on the toddlers' language development. The toddlers with school-aged siblings were more
advanced in English and less advanced in Spanish, compared to the toddlers without school-aged siblings. The toddlers without school-aged siblings were more
advanced in Spanish than they were in English, while the toddlers with school-aged
siblings were more advanced in English than they were in Spanish. An important
point to note: where it was possible to look at language knowledge combined
across languages, namely in the domain of vocabulary size, the children with and
without older, school-attending siblings did not differ in total language knowledge. They differed only in the distribution of their knowledge between English
and Spanish. The effects of having an older sibling on the children's grammatical
development were in the same direction as the effects on vocabulary, but they
were smaller and in the case of MLU, not significant. The finding of similar trends
in effects on vocabulary and grammar is not surprising given other evidence that
vocabulary and grammatical development are related, including within-language
relations between vocabulary and grammar among bilingual children (Marchman,
Martinez-Sussmann, & Dale, 2004). The finding of more robust effects on vocabulary also parallels other findings in the literature that vocabulary growth is more
sensitive to input effects than is grammatical development (Hoff, 2006; Zhang,
Jin, Shen, Zhang, & Hoff, 2008).

GENERAL DISCUSSION

In a series of two studies, the influence of older siblings on language use in bilingual
homes with young toddlers and the influence of older siblings on the language
development of those toddlers were assessed. Specifically, we sought to determine
the role that language input from older siblings has on the bilingual development
of younger children in the household. Study 1 found that in bilingual homes,
toddlers' conversations with their older siblings were more likely to be in English
than other conversations in the household and that toddlers who have older siblings
show more advanced English vocabulary for their age than toddlers without older
siblings. The inference that exposure to English via older siblings was the cause of
the these English skills is supported by the findings that the amount of English that
older siblings used with younger children was a positive predictor of the younger
children's English vocabulary development. The findings of Study 1 left some
unanswered questions: despite the difference in English use between siblings and
household use in general, the difference in household use between the homes
of toddlers with and without older siblings was not significant, raising questions
about the overall impact of older siblings on households. Moreover, Study 1 looked
only at toddlers' English development, leaving open the possibility that the effect

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

238

of siblings was not a specific effect of English use on English development, but
possibly a more general effect of the stimulation of an older sibling on development
or language development.
Study 2 addressed these open questions. When households with older siblings
who attended school taught in English were compared to households with no
school-aged children, the difference in English usage was significant. The more
detailed data available in Study 2 revealed not only that older, school-aged siblings
use English more than mothers, but also that mothers who had an older child in
addition to the target toddler used English more in talking to their toddler than
did mothers with only a toddler. The findings of Study 2 replicated the effect
observed in Study 1 of older siblings on toddlers' English and revealed that the
effect was not on language development in general but on the acquisition of
English. Toddlers without older siblings who heard less English at home were
more advanced in Spanish than toddlers with older siblings. The findings of Study
2 also demonstrated that language development differences between toddlers with
and without older siblings were not confined to vocabulary but appeared in at least
some measures of grammatical development as well. Last, the findings of Study
2 demonstrate that the effects of older siblings on toddlers' English exposure and
English development were stable across the period of development from 22 to
30 months.
The present findings are consistent with previous work on the influence of
siblings that has argued that older siblings can serve as a significant source of language exposure to young bilingually developing children (e.g., Zukow-Goldring,
2002). The present findings suggest that older siblings may be a valuable source
of English exposure to young children in some immigrant households. Although
other findings have suggested that older siblings are not equivalent to adults as
sources of language-advancing input (Hoff-Ginsberg & Krueger, 1991), there was
no evidence of that in the present data. The effect of older siblings was on the
balance of English and Spanish in the children's development, but not on the overall
rate of development. In that regard, however, it is important to point out that the
present findings are limited to a very early period in language development. The
continued role of siblings in the English language use and English development
of children in bilingual homes requires further study. The present findings also
confirm the informal observation that heritage language use in the home is less
likely to be maintained as children enter school and bring their English experience home. Thus, the entry of children into school, at least into schools that use
English as the medium of instruction, as was the case for all the older siblings in
Study 2, appears to contribute to heritage language loss as it also contributes to
English language development in their younger siblings.
The present studies provide only a limited window on the influence of older
children in bilingual households on their younger siblings' language environments.
We have measured children's exposure using caregiver estimates of the balance
of English and heritage language use in the home. Although these and other
data suggest that these measures are valid and relevant to children's language
development, it is clear from other research that children's total amount of language experience varies from home to home and that the total amount of children's
language experience matters for language development (e.g., Hoff, 2006). It is

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

239

also clear from research on monolingual and bilingual children that some types
of input are more supportive of language development than others, such that not
only quantity but also the quality of input matters (Hoff, 2006; Place & Hoff,
2011). Moreover, we have measured the children's language development using
only caregiver report instruments and the summary measures of vocabulary and
grammatical development they yield. Again, although these measures are valid
measures of language development, they may not fully capture the differences in
language development that older sibling influences produce. Last, the findings of
these studies may be specific to bilingual environments in which one language is
clearly the culturally dominant language and the other is a heritage and minority language. For all the school-aged siblings in these studies, English was the
language of instruction in school, and the findings of other research suggest that
English would have been the almost exclusive language of peer interaction for these
older children (Oller & Eilers, 2002). In a different type of bilingual environment,
in which the two languages used at home were both used in instruction and among
peers, the influence of an older sibling might be different.
These limitations notwithstanding, the present findings shed new light on the
contextual variables that shape young children's dual language experience and
the processes that account for variability in early bilingual development. When
the language that adults speak in the home differs from the culturally dominant
language, the children in households who leave the home each day to attend school
are a bridge between the home and larger environment. These children bring the
language they use in school home with them and influence the balance of language
use in bilingual homes. The result is that young toddlers in bilingual homes hear
the culturally dominant language more and acquire it more rapidly when they
have a school-aged sibling. This exposure to and acquisition of the culturally
dominant language appears to come at the expense of the heritage language. An
important finding of the present work is that school-aged siblings add to the use
of the culturally dominant language not only by speaking it themselves but also
by increasing their mothers' use of that language. This finding is an example of
how the nested influences of different levels of children's environments exert their
effects (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998). In this case a societal level variable,
the language used in schooling, influences the home environments that children
experience.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Grant HD054427 (to E.H.) from the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Portions of this work
were submitted by the first author in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Arts at Florida Atlantic University.

REFERENCES
Bates, E. (1975). Peer relations and the acquisition of language. In M. Lewis & L. Rosenblum (Eds.),
Friendship and peer relations (pp. 259-292). New York: Wiley.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

240

Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (1998). The ecology of developmental processes. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 993-1028). New York: Wiley.
Center for Early Care and Education Research. (2010). Dual language learners. Retrieved from
http://www.cecerdll.fpg.unc.edu
Caldas, S. J. (2006). Raising bilingual-biliterate children in monolingual cultures. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
David, A., & Wei, L. (2008). Individual differences in the lexical development of French-English
bilingual children. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 11, 598-
618.
De Houwer, A. (2009). Bilingual first language acquisition. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
De Houwer, A., & Bornstein, M. (2003). Balancing on the tightrope: Language use patterns in
bilingual families with young children. Paper presented at the 4th International Symposium on
Bilingualism, Tempe, AZ, April 30-May 1.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E., Hartung, J. P., et al. (1993). The MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventories: User's guide and technical manual. Baltimore, MD:
Paul H. Brookes.
Fenson, L., Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J. L., Dale, P. S., & Reznick, J. S. (2000). Short-form version
of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics, 21,
95-116.
Garcia, E., & Jensen, B. (2009). Early educational opportunities for children of Hispanic origins
(Social Policy Report 23, No. 2). Ann Arbor, MI: Society for Research in Child Development.
Gathercole, V. C. M. (Ed.). (2007). Language transmission in bilingual families in Wales. Cardiff:
Welsh Language Board.
Gathercole, V. C. M., & Thomas, E. M. (2009). Bilingual first-language development: Dominant language takeover, threatened minority language take-up. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
12, 213-237.
Gathercole, V. C. M., & Hoff, E. (2007). Input and the acquisition of language: Three questions. In E.
Hoff & M. Shatz (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of language development (pp. 107-127). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Hakuta, K., & D'Andrea, D. (1992). Some properties of bilingual maintenance and loss in Mexican
background high-school students. Applied Linguistics, 13, 72-99.
Hammer, C. S., Miccio, A. W., & Rodriguez, B. L. (2004). Bilingual language acquisition and the child
socialization process. In B. A. Goldstein (Ed.), Bilingual language development and disorders
in Spanish-English speakers (pp. 21-52). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Hoff, E. (2006). How social contexts support and shape language development. Developmental Review,
26, 55-88.
Hoff, E., Core, C., Place, S., Rumiche, R., Senor, M., & Parra, M. (2011). Dual language exposure and
early bilingual development. Journal of Child Language, 22, 1-27.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). The relation of birth order and socioeconomic status to children's language
experience and language development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 603-629.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E., & Krueger, W. M. (1991). Older siblings as conversational partners. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 37, 465-482.
Huttenlocher, J., Waterfall, H., Vasilyeva, M., Vevea, J., & Hedges, L. V. (2010). Sources of variability
in children's language growth. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 343-365.
Ishizawa, H. (2004). Minority language use among grandchildren in multigenerational households.
Sociological Perspectives, 47, 465-483.
Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D., Marchman, V., Newton, T., Fenson, L., & Conboy, B. (2003).
MacArthur Inventarios del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas. User's Guide and Technical Manual. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Jia, G., & Aaronson, D. (2003). A longitudinal study of Chinese children and adolescents learning
English in the United States. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 131-161.
Kohnert, K. (2002). Picture naming in early sequential bilinguals: A 1-year follow-up. Journal of
Speech and Hearing, 45, 759-771.
Marchman, V. A., & Martinez-Sussmann, C. (2002). Concurrent validity of caregiver/parent report
measures of language for children who are learning both English and Spanish. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 993-997.

Applied Psycholinguistics 35:2
Bridges & Hoff: Sibling influences on bilingual development

241

Marchman, V. A., Martinez-Sussmann, C., & Dale, P. S. (2004). The language-specific nature of
grammatical development: Evidence from bilingual language learners. Developmental Science,
7, 212-224.
McCardle, P., & Hoff, E. (2006). An agenda for research on childhood bilingualism. In P. McCardle &
E. Hoff (Eds.), Childhood bilingualism: Research on infancy through school age (pp. 157-165).
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Miller, J. F., Heilmann, J., Nockerts, A., Iglesias, A., Fabiano, L., & Francis, D. J. (2006). Oral language
and reading in bilingual children. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 21, 30-43.
Morrison, F. J., Connor, C. M., & Bachman, H. J. (2006). The transition to school. In D. K. Dickinson
& S. B. Neuman (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (2nd ed., pp. 375-394). New
York: Guilford Press.
Oller, D. K., & Eilers, R. (Eds.). (2002). Language and literacy in bilingual children. Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Parra, M., Hoff, E., & Core, C. (2011). Relations among language exposure, phonological memory,
and language development in Spanish-English bilingually developing 2-year-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108, 113-125.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V., & Oller, D. K. (1997). The relation of input factors to
lexical learning by bilingual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 41-58.
Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2011). Properties of dual language exposure that influence two-year-olds'
bilingual proficiency. Child Development, 82, 1834-1849.
Scheele, A. F., Leseman, P. P. M., & Mayo, A. Y. (2010). The home language environment of monolingual and bilingual children and their language proficiency. Applied Psycholinguistics, 31,
117-140.
Squires, J., Potter, L., & Bricker, D. D. (1999). Ages and Stages Questionnaire: A parent completed,
child monitoring system (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Vagh, S. B., Pan, B. A., & Mancilla-Martinez, J. (2009). Measuring growth in bilingual and monolingual
children's English productive vocabulary development: The utility of combining parent and
teacher report. Child Development, 80, 1545-1563.
Wang, Z.-L. (2008). Growing up with three languages: Birth to eleven. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Yip, V., & Matthews, S. (2007). The bilingual child: Early development and language contact. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, Y., Jin, X., Shen, X., Zhang, J., & Hoff, E. (2008). Correlates of early language development
in Chinese children. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 32, 145-151.
Zukow-Goldring, P. (2002). Sibling caregiving. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol.
3. Being and becoming a parent (2nd ed., pp. 253-286). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

