J. Child Lang. 41 (2014), 200-225. f Cambridge University Press 2013
doi:10.1017/S0305000912000542

Past tense productivity in Dutch children with
and without SLI: the role of morphophonology
and frequency*
J U D I T H E. R I S P E N S
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
AND

E L I S E H. D E B R E E
Utrecht University, Netherlands
(Received 23 August 2011 - Revised 8 March 2012 - Accepted 20 September 2012 -
First published online 8 February 2013)
ABSTRACT

This study focuses on morphophonology and frequency in past tense
production. It was assessed whether Dutch five- and seven-year-old
typically developing (TD) children and eight-year-old children with
specific language impairment (SLI) produce the correct allomorph in
regular, irregular, and novel past tense formation. Type frequency of
the allomorph, token frequency and phonotactic probability (PP) of the
novel verb form are considered. The results showed all groups were
sensitive to the phonological cue. PP did not contribute to past tense
inflection of novel verbs in any of the groups, but type frequency did in
all three groups. Only the seven-year-old typically developing children
relied on token frequency for inflection of regulars. The findings
point to an important role of phonology and frequency in past tense
acquisition for both TD children and children with SLI. We discuss
how the SLI performance pattern relates to theories on SLI.
INTRODUCTION

The present study focuses on the morphophonology of Dutch past tense
production in typically developing (TD) five- and seven-year-olds as well
as in children with specific language impairment (SLI), investigating
the productivity of the two past tense allomorphs in Dutch. Whereas
allomorphy of past tense inflection has been studied in Dutch adults
(Ernestus & Baayen, 2003), to our knowledge no Dutch data are available on
[*] Address for correspondence : Judith Rispens, University of Amsterdam - Linguistics,
Spuistraat 210 Amsterdam 1012 VT, Netherlands. e-mail : J.E.Rispens@uva.nl

200

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

the acquisition and productivity of these two allomorphs for regular past
tense marking. We further wanted to investigate allomorphy in children
with SLI as difficulties with the past tense are frequently reported in this
group (see Leonard, 1998, for an overview). In addition, children with SLI
demonstrate problems in the morphophonological domain (Chiat 2001 ;
Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1998 ; Marshall & van der Lely, 2006; Dutch :
de Bree & Kerkhoff, 2010). As the development of the regular past
tense involves morphophonology, performance patterns on allomorph
productivity will contribute to the debates concerning the nature of past
tense problems in SLI.
In Dutch, as in English, inflecting regular verbs for the past tense
depends on an interaction between morphology and phonology. Regular
past tense marking consists of adding a one-syllable suffix to the verb stem,
surfacing as allomorph de (/de/) or te (/te/). Verbs ending in an underlyingly
voiceless obstruent take te, all other cases take de (Ernestus & Baayen,
2001). For example, the infinitive gapen ` to yawn', with the stem ending in
a voiceless obstruent (gaap), becomes gaap-te in the past tense, whereas
noemen ` to name' becomes noem-de.
Studies investigating the morphophonology of past tense inflection
in English have found that past tense inflection of regular verbs shows
different patterns for the three allomorphs (/t/ : walked ; /d/ : loved; and /Id/ :
waited) in TD children (Berko, 1958 ; Bybee & Slobin, 1982; Marchman,
1997) and in children with SLI (Blom & Paradis, in press; Marchman,
Wulfeck & Ellis Weismer, 1999 ; Marinis & Chondrogianni, 2011 ; Oetting
& Horohov, 1997 ; Paradis, Nicoladis, Crago & Genesee, 2010). Inflection of
verbs with a stem ending in an alveolar with the /Id/ suffix triggers more
errors in the form of zero-marking than inflection with /t/ and /d/, not only
in TD children but also in children with SLI. Several explanations for
this observation have been offered, such as the suggestion that verb stems
ending in alveolar /t/ and /d/ resemble the past tense suffix, which may lead
children to think that these forms are already marked for the past
tense (Berko, 1958 ; Marchman, 1997 ; Marchman et al., 1999). Also, verb
stems demanding the /Id/ allomorph are similar to irregular verbs that are
zero-marked for the past tense (for example cut-cut; e.g., Matthews &
Theakston, 2006). Furthermore, the complexity of the syllabic suffix /Id/
relative to the phonemic suffixes /t/ and /d/ may play a role. Frequency has
also been proposed as a factor determining the production accuracy of the
inflected form. The relatively low frequency of the suffix /Id/ may be the
driving factor for omission of this suffix, especially when the bare stem has
a higher frequency than the inflected form (Derwing & Baker, 1980 ;
Matthews & Theakston, 2006).
Frequency plays a role in the acquisition of morphology according to the
usage-based approach (e.g., Bybee 1995, 2001, 2008). Usage-based theory
201

RISPENS AND DE BREE

assumes that language experience enables the construction of networks in
which items are stored based on their forms and meanings. Lexical items
are associated with other items based on similarities of their semantic and
phonological properties. These similarities lead to so-called schemas from
which generalizations for new items emerge. Frequency, which is important
for the construction of such schemas/patterns in language acquisition, can
be divided into token and type frequency (Bybee, 2008). Token frequency
refers to the number of times a lexical item, such as a specific verb, appears.
Words with high token frequency have stronger memory representations,
improving accessibility of that word, compared to low-frequency items.
The former are thus processed more quickly and accurately than the latter.
Experimental evidence has shown that token frequency influences past tense
marking of regular verbs (e.g., Matthew & Theakston, 2006; Oetting &
Horohov, 1997) and irregular verbs (e.g., van der Lely & Ullman, 2001) in
children. In other words, the higher the frequency of the inflected form, the
more likely it is to be retrieved. Ernestus and Baayen (2001) found evidence
for token effects in the productions of past tense forms of Dutch adults.
Type frequency counts how many lexical items a certain pattern, for
example a suffix, is applicable to (Bybee, 2007). It plays a role in past tense
inflection, specifically with respect to morphological productivity (e.g.,
Bybee, 2008). A suffix tends to be applied to newly learned items if many
different lexical items take that same suffix. For past tense morphology, it
is assumed that highly frequent past tense markers (types) will be most
productive. For English and Dutch, the regular past tense inflection is
more frequent than the irregular ones. The combination verb+regular
inflection -ed in English is more likely to be applied to new lexical items
(e.g., blog-blogged ; see Gor, 2007) than an irregular verb inflection.
Similarly, in Dutch, new lexical verbs generally take the suffix de or te,
rather than take an irregular inflection. However, within the type ` regular
past tense' the frequency of the occurrence of the two types of allomorphs
of the regular past tense also needs to be taken into account. In Dutch, the
distributional frequency of the two allomorphs de and te in the input is
different. On the basis of tallying past tenses in Dutch adult input to
children in CHILDES corpora (MacWhinney, 2000), Kerkhoff, de Bree,
Kager, and Zonneveld (2011) report that the majority (62%) of regular past
tense types of all past tenses have the voiced allomorph de. They also report
that this pattern holds when using the CELEX database (Baayen,
Piepenbrock & van Rijn, 1995), in which 71 % of all verbs take de. Thus, the
type frequency of the allomorph de is higher than te as more verbs take de in
Dutch than te. Given that high type frequency facilitates productivity it
may thus be expected that inflecting verbs for the past tense demanding the
de allomorph is more accurate than verbs that take te, and that novel verbs
that demand the de allomorph will be produced more accurately for the past
202

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

tense than those taking the te allomorph. In addition, as type frequency has
been suggested to be influential for morphological productivity, we predict
that it is more likely that children overgeneralize the de allomorph (thus
applying a de allomorph to a voiceless verb stem) than the other way
around.
Another frequency-related factor that has been demonstrated to play a
role in past tense inflection is phonotactic probability (PP), that is, the
probability with which adjacent phonemes appear together in actual words
of the language (Jusczyk, Luce & Charles-Luce, 1994). A high PP of a
target form (word or non-word) is likely to facilitate its inflection, given that
it resembles the language-specific pattern (Vitevitch & Luce, 1998).
Leonard, Davis, and Deevy (2007) looked at the role of PP in novel verb
inflection. They found that four- to six-year-old children with SLI were
less likely than age- or language-matched children to inflect novel verbs.
Furthermore, they were less likely to use the past tense suffix with low PP
novel verbs than high PP novel verbs. The control groups did not show this
effect. Leonard, Davis, and Deevy (2007) propose that the verbs with low
PP may be more difficult for children with SLI as they deviate from familiar lexical entries.
In addition to possible frequency effects, phonological preferences
also need to be considered both in typical language development and in
SLI for their impact on inflection (see Marshall & van der Lely, 2007 ;
Song, Sundara & Demuth, 2009). In Dutch, there is evidence that the
development of voiced segments/phonemes is different from that of
voiceless ones. Dutch children around the age of three have been found to
show a clear preference for voiceless over voiced segments (Kager, van der
Feest, Fikkert, Kerkhoff & Zamuner, 2007) and acquire voiceless phonemes
before voiced ones (e.g., Beers, 1995). Dutch shows final devoicing, and has
the tendency of voiceless word-internal clusters (Zonneveld, 1983).
Currently, there is also a tendency of Dutch past tenses to be realized with
voiceless clusters (Kerkhoff et al., 2011). If phonology influences the
development of grammatical morphemes, we may expect an advantage for te
allomorphs in Dutch in the sense that verbs demanding a te allomorph are
inflected for the past tense more accurately during development.
For SLI, different theoretical perspectives have been offered to account
for the difficulty with past tense production (see Marinis (2011) for a recent
overview). Theories that pinpoint the deficit at the level of morphosyntactic
representations (the Extended Optional Infinitive, for example ; Rice,
Wexler & Cleave, 1995) do not readily predict a difference in the production
between past tense allomorphs as token/type frequency are not viewed as
particularly influential on the development of the past tense. A prediction
from this theory is that in case of errors, assignment of the wrong allomorph
is not expected, but rather an infinitive instead of a past tense form.
203

RISPENS AND DE BREE

The ` Surface hypothesis ' proposed by Leonard (1998) attributes the
tense-marking problems of children with SLI to a problem with perceptual
processing combined with a general processing capacity limitation.
According to this view, past tense marking is compromised in SLI as the
grammatical markers are perceptually not highly salient, making such
morphemes difficult to process. With respect to allomorph production, we
deduce that regular past tense marking in Dutch may itself be difficult to
acquire as the past tense markers are unstressed syllables, but there is no
reason to expect a difference between allomorph production according to
the surface hypothesis as the perceptual properties are the same for both
allomorphs.
A somewhat related theory on the difficulties of past tense marking in
SLI is proposed by Joanisse and Seidenberg (1998). They claim that
children with SLI have phonological processing problems which result in
problems with developing accurate phonological representations. This will
subsequently interfere with morphosyntactic development as the past tense
is dependent on accurate phonological analysis of the verb stem. If
the phonological representations of children with SLI are less robust in
comparison with those of the TD children we may expect to find errors of
assigning the wrong allomorph to the verb stem in our study, as children
may have difficulty with retrieving the correct end phoneme of the verb
stem. Joanisse and Seidenberg (1998) further argue that frequency
influences morphosyntactic learning and that a relatively high frequency of
exposure to a morpheme may explain a developmental advantage for some
grammatical morphemes (such as the plural /s/ versus the agreement marker
/s/ in English). As discussed above, there is a frequency difference in the
occurrence of Dutch allomorphs, and it can be predicted that children with
SLI show the same type of frequency influences for allomorph production
as the TD children.
This research was conducted to address several issues. A first aim of the
current study was to investigate the sensitivity to morphophonology in past
tense marking, using both existing and novel verbs. TD children aged
five and seven years participated to investigate cross-sectionally the
development of past tense productivity and a group of children with SLI
participated to investigate past tense productivity from the perspective of
disordered language development. We analyzed whether the error patterns
of the children showed that they were sensitive to the phonological cue for
past tense realization. If they were, incorrect allomorph selection such as a
voiced verb final consonant followed by the te allomorph and vice versa
should not occur.
Second, our aim was to investigate the influence of three types of
frequency measures on the production of the past tense inflection : (1) token
frequency of the existing verbs (both regular and irregular ; half of the items
204

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI
TABLE

1. The behavioural profiles of the three groups

Group

Age

Younger TD

CA TD

SLI

NOTES :

Raven

M

65.2a

-

SD

8.4

-

Range

49-79

-

M

94.5a

63.3b

SD

4.7

24.2

Range

86-105

19-95b

M

96.9a

47.4b

SD

5.7

21.1

Range

84-106

15-90

PPVT
.65c
83.4d
.80c
12.9d
x.71 to 2.86c
57-106d
.23c
103.9d
.64c
9.5d
x.98 to 2.46c
90-135d
x.96c
9.8d
.75c
9.8d
x2.47 to .44c
76-108d

a in months; b in Percentile; c in z scores; d in raw scores.

were high/low in frequency) ; (2) type frequency (the allomorph de having a
higher type frequency than te ; and (3) the phonotactic probability of the
novel verbs (half were high/low in PP).
A third aim of this study was to evaluate whether existing theories on
impaired past tense production in SLI can accommodate the findings of the
current study. All theories predict that the children with SLI would have
more problems with past tense marking than the age-matched TD children.
There would be differences, however, with respect to expecting influences
of frequency and type of error patterns. These expectations were tested in
this study.

METHOD

Participants
Three groups of children participated in this study, of which two were TD
children : one group of seven- to eight-year-olds (CA TD : 39 children,
mean age 7 ; 9, 16 boys) and one group of five-year-olds (younger TD : 40
children, mean age 5; 4, 25 boys). The third group consisted of children
with SLI (36 children, mean age 8 ; 1, 26 boys). The older TD group (CA
TD) was matched on the chronological age of the SLI group (see Table 1).
The CA TD children were selected from four primary schools that were
located in the north, middle, and south-west regions of the Netherlands.
205

RISPENS AND DE BREE

All children attended second grade and only children who made normal
progress in school and did not have any cognitive or emotional
disturbances, such as ADHD, developmental dyslexia, or autism were
selected for this study. All children had normal hearing and normal, or
corrected-to-normal, vision. Only children who were raised in a family with
at least one parent who was a native speaker of Dutch were accepted and
children had to be raised with Dutch being the language spoken at home
from birth onwards.
The younger TD children all attended kindergarten and came from
three different primary schools located in the north and middle part of the
Netherlands. The same exclusion criteria as the CA TD children were used
for selection of the younger TD group.
The children with SLI were selected from three special schools for
children with developmental language disorders. SLI was diagnosed when a
child performed at least 1.5 SD below the mean in at least two language
domains measured with Dutch standardized language tests, or when a child
performed more than 2 SD below the mean on a Dutch standardized
general language test. The testing for the diagnosis was carried out by a
multidisciplinary team of the special needs schools, and the diagnosis of
SLI was a requirement for acceptance by the special needs schools.
Children who had evidence of (a history of) speech output problems, such
as dyspraxia, were excluded from participation. All children had normal
hearing and normal, or corrected-to-normal, vision. Only children who
were raised in a family with at least one parent who was a native speaker of
Dutch were selected and children had to be raised with Dutch being the
language spoken at home from birth onwards. The special schools were
located in two different regions (north and middle) of the Netherlands.
The children with SLI and the CA TD children were assessed with the
Dutch version of the Raven Standard Progressive Matrices (Raven, 2006)
for an estimation of their non-verbal IQ performance at the time of testing.
All children had a percentile score of at least 15 and the mean scores of both
groups were within normal limits (the mean percentile score of the children
with SLI was 47.4 and of the CA TD children 63.3). As the Raven has
norm scores starting at the age of six, the younger TD children were not
assessed with this measure. According to the kindergarten teachers, all
younger TD children made normal progress in school, indicating that at
least severe intellectual delay seems unlikely.
Furthermore, a receptive vocabulary measure (the Dutch version of
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III-NL; Schlichting, 2005) was
administered to check whether the CA TD and younger TD children
performed within normal limits. Importantly, both TD groups scored
within normal limits (see Table 1 for the raw and standard scores). A oneway ANOVA demonstrated a significant difference between the groups
206

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

(F(2, 111)=36.06, p<.001). The children with SLI performed significantly
lower than the CA TD children (p<.001). We had wanted to match the
group with SLI children on the vocabulary level of the younger TD children, but the mean raw PPVT score of the younger TD children was significantly lower than that of the children with SLI (p=.011). Matching the
raw vocabulary scores of the two groups was difficult as there was a wide
range of scores within both groups and therefore the standard deviations
were large. Importantly, the mean score of the TD kindergarten children
was lower than that of the group with SLI so that the TD kindergarten
children could still function as a comparison group. That is, if the SLI
group display a performance pattern similar to that of the younger TD
group, we have some basis for concluding that their performance resembles
typical development.
Materials
Two tasks were constructed to investigate past tense production : a task in
which the past tense form of existing verbs was elicited and a task in which
novel verbs were presented.
Task 1 : past tense production of existing verbs
Two types of verbs were included in this task: regular and irregular verbs.
Twelve regular verbs were selected based on high and low token frequency.
The CELEX database (Baayen et al., 1995) was used and the Log frequency
count was used for analysis. The frequency of both the past tense and
non-past tense forms was counted and the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd person singular
and plural verb forms (present and past) were included in the frequency
count. The high token frequency regular verbs had a mean present
tense frequency of 4.1 and a mean past tense frequency of 2.8, whereas the
low-frequency regular verbs had a mean present tense frequency of 1.3 and
a mean past tense frequency of 0.8 (see Table 2 for all the frequencies).
Independent t-tests showed that there was a significant difference between
the high- and low-frequency verbs, regardless of the tense (mean present
tense frequency t(10)=6.1, p=.001 ; mean past tense frequency t(10)=4.0,
p=.006).
The verbs were furthermore classified according to the type of past
allomorph with which the verbs are inflected. Half of the verb stems ended
in an underlying voiceless obstruent (four times /k/ and twice /s/), the other
half in a voiced consonant (twice /l/, twice /r/, and twice /w/). These stems
were chosen as they are unambiguous with respect to devoicing and
rendered unambiguous te or de expectations. All verbs in the infinitival
form had a CVCVC structure (see Table 2 for an overview of the items).
207

RISPENS AND DE BREE
TABLE

2. Frequencies of regular verbs. Present and past tenses include
1st, 2nd, and 3rd singular/plural
Frequency

Verb

Present

Past

English translation

3.68
1.93
3.45
1.32
1.30
1.26
3.32
2.59
3.11
1.08
1.69
1.20

4.52
1.79
2.59
0.30
1.25
0.47
1.83
2.21
3.94
0.60
1.42
0.60

Make
Kiss
Take
Bake
Lick
Fish

-te allomorph

High
High
High
Low
Low
Low

Maken
Kussen
Pakken
Bakken
Likken
Vissen

-de allomorph

High
High
High
Low
Low
Low

Bellen
Duwen
Horen
Boren
Hollen
Kauwen

TABLE

3. Frequencies of irregular verbs. Present and past tenses include
1st, 2nd, and 3rd singular/plural

Frequency
High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low

Phone
Push
Hear
Drill
Run
Chew

Verb

Present

Past

English translation

Kijken
Lopen
Trekken
Vragen
Gieten
Knijpen
Klimmen
Liegen

6.58
5.28
4.71
6.08
1.66
1.84
1.99
2.16

4.45
4.54
3.93
3.95
0.60
1.58
2.01
0.85

Look
Walk
Pull
Ask
Pour
Squeeze
Climb
Lie

Eight irregular verbs were selected based on high/low token frequency
following the same method as for the regular verbs. The mean frequency of
high token frequency verbs in the present tense was 5.7, and 4.2 for the past
tense forms, whereas the low-frequency items had a mean token frequency
of 1.9 and a past tense form frequency of 1.3. The difference in frequency
between the high and low verbs was statistically significant (present tense
frequency t(6)=8.75, p=.002 ; past tense frequency t(6)=8.19, p<.001).
All verbs in the infinitival form had a CVCVC structure. The verb forms
plus their irregular past tense forms can be found in Table 3.
Task 2: past tense production of novel verbs
Sixteen novel verbs were created ; see Table 4 for an overview. The novel
verbs were divided into high and low PP sets and into voiced and voiceless
sets with respect to the final consonant of the verb stem. As for the existing
208

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI
TABLE

PP

4. Phonotactic probabilities of novel verbs
Infinitive

-te allomorph

High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low

Dappen
Dieken
Moepen
Nikken
Guipen
Rakken
Vuppen
Wauken

-de allomorph

High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low

Danen
Homen
Norren
Wommen
Reumen
Luunen
Pirren
Lummen

PP value
x5.81
x5.76
x6.41
x6.20
x8.85
x7.39
x8.34
x8.40
x6.06
x6.07
x6.24
x6.16
x9.7
x8.52
x8.70
x7.61

Past tense

PP value

Dapte
Diekte
Moepte
Nikte
Guipte
Rakte
Vupte
Waukte

x5.98
x5.94
x6.58
x6.36
x9.02
x7.56
x8.52
x8.56
x5.22
x6.47
x5.89
x6.05
x10.1
x7.93
x8.35
x8.02

Daande
Hoomde
Norde
Womde
Reumde
Luunde
Pirde
Lumde

verbs, only verb stems ending in consonants that demand unambiguously
the te or de suffix were chosen. PP was calculated using the database of
Adriaans (2006), which is based on a corpus of spoken adult language
(Corpus Gesproken Nederlands ; Goddijn & Binnenpoorte, 2003). The
PP count represents the probability that two phonemes occur together
(biphones) in the Dutch language (positional probability). The calculations
of the PP run from a negative outcome to zero as the most frequent
probability. For the novel verbs we calculated the sum of the biphones
within the novel verb form.
Two counts of measuring the PP of the verbs were made : one for the
infinitival verb form was used (for instance vuppen) and another one for the
past tense form (stem+allomorph, for instance vupte) was taken. The closer
the logged sum is to zero, the higher the PP. The high PP infinitival verb
forms had a minimum PP of x6.4 (the sum of PP for the whole item); the
mean summed PP of all high PP items was x6.1. The maximum sum of
the low PP items was x7.3; the mean of all low PP items x8.4. The PP of
the past tenses did not differ much from that of the infinitival verb form :
the mean sum of the items that were high in PP was x6.1 ; mean sum of the
items low in PP was x8.5. An independent t-test demonstrated a significant
difference in PP between the two groups of verbs (t(14)=7.77, p<.001).
Half of all verbs ended in a voiceless stem (/k/ or /p/), requiring the te
allomorph. The other half demanded the de allomorph, based on the voiced
character of the final phoneme (/r/, /m/, and /n/). All verbs in the infinitival
form had a CVCVC structure.
209

RISPENS AND DE BREE

Inspection of the results showed that disproportionately more errors were
produced for the item dieken compared with the other items, indicating
that the item was an outlier. Specifically, the children within the younger
TD and the SLI group demonstrated profound difficulties on that item,
producing respectively 22 % (younger TD) and 2.8% (SLI) of the past tense
form correctly, whereas the overall percentage correct of novel verbs
demanding the te allomorph was 64% for the younger TD group and 2.5 %
for the SLI group. We therefore decided to exclude the item from the
analysis.
Procedure
The children were shown a picture on the screen of a laptop computer that
depicted an action. Prior to testing, all experimental items had been read
aloud by a female native speaker of Dutch and had been digitally recorded
and stored on a PC. For the items in the task eliciting existing verbs, a
photograph was presented ; for the novel verbs, a drawing was presented.
The latter pictures represented monsters or other fictional characters, or
were created by the authors using software to draw the characters. The
pictures were presented to the children within a PowerPoint presentation.
During the presentation of the picture, the experimenter would click on a
sound button and the child would hear a digitalized presentation of the
infinitive form of the verb once before the story was told. The sound file
was played to the children from the laptop computer using loudspeakers.
The pictures were presented to the children, one at a time, and they were
accompanied by a little story during which the picture remained on the
screen. This was a three-line story which first described what was going on
in the picture. After saying that the characters performed this action often
or every day, the children were asked to finish the final sentence in which
they were prompted to give a past tense form. An example of the prompting
procedure for the existing verbs is the following : a child is presented with a
photograph of an elderly woman baking a pancake and the audio file of the
infinitive form ` bake ' is played simultaneously. The experimenter would
tell the child : dit is een lieve oma. Zij bakt vaak pannekoeken. Gisteren ook.
Gisteren _ ` This is a kind grandmother. She often bakes pancakes.
Yesterday also. What did she do yesterday ? Yesterday _ .' The
experimenter would then wait for the child to finish the sentence. The
children heard the present tense form of the verb within a sentence (once)
and the verb in its infinitive form through an auditory file (once). In Dutch
the subject comes after the verb in the sentences used in the tasks. A child
would thus have to produce the verbs immediately after `yesterday '.
Example answer : gisteren bakte zij ook pannekoeken `lit. : Yesterday baked
she also pancakes '.
210

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

The task with the novel verbs was introduced by explaining to the
children that in this task they would be presented with funny figures that do
not exist and that these figures are doing something strange. The children
were told that the experimenter would tell them a little story in which the
name of the action would be told and that the children had to finish the
story. For example : a child is presented with a drawing in which a monster
is depicted waving its arms. The sound file vuppen was played to the
children. The experimenter would say aloud : dit monster vindt het leuk om te
vuppen. Elke dag vupt hij. Gisteren ook. Wat deed het monster gisteren ?
Gisteren : _ ` This monster likes to vup. Everyday it vups. Yesterday also.
What did the monster do yesterday ? Yesterday _ .' The experimenter
waited for the child to finish the sentence. Two of the lead-in stories out of
the sixteen items contained plural subjects, the others were all singular. The
children never heard the past tense verb; they heard the present tense verb
form once, and the infinitive twice (once before the story presented by the
audio file and once within the lead-in story).
The responses of the children were recorded and transcribed on-line
and scored afterwards. Only the verb was marked as correct or incorrect,
the remainder of the sentence that a child would possibly utter was ignored.
An item would be scored as correct if the choice of the past tense suffix
was correct. Violations of agreement between the verb and the subject
were not taken into account. An example of a correct past tense form
with an agreement error would be gisteren bakten (plural) zij (singular)
ook pannekoeken instead of gisteren bakte (singular) zij ook pannekoeken
` yesterday she also baked pancakes '.
Some children would start the sentences that they had to finish with
` also' followed by the infinitive. For example, the experimenter would say :
` yesterday _ ? ', and the answer of the child was `also fish '. The child
was then prompted to start their response with the target verb, as the
experimenter would give the verb's first sound (e.g., experimenter :
` yesterday f _ ? '). The order of the presentation of the two tasks was
pseudo-randomized : half of the children were first presented with task 2
(novel verbs) followed by task 1 (lexical verbs), the other half the other way
around.
With respect to the novel verb inflection task, three of the CA TD
children did not perform this task, given that the time for the scheduled
testing session had ended, but the task had not yet been presented.
Qualitative error analysis
In addition to calculating the number of correct responses, we also
assigned all erroneous responses to a category, based on the most frequently
produced error types. For the regular existing verbs and the novel verbs,
211

RISPENS AND DE BREE

5. Error categories for regular, novel, and irregular verbs. Target productions are vupte and liep : error categories show (potential) errors

TABLE

Error categories
-en suffix (corresponds
to the infinitive)
Zero-marking
-t suffix (corresponds
to present tense)
Incorrect allomorph
Regularization with
correct allomorph
Regularization with
incorrect allomorph
Double marking :
both the past
tense form and the
regular suffix
Other : various types
of errors

Regular and novel verbs

Irregular verbs

vuppen

lopen

vup
vupt

loop
loopt

vupde (instead
of vupte)
-

-
loopte

-

loopde

-

liepte

Examples :
(a) verb ` go'+verb :
ging vuppen
(b) change within the
verb stem, e.g., vumde
(c) infinitive+-de : vuppende

Examples :
(a) ` go'+verb : ging lopen
(b) change within the
verb stem, e.g., leepte
instead of liep
(c) infinitive+de : lopende

five categories were created (see Table 5). Note that especially the error
category ` incorrect allomorph' is important for our research question.
It measures the instances of assigning the wrong allomorph, which may
indicate reduced sensitivity to morphophonology in past tense inflection
and it may indicate overgeneralization due to the effect of type frequency.
For the irregular verbs, seven error categories were used. Table 5 provides
examples of the errors using the novel verb vuppen, of which the target past
tense form is vupte, and the irregular verb lopen `walk', which takes liep as
the past tense. The error categories also include `other'. All responses
that could not be classified to one of the error types were assigned to this
category. This means that all responses were assigned to a category, as it
never happened that a participant responded with silence. We calculated the
mean of the errors as part of the total correct score: the mean errors plus the
mean correct score add up to 100 %.

RESULTS

Production of past tense of regular verbs
Table 6 presents the proportional scores of correctly inflected regular verbs
for past tense divided by verb token frequency and allomorph.
212

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI
TABLE

6. Proportional scores of existing regular verbs, existing irregular verbs,
and novel verbs correctly inflected for past tense for each group

Group

Younger TD

CA TD

SLI

Regular verbs
Mean regular
Regular HF verbs
Regular LF verbs
-te verbs
-de verbs

M
.73
.74
.73
.82
.65

SD
.29
.25
.27
.26
.29

M
.82
.85
.78
.82
.81

SD
.26
.25
.28
.25
.28

M
.24
.24
.24
.29
.19

SD
.32
.35
.30
.32
.33

Irregular verbs
Mean irregular
HF irregular verbs
LF irregular verbs

.08
.13
.04

.12
.19
.09

.32
.46
.19

.16
.32
.27

.17
.22
.13

.27
.21
.13

Novel verbs
Mean novel verbs
HPP verbs
LPP verbs
-te verbs
-de verbs

.55
.52
.55
.70
.39

.31
.31
.33
.33
.37

.73
.75
.71
.82
.65

.29
.32
.29
.30
.37

.19
.17
.19
.23
.15

.28
.27
.30
.33
.29

NOTES :

HF high frequency; LF low frequency; HPP high phonotactic probability; LPP low
phonotactic probability.

A repeated-measures ANOVA was carried out on the proportion of
correctly inflected verbs with verb token frequency (high/low) and
allomorph (te/de) as the within-subjects variables and group (younger TD,
CA TD, SLI) as the between-subjects variable. The results demonstrated
significant main effects of allomorph type (F(1, 112)=16.7, p<.001,
g2p=.13) and group (F(1, 112)=5.7, p<.001, gp2 =.48), and an interaction
between allomorph type * group (F(2, 112)=4.5, p=.013, g2p=.08).
Post-hoc tests, chance-level adjusted with the Bonferonni correction,
showed that the CA TD (p<.001) and the younger TD group (p<.001)
produced significantly more correct inflections than the children with
SLI, but there was no significant difference between the older
and younger TD children (p=.28). Additional tests were carried out to
investigate the group * allomorph interaction. Repeated-measures
ANOVAs conducted within the different groups with allomorph as the
within-subjects variable showed that children with SLI and the younger
TD children made more errors when they had to inflect verbs demanding a
de allomorph than a te allomorph (SLI : F(1, 35)=7.6, p=.009, g2p=.18 ;
younger TD : F(1, 39)=12.4, p<.001, g2p=.24) but that the CA TD group
did not show a significant effect of allomorph type (F(1, 38)=.09, p=.77,
g2p=.002).
In the omnibus repeated-measures ANOVA, no main effect of
frequency was found (F(1, 112)=1.9, p=.17, g2p=.017) and there was no
213

RISPENS AND DE BREE

significant interaction between frequency * group (F(1, 112)=2.05, p=.13,
g2p=.035). However, as the difference between the mean performances on
the high- and low-frequency items was quite large, a repeated-measures
analysis for the CA TD group was conducted. It revealed that the CA TD
group performed significantly better on the high-frequency verbs compared
to the low-frequency verbs (p=.018, g2p=.14). This frequency effect was
not found for the children with SLI (p=.76, g2p=.003), nor for the younger
TD children (p=.80, g2p=.002).
Error analysis of regular verbs
Figure 1 presents the mean percentage of errors coded as -en suffix,
zero-marking, -t suffix, wrong past tense allomorph, and `other ' (see
` Methods ' section for a description of the error types).
A repeated-measures ANOVA demonstrated a main effect of error type
(F(4, 448)=18.95, p<.001, g2p=.15) and group (F(2, 112)=51.6, p<.001,
g2p=.48), and a significant interaction between group and error type
(F(8, 448)=9.3, p<.001, g2p=.14). The main effect of group was
unsurprising, as the previous results had already indicated a group effect. The
interaction was investigated by pairwise comparisons of the error types within
each group, chance level adjusted with Bonferroni correction. The children
with SLI most dominantly produced a -t and -en suffix compared to the other
error types (both error categories, p<.001). The younger TD children also
produced significantly more often a -t suffix (p<.024), as well errors in the
category ` other' (p<.025) than the other error categories. In contrast, the CA
TD group did not show a clear preference for an error type.
As this research focuses on sensitivity to morphophonology, it is important
to note that for all groups the error type `incorrect allomorph ' was
infrequent. The children with SLI produced a wrong allomorph in 2.2 % of
all past tense productions, the CA TD children in 1.3%, and the younger TD
children in 2.1 %. When we calculated how often this error was produced
relative to the overall number of errors, thus excluding the correct responses
from the results, it appeared that this error occurred in 4.3 % of all errors in
the group of SLI children, in 5.3 % of all errors in the CA TD children, and
in 5.3 % of all errors in the younger TD children. This error rate was
equal between the groups (F(2, 110)=.39, p=.68, g2p=.007), and the errors
were equally distributed over the two allomorphs (F(1, 110)=.87, p=.35,
g2p=.008), indicating no overgeneralization of a particular allomorph.
Production of the past tense of irregular verbs
Table 6 also presents the mean past tense production of the irregular
verbs. A repeated-measures ANOVA with frequency (high, low) as the
214

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

40
35
30
en suffix

25

zero-marking
20

t suffix

15

incorrect allomorph

10

other

5
0
younger TD

CA TD

SLI

(a) Regular verbs
50

en suffix

45
zero-marking

40
35

t suffix

30

regularized correct
allomorph
regularized incorrect
allomorph
double marking

25
20
15
10

other

5
0
younger TD

CA TD

SLI

(b) Irregular verbs
35
30
25

en suffix

20

zero-marking

t suffix

15

incorrect allomorph
10

other

5
0
younger TD

CA TD

SLI

(c) Novel verbs
Fig. 1. The mean percentage of different errors on the regular (1a), irregular (1b),
and novel verbs (1c).

215

RISPENS AND DE BREE

within-subjects variable and group (younger TD, CA TD, SLI) as the
between-subjects variable demonstrated that there were main effects of
frequency (F(1, 112)=67.7, p<.001 g2p=.38) and group (F(2, 112)=15.2,
p<.001, g2p=.21). The younger TD group made significantly more errors
than the other two groups (p<.05), and the SLI group was outperformed
by the CA TD group (p<.05). A significant interaction between frequency
and group was also found (F(2, 112)=1.2, p<.001, g2p=0.15). Follow-up
tests showed that all three groups produced past tense forms of highfrequency verbs more accurately than low-frequency past tense forms (CA
TD : F(1, 38)=6.9, p<.001, g2p=.62 ; SLI : F(1, 35)=7.8, p =.009, gp2 =.18;
younger TD : F(1, 39)=11.2, p=.002, g2p=.23). The frequency effect was
most pronounced for the CA TD group, causing the interaction between
frequency and group.
Error analysis of past tenses of irregular verbs
A repeated measures ANOVA showed that there was a main effect of error
type (F(6, 672)=54.7, p<.001, g2p=.33), a main effect of group (already
demonstrated by the accuracy scores above ; F(2, 112)=15.4, p<.001,
g2p=.22), and a significant interaction between error type * group
(F(6, 672)=11.6, p<.001, g2p=.170 (see Figure 1). This interaction was
investigated by pairwise comparisons of the error types within each group,
chance level adjusted with Bonferroni correction. All three groups showed
main effects of error type (p<.001 for all the groups). The CA TD group
often regularized the irregular past tense (39% of all errors) and did this
significantly more often than producing a stem, an infinitive, or a present
tense (p<.05). Another frequent error in the CA TD group was producing
an -en instead of the past tense (12 % of all errors) and producing an `other'
(10 %) error. For the children with SLI, the most frequent error was a -t
instead of a past tense (31% of all errors), and this error was significantly
more frequent than zero-marking, correct regularization with a correct
suffix, and an -en suffix (p<.05 for all three comparisons). An -en suffix
(15 %) was produced significantly more often than regularization with an
incorrect suffix, and than double marking (p<.05). For the children of the
younger TD group the most dominant error type was regularization with a
correct suffix (44%), and this was produced significantly more often
than zero-marking and production of the suffixes -t and -en (p<.05 for all
comparisons).
The two TD groups thus replaced the past tense of an irregular verb
most often with a regularization form with a correct allomorph, whereas the
SLI group most dominantly produced a -t (present tense suffix) instead of a
past tense suffix. Thus, as was the case for the regular verbs, selection of the
incorrect allomorph was infrequent.
216

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

Task 2 : production of past tense of novel verbs
The proportional scores of correctly inflected novel verbs for the
different conditions are presented in Table 6. A repeated-measures
ANOVA on proportion of correctly inflected verbs was carried out
with allomorph type (de versus te) and PP (low PP versus high PP)
as the within-subjects variables and group (younger TD, CA TD, SLI)
as the between-subjects factor. A significant main effect of group
(F(2, 109)=32.2, p<.001, g2p=.37) was found. Post-hoc tests indicated
that the SLI children were outperformed by both TD groups (both
comparisons p<.001) and that the CA TD group scored more accurately
than the younger TD group (p=.02). A significant main effect of
allomorph type was found, showing that inflecting verbs for the past
tense that require a te allomorph was significantly more accurate than de
verbs (F(1, 109)=4.8, p<.001, g2p=.27). Also, a significant interaction
between allomorph type and group was found (F(2, 109)=4.9, p=.009,
g2p=.08). Post-hoc tests showed that this significant interaction was
caused by the robust main effect of allomorph type for the five- and
seven-year-olds (CA TD : p=.003, g2p=.229; younger TD : p<.001,
g2p=.47), in contrast to the non-significant effect of allomorph type for
the group of children with SLI (p=.077, g2p=.086). The absence of an
effect of allomorph in the group of children with SLI might be explained
by the floor effect of the accuracy scores, as the group only reached a
mean of 18% correct. To assess whether the low inflection scores of the
group of SLI children masked a potential effect of allomorph, a second
analysis was carried out in which all children of the three groups who
did not inflect at least one novel verb correctly for the past tense were
removed from the database. Seventeen children (out of 36=44%) with
SLI were excluded, and two children from both the CA TD (2/39=5%)
and the younger TD group (2/40=5%). The mean score of this reduced
SLI group improved to 35 %, compared with the previous score of 18%
correct. Using these new scores there was no significant interaction
between group and allomorph type (p=.13, g2p=.053) for the three
groups. In other words, all three groups show a similar advantage for the
production of verbs taking a te allomorph if very poor inflection scores
are excluded.
The omnibus repeated-measures ANOVA further showed that there
was no main effect of PP (F(1, 109)=.22, p=.64, g2p=.002), and no
significant interaction between PP and group (F(2, 109)=1.8, p=.17,
g2p=.02). Thus, PP did not impact on the past tense realizations of novel
verbs in any of the three groups. The results were the same for an analysis
of the three groups, including children who at least produced one past tense
form correctly.
217

RISPENS AND DE BREE

Error analysis of novel verbs
Figure 1 shows the mean percentages of possible error types (-en suffix,
zero-marking, -t suffix, incorrect allomorph, and other) the children produced. A repeated-measures analysis with error type as the within-subjects
variable and group as the between-subjects variable showed a significant
main effect of error type (F(4, 436)=12.7, p<.001 g2p=.10) and group
(F(1, 109)=34.4, p<.001, g2p=.39), and a significant interaction between
error type and group (F(8, 436)=3.96, p<.001, g2p=.07). This interaction
was investigated by pairwise comparisons of the error types within each
group, chance level adjusted with Bonferroni correction.
The effect of error type was not significant (F(4, 140)=2.7, p=.06,
2
gp=.07) for the children within the CA TD group. The group of SLI
children showed a significant main effect of error type (F(4, 140)=7.1,
p<.001, g2p=.17). They replaced the past tense inflection significantly more
often with -en and -t suffixes than zero-marking or with a wrong allomorph
(p<.01). The younger TD group also revealed a significant effect of error
type (F(4, 156)=7.9, p<.001, g2p=.17), showing the same pattern as the
children with SLI.
As was the case for the regular and irregular verbs, selection of the
incorrect allomorph was infrequent (see Figure 1). Of all errors (thus
excluding the correct responses) the wrong allomorph occurred 9.2 % within
the group of SLI children, 26.6 % within the age-matched TD children,
and 16.8 % in the younger TD children. To investigate whether
children preferred to produce a past tense with a particular allomorph,
a repeated-measures ANOVA was carried out with the error category
` incorrect allomorph' as the within-subjects variable and group as the
between-subjects variable. There was a significant effect of allomorph type
(F(1, 109)=19.48, p<.001, g2p=.152), and a significant interaction between
allomorph type and group (F(2, 109)=4.19, p=.02, g2p=.07). The main
effect indicated that more past tenses involving the de allomorph were
realized as a te allomorph than vice versa. The interaction between group
and allomorph type indicated that the children with SLI did not show
a preference for te. It must be kept in mind that the children with SLI
produced fewer instances of past tenses with a wrong allomorph than
the TD children (producing a wrong allomorph in 3.5% of all their verb
productions), making it difficult to observe a particular error pattern.
DISCUSSION

This study was undertaken to answer three questions. The first was whether
Dutch children were sensitive to the morphophonology involved in past
tense formation. In other words, did they select the correct allomorph
(de or te) to form the past tense ? This question was addressed from a
218

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

developmental perspective, by looking at younger and older TD children,
as well as by looking at children with SLI. Real regular verbs, irregular
verbs, and novel verbs were included to assess the production of past tense
inflection, as well as to establish whether morphophonological sensitivity
surfaced in inflecting them.
We found differences in overall ability in past tense marking, with
the younger children performing worse than the older TD children on the
irregular and the novel verbs, and with the children with SLI scoring more
poorly than both the age-matched and younger TD children on the regular
and novel verbs, except for the irregular verbs where they performed better
than the younger TD children, but more poorly than the age-matched TD
children. All children were sensitive to the phonological demands of past
tense marking, as the error pattern demonstrated that the allomorphs
were produced generally in the correct phonological context. The error type
incorrect allomorph was not produced significantly more often than the
other error types. Our findings can be aligned with those that looked at
sensitivity to morphophonological voicing in Dutch plural realization
(de Bree & Kerkhoff, 2010). Further, our findings of correct allomorph
production, with infrequent incorrect allomorph production, agree with those
of Kidd and Kirjavainen (2011). They studied past tense marking in four- and
six-year-old TD children of novel, regular, and irregular verbs in Finnish,
which has a highly inflected past tense morphology, and found that they
consistently used the correct allomorphs in the novel and regular verbs.
The second question concerned the effect of type frequency of the
allomorphs (de versus te), token frequency of the verbs, and PP of the novel
verbs on past tense inflection. The performance patterns of the CA TD
and younger TD children differed for the regular and novel verbs. The
correct responses on the regular verbs demanding the te allomorph were
significantly higher compared with the de allomorph for the five-year-old
children, but there were no differences between the production of the verbs
demanding te and de allomorphs for the seven-year-old TD children.
Nevertheless, for the novel verbs, both the five- and seven-year-old children
demonstrated a similar pattern as they were significantly more accurate in
inflecting te than de verbs. This is in contrast with the prediction that de
suffixes would show an advantage, as the type frequency of de is higher as
there are more verbs in Dutch that take a de allomorph. Similarly to the
five-year-old TD children, the children with SLI produced significantly
more correct past tenses for both novel and regular verbs demanding the te
allomorph. We will return to the matter of the te allomorph preference
below, after discussing the findings on the other frequency-related
measures.
Token frequency, that is, the frequency of occurrence of the lexical verbs,
was found to influence past tense inflection, especially for the CA TD
219

RISPENS AND DE BREE

children. For both regular and irregular verbs, past tense formation was
better for high-frequency verbs than for low-frequency verbs. The SLI
and younger TD children did not show this pattern for the regular verbs,
but did show an effect of high >low frequency for irregular verbs. An
advantage for high-frequency irregular verbs for TD children ranging from
five to eight years old and an SLI group (mean age 11 years) was also
reported in van der Lely and Ullman (2001). It may be the case that
the acquisition of a substantial vocabulary size generates an effect of token
frequency and that therefore the effect was only observed in the CA TD
group (see, e.g., Marchmann and Bates, 1994, and Kidd and Kirjavainen,
2011, for discussions on this matter). An explanation for the observation
that there was a frequency effect for the irregular, but not the regular, verbs
in the children with SLI and the younger TD group is that the frequency of
the high-frequency irregular verbs is higher than that of the high-frequency
regular verbs. This may suggest that token frequency influences past tense
formation but that the effects are only visible in children with relatively
small lexicons when verbs are highly frequent. For the novel verbs, the
effect of PP was investigated. The results did not show a preference for high
PP over low PP items for any of the three groups.
Thus, so far, the following observations have been made : (1) there was an
effect of token frequency on past tense inflection of regular verbs for the
seven-year-old TD children ; and (2) there was an effect of token frequency
on irregular verb past tense formation in all groups. Furthermore, (3) in the
novel verb condition, all groups (the younger TD children and the children
with SLI also in the regular verb condition) demonstrated that past tense
production of verbs demanding the allomorph te was more accurate than de ;
the opposite of the pattern that was anticipated based on the higher type
frequency of de.
How can the advantage for past tense formation in verbs taking the te
allomorph be explained ? As discussed in the `Introduction ', phonological
development is constrained by voicing in Dutch. The fact that voiced
phonemes are more marked phonologically than voiceless ones may be one
explanation. However, it is important to note that that all children were able
to produce voiced obstruents, as they showed voiced obstruents in the onset
of the experimental items and regularly used de allomorphs. Also, none of
the children had specific speech output problems. This is in line with other
studies that have shown voicing to be intact in children with SLI (e.g.,
de Bree & Kerkhoff, 2010 ; Forrest & Morrisette, 1999). Phonological
markedness of the verb stem combined with the allomorph de alone might
thus not capture the data.
Another explanation for the higher te than de score is that the type
frequency of the allomorph can be calculated differently. We stated that
the type frequency of the de suffix is higher than that for te as there are more
220

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

verbs taking de suffixes. However, it could be the case that the phonotactic
frequency of the stem plus the allomorph rather than the frequency of the
past tense allomorph itself provides the most important cue (Bybee, 2008).
In other words, the type frequency of the past tense allomorph may need to
be calculated by the combined PP of the verb stem+suffix te or de rather
than the allomorph alone. Calculations of the PP of the consonants of the
verb stems tested in this study (k, p, m, n, r, s, l, and w)+/te/ or /de/ in a
database of spoken Dutch language (CGN ; Goddijn & Binnenpoorte, 2003)
showed that the mean logged PP of the stem final consonant+/te/ clusters is
much higher than that of the stem-final consonant+/de/ clusters : that is,
x6.16 as opposed to x1.55, with a score closer to 0 reflecting a higher
probability. Thus, the cluster of a consonant+/te/ is more frequent in the
Dutch language, regardless of word class, than the cluster consisting of a
consonant+/de/. The higher PP of stem+suffix may thus have facilitated
the productivity of past tenses. Bear in mind that the PP of the novel verbs
in our experiment was controlled for and that the results showed that there
was no main effect of PP. It is thus not the case that the PP of the entire
stimulus influenced the production of the past tense, but that specifically
the PP of the verb stem and the suffix itself seems influential. The difference
between the results of Leonard, Davis, and Deevy (2007), who demonstrated an effect of PP on past tense marking of novel verbs in children with
SLI, may stem from differences in the design between their and our study.
In their study the novel verbs always demanded the allomorph /d/, except
for one instance of /t/. However, in our study the two past tense allomorphs
were presented equally. It may be the case that different results for the
effect of PP would have been obtained if only one allomorph type had been
tested, as then there would not have been a confound between the PP of the
allomorph and the PP of the novel verb stem.
Ernestus and Baayen (2003) also looked at a frequency cue related to
phonological environment. They found that in a (novel) verb inflection task,
Dutch adults' proportion of de responses was guided by the number of
similar words ending in a voiced obstruent, regardless of their frequencies
of occurrence. Thus, the past tense can be driven by different types of
frequency information. The question of how these types of frequency are
related in development would merit more attention (see work by Moscoso
del Prado Martin, Ernestus, and Baayen, 2004, on simulation studies of
adult data).
Frequency thus plays an important role in past tense productivity,
but the type of frequency seems to be dependent on the stage of language
development - token frequency in older TD children but not for younger
TD children or children with SLI - and on task specificity : irregular
verbs rendered token frequency effects for all groups, whereas regular
verbs showed a frequency effect of stem+allomorph for five-year-old TD
221

RISPENS AND DE BREE

children and children with SLI but not for older children. Novel verbs,
finally, led to an effect of frequency of occurrence of verb stem+allomorph
for all groups (see also Matthews & Theakston, 2006).
The results of both token frequency and the frequency of
stem+allomorph (type frequency) significantly influencing past tense productivity are in accordance with the work of Bybee (1995, 2002, 2007,
2008). Interesting in this respect is the finding that in the novel verbs we
found that the TD children produced the past tense with a te in instances in
which the wrong allomorph was applied (which we would like to stress
did not occur frequently). This fits the assumption that morphological
productivity is influenced by type frequency (calculated here as the verb
stem+allomorph). They also align with recent findings of Paradis
(2010), who demonstrated that input properties affect the rate of past tense
development in bilingual children, and those of Finneran and Leonard
(2010), who demonstrated an effect of input frequency for the use of
third person singular. These results thus establish that there are multiple
interacting factors involved in successful inflection.
Our third aim was to evaluate theories on past tense marking in
SLI. Importantly, our results showed that children with SLI have severe
difficulties with past tense production, even more severe than children who
are around two years younger than them (on the regular and novel
verbs). They furthermore showed that children with SLI demonstrated
morphophonological sensitivity, as there were low occurrences of wrong
allomorph selection. The past tense production of the children with SLI
followed the same pattern of that of the TD children (te verbs >de verbs).
The observed allomorph effect in children with SLI therefore does not fit
an account based on impaired/delayed syntactic representations. This is
endorsed by the findings that infinitives were not the most common error
types for the children with SLI in any of the three types of verbs. The
results also do not readily fit the ` surface ' hypothesis, as the perceptual
saliency of both allomorphs is equal, but different performances between
allomorphs were found. Further, as discussed, the children with SLI were
sensitive to the phonological characteristics of the verb stem and thus to the
morphophonological nature of past tense marking, as only a few allomorph
selection errors were produced. This does not readily fit the account of
Joanisse and Seidenberg (1998). In sum, none of the three hypotheses are
borne out completely in the present data.
Hsu and Bishop (2011) propose that children with SLI may have
problems extracting the statistical regularities from the input that are
necessary to form abstract patterns or schemas. They hypothesize that
children with SLI learn language by exemplars rather than via statistical
generalizations, as they cannot reach the stage of generalization. In a way,
this model recasts the usage-based approach to learning and localizes an
222

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

area of breakdown for the children with SLI. The results of the
children with SLI partly corroborate this idea, as the children with SLI
were significantly better at inflecting the regular verbs than the novel verbs,
which could reflect exemplar-based learning, just like the advantage for
the irregular verbs that were high in token frequency, despite their poor
percentage correct scores. However, our data show that children with
SLI are sensitive to the statistical, specifically distributional, cues from
the input, as they show the same pattern for the production of the two
allomorphs as the TD children. Further research is warranted to look into
the learning mechanism of morphophonology.
In conclusion, our investigation has demonstrated that both children
with SLI and their TD peers are sensitive to the interaction between
phonology and morphology in past tense production, as they were accurate
in choosing the correct allomorph according to the phonological context.
They further showed the influence of the frequency of the lexical verb and
of the phonotactic frequency of the combination of the verb stem and the
allomorph with respect to past tense inflection.
REFERENCES
Adriaans, F. (2006). PhonotacTools (Test version). [Computer program]. Utrecht Institute
of Linguistics OTS, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R. & van Rijn, H. (1995). The CELEX lexical database.
CD-ROM. Philadelphia, PA. Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Beers, M. (1995). The phonology of normally developing and language impaired children.
(IFOTT dissertation series, No. 20). Amsterdam: IFOTT.
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word 14, 150-77.
Blom, E. & Paradis, J. (in press). Past tense production by English second language
learners with and without language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing
Research.
de Bree, E. & Kerkhoff, A. (2010). Bempen or bemben : differences between children at-risk
of dyslexia and children with SLI on a morpho-phonological task. Scientific Studies of
Reading 14, 85-109.
Bybee, J. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes 10,
425-55.
Bybee, J. (2001). Phonology and language use. Cambridge : C.U.P.
Bybee, J. (2007). Frequency of use and the organization of language. Oxford : O.U.P.
Bybee, J. (2008). Usage-based grammar and second language acquisition. In P. Robinson
& N. Ellis (eds.), Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition.
New York : Routledge.
Bybee, J. & Slobin, D. (1982). Rules and schemas in the development and use of the
English past tense. Language 58, 265-89.
Chiat, S. (2001). Mapping theories of developmental language impairment : premises,
predictions and evidence. Language and Cognitive Processes 16, 113-42.
Derwing, B. L. & Baker, W. J. (1980). Rule learning and the English inflections (with
special emphasis on the plural). In G. D. Prideaux, B. L. Derwing & W. J. Baker (eds.),
Experimental linguistics : integration of theory and applications. Ghent : E.Stroy-Scientia.
Ernestus, M. & Baayen, H. (2001). Choosing between the Dutch past tense suffixes -te and
-de. In T. van der Wouden and H. de Hoop (eds.), Linguistics in the Netherlands 2001,
77-87. Amsterdam.

223

RISPENS AND DE BREE

Ernestus, M. & Baayen, H. (2003). Predicting the unpredictable : interpreting neutralized
segments in Dutch. Language 18, 5-38.
Finneran, D. A. & Leonard, L. B. (2010). Role of linguistic input in third person singular -s
use in the speech of young children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 53,
1065-74.
Forrest, K. & Morrisette, M. L. (1999). Feature analysis of segmental errors in children
with phonological disorders. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research 42,
187-94.
Goddijn, S. & Binnenpoorte, D. (2003). Assessing manually corrected broad phonetic
transcriptions in the Spoken Dutch Corpus. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, 1361-64. Barcelona.
Gor, K. (2007). Experimental study of first and second language morphological processing.
In M. Gonzalez-Marquez, I. Mittelberg, S. Coulson & M. J. Spivey (eds.), Methods in
cognitive linguistics. Ithaca : John Benjamins.
Hsu, H. J. & Bishop, D. V. M. (2011). Grammatical difficulties in children with specific
language impairment : is learning deficient? Human Development 21(53), 264-77.
Joanisse, M. F. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1998). Specific Language Impairment in children : an
impairment in grammar or processing? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2, 240-46.
Jusczyk, P. W., Luce, P. A. & Charles-Luce, J. (1994). Infants' sensitivity to phonotactic
patterns in the native language. Journal of Memory and Language 33, 630-45.
Kager, R., van der Feest, S., Fikkert, P., Kerkhoff, A. & Zamuner, T. (2007).
Representations of [voice]. Evidence from acquisition. In J. van de Weijer & E. J. van der
Torre (eds.), Voicing in Dutch : (de)voicing phonology, phonetics, and psycholinguistics.
Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
Kerkhoff, A., de Bree, E., Kager, R. & Zonneveld, W. (2011). Voicing errors in regular past
tense inflection. Presentation at the Tin dag, Utrecht, February 2011.
Kidd, E. & Kirjavainen, E. (2011). Investigating the contribution of procedural and
declarative memory to the acquisition of the past tense : evidence from Finnish. Language
and Cognitive Processes 26, 794-829.
van der Lely, H. K. J. & Ullman, M. (2001). Past tense morphology in specifically language
impaired and normally developing children. Language and Cognitive Processes 16, 177-217.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press.
Leonard, L. B., Davis, J. & Deevy, P. (2007). Phonotactic probability and past tense use by
children with specific language impairment and their typically developing peers. Clinical
Linguistics & Phonetics 21, 747-58.
Leonard, L. B., Ellis Weismer, S., Miller, C. A., Francis, D. J., Tomblin, J. B. &
Kail, R. V. (2007). Speed of processing, working memory, and language impairment in
children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 50, 408-28.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : tools for analyzing talk : Vol. 2. The
database. London : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Marchman, V. A. (1997). Children's productivity in the English past tense : the role of
frequency, phonology, and neighbourhood structure. Cognitive Science 21, 283-304.
Marchman, V. A. & Bates, E. (1994). Continuity in lexical and morphological development :
a test of the critical mass hypothesis. Journal of Child Language 21, 339-66.
Marchman, V. A., Wulfeck, B. & Ellis Weismer, S. (1999). Morphological productivity in
children with normal language and SLI : a study of the English past tense. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 42, 206-19.
Marinis, T. (2011). On the nature and cause of Specific Language Impairment : a view from
sentence processing and infant research. Lingua 121, 463-75.
Marinis, T. & Chondrogianni, V. (2011). Comprehension of reflexives and pronouns
in sequential bilingual children : do they pattern similarly to L1 children, L2 adults,
or children with specific language impairment? Journal of Neurolinguistics 24, 202-12.
Marshall, C. & van der Lely, H. (2006). A challenge to current models of past tense
inflection : the impact of phonotactics. Cognition 100, 302-20.

224

THE PAST TENSE IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SLI

Marshall, C. & van der Lely, H. (2007). The impact of phonological complexity on past
tense inflection in children with Grammatical-SLI. Advances in Speech-Language
Pathology 9, 191-203.
Matthews, D. E. & Theakston, A. (2006). Errors of omission in English-speaking children's
production of plurals and the past tense : the effects of frequency, phonology, and
competition. Cognitive Science 30, 1027-52.
Moscoso del Prado Martin, F., Ernestus, M. & Baayen, R. H. (2004). Do type and token
effects reflect different mechanisms ? Connectionist modeling of Dutch past-tense formation and final devoicing. Brain and Language 90, 287-98.
Oetting, J. & Horohov, J. (1997). Past-tense marking by children with and without specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research 40, 62-74.
Paradis, J. (2010). Bilingual children's acquisition of English verb morphology : effects of
language exposure, structure complexity, and task type. Language Learning 60, 651-80.
Paradis, J., Nicoladis, E., Crago, M. & Genesee, F. (2010). Bilingual children's acquisition
of the past tense : a usage-based approach. Journal of Child Language 38, 554-78.
Raven, J. (2006). Raven Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM). Enschede: Harcourt Test
Publishers.
Rice, M., Wexler, K. & Cleave, P. (1995). Specific language impairment as a period of
optional infinitive. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research 38, 850-63.
Schlichting, L. (2005). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III NL. Amsterdam : Harcourt
Test Publisher.
Song, J. Y., Sundara, M. & Demuth, K. (2009). Effects of phonology on children's
production of English 3rd person singular -s. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing
Research 52, 623-42.
Vitevitch, M. S. & Luce, P. A. (1999). Probabilistic phonotactics and neighborhood
activation in spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language 40, 374-408.
Zonneveld, W. (1983). Lexical and phonological properties of Dutch voicing assimilation. In
M. van de Broecke, V. van Heuven & W. Zonneveld (eds.), Sound and structure: Studies
for Antonie Cohen, 297-312. Dordrecht: Foris.

225

