Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain & Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Nouns, verbs, objects, actions, and abstractions: Local fMRI
activity indexes semantics, not lexical categories
Rachel L. Moseley a,b,, Friedemann Pulvermuller c
a

MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences, Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, CB2 7EF, Cambridge, UK
Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Douglas House, 18b Trumpington Road, CB2 8AH, Cambridge, UK
c
Brain Language Laboratory, Department of Philosophy and Humanities, Freie Universitat Berlin, Habelschwerdter Allee 45, 14195 Berlin, Germany
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Accepted 3 March 2014
Available online 12 April 2014
Keywords:
Embodied meaning
fMRI
Grammatical category
Lexical category
Semantics

a b s t r a c t
Noun/verb dissociations in the literature defy interpretation due to the confound between lexical category and semantic meaning; nouns and verbs typically describe concrete objects and actions. Abstract
words, pertaining to neither, are a critical test case: dissociations along lexical-grammatical lines would
support models purporting lexical category as the principle governing brain organisation, whilst semantic models predict dissociation between concrete words but not abstract items. During fMRI scanning,
participants read orthogonalised word categories of nouns and verbs, with or without concrete, sensorimotor meaning. Analysis of inferior frontal/insula, precentral and central areas revealed an interaction
between lexical class and semantic factors with clear category differences between concrete nouns
and verbs but not abstract ones. Though the brain stores the combinatorial and lexical-grammatical properties of words, our data show that topographical differences in brain activation, especially in the motor
system and inferior frontal cortex, are driven by semantics and not by lexical class.
O 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

1. Introduction
The neurobiological basis of noun and verb processing has been
elucidated by cognitive neuroscience research. A range of neuropsychological (Damasio & Tranel, 1993; Daniele, Giustolisi, Silveri,
Colosimo, & Gainotti 1994; Kemmerer, Rudrauf, Manzel, & Tranel
2012; Miceli, Silveri, Villa, & Caramazza 1984; Neininger &
Pulvermueller, 2001; Neininger & Pulvermuller, 2003) and brain
imaging studies (Bedny, Caramazza, Grossman, Pascual-Leone, &
Saxe 2008; Perani et al. 1999; Price, Wise, & Frackowiak 1996;
Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger, & Preissl 1999) have linked these word
classes to specific parts of the human brain, with verb processing
associated with inferior frontal and middle temporal cortex and
noun processing related to other temporal and parietal areas. Differences in grammatical or lexical class may not, however, be the
principle factor in the neural differentiation between nouns and
verbs. As one variable of interest, word meaning, or semantics,
has frequently been discussed as an underlying determinant of
noun/verb dissociations (Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger et al. 1999;
Shallice, 1988; Vigliocco, Vinson, Druks, Barber, & Cappa 2011;
Warrington & Shallice, 1984). An essential confound exists in the
 Corresponding author at: Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge, UK.
E-mail addresses: rachel.moseley@cantab.net (R.L. Moseley), friedemann.
pulvermuller@fu-berlin.de (F. Pulvermuller).

literature as most verbs are undeniably words used to speak about
actions whereas most nouns refer to objects, so it is hardly possible
to match and control for relevant semantic differences between the
lexical classes; furthermore, were one to succeed in precisely
matching sets of nouns and verbs for factors such as the concreteness of their object reference and intensity of their action relationship, one might, from a linguistic perspective, still argue that such
selections would certainly be far from representing typical specimens from the lexical groups. Given this seemingly hopeless confound of lexical class with semantics, it is therefore unsurprising
that many scholars have tried to trace the ``lexical'' differences to
their semantic origins, at least as far as putative word class specific
brain activation patterns are concerned.
Ingenious attempts have been made to clarify this issue by
varying semantic properties within the lexical classes so that consistent noun/verb differences in brain activation - for example in
the middle-temporal cortex (Bedny et al. 2008) - reveal more genuine lexical class differences. In addition, many authors have attempted to strip words of their semantics by contrasting
homophonous pseudowords in noun and verb context (to wug
vs. the wug), thus providing a tool for ascertaining differential
representation of lexical categories (Cappelletti, Fregni, Shapiro,
Pascual-Leone, & Caramazza, 2008; Laiacona & Caramazza, 2004;
Shapiro & Caramazza, 2003; Shapiro, Moo, & Caramazza 2006;
Shapiro, Pascual-Leone, Mottaghy, Gangitano, & Caramazza

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.03.001
0093-934X/O 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

2001). However, taking on the role of an advocatus diaboli, one
might still argue that the phrase ``to wug'' suggests an action
(e.g., whacking) whereas the context ``the wug'' is more compatible
with an object (a rug) interpretation and, therefore, these pseudowords were not truly stripped of semantic associations, but were,
in fact, semantically biased by the contexts in which they were
presented: as the authors did not explore this possibility empirically, this interpretation (which has earlier been suggested and
supported by Pulvermuller, Kherif, Hauk, Mohr, and Nimmo-Smith
(2009) and Vigliocco et al. (2011)) cannot be ruled out at this point.
Further evidence for representation of lexical categories in the
brain comes from differential brain activity in response to
homophonous noun and verb affixes presented in noun and verb
contexts (Pulvermuller & Shtyrov, 2009), which persist even after
the contributions of the noun/verb stems are subtracted. Differential neural responses to acoustically identical affixes of nouns and
verbs would appear to strongly support genuine differentiation between lexical categories at the inflectional level. However, since
these affixes most typically appear in the context of action verbs
and object nouns, respectively, it is entirely probable that their
neuronal circuits bind with the semantic knowledge attached to
their companion words. Even such surprising noun/verb distinctions in brain activation patterns may, therefore, be traced to a
semantic origin.
Indeed, whilst the bulk of evidence regarding noun and verb
processing fails to replicate clear brain activation differences between these lexical categories and is frequently confounded by
semantics (see Vigliocco et al. 2011, for review), there is unambiguous evidence that semantic associations alone, when disentangled from and unconfounded by lexical category differences,
differentially activate cortical areas. This has been concisely addressed by the exploration of different semantic categories within
the same lexical class. Action words (verbs) semantically related to
the different effectors of the body have been robustly shown to
produce differential somatotopic activity in motor systems
(Aziz-Zadeh & Damasio, 2008; Boulenger, Hauk, & Pulvermuller
2009; Cappa and Pulvermuller, 2012; Hauk, Johnsrude, &
Pulvermuller 2004; Hauk, Shtyrov, & Pulvermuller 2008;
Kemmerer, Castillo, Talavage, Patterson, & Wiley, 2008;
Pulvermuller, Harle, & Hummel 2001), and likewise, nouns with
strong gustatory, olfactory or auditory associations have been
shown to differentially activate these respective sensory brain regions (Barros-Loscertales et al. 2012; Gonzalez et al., 2006; Kiefer,
Sim, Herrnberger, Grothe, & Hoenig 2008). These sensorimotor
activations specific to the semantic category of linguistic symbols
(words) occur in conjunction with left-perisylvian area activations
generally seen during language processing. These semantic activation topographies support a model of language processing based on
Hebbian cell assemblies that bind together distributed semantic
category-specific sensorimotor and left-hemispheric perisylvian
language circuits (Pulvermuller, 1999; Pulvermuller, 2002;
Pulvermuller, 2012; Pulvermuller, 2013). The functional relevance
of sensorimotor activation for language processing has been demonstrated by causal effects of sensorimotor cortex activation on the
processing of specific semantic types of symbols (Boulenger et al.
2006; Devlin & Watkins, 2007; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002;
Glenberg, Sato, & Cattaneo 2008a; Pulvermuller, Hauk, Nikulin, &
Ilmoniemi 2005) and by a range of patient studies (Bak, O'Donovan,
Xuereb, Boniface, & Hodges, 2001; Pulvermuller et al. 2010; for discussion, see Kemmerer et al., 2012). It therefore appears that differences in meaning between linguistic symbols are manifest in
neuronal circuits with specific brain topographies.
Whilst neural differentiation between semantic categories is
relatively well-supported, the influence of lexical categories in
modulating brain activity is, for the previously mentioned reasons,
still undetermined. The optimal design for comparing lexical

29

(noun/verb) and semantic (action/object relationship) differences
in brain activation would vary these factors independently. Earlier
work explored this strategy using EEG (Brown & Lehmann, 1979;
Kellenbach, Wijers, Hovius, Mulder, & Mulder, 2002; Pulvermuller,
Mohr, & Schleichert, 1999) and fMRI (Vigliocco et al. 2006) but,
especially in the fMRI studies, it was not always possible to control
all relevant confounds in an optimal fashion. For example,
Vigliocco et al. (2006) compared Italian nouns and verbs with sensory or motor features and found a semantic-topographical but not
a lexical class difference. However, a shortcoming of this study was
that their Italian noun/verb stimuli shared stems but differed in
their affixes (e.g. noun ``arrivo'' [-O] and verb ``arrivare'' [-ARE])
and no stimulus matching for word length, word frequency or
other lexical variables was reported. This study, as many earlier
ones, did not exclude important psycholinguistic confounds which
might have led differences in brain activation between nouns and
verbs to be overlooked. On the other hand, the fact that ''sensory
words were judged as less familiar, acquired later, and less imageable than motor words'' (Vigliocco et al., 2006, p. 1791) leaves it
open whether the observed differences in brain activation between
word types were due to their sensorimotor semantics or to other
psycholinguistic features. It is therefore of the essence to properly
address the issue of putative lexical-grammatical class differences
in brain activation with these pitfalls avoided, and in particular to
examine the relationship of lexical class differences to the semantic differences in brain activation reported by the aforementioned
authors.
The debate concerning lexical vs. semantic differences as the
primary factor for neural differentiation might be addressed with
the exploration of well-matched word categories orthogonalised
for semantic and lexical factors, such that the contribution of these
factors to brain activation in specific cortical areas can be clarified.
Whilst nouns and verbs have generally been investigated in the
context of concrete items which refer respectively to objects and
actions in the world (e.g. ``door'' and ``speak''), they are also highly
typical as abstract items generally used to speak about abstract
concepts or feelings (e.g. ``despair'' and ``suffer'', ``idea'' and
``think'') and therefore possessing few, if any, sensorimotor associations. Using typical nouns and verbs of a concrete or abstract
semantic nature, we here tested predictions of theories of lexical
and semantic category representation in the human brain. The lexical-grammatical approach to category-specific local brain processes postulates that the differences in word-elicited cortical
activation landscapes are best described in terms of the lexical
(or grammatical) categories of nouns and verbs (Daniele et al.
1994; Miceli, Silveri, Nocentini, & Caramazza, 1988; Miceli et al.,
1984; Shapiro, Shelton, & Caramazza 2000; Shapiro et al. 2001;
Caramazza and Shelton, 1998; Bedny, Caramazza, Pascual-Leone,
& Saxe, 2012; Bedny et al. 2008; Laiacona & Caramazza, 2004;
Shapiro & Caramazza, 2003). This position implies that the same
differences are present for concrete and abstract members of these
lexical categories.
In contrast, a semantic approach postulates a difference in brain
activation topographies only for concrete nouns and verbs semantically related to objects and actions respectively, but not for abstract nouns and verbs, which lack such clear differences in
semantic links with action and perception information. The
grounded semantics position views semantic representations as
circuits tying together symbolic word form information with action and perception schemas (Barsalou, 1999; Lakoff, 1987). In this
perspective, neuronal circuits in motor systems (the neural substrate of action schemas) contribute to semantic knowledge about
action-related verbs, whereas meaning knowledge related to object words, typically concrete nouns, is underpinned by neuronal
assemblies reaching into inferior-temporal cortex of the ventral-visual ``what'' stream of object processing (Barsalou, 2008; Gallese &

30

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Lakoff, 2005; Martin, 2007; Pulvermuller, 1999; Pulvermuller &
Fadiga, 2010). Cortical areas associated with movement or object
perception, in middle temporal and inferior temporal/fusiform
gyrus respectively, may house additional perceptual schemas related to actions and objects. Abstract words which belong to the
noun and verb categories, but which cannot be differentiated from
each other based on action- or perception-related semantic features, are hypothesised to evoke similar topographical patterns of
brain activation. Previous studies of abstract language processing
have implicated a wide range of brain regions, including multimodal dorsolateral prefrontal (Binder, Westbury, McKiernan,
Possing, & Medler 2005; Boulenger et al., 2009; Moseley, Carota,
Hauk, Mohr, & Pulvermuller 2012), anterior temporal (Patterson,
Nestor, & Rogers 2007) and superior parietal cortex (Binder et al.
2005). As a number of studies on abstract word processing have
previously found activation in premotor and prefrontal cortex
(Moseley et al., 2012; Pexman, Hargreaves, Edwards, Henry, &
Goodyear, 2007; Pulvermuller & Hauk, 2006), it seems to be reasonable to predict such activation for our present abstract items,
without any further prediction about differences between abstract
nouns and verbs.
With tight matching of stimuli and the use of event-related
functional resonance imaging (fMRI), we here address the debate
around the question as to whether brain activation topographies
elicited by words are driven by lexical or semantic factors, or by
both. In an orthogonalised design, we presented participants with
concrete nouns, concrete verbs, abstract nouns and abstract verbs,
hypothesising that differential brain activation between concrete
items but not between abstract ones would support a view of
semantics driving brain differences between nouns and verbs (reflected in an interaction effect of lexical category and abstractness).
Divisions between nouns and verbs but not between abstract and
concrete items of the same lexical category, reflected in a main effect of lexical category, would imply that the differential topographies for nouns and verbs are driven by the grammatical categories
that these items belong to, rather than their varying semantic
associations.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Subjects
Participants (n = 18) were right-handed, monolingual native
speakers of English all of whom had no history of psychiatric or
neurological illness and were free of psychotropic medication.
They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision as suitable for a
task within the visual modality. The mean age of participants
was 29 (SE = 2.8), all were strongly right-handed (mean laterality
quotient = 90, SE = 3.1, Oldfield, 1971), and the group had a mean
IQ slightly above average (mean = 110, SE = 3.0) as tested using
Form A of the Cattell Culture Fair test (Cattell & Cattell, 1960).
Ethical approval was obtained from the Cambridge Psychology
Research Ethics Committee (CPREC 2008.64): after receiving
written and verbal briefing concerning the full nature of the experiment, participants gave written consent and were all remunerated
for their time.
2.2. Stimuli
In order to disentangle the effects of lexical category from
semantic-abstractness, four word categories of 40 words each were
employed (please see Appendix A). Abstract nouns (such as `clue',
`jape', `truce') were contrasted with concrete nouns (`mouse',
`cheese', `spade'), abstract verbs (`faze', `bide', `glean') and concrete
verbs (`peel', `chomp', `skate'). Prior to the fMRI study, 10 native
speakers of English were recruited to provide ratings for a large

word corpus on a range of semantic variables. These covered aspects of sensorimotor features, such as imageability, concreteness,
visual-relatedness, form-relatedness, colour-relatedness and action-relatedness, and affective-emotional features such as arousal
and valence (Bradley & Lang, 1994; Osgood, Suci, & Tannenhaus
1975). Details of the behavioural procedures are described elsewhere (Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger, et al., 1999a, Pulvermuller,
Mohr, et al., 1999b). The psycholinguistic properties of words were
obtained from the CELEX database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van
Rijn, 1993), and stimulus groups were consequently matched on
length, bigram and trigram frequency, logarithmic lemma frequency, and number of orthographic neighbours (see Appendix B
for psycholinguistic and statistical properties of the stimuli). Our
study included lexically unambiguous nouns and verbs; lexically
ambiguous noun/verbs (such as ``the/to walk'') were allowed if
their lemma frequencies indicated a dominant usage as either verb
or noun. Statistically, the noun lemma frequencies of items in the
noun word category by far outnumbered their verb lemma frequencies (abstract nouns: t(39) = 4.574, p < .000 l; concrete nouns:
t(39) = 7.891, p < .0001), and the reverse was true for the verbs
(concrete verbs: t(39) = 10.950, p < .0001; abstract verbs:
t(39) = 24.240, p < .0001). As can be seen in Appendix B, there
were no main effects (or indeed interactions) of lexical category
or semantic-abstractness on psycholinguistic properties of stimuli.
This being the case, we were confident that brain activation in contrasts focusing on lexical category and semantic-abstractness were
free of ulterior confounding effects.
The experimental word categories were dispersed among 200
filler words during presentation, with which they were matched
in length (F(1, 359) = 1.006, p > .436), bigram (F(1, 359) = 1.679,
p > .084) and trigram frequency (F(1, 359) = .868, p > .560). 120
hash marks, matched to word stimuli in length, acted as a low level
visual baseline in contrasts.
2.3. Procedure and experimental design
Adopting a paradigm previously employed for investigating lexicosemantic processing (e.g., Hauk et al. 2004; for review, see
Pulvermuller et al. 2009), words written in lowercase letters were
presented tachistoscopically while haemodynamic responses were
recorded using event-related fMRI. This passive reading paradigm
was chosen to be unbiased towards semantic or grammatical processing. Despite no overt instructions for semantic processing, it is
reliably known to evoke early differential activations that reflect a
word's semantic category (see Hauk et al., 2008, for review),
strongly implying that reading automatically evokes semantic processing of word stimuli in typical participants. Subjects were instructed to attend to and carefully read all stimulus words
silently, without moving their lips or tongue. The passive reading
task was delivered in three blocks of approximately 7 min each.
A short presentation time of 150 ms ensured that saccades were
discouraged and that participants had to continuously attend to
the screen in order to perform the task. A central fixation cross
was displayed between stimuli for an average 2350 ms, with a
jitter of 250 ms, resulting in SOAs between 2250 and 2750 ms
(average 2500 ms). The order of stimuli was pseudo-randomised
(restriction: not more than two items of the same category in direct succession) with two lists, counter-balanced across subjects.
Following the scan, our participants were requested to complete a short unheralded word recognition test outside the scanner.
In the recognition test, they were presented with a list of experimental stimuli and novel words and had to rate each word on a
scale from 1 to 7, indicating how certain they were that a given
item had appeared in the fMRI experiment. For evaluation, ratings
were converted into percentage correct/incorrect responses. The
test contained a combination of 50 experimental and 25 novel

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

distracter words, and above chance performance was thus taken to
confirm that subjects had engaged with the task.
2.4. Imaging methods and data analysis
A Siemens 3T Tim Trio (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with a
head coil attached was employed during data collection. The functional scans consisted of 32 slices which covered the whole brain in
descending order (slice thickness: 3 mm, in-plane resolution:
3  3 mm, inter-slice distance: 0.75 mm), and echo-planar
sequence parameters were TR = 2000 ms TE = 30 ms and flip
angle = 78 degrees.
SPM5 (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London,
UK) was employed for all processing stages. Images were corrected
for slice timing and re-aligned to the first image using sinc interpolation. The EPI images were co-registered to the structural T1
images, which were normalised to the 152-subject T1 template
of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI), and the resulting
transformation parameters applied to the co-registered EPI images.
During this pre-processing, images were resampled with a spatial
resolution of 2  2  2 mm and spatially smoothed with an
8-mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel. Single-subject
and second level statistical contrasts were computed using the
canonical Haemodynamic Response Function (HRF) of the general
linear model, a measure for the amplitude of brain response.
Low-frequency noise was removed by applying a high-pass filter
of 128s. Onset times for each stimulus were extracted from Eprime
output files and integrated into a model for each block in which
each stimulus group was modelled as a separate event. Group data
were then analysed with a random-effects analysis. Activation to
each of the experimental word categories was compared statistically against baseline (the hash mark condition) and subsequently
between critical stimulus conditions (nouns vs. verbs and abstract
vs. concrete words, see below). Stereotaxic coordinates for voxels
are reported in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard
space.
In addition to whole brain analysis, a regions of interest (ROI)
analysis was undertaken in which 2 mm-radius regions were defined using the MarsBar function of SPM5 (Brett, Anton, Valabregue, & Poline 2002). This analysis employed both an apriori
(theory-led) and a data-driven approach. In the former, a number
of coordinates were identified and taken from previous literature
concerning category-specific effects for concrete objects in frontotemporal cortex (Chao, Haxby, & Martin 1999; Martin & Chao,
2001; Martin & Weisberg, 2003; Martin, Wiggs, Ungerleider, &
Haxby, 1996). Regions were also examined from the recent work
of Bedny et al. (2008), who used a motor localiser to identify areas
activated by biological motion (left and right area MT+, left and
right superior temporal sulcus respectively) and a semantic decision task to identify areas activated by the contrast of action verbs
vs. animal nouns (left tempero-parietal junction, left and right
anterior superior temporal sulcus).
In a similar fashion, in our data-driven approach, we extracted
the regions where clearest evidence for activation (in terms of error probabilities/t-values) was found in the contrast of all experimental words pooled together against the baseline, plotted at an
FDR-corrected significance level of p < .05. The criteria for ROI
selection was based on t/Z-values-obtained in this contrast: we selected the three ``most significant voxels'', i.e. those with the highest t/Z values for the words vs. baseline contrast. As this
comparison (words vs. baseline) is orthogonal to both of the variables investigated (lexical category, abstractness), the strategy applied for selecting ROIs follows recent recommendations to avoid
``double dipping'' (Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan & Baker,
2009). In this data-driven analysis, average activation values within each of these 2 mm-radius spheres for each subject and each of

31

the four word categories were entered into a repeated-measures
ANOVA with the factors ROI x lexical category (2)  semantics/
abstractness (2).
Note that, because 2  2  2 mm voxels, 8 mm smoothing kernel and 2 mm ROI radius were chosen, the half maximum width
of each ROI was 12 mm. This allowed us to keep overlap between
ROIs to a minimum while at the same time compensating for some
of the spatial variance caused by the projection of individual brains
to the averaged MNI template. Where appropriate, Huynh-Feldt
correction was applied to correct for sphericity violations. In this
case, epsilon values and corrected p values are reported
throughout.
3. Results
3.1. Behavioural results
Whereas psycholinguistic properties were matched between
word groups (see Methods, Appendix B), results of the semantic
rating study executed prior to the fMRI experiment revealed significant differences in the semantic variables of imageability, arousal,
action-relatedness, concreteness, visual-relatedness, colour-relatedness and form-relatedness (see Appendix B). For all of these features, 2-way ANOVAs revealed significant interaction effects and,
in most cases, additional main effects. The interactions of all object-related features, including concreteness, imageability, formand visual-relatedness, showed, as expected, highest values for
concrete nouns towering over all other word groups. For arousal
and action-relatedness, which both reflect semantic action features, concrete verbs achieved the highest ratings and concrete
nouns the lowest. In addition, object-related semantic ratings were
higher for nouns than for verbs and higher for concrete items than
for abstract ones; with regard to action-relatedness, verbs dominated over nouns and, again, concrete over abstract items.
Statistical tests for word groups, including interactions and
main effects, are displayed in Appendix B. Pairwise comparisons
between stimulus groups showed that the abstract noun category
was indeed significantly less imageable (t(78) = 14.028, p < .001),
less concrete (t(78) = 16.812, p < .001), less related to visual objects (t(78) = 15.145, p < .001), and less form/shape-related
(t(78) = 10.443, p < .001) than concrete nouns. Likewise, abstract
verbs were significantly less imageable (t(78) = 8.613, p < .001),
less concrete (t(78), and less action-related (t(78) = 3.018,
p < .005) than concrete verbs. There were no significant differences
between the two abstract categories in imageability (t(78) = .809,
p > .421), visual- (t(78) = 1.364, p > .175) or form-relatedness
(t(78) = 8.54, p > .395), though abstract verbs were significantly
less concrete than abstract nouns (t(78) = 2.206, p < .031). As expected, the most highly imageable category, concrete nouns, significantly outperformed concrete verbs in imageability (t(78) = 8.988,
p < .001), concreteness (t(78) = 18.307, p < .001), and visual(t(78) = 9.814, p < .001) and form-relatedness (t(78) = 4.861,
p < .001).
On the surprise word recognition test performed after scanning,
performance was above chance (average hit rate: 76.2% (SE = 4.2%),
false positive rate: 56.8% (SE = 5.2%), d'prime rate: 0.53). Although
these results only document moderate recognition of stimulus
words, possibly due to the large number of the stimuli presented
and the long delay between experiment and later testing outside
the scanner (23 min average), they document that subjects had
been attentive during passive reading. In order to check that concrete items were not processed any more thoroughly than abstract
ones, d'prime values were calculated for each word category. The
average d'primes for each category were as follows: concrete
nouns = .024; concrete verbs = 0.59; abstract nouns = 0.52; abstract verbs = 0.56. One-sample t-tests revealed that the d'prime

32

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

of each word category was significantly above 0 (concrete nouns:
t[17] = 2.092, p < .05; concrete verbs: t[17] = 4.135, p < .002; abstract nouns: t[17] = 3.324, p < .005; abstract verbs: t[17] = 3.669,
p < .003). A two-way ANOVA (lexical category  concreteness) revealed no significant main effects or interactions between the
d'primes of different word categories, such that there was no
behavioural evidence for processing differences between word
categories.
3.2. fMRI results
Examination of the contrast of all experimental words against
the hashmark baseline, presented at an FDR-corrected significance
level of p < .05 in Fig. 1 part A, revealed activation typical of that
generally seen in visual language processing tasks (Bookheimer,
2002; Kronbichler et al. 2004). A very large left-hemispheric cluster extended from inferior frontal gyrus (pars orbitalis (BA 47), pars
triangularis (BA 45) and pars opercularis (BA 44)) over precentral
and postcentral gyrus to supramarginal gyrus, down over superior,
middle and inferior temporal and fusiform gyrus, and even back to
inferior occipital cortex. Other left-hemispheric clusters included
the middle cingulate, parietal and superior occipital cortex and
the cerebellum. Activation was also observed in the right hemisphere, with large clusters located at right middle frontal cortex,
precentral gyrus and the right cerebellum (close to fusiform gyrus),
and a smaller cluster at right supramarginal gyrus. Activation maxima for this contrast are displayed in Appendix C.
3.3. Data-driven ROI analyses
Using a data-driven approach, we examined stimulus-induced
activation dynamics in ROIs where clearest word-related activation
was present. In the contrast of all words vs. baseline, three left
frontocentral activation clusters stood out with regard to their
low p- and high t-values (t > 6.5; see Fig. 1, and Appendix C) (see
also Methods). Activation evoked by the four word categories at
these three foci, located in inferior frontal cortex and insula
( 32, 18, 2), on the precentral gyrus ( 42, 8, 46) and across

the central sulcus ( 54, 16, 42), was entered into a 3 (ROI:
inferior frontal, precentral, central) by 2 (Lexical category: noun/
verb) by 2 (Semantics: concrete/abstract) ANOVA. Crucially, a significant interaction of all three factors, ROI, Lexical category and
Semantics (F(2, 34) = 4.002, p < .028), demonstrated that the four
word categories evoked significantly different topographic activation patterns across these three frontocentral regions. (Fig. 1B).
To further investigate this complex interaction, separate analyses of variance were carried out for concrete and abstract words
(design: ROI  Lexical category [nouns vs. verbs]). For concrete
nouns and verbs, there was a significant interaction of the ROI factor with Lexical category (F(2, 34) = 4.38, p < 0.020). Planned comparison tests failed to reveal a category difference in the inferior
frontal and precentral ROIs, but documented stronger haemodynamic activity in central motor cortex for concrete action-related
verbs than for object-related nouns (F(1, 17) = 5.66, p < 0.029) and
a tendency in the opposite direction for the inferior frontal ROI
(F(1, 17) = 2.227, p > .15). When grouping together premotor and
motor ROIs (i.e. precentral and central), significantly stronger responses to concrete verbs than to concrete nouns were re-confirmed (F(1, 17) = 5.74, p < 0.028). The same two-way analysis of
variance carried out for abstract nouns and verbs failed to reveal
a significance interaction effect of the ROI and Lexical category factors (F(2,34) = 0.79, p > 0.46, n.s.). There was no indication of word
category differences in motor, premotor or prefrontal areas of
interest. This pattern of results shows that only concrete action-/
object-related nouns and verbs, but not abstract ones, activate
the frontocentral areas differentially.
Further inspection of activation patterns to abstract and concrete nouns and verbs in the three ROIs suggested that, over and
above the statistically confirmed category-difference for concrete
but not abstract items, the abstract items seemed to group with action verbs. Pooling haemodynamic responses to abstract words
with those to concrete action verbs did indeed confirm significantly greater activity in the central motor ROI than that evoked
by concrete nouns (t [17] = 2.285, p < .04). The precentral region
indicated the same trend but without reaching significance. The
inferior frontal ROI showed a trend towards stronger responses

Fig. 1. Brain activation elicited by concrete and abstract nouns and verbs. (A) Activation overlays evoked by all experimental words against baseline (hashmarks), plotted at
p < .05 (FDR-corrected). (B) Activation evoked by each word group in the three ROIs defined around the most highly significant maxima for this contrast. ROIs are located in
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and underlying insula, in precentral cortex and in central areas.

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

33

to concrete nouns compared with the other three categories,
though this did not reach significance (t(17) = 1.351, p > .195).
3.4. A-priori defined ROI analyses
In a second set of analyses, we investigated the word-type related activation in regions highlighted in previous research. ROIs
were therefore taken from the literature and effects of lexical
category or semantics were investigated by two-way ANOVAs. Previous work targeting both lexical category differences (noun-verb)
and semantic dissociations (living-nonliving, animals-tools, etc.)
was exploited in defining ROIs (Bedny et al. 2008; Chao et al.
1999; Martin & Chao, 2001; Martin & Weisberg, 2003; see
Vigliocco et al. 2011). Bedny et al. (2008) reported a significant effect of lexical category but NOT of the only semantic variable they
focused on, motion--related semantic word properties. This lexical
category effect was seen in three ROIs, where verbs evoked greater
activity than nouns: left temperoparietal junction (TPJ: coordinates
58, 48, 22), superior temporal sulcus (STS: 57, 55, 12) and
anterior superior temporal sulcus (aSTS: 57, 41, 1). However,
using the same ROIs to scrutinise the present data set, we could not
observe any concordant significant effect, and, more generally, not
any main effect or interaction of either Lexical category or
Semantics (all F-values <0.5). Their left STS ROI revealed a trend towards a lexical category difference which, though weak and far below significance (F(1, 17) = .422, p > .525), somewhat resembled
that reported by Bedny, with numerically greater activity for verbs
(see Fig. 2, Part A). No significant effect of lexical category appeared
in either the left temperoparietal junction ROI (F(1, 17) = .400,
p > .536) or the left anterior superior temporal sulcus ROI
(F(1, 17) = .105, p > .750); in these cases, any numerical differences
in favour of verbs were also absent in our data, in favour of a
numerical contrast in the opposite direction. The combination of
all three Bedny et al. regions (TPJ, STS and aSTS) also failed to reveal a significant effect of lexical category or semantics. Although,
in our present analysis, activation maxima did not arise in the left
STS in the contrast of all experimental words against baseline, we
chose two coordinates located in the cluster of STS activation
which were closest to Bedny et al.'s original anterior and posterior
STS regions (see Fig. 2B). These coordinates, too, failed to replicate
the verb advantage reported by Bedny and colleagues in left STS
and showed no effect of lexical category. The present study was
therefore unable to replicate the noun/verb difference in haemodynamic responses previously reported in left middle-temporal
cortex.
So far, analysis of all ROIs from the previous literature failed to
reveal effects of lexical category. We did, however, observe a main
effect of lexical category in analysis of two left frontal-insula regions (one more anterior at MNI coordinates 27, 33, 11, the other
more posterior at 27, 3, 23) suggested by Martin et al.'s (1996)
results of a positron emission tomography (PET) experiment investigating the naming of visually depicted animals and tools
(F(1, 17) = 6.280, p < .025). Of more important note, though, was
the significant interaction between this lexical category factor
and the semantics variable (F(1, 17) = 9.319, p = .007). This interaction was driven by significantly greater activation for concrete
nouns (see Fig. 3) compared with concrete verbs in both the more
anterior first (t(17) = 2.301, p < .035) and posterior (t(17) = 3.046,
p < .01) frontal regions. Whilst nouns generally evoked greater
average activation than verbs in these regions, the difference between abstract nouns and verbs did not reach significance in the
present study. Comparison of brain responses to concrete nouns
to the pooled response to all three other word types confirmed
the relatively enhanced signal to the former in the anterior ROI
(t(17) = 2.611, p = .018) and a trend in this direction in the posterior (t(17) = 1.672, p = .113). Note, furthermore, the similarity

Fig. 2. Left-temporal brain activations elicited by noun and verb categories.
Comparison between earlier reports and the present results. (A) ROIs and data
from Bedny et al. (2008): averaged relative signal change (in arbitrary units) during
word comprehension vs. baseline. High- and low-motion nouns and verbs are
depicted in shades of grey in these three ROIs (superior temporal sulcus [STS],
temperoparietal junction [TPJ], and anterior superior temporal sulcus [aSTS]). (B)
Activity evoked in the same regions by abstract and concrete nouns and verbs in the
present study. (C) Activation to abstract and concrete nouns and verbs in regions
around local activation maxima in the contrast of all words vs. baseline. In this case,
we selected local activation maxima in posterior and anterior STS which were close
to the activation foci shown in A.

between the activation advantage for concrete nouns in this ROI
defined by Martin et al. (1996) and the data-driven IFG/insular
ROI found in the present study. Martin et al. had investigated animal and tool naming and these ROIs showed strongest responses in
animal naming; in our study, which used words in a passive reading task, most of the concrete nouns were also animal names. The
inferior frontal region thus appears particularly engaged in animal
name processing, regardless whether this occurs during naming or
passive reading.
4. Discussion
In a study of abstract and concrete noun and verb processing,
we found a significant interaction effect of orthogonalized semantic (abstract vs. concrete) and lexical (noun vs. verb) factors in the
frontocentral motor system. In central and precentral motor cortex, activation to concrete verbs was generally enhanced compared

34

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Fig. 3. Analysis of activity to concrete and abstract nouns and verbs in inferior frontal ROIs taken from Martin et al. (1996). The observed activation strength for concrete
nouns in inferior frontal regions shows similarity with the pattern obtained from the IFG-insula region of the data-driven analysis (see Fig. 1).

with concrete nouns and, crucially, a similar difference for abstract
word groups was absent. Inferior frontal regions suggested the
opposite contrast, activation greater for concrete nouns than for
concrete verbs, but, once again, the contrast of nouns vs. verbs
was not significant for abstract items. As statistically significant effects of lexical category appeared in interaction with semantic differences between abstract and concrete words, our results argue
against a distinction between topographical patterns of brain activation in terms of the lexical categories of nouns and verbs. Rather,
our data show that brain activation patterns to nouns and verbs
depend on the semantic nature of these items. The most prominent
brain distinctions include enhanced activity in central motor cortex to verbs typically used to speak about actions relative to object-related nouns, and relatively stronger activation in inferior
frontal cortex to object nouns as compared with action verbs.
Our neurometabolic data reveals a pattern of activation across
frontal and temporal cortices typical of that generally seen in visual word processing (Bookheimer, 2002; Kronbichler et al.,
2004). It is also consistent with the aforementioned model of distributed word-related cell assemblies, showing activation spread
out across left perisylvian language cortex and incorporating
semantic circuits in extrasylvian regions, especially motor and visual areas (Pulvermuller, 1999; Pulvermuller, 2002; Pulvermuller,
2012; Pulvermuller, 2013). In an investigation of three frontal regions (in IFG-insula, precentral and central gyrus) most significantly active during processing of experimental words, a region
(3) by semantic abstractness (2) by lexical category (2) ANOVA revealed a significant interaction of all three factors. Further investigation confirmed the lexical category difference in brain activation
patterns for concrete but not for abstract items. These results show
that noun/verb differences in brain activation patterns are specific
to concrete items and therefore depend on semantics.
A search for effects of lexical category in temporal regions
implicated in previous literature was unfruitful, though a lexical
category effect did appear in two frontal regions previously implicated by Martin et al. (1996) in the processing of animal pictures.
This effect was driven by a particular strength for concrete nouns,
which were indeed mainly animal words, as consistent with this
and other previous studies reporting substantial activation overlap

in this area for animal concepts across modalities (Martin, 2007;
Martin & Chao, 2001). Considering the theoretical models previously discussed, our findings demonstrate greater support for a
semantic than a lexical interpretation of focal neurometabolic
noun/verb differences, but demand a more complex discussion of
the impact of lexical category and semantics on the brain.
4.1. Lexical categories in the brain
The proposition that lexical (grammatical) categories are differentially represented in the brain would seem plausible given that
nouns and verbs are suggested by many to be linguistic universals
(Vigliocco et al., 2011), even present in American Sign Language
(ASL: Supalla and Newport, 1978), pidgin and creole languages
(Slobin, 1975). Exceptions do exist (Broschart, 1997; Foley, 1998;
Langacker, 1987; Robins, 1952), however, such that linguists now
query whether these categories are truly shared cross-culturally
across languages (Croft, 2001; Kemmerer & Eggleston, 2010).
Nouns and verbs are defined combinatorially and due to the extreme diversity of language systems (some which lack inflectional
categories and function word types, for example), it is clear that
the combinatorial criteria for inclusion in the noun/verb categories
must differ between languages. At present, the brain-imaging work
on nouns and verbs assume that these categories are valid in the
Western population (speakers of English or European languages
such as Italian and German) and that, therefore, it is possible that
these categories have a shared and specific basis in the brain. It is
this claim that we investigate here; the wider notion that all language-speaking individuals have inborn brain representational
systems for these grammatical categories cannot be ascertained,
as it is uncertain whether these conceptual categories can be applied to all languages in the same manner. The semantic feature
that words are used to speak about actions or objects seems to
be shared by many, if not all, languages and therefore would provide a solid basis for a cross-linguistic distinction.
Based on previous evidence from neuropsychological, neurophysiological and neurometabolic investigation, a range of authors
have suggested that the lexical/grammatical category of words
might be the primary dimension by which neural segregation is

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

driven (Shapiro et al. 2000; Shapiro et al. 2001; Caramazza and
Shelton, 1998; Bedny et al. 2008; Cappelletti et al., 2008; Laiacona
& Caramazza, 2004; Mahon & Caramazza, 2008; Shapiro et al.,
2006; but see also Damasio & Tranel, 1993; Daniele et al., 1994;
Gainotti, 2000; Luzzatti et al. 2002). This idea is founded on noun
and verb dissociations in patient studies (Bak, O'Donovan, Xuereb,
Boniface, & Hodges 2001; Bak et al. 2006; Boulenger et al., 2008;
Cappa et al., 1998; Cotelli et al. 2006; Damasio et al. 2001; Daniele
et al. 1994; Miceli et al., 1984; Miceli et al., 1988; Shapiro & Caramazza, 2003), electrophysiological studies (Brown, Lehmann, &
Marsh 1980; Dehaene, 1995; Preissl, Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger,
& Birbaumer 1995; Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger et al., 1999;
Pulvermuller, Mohr et al., 1999; Pulvermuller, Preissl, Lutzenberger, & Birbaumer 1996) and metabolic imaging studies (Perani
et al. 1999; Warburton et al., 1996). As such, some authors, such
as Bedny et al. (2012), suggest that language processing and conceptual representation is amodal and functionally separate from
perceptual and action systems of the brain. This view has a rich tradition in approaches to cognitive science (Anderson, 2003; Fodor,
1985; Machery, 2007), viewing the manipulation of abstract amodal symbols as a core component of mental functions. The amodal
symbolic system would interface with sensorimotor systems only
for receiving its input or passing on its output, but otherwise maintain functional separation from those brain systems concerned
with action and perception (cf., for example, Bedny et al., 2012;
Mahon & Caramazza, 2008; Pylyshyn, 1984). Therefore, this position interprets the noun/verb dissociations found in clinical and
neurofunctional studies in the sense of a lexical category difference
unrelated to semantics.
Problematically, as mentioned in the introduction, nouns and
verbs differ on a range of dimensions uncontrolled for in many of
the studies mentioned in the previous paragraph. These features
are either semantic in nature (as many nouns relate to objects
whereas most verbs are used to speak about actions) or immanent
to psycholinguistics measures (for example word frequency) or
more general linguistic features (for example to the degree to
which combinatorial grammatical information is linked to classes
of lexical items) (see, for example, Bird, Howard, & Franklin
2001; Bird, Lambon Ralph, Patterson, & Hodges 2000; Gainotti,
2000; Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger et al. 1999). Therefore, although
noun/verb dissociations in patient populations and differential
brain activation to these categories have been reported in the studies above, it is unclear to what degree such dissociation depends on
linguistic and semantic features of these word groups.
In an attempt to take these confounds into consideration, Bedny
et al. (2008) focused on nouns and verbs varying in semantic features, especially in their semantic relationship to motion perception. We would like to consider these findings in detail as,
despite a similar design, Bedny and colleagues' stimulus selection
along with their results dramatically differ from those reported
here. Contrary to previous studies (Martin et al. 1996), these
authors reported that activity in middle temporal regions close
to motion-sensitive areas ``responded preferentially to verbs relative to nouns, even when the nouns have higher visual-motion
properties'' (than verbs) (p. 11352) and hence suggested that ``concepts. . . are organised according to conceptual (lexical) properties''
(p. 11347). In their attempt to tease apart lexical and semantic factors, these authors controlled semantic aspects related to visually
perceived motion, grouping together animal nouns and action
verbs as ``high motion'' items in spite of their fundamental
differences with regard to a range of semantic dimensions. This neglect and lack of control for semantic aspects of verb and noun
stimuli is a major shortcoming, as previous work has documented
brain activation differences related to semantic action- vs. objectrelatedness, manipulability of referent objects of nouns, or
action-relatedness of verbs (see next section; Brambati et al.

35

2006; Damasio et al. 2001; Martin & Weisberg, 2003; Pulvermuller
et al. 2009; Tranel, Martin, Damasio, Grabowski, & Hichwa 2005).
Bedny's comparison of ``high-motion'' noun and verb categories,
namely animal names and action verbs (such as ``sheep'' vs.
''grasp''), is problematic, as we have demonstrated in previous
work that many animal words lack action-semantic links and, correspondingly, fail to elicit action-related brain activity, whereas action verbs, which represent the prototype of action-related lexical
materials, activate cortical motor systems along with middle-temporal cortex (Moseley et al., 2012). It has indeed been suggested
that the middle-temporal activation might reflect visual motion
processing, but there is so far no firm proof for this hypothesis
and general action-relatedness provides at least one alternative
cognitive-semantic feature that may be reflected (Kiefer et al.
2012). Because likely semantic determinants of their middle-temporal activations were not sufficiently documented, the noun/verb
difference in brain activation observed by Bedny et al. cannot be
seen as unrelated to semantics.
With greater control of semantic stimulus properties related to
action and perception, our present findings as summarised in Fig. 3
indeed failed to support the hypothesis brought forward by Bedny
et al. that noun/verb differences might be sufficient for differential
middle-temporal activation. This was true in spite of the care taken
to replicate the exact regions of interest where Bedny and colleagues found their effects, and we even explored adjacent regions
where activation maxima were observed in our present data set.
Any significant main effects of lexical class were absent both in
Bedny et al.'s left STS and temperoparietal ROIs and in adjacent
ROIs defined in a data-driven manner. Although there was a weak
tendency in the previously reported STS ROI towards higher activity for verbs, the opposite trend emerged from both TPJ and aSTS
regions. Therefore the present data fail to confirm the conclusions
drawn by Bedny et al. A recent review concludes that, after exclusion of linguistic and semantic confounds, any possible differences
between the grammatical categories of nouns and verbs are weak if
present at all (Vigliocco et al. 2011). Our work leads us to concur
that there is, to date, no unambiguous evidence for lexical category
differences in middle temporal cortex. More generally, our present
results seem to discourage the idea that lexical differences per se
are reflected at brain-level by different areas for either ``nouns''
or ``verbs''.
4.2. Semantic categories in the brain
Whilst our findings belie local dissociation between words on
the sole basis of lexical category, they are consistent with a semantic approach postulating that the meaning of words is reflected in
differential brain activation topographies elicited when these
words are recognised and understood. Any topographical difference in brain activation to concrete nouns and verbs, or neuropsychological dissociations between the same, would, accordingly, be
a consequence of the fact that these items are typically used to
speak about objects and actions respectively (Gainotti, 2000;
Pulvermuller & Fadiga, 2010; Pulvermuller, Lutzenberger et al.
1999; Pulvermuller, Mohr et al. 1999; Shallice, 1988).
The modulation of frontocentral brain activity by semantic features of stimulus words in the present study, especially the stronger activation seen in the central motor region to concrete action
verbs compared with concrete object nouns, is consistent with a
wealth of literature showing semantically-driven differences in
word-elicited brain activation (Aziz-Zadeh and Damasio, 2008;
Barros-Loscertales et al., 2012; Boulenger et al., 2009. Gainotti,
2000; Gonzalez et al., 2006; Hauk et al., 2004; Kemmerer et al.,
2008; Kiefer et al., 2008; Pulvermuller et al. 2001; Tettamanti
et al. 2005; Willems, Hagoort, & Casasanto 2010). The appearance
of dissociations within grammatical categories, for example

36

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

between face-, arm- and leg-related verbs (Hauk et al., 2004) and
between action- and sound-related nouns (Kiefer et al., 2012;
Trumpp, Traub, & Kiefer, 2013) is strong evidence for semantic
modulation of neural response to words which is independent of
lexical category.
Patient studies, too, would appear to support this interpretation. Deficits for processing tool concepts and words are associated
with frontoparietal sensorimotor systems (Gainotti, 2004; Gainotti,
Silveri, Daniel, & Giustolisi 1995) and deficits for animals with
occipitotemporal regions (Hart & Gordon, 1992; Tranel, Damasio,
& Damasio 1997). These dissociations appear to be underpinned
by the dissociation between action- and perception-related knowledge, with manipulability and other action-features most relevant
for tools, and visual-features such as colour and form most relevant
for animals. More recent work with stringent psycholinguistic
matching has revealed relative impairments for action-word processing in a range of neurological diseases and disorders characterised by motor impairment (Bak et al., 2001; Bak et al. 2006;
Boulenger et al., 2008; Cappa et al., 1998; Cotelli et al., 2006;
Moseley et al., 2013). Importantly, deficits in processing action
language, associated with lesions to inferior frontal and motor systems, are accompanied by concordant deficits in semantic processing of actions in nonverbal tasks (Bak et al. 2006). This pattern of
deficits provides further evidence for a semantic rather than grammatical basis of category-specific semantic and conceptual disorders, a position reached by two recent reviews of the literature
(Kemmerer et al., 2012; Kiefer & Pulvermuller, 2012).
The conclusions drawn in the present paper are consistent with
previous works but avoid some of the methodological pitfalls evident in the same. Vigliocco et al. (2006), as in the current paper, reported brain dissociations between sensory and motor words but
no distinctions on the basis of lexical category. Problematically,
this study used Italian nouns and verbs sharing the same stem
but differing in their affixes, which immediately inform the reader
of the word's lexical category. The co-occurrence of verb affixes
with verb stems (used to speak about actions) and the co-presence
of noun affixes with nouns (related to objects) appears to indirectly
load the neuronal circuit of affixes with semantic links (Pulvermuller & Shtyrov, 2009). The study also suffered from poor stimulus
matching, such that apparent dissociation between motor and sensory words might also be explained by differences in familiarity,
imageability and age of acquisition (see, for example, Hauk et al.,
2008). Other electrocortical dissociations on the basis of both lexical and semantic distinctions were reported by Kellenbach et al.
(2002) and Barber, Kousta, Otten, and Vigliocco (2010). Whilst
these could not be localised to specific brain regions in the former,
the latter argued that, as both differences showed the same N400
topography, they might both best be explained in terms of a
semantic effect (Barber et al., 2010). Whilst we too would support
primary dissociations between word types at the semantic level,
the N400 can reflect a range of different psycholinguistic features
(e.g., Hauk, Davis, Ford, Pulvermuller, & Marslen-Wilson, 2006) so
that a strong conclusion on semantics being the only relevant variable required more support from an experiment avoiding major
psycholinguistic confounds.
In light of these flaws in pre-existing research, our present
study using well-matched stimulus materials, spatially precise
event-related fMRI and a fully orthogonal design crossing the effects of lexical category and semantic type now provides strong
support that action- and object-related referential semantics but
not lexical categories (noun/verb) are reflected at brain-level by a
topographical distinction between motor systems and inferiortemporal activations. The current work can therefore corroborate
some of the statements made by studies above which, due to their
methodological flaws, could not be strongly defended the findings
reported here suggest that previously reported noun/verb

differences in the brain were driven by semantics. This position
seems consistent with an EEG study, where Pulvermuller, Mohr
et al. (1999) reported neurophysiological dissociations between action verbs and object nouns, which were closely paralleled by the
contrast between action and object nouns, but no evidence for
neurophysiological dissociations between action nouns and verbs.
A lack of neurophysiological and neurometabolic differences in
brain activation patterns elicited by the lexical categories might
lead some to suggest that lexical categories are illusory, lacking a
brain basis - an argument that would of course be flawed. Apart
from their semantic differences, nouns and verbs are distinct in
their combinatorial properties: English nouns combine with articles and adjectives, and verbs combine with nouns, pronouns and
specific prepositions or complementizers. It is necessary to neurally represent the different combinatorial properties of these
words in the brain, and the imprinting of different combinatorial
patterns of nouns and verbs in a neurocomputational model
induces fine-grained connection differences at the neuronal
circuit level which provide a neuromechanistic correlate of combinatorial lexical categories (Buzsaki, 2010; Pulvermuller, 2010;
Pulvermuller & Knoblauch, 2009). However, such differences at
the micro-circuit level, related to the combinatorial properties of
nouns and verbs, may be too fine-grained to become manifest as
differential brain activations revealed by standard neuroimaging
techniques (fMRI, EEG or MEG). As such, with the data available
at present, these topographical differences between word types
are best explained in semantic terms, as outlined in the following
section.
4.3. Neuronal dissociations between concrete nouns and verbs as
explained by the cell assembly model
Differential activation was found for concrete nouns and verbs,
whereby the latter activated motor and premotor areas more
strongly than the former and the opposite contrast was significant
in inferior frontal cortex. These results are consistent with and explained by a neuromechanistic model rooted in Hebb's concept of
distributed cell assemblies. Because knowledge about the form and
meaning of a word are normally active together such that neuronal
connections between the respective neuronal circuits are strengthened, these meaning- and form-related circuits are joined together
into one higher-order semantic network - to the degree that one
circuit part typically does not activate without the other becoming
active too. There is room for flexibility in this mechanism, especially if attentional resources are limited, overt motor action is
being prepared for, or context puts a focus on grammatical
processing (Angrilli, Dobel, Rockstroh, Stegagno, & Elbert 2000;
Chen, Davis, Pulvermuller, & Hauk 2013; Hoenig, Sim, Bochev,
Herrnberger, & Kiefer 2008; Pulvermuller, Cook, & Hauk 2012;
Rueschemeyer, Lindemann, Van Elk, & Bekkering 2009; van Elk,
van Schie, Zwaan, & Bekkering 2010). However, for typical passive
tasks (reading, listening), action-related verbs activate semantic
circuits involving motor and action schemas stored in motor and
premotor cortex, and a wealth of neuroimaging and neuropsychological work indicates that this activation is functionally important
for action word processing (Buccino et al. 2005; D'Ausilio et al.
2009; Devlin & Watkins, 2007; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Moseley
et al., 2013; Pulvermuller et al. 2005; Shebani & Pulvermuller,
2011).
For object-related nouns, visual knowledge about objects stored
in inferior-temporal areas is of special relevance. Previous research
(Kiefer et al., 2008; Kiefer et al., 2012; Martin et al., 1996; Pulvermuller & Hauk, 2006) has documented focal differences between
fine-grained word types in temporal cortex. This was not replicated in our dataset, possibly because our concrete noun category
lacked semantic uniformity, including nouns from several different

37

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

semantic categories which may have led to a mix of temporal region activations and weighed against semantic dissociations. For
example, the concrete noun category was predominantly dominated by animal names, which were rated as strongly semantically-related to form knowledge (Appendix B). Pre-existing work
reported that form-related words activate inferior frontal areas
( 46 28 10; Pulvermuller & Hauk, 2006), such that the current
activation advantage for concrete nouns in more anterior inferior
frontal cortex ( 27 33 11) may be hypothesised to reflect form
knowledge immanent to animal concepts. In this context, it is
important to recall that our inferior frontal ROIs, where concrete
nouns activated more strongly than concrete verbs, were motivated by previous work by Martin and colleagues, who reported
stronger activation during animal naming compared with tool
naming in these regions (Chao et al. 1999; Martin & Chao, 2001;
Martin et al. 1996). However, as other concrete nouns were also
part of this lexico-semantic subcategory, it is not surprising that
any inferior-frontal effect potentially related to form-semantics
did not yield clear significant results.

consistent with a fundamental role of motor systems in abstract
word and concept processing, as suggested above. On theoretical
grounds, the cell assembly model predicts comparably weak sensorimotor links for some abstract terms (e.g., ``beauty'' and ``justice''),
because their semantic manifestation in action and perception is
quite variable and therefore correlation learning predicts relatively
weak links between sign and concept. We did not find a general
difference in activation between our strongly action-related verbs
and the abstract categories here, but, as mentioned, this may be
due to the stimulus selection, especially a low proportion of abstract terms with variable semantics in the present stimulus set.
In this context, it is noteworthy that Pexman et al. (2007) also
found sensorimotor activation for both abstract and concrete
concepts but in their study activation to the former was weaker
than that to the latter, which is consistent with somewhat weaker
sensorimotor semantic links in cell assemblies for abstract
semantics.

4.4. Abstract nouns and verbs and the motor system

This study investigated whether topographical patterns of brain
activation to nouns and verbs are driven by lexical (grammatical)
class or rather by semantics and word meaning. We found that
concrete nouns and verbs activate frontocentral cortex to different
degrees. Whereas motor and premotor areas are relatively more
strongly activated by action verbs, concrete nouns activated more
anterior prefrontal areas. At the cognitive level, these differential
activations appear to relate to the processing of action schemas
that are part of the semantic representation of action verbs and
of form knowledge semantically linked to object words. Abstract
nouns and verbs fail to elicit similar activation differences, thus
calling into question previous claims about genuine brain loci for
the major lexical categories. Systematic investigation of other
areas, especially temporal cortex, also failed to reveal a genuine
distinction between noun and verb processing loci. We suggest
that topographical brain activation differences elicited by words
are driven by semantic factors and that the lexical category distinction is mechanistically implemented at a level beyond the grain
size of neurometabolic imaging.

It may come as a surprise that abstract nouns and verbs activated the motor systems to a similar degree as action verbs. There
are however theoretical arguments for involvement of motor systems in abstract meaning processing. For abstract words typically
used to speak about emotions and internal states of the body,
semantic theory postulates that these are learnt when word form
and state-/emotion-expressing actions are linked with each other
(Baker & Hacker, 2009; Wittgenstein, 1953) - a prediction consistent with motor activity evoked by emotion-related words
(Moseley et al. 2012). (Note that abstract emotion words may be
both nouns and verbs (e.g. (the) fear), and, therefore, a degree of
motor activation to the nouns and verbs in this study can be explained). Abstract metaphors, idioms and other types of abstract
concept, including numbers, have also been suggested to be intrinsically linked with visually-observable behaviours and actions
(Boulenger, Shtyrov, & Pulvermuller 2012; Boulenger et al., 2009;
Glenberg et al. 2008b; Tschentscher, Hauk, Fischer, & Pulvermuller
2012) or arrangements/relationships in space (Casasanto, 2009;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980) that represent typical instantiations of
their abstract meaning. In this view, knowledge about actions
and perceptions and corresponding processes in sensorimotor
areas of cortex play a role in abstract concept and meaning
processing (Barsalou, 1999; Gallese & Lakoff, 2005; Kiefer and
Pulvermuller, 2012; Lakoff & Nunez, 2000; Wilson-Mendenhall,
Barrett, Simmons, & Barsalou, 2011).
Abstract nouns and verbs can, of course, differ semantically
both between and within their lexical categories, and in order to
obtain a representative sample of abstract items from each lexical
category, it was not possible to focus on specific semantic subclasses of abstract terms in this present work. Our results are therefore

5. Conclusions

Funding
This work was supported by the MRC (MC_US_A060_0034,
U1055.04.003.00001.01 to F.P., MRC studentship to R.M.), EPSRC
and BBSRC (BABEL grant), DFG (Center of Excellence ``Languages
of Emotion'') and Freie Universitat Berlin.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Clare Cook, Olaf Hauk, Bettina Mohr,
Yury Shtyrov and Francesca Carota for their help at different stages
of this work.

Appendix A
Experimental word stimuli (presented in lowercase).
Abstract nouns

Abstract verbs

Concrete nouns

Concrete verbs

Dole
Clue
Wares
Speck

Skimp
Glut
Bilk
Stash

Mouse
Shark
Cow
Trout

Bash
Slash
Jive
Pat
(continued on next page)

38

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Appendix A (continued)
Abstract nouns

Abstract verbs

Concrete nouns

Concrete verbs

Loot
Graph
Tune
Luck
Chore
Knell
Pledge
Draft
Fluke
Mote
Yield
Farce
Jape
Hint
Bloom
Guide
Fleck
Dream
Truce
Scope
Lump
Goal
Truth
Batch
Wealth
Aid
Flow
Fraud
Gale
Score
Theme
Crime
Term
Spur
Realm
Lint

Coax
Snare
Heal
Cite
Glean
Parse
Soothe
Dwell
Pall
Fend
Fetch
Waive
Faze
Soak
Lapse
Drift
Slake
Trust
Shirk
Feign
Lure
Stun
Shine
Botch
Strive
Bid
Dare
Quell
Bate
Cease
Lodge
Tempt
Fade
Reap
Taint
Bide

Flute
Torch
Spade
Skunk
Crab
Seal
Crow
Cream
Duck
Cress
Worm
Beet
Axe
Dove
Sloth
Hawk
Snake
Hare
Harp
Goose
Cheese
Kale
Soup
Goat
Frog
Flan
Deer
Rice
Pig
Cake
Sheep
Bull
Bran
Whale
Shrimp
Toad

Swig
Delve
Steer
Knit
Chat
Chomp
Hike
Knead
Peel
Skate
Drone
Snort
Chew
Braid
Skim
Stride
Poke
Hack
Croon
Sprint
Munch
Carve
Slink
Wade
Lisp
Choke
Bind
Grope
Scrape
Tug
Strut
Pinch
Scuff
Frisk
Stab
Slur

Appendix B
Psycholinguistic and semantic properties of word stimuli. Statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) between word groups is displayed in
F values, as are possible interactions and main effects.
Abstract nouns

Abstract verbs

Concrete nouns

Concrete verbs

Length
Bigram freq.
Trigram freq.
Log. lemma freq.
No. of neighbours

4.63 (.10)
40794.5 (3344.74)
4166.72 (1025.41)
1.26 (.10)
6.38 (.86)

4.6 (.01)
41159.19 (2868.66)
4503.48 (732.12)
1.26 (.11)
6.4 (.86)

4.38 (.01)
39189.07 (2745.79)
4293.83 (429.39)
1.18 (.08)
8.28 (.90)

4.58 (.01)
36984.03 (2099.55)
3529.272 (419.95)
1.35 (.07)
6.53 (.86)

Imageability
Concreteness
Visual-relatedness
Form-relatedness
Action-relatedness
Arousal
Valence

2.49
3.06
2.31
1.50
2.58
1.71
3.89

2.28
2.61
1.97
1.37
4.16
2.04
3.64

6.05
6.42
6.02
3.37
1.76
1.43
3.81

4.13
3.53
3.72
2.38
4.91
2.98
3.56

(.20)
(.17)
(.21)
(.13)
(.22)
(.11)
(.20)

(.16)
(.11)
(.14)
(.09)
(.20)
(.16)
(.17)

(.16)
(.10)
(.13)
(.13)
(.15)
(.11)
(.08)

(.14)
(.12)
(.20)
(.16)
(.14)
(.15)
(.15)

39

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Length
Bigram freq.
Trigram freq.
Log. lemma freq.
No. of neighbours
Imageability
Concreteness
Visual-relatedness
Form-relatedness
Action-relatedness
Arousal
Valence

Main effect of lexical
category (F)

Main effect of semanticabstractness (F)

Interaction: lexical category  semanticabstractness (F)

.681 (p > .410)
.108 (p > .743)
.094 (p > .760)
.960 (p > .329)
.980 (p > .324)
40.841 (p < .001)
167.848 (p < .001)
58.773 (p < .001)
19.342 (p < .001)
170.307 (p < .001)

1.682 (p > .197)
1.065 (p > .304)
.368 (p > .545)
.001 (p > .981)
1.350 (p > .247)
264.807 (p < .001)
276.123 (p < .001)
251.677 (p < .001)
128.860 (p < .001)
.036 (p < .850)

1.126 (p > .290)
.211 (p > .647)
.623 (p > .431)
.938 (p > .334)
1.038 (p > .310)
26.524 (p < .001)
89.628 (p < .001)
32.085 (p < .001)
11.379 (p < .001)
18.553 (p < .001)

48.320 (p < .001)
2.505 (p < .116)

5.921 (p < .016)
.278 (p < .599)

20.437 (p < .001)
.000 (p < .992)

Appendix C
MNI coordinates evoked by the contrast of all experimental words against a low-level visual baseline (###), calculated at an FDR-corrected significance level of p < .05.The maxima from the most highly significant cluster, which were the focus of our analysis, are highlighted in bold.
x
Experimental words
L. insula (bordering on BA 47)
L. central gyrus (BA 4)
L. precentral (BA 6)

32
54
42

y

z

Cluster size

t

P

18
16
8

2
42
46

8522

6.90
6.67
6.54

<.001
<.001
<.001

R. middle cingulate (BA 24)
(cluster extending rightwards from cingulate, touching on the caudate)

10
22
28

12
10
14

26
28
20

987

6.47
5.47
5.41

<.001
<.001
<.001

R. precentral gyrus (BA 6)
R. precentral gyrus (BA 6)

60
58

2

36
44

429

2

5.91
5.39

<.001
<.001

L. superior occipital cortex (BA 19)
L. cuneus (BA 18)
R. cuneus (BA 19)

12
2
10

84
84
82

42
26
22

761

5.56
4.55
4.07

<.001
<.001
<.001

38
34
60

974

5.30
5.05
4.58

<.001
<.001
<.001

562

5.22
5.09
3.86

<.001
<.001
<.001

16
22
28

519

4.77
4.09
3.37

<.001
<.001
<.002

36

34

100

4.61

<.001

46
56

137

4.15
3.67

<.001
<.001

L. middle cingulate (BA 32)
L. SMA (BA 6)

8
12
2

R. cerebellum crus. 1/fusiform
R. cerebellum 6 (BA 19)
R. cerebellar vermis 6

36
26
6

R. middle frontal cortex (BA 46)
R. middle frontal cortex (BA 46)
R. middle frontal cortex (BA 46)

30
36
42

R. supramarginal gyrus (BA 40)

66

20
4
0
54
64
72
44
56
46

32
24
18

Deep parietal
L. superior parietal (BA 7)

16
22

46
56

Very bottom of BA 30

14

32

32

39

4.02

<.001

L. cerebellum

10

54

18

42

3.73

<.001

L. cerebellar vermis/lingual cortex
L. lingual cortex (BA 17)
L. cerebellar vermis

4
2
2

62
72
54

197

3.71
3.68
3.26

<.001
<.001
<.002

6
10

56
56

20
6

190

3.65
3.58

<.001
<.001

66

26

70

3.60

<.001

R. cerebellum
R. cerebellum (BA 18)
L. cerebellum (BA 19)

32

0
0
6

40

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

References
Anderson, M. L. (2003). Embodied cognition: A field guide. Artificial Intelligence, 149,
91-130.
Angrilli, A., Dobel, C., Rockstroh, B., Stegagno, L., & Elbert, T. (2000). EEG brain
mapping of phonological and semantic tasks in Italian and German languages.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 111, 706-716.
Aziz-Zadeh, L., & Damasio, A. (2008). Embodied semantics for actions: Findings from
functional brain imaging. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102(1), 35-39.
Baayen, H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The CELEX lexical database (CDRom). Pennsylvania, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Bak, T. H., O'Donovan, D. G., Xuereb, J. H., Boniface, S., & Hodges, J. R. (2001).
Selective impairment of verb processing associated with pathological changes
in Brodmann areas 44 and 45 in the motor neurone disease-dementia-aphasia
syndrome. Brain, 124(1), 103-120.
Bak, T. H., Yancopoulou, D., Nestor, P. J., Xuereb, J. H., Spillantini, M. G., Pulvermuller,
F., et al. (2006). Clinical, imaging and pathological correlates of a hereditary
deficit in verb and action processing. Brain, 129(2), 321-332.
Baker, G. P., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2009). Wittgenstein: Understanding and meaning.
Essays (vol. 1). Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell (part 1).
Barber, H. A., Kousta, S. T., Otten, L. J., & Vigliocco, G. (2010). Event-related potentials
to event-related words: Grammatical class and semantic attributes in the
representation of knowledge. Brain Research, 1332, 65-74.
Barros-Loscertales, A., Gonzalez, J., Pulvermuller, F., Ventura-Campos, N.,
Bustamante, J. C., Costumero, V., et al. (2012). Reading salt activates gustatory
brain regions: fMRI evidence for semantic grounding in a novel sensory
modality. Cerebral Cortex, 22(11), 2554-2563.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral Brain Science, 22,
577-660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Bedny, M., Caramazza, A., Grossman, E., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2008).
Concepts are more than percepts: The case of action verbs. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 28(44), 11347-11353.
Bedny, M., Caramazza, A., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2012). Typical neural
representations of action verbs develop without vision. Cerebral Cortex, 22(2),
286-293.
Binder, J. R., Westbury, C. F., McKiernan, K. A., Possing, E. T., & Medler, D. A. (2005).
Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(6), 905-917.
Bird, H., Howard, D., & Franklin, S. (2001). Noun-verb differences? A question of
semantics: A response to Shapiro and Caramazza. Brain and Language, 76(2),
213-222.
Bird, H., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. (2000). The rise and fall of
frequency and imageability: Noun and verb production in semantic dementia.
Brain and Language, 73(1), 17-49.
Bookheimer, S. (2002). Functional MRI of language: New approaches to
understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 25(1), 151-188.
Boulenger, V., Hauk, O., & Pulvermuller, F. (2009). Grasping ideas with the motor
system: Semantic somatotopy in idiom comprehension. Cerebral Cortex, 19(8),
1905-1914.
Boulenger, V., Mechtouff, L., Thobois, S., Broussolle, E., Jeannerod, M., & Nazir, T. A.
(2008). Word processing in Parkinson's disease is impaired for action verbs but
not for concrete nouns. Neuropsychologia, 46(2), 743-756.
Boulenger, V., Roy, A. C., Paulignan, Y., Deprez, V., Jeannerod, M., & Nazir, T. A.
(2006). Cross-talk between language processes and overt motor behavior in the
first 200 msec of processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(10),
1607-1615.
Boulenger, V., Shtyrov, Y., & Pulvermuller, F. (2012). When do you grasp the idea?
MEG evidence for instantaneous idiom understanding. Neuroimage, 59(4),
3502-3513.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1994). Measuring emotion: The self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 25(1), 49-59.
Brambati, S. M., Myers, D., Wilson, A., Rankin, K. P., Allison, S. C., Rosen, H. J., et al.
(2006). The anatomy of category-specific object naming in neurodegenerative
diseases. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(10), 1644-1653.
Brett, M., Anton, J. L., Valabregue, R., & Poline, J. B. (2002). Region of interest analysis
using the MarsBar toolbox for SPM 99. Neuroimage, 16, S497.
Broschart, J. (1997). Why Tongan does it differently. Linguistic Typology, 1, 123-165.
Brown, W. S., & Lehmann, D. (1979). Verb and noun meaning of homophone words
activate different cortical generators: A topographic study of evoked potential
fields. Experimental Brain Research, 2, 159-168.
Brown, W. S., Lehmann, D., & Marsh, J. T. (1980). Linguistic meaning related
differences in evoked potential topography: English, Swiss-German, and
imagined. Brain and Language, 11(2), 340-353.
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005).
Listening to action-related sentences modulates the activity of the motor
system: A combined TMS and behavioral study. Cognitive Brain Research, 24(3),
355-363.
Buzsaki, G. (2010). Neural syntax: Cell Assemblies, synapsembles, and readers.
Neuron, 68, 362-385.
Cappa, S. F., Binetti, G., Pezzini, A., Padovani, A., Rozzini, L., & Trabucchi, M. (1998).
Object and action naming in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia.
Neurology, 50(2), 351-355.

Cappa, S. F., & Pulvermuller, F. (2012). Language and the motor system. Cortex, 8,
785-787.
Cappelletti, M., Fregni, F., Shapiro, K., Pascual-Leone, A., & Caramazza, A. (2008).
Processing nouns and verbs in the left frontal cortex: A transcranial magnetic
stimulation study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(4), 707-720.
Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. (1998). Domain-specific knowledge systems in the
brain: The animate-inanimate distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
10(1), 1-34.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts: Good and bad in right-and
left-handers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 138(3), 351.
Cattell, R. B., & Cattell, A. K. S. (1960). Test of ``g'': Culture fair, scale 2, form A.
Champaign, IL: Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Chao, L. L., Haxby, J. V., & Martin, A. (1999). Attribute-based neural substrates in
temporal cortex for perceiving and knowing about objects. Nature Neuroscience,
2(10), 913-919.
Chen, Y., Davis, M. H., Pulvermuller, F., & Hauk, O. (2013). Task modulation of brain
responses in visual word recognition as studied using EEG/MEG and fMRI.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 376. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2013.00376.
Cotelli, M., Borroni, B., Manenti, R., Alberici, A., Calabria, M., Agosti, C., et al. (2006).
Action and object naming in frontotemporal dementia, progressive
supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration. Neuropsychology, 20(5), 558.
Croft, W. (2001). Radical construction grammar: Syntactic theory in typological
perspective. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Damasio, H., Grabowski, T. J., Tranel, D., Ponto, L. L., Hichwa, R. D., & Damasio, A. R.
(2001). Neural correlates of naming actions and of naming spatial relations.
Neuroimage, 13(6), 1053-1064.
Damasio, A. R., & Tranel, D. (1993). Nouns and verbs are retrieved with differently
distributed neural systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
90(11), 4957-4960.
Daniele, A., Giustolisi, L., Silveri, M. C., Colosimo, C., & Gainotti, G. (1994). Evidence
for a possible neuroanatomical basis for lexical processing of nouns and verbs.
Neuropsychologia, 32(11), 1325-1341.
D'Ausilio, A., Pulvermuller, F., Salmas, P., Bufalari, I., Begliomini, C., & Fadiga, L.
(2009). The motor somatotopy of speech perception. Current Biology, 19(5),
381-385.
Dehaene, S. (1995). Electrophysiological evidence for category-specific word
processing in the normal human brain. NeuroReport, 6, 2153-2157.
Devlin, J. T., & Watkins, K. (2007). Stimulating language: Insights from TMS. Brain,
130, 610-622.
Fodor, J. A. (1985). Fodor's guide to mental representation: The intelligent auntie's
vade-mecum. Mind, 94, 76-100.
Foley, W. A. (1998). Symmetrical voice system and precategoriality in Philippine
languages. Workshop on Voice and Grammatical Functions in Austronesian,
Brisbane.
Gainotti, G. (2000). What the locus of brain lesion tells us about the nature of the
cognitive defect underlying category-specific disorders: A review. Cortex, 36,
539-559.
Gainotti, G. (2004). A metanalysis of impaired and spared naming for different
categories of knowledge in patients with a visuo-verbal disconnection.
Neuropsychologia, 42, 299-319.
Gainotti, G., Silveri, M. C., Daniel, A., & Giustolisi, L. (1995). Neuroanatomical
correlates of category-specific semantic disorders: A critical survey. Memory,
3(3-4), 247-263.
Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain's concepts: The role of the sensorymotor system in conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22(3-4),
455-479.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 558-565.
Glenberg, A. M., Sato, M., & Cattaneo, L. (2008a). Use-induced motor plasticity
affects the processing of abstract and concrete language. Current Biology, 18(7),
R290-R291.
Glenberg, A. M., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Riggio, L., Palumbo, D., & Buccino, G. (2008b).
Processing abstract language modulates motor system activity. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(6), 905-919.
Gonzalez, J., Barros-Loscertales, A., Pulvermuller, F., Meseguer, V., Sanjuan, A.,
Belloch, V., et al. (2006). Reading cinnamon activates olfactory brain regions.
Neuroimage, 32(2), 906-912.
Hart, J., Jr., & Gordon, B. (1992). Neural subsystems for object knowledge. Nature,
359, 60-64.
Hauk, O., Davis, M. H., Ford, M., Pulvermuller, F., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2006).
The time course of visual word recognition as revealed by linear regression
analysis of ERP data. Neuroimage, 30(4), 1383-1400.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermuller, F. (2004). Somatotopic representation of
action words in human motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41(2), 301-307.
Hauk, O., Shtyrov, Y., & Pulvermuller, F. (2008). The time course of action and
action-word comprehension in the human brain as revealed by
neurophysiology. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102(1), 50-58.
Hoenig, K., Sim, E. J., Bochev, V., Herrnberger, B., & Kiefer, M. (2008). Conceptual
flexibility in the human brain: Dynamic recruitment of semantic maps from
visual, motor, and motion-related areas. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
20(10), 1799-1814.
Kellenbach, M. L., Wijers, A. A., Hovius, M., Mulder, J., & Mulder, G. (2002). Neural
differentiation of lexico-syntactic categories or semantic features? Eventrelated potential evidence for both. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(4),
561-577.

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42
Kemmerer, D., Castillo, J. G., Talavage, T., Patterson, S., & Wiley, C. (2008).
Neuroanatomical distribution of five semantic components of verbs: Evidence
from fMRI. Brain and Language, 107(1), 16-43.
Kemmerer, D., & Eggleston, A. (2010). Nouns and verbs in the brain: Implications of
linguistic typology for cognitive neuroscience. Lingua, 120(12), 2686-2690.
Kemmerer, D., Rudrauf, D., Manzel, K., & Tranel, D. (2012). Behavioral patterns and
lesion sites associated with impaired processing of lexical and conceptual
knowledge of actions. Cortex, 48(7), 826-848.
Kiefer, M., & Pulvermuller, F. (2012). Conceptual representations in mind and brain:
Theoretical developments, current evidence and future directions. Cortex, 48,
805-825.
Kiefer, M., Sim, E. J., Herrnberger, B., Grothe, J., & Hoenig, K. (2008). The sound of
concepts: Four markers for a link between auditory and conceptual brain
systems. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28(47), 12224-12230.
Kiefer, M., Trumpp, N., Herrnberger, B., Sim, E. J., Hoenig, K., & Pulvermuller, F.
(2012). Dissociating the representation of action-and sound-related concepts in
middle temporal cortex. Brain and Language, 122(2), 120-125.
Kriegeskorte, N., Simmons, W. K., Bellgowan, P. S., & Baker, C. I. (2009). Circular
analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nature
Neuroscience, 12(5), 535-540.
Kronbichler, M., Hutzler, F., Wimmer, H., Mair, A., Staffen, W., & Ladurner, G. (2004).
The visual word form area and the frequency with which words are
encountered: Evidence from a parametric fMRI study. Neuroimage, 21(3),
946-953.
Laiacona, M., & Caramazza, A. (2004). The noun/verb dissociation in
language production: Varieties of causes. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 21(2-4),
103-123.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the
mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Nunez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied
mind creates mathematics. New York: Basic Books.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Nouns and verbs. Language, 63, 53-94.
Luzzatti, C., Raggi, R., Zonca, G., Pistarini, C., Contardi, A., & Pinna, G. D. (2002). Verb-
noun double dissociation in aphasic lexical impairments: The role of word
frequency and imageability. Brain and Language, 81(1), 432-444.
Machery, E. (2007). Concept empiricism: A methodological critique. Cognition, 104,
19-46.
Mahon, B. Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the embodied cognition
hypothesis and a new proposal for grounding conceptual content. Journal of
Physiology-Paris, 102(1), 59-70.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in the brain. Annual Review
of Psychology, 58, 25-45.
Martin, A., & Chao, L. L. (2001). Semantic memory and the brain: Structure and
processes. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11(2), 194-201.
Martin, A., & Weisberg, J. (2003). Neural foundations for understanding social and
mechanical concepts. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 20(3-6), 575-587.
Martin, A., Wiggs, C. L., Ungerleider, L. G., & Haxby, J. V. (1996). Neural correlates of
category-specific knowledge. Nature, 379(6566), 649-652.
Miceli, G., Silveri, M. C., Nocentini, U., & Caramazza, A. (1988). Patterns of
dissociation in comprehension and production of nouns and verbs.
Aphasiology, 2(3-4), 351-358.
Miceli, G., Silveri, M. C., Villa, G., & Caramazza, A. (1984). On the basis for the
agrammatic's difficulty in producing main verbs. Cortex, 20(2), 207-220.
Moseley, R., Carota, F., Hauk, O., Mohr, B., & Pulvermuller, F. (2012). A role for the
motor system in binding abstract emotional meaning. Cerebral Cortex, 22(7),
1634-1647.
Moseley, R. L., Mohr, B., Lombardo, M. V., Baron-Cohen, S., Hauk, O., & Pulvermuller,
F. (2013). Brain and behavioral correlates of action semantic deficits in autism.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 725.
Neininger, B., & Pulvermueller, F. (2001). The right hemisphere's role in action word
processing: A double case study. Neurocase, 7(4), 303-317.
Neininger, B., & Pulvermuller, F. (2003). Word-category specific deficits after lesions
in the right hemisphere. Neuropsychologia, 41(1), 53-70.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh
inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9, 97-113.
Osgood, C., Suci, G., & Tannenhaus, P. (1975). The measurement of meaning. Urbana,
IL: University of Illinois.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do you know what you
know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 8(12), 976-987.
Perani, D., Cappa, S. F., Schnur, T., Tettamanti, M., Collina, S., Rosa, M. M., et al.
(1999). The neural correlates of verb and noun processing A PET study. Brain,
122(12), 2337-2344.
Pexman, P. M., Hargreaves, I. S., Edwards, J. D., Henry, L. C., & Goodyear, B. G. (2007).
Neural correlates of concreteness in semantic categorization. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 1407-1419.
Preissl, H., Pulvermuller, F., Lutzenberger, W., & Birbaumer, N. (1995). Evoked
potentials distinguish between nouns and verbs. Neuroscience Letters, 197(1),
81-83.
Price, C. J., Wise, R. J. S., & Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1996). Demonstrating the implicit
processing of visually presented words and pseudowords. Cerebral Cortex, 6(1),
62-70.
Pulvermuller, F. (1999). Words in the brain's language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
22(2), 253-279.

41

Pulvermuller, F. (2002). A brain perspective on language mechanisms: From
discrete neuronal ensembles to serial order. Progress in Neurobiology, 67(2),
85-111.
Pulvermuller, F. (2010). Brain embodiment of syntax and grammar: Discrete
combinatorial mechanisms spelt out in neuronal circuits. Brain and Language,
112(3), 167-179.
Pulvermuller, F. (2012). Meaning and the brain: The neurosemantics of referential,
interactive, and combinatorial knowledge. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 25(5),
423-459.
Pulvermuller, F. (2013). How neurons make meaning: Brain mechanisms for
embodied and abstract-symbolic semantics. Trends in Cognitive Science, 17(9),
458-470. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.06.004.
Pulvermuller, F., Cook, C., & Hauk, O. (2012). Inflection in action: Semantic motor
system activation to noun-and verb-containing phrases is modulated by the
presence of overt grammatical markers. Neuroimage, 60(2), 1367-1379.
Pulvermuller, F., Cooper-Pye, E., Dine, C., Hauk, O., Nestor, P. J., & Patterson, K.
(2010). The word processing deficit in semantic dementia: All categories are
equal, but some categories are more equal than others. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 22(9), 2027-2041.
Pulvermuller, F., & Fadiga, L. (2010). Active perception: Sensorimotor circuits as a
cortical basis for language. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(5), 351-360.
Pulvermuller, F., Harle, M., & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking or talking?: Behavioral
and neurophysiological correlates of action verb processing. Brain and Language,
78(2), 143-168.
Pulvermuller, F., & Hauk, O. (2006). Category-specific conceptual processing of color
and form in left fronto-temporal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 16(8), 1193-1201.
Pulvermuller, F., Hauk, O., Nikulin, V. V., & Ilmoniemi, R. J. (2005). Functional links
between motor and language systems. European Journal of Neuroscience, 21(3),
793-797.
Pulvermuller, F., Kherif, F., Hauk, O., Mohr, B., & Nimmo-Smith, I. (2009). Distributed
cell assemblies for general lexical and category-specific semantic processing as
revealed by fMRI cluster analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 30(12), 3837-3850.
Pulvermuller, F., & Knoblauch, A. (2009). Discrete combinatorial circuits emerging
in neural networks: A mechanism for rules of grammar in the human brain?
Neural networks, 22(2), 161-172.
Pulvermuller, F., Lutzenberger, W., & Preissl, H. (1999). Nouns and verbs in the
intact brain: Evidence from event-related potentials and high-frequency
cortical responses. Cerebral Cortex, 9(5), 497-506.
Pulvermuller, F., Mohr, B., & Schleichert, H. (1999). Semantic or lexico-syntactic
factors: What determines word-class specific activity in the human brain?
Neuroscience Letters, 275(2), 81-84.
Pulvermuller, F., Preissl, H., Lutzenberger, W., & Birbaumer, N. (1996). Brain
rhythms of language: Nouns versus verbs. European Journal of Neuroscience,
8(5), 937-941.
Pulvermuller, F., & Shtyrov, Y. (2009). Spatiotemporal signatures of large-scale
synfire chains for speech processing as revealed by MEG. Cerebral Cortex, 19(1),
79-88.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition: Toward a foundation for cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: M. I. T. Press.
Robins, R. H. (1952). Noun and verb in universal grammar. Language, 28, 289-298.
Rueschemeyer, S. A., Lindemann, O., Van Elk, M., & Bekkering, H. (2009). Embodied
cognition: The interplay between automatic resonance and selection-for-action
mechanisms. European Journal of Social Psychology, 39(7), 1180-1187.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Shapiro, K., & Caramazza, A. (2003). Grammatical processing of nouns and verbs in
left frontal cortex? Neuropsychologia, 41(9), 1189-1198.
Shapiro, K. A., Moo, L. R., & Caramazza, A. (2006). Cortical signatures of noun and
verb production. Proceedings of the National academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 103(5), 1644-1649.
Shapiro, K. A., Pascual-Leone, A., Mottaghy, F. M., Gangitano, M., & Caramazza, A.
(2001). Grammatical distinctions in the left frontal cortex. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 13(6), 713-720.
Shapiro, K., Shelton, J., & Caramazza, A. (2000). Grammatical class in lexical
production and morhpological processing: Evidence from a case of fluent
aphasia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 17(8), 665-682.
Shebani, Z., & Pulvermuller, F. (2011). Moving the hands and feet specifically
impairs working memory for arm- and leg-related action words. Cortex. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.10.005.
Slobin, D. I. (1975). The more it changes. . . on understanding language by watching
it move through time. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 10,
1-30.
Supalla, S., & Newport, H. (1978). How many seats in a chair? The derivation of
nouns and verbs in American Sign Language. In P. Siple (Ed.), Understanding
language through sign language research. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M. C., Gallese, V., Danna, M., Scifo, P., et al.
(2005). Listening to action-related sentences activates fronto-parietal motor
circuits. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(2), 273-281.
Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (1997). A neural basis for the retrieval of
conceptual knowledge. Neuropsychologia, 35(10), 1319-1327.
Tranel, D., Martin, C., Damasio, H., Grabowski, T. J., & Hichwa, R. (2005). Effects of
noun-verb homonymy on the neural correlates of naming concrete entities and
actions. Brain and Language, 92(3), 288-299.
Trumpp, N. M., Traub, F., & Kiefer, M. (2013). Masked priming of conceptual features
reveals differential brain activation during unconscious access to conceptual
action and sound information. PLoS ONE, 8(5), e65910.

42

R.L. Moseley, F. Pulvermuller / Brain & Language 132 (2014) 28-42

Tschentscher, N., Hauk, O., Fischer, M. H., & Pulvermuller, F. (2012). You can count
on the motor cortex: Finger counting habits modulate motor cortex activation
evoked by numbers. Neuroimage, 59(4), 3139-3148.
van Elk, M., van Schie, H. T., Zwaan, R. A., & Bekkering, H. (2010). The functional role
of motor activation in language processing: Motor cortical oscillations support
lexical-semantic retrieval. Neuroimage, 50(2), 665-677.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Druks, J., Barber, H., & Cappa, S. F. (2011). Nouns and
verbs in the brain: A review of behavioural, electrophysiological,
neuropsychological and imaging studies. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 35(3), 407-426.
Vigliocco, G., Warren, J., Siri, S., Arciuli, J., Scott, S., & Wise, R. (2006). The role of
semantics and grammatical class in the neural representation of words. Cerebral
Cortex, 16(12), 1790-1796.

Warburton, E., Wise, R. J., Price, C. J., Weiller, C., Hadar, U., Ramsay, S., et al. (1996).
Noun and verb retrieval by normal subjects studies with PET. Brain, 119(1),
159-179.
Warrington, E. K., & Shallice, T. (1984). Category specific semantic impairments.
Brain, 107(3), 829-853.
Willems, R. M., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2010). Body-specific representations of
action verbs neural evidence from right-and left-handers. Psychological Science,
21(1), 67-74.
Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Barrett, L. F., Simmons, W. K., & Barsalou, L. W. (2011).
Grounding emotion in situated conceptualization. Neuropsychologia, 49(5),
1105-1127.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishers.

