Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

The advantage of starting big: Learning from unsegmented
input facilitates mastery of grammatical gender in an artificial
language
Noam Siegelman, Inbal Arnon 
Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91905, Israel

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 2 April 2015
revision received 26 July 2015
Available online 10 August 2015
Keywords:
Language learning
Multiword units
Second language learning
Grammatical gender
Adult L2 learning

a b s t r a c t
Why is it difficult to learn a second language as an adult? We focus on the way adults'
existing knowledge of words impacts L2 learning. We suggest adults' prior knowledge
leads them to rely less on multiword units, and that this hinders learning certain grammatical relations between words. We test this prediction in two artificial language learning
studies of grammatical gender with adult learners. In the first study, we manipulate
whether the artificial language is segmented during initial learning and show that learning
from unsegmented input leads to more article-noun units, and to better learning.
Individually, learners who were more likely to treat the article and noun as one unit
showed better learning on an off-line measure, confirming the link between unit-size
and learning outcomes. In the second study, we show this pattern does not hold when
the article conveys semantic information (animate vs. inanimate), illustrating the way unit
size interacts with informativity during learning. The findings provide novel evidence for
the advantage of learning grammar from multiword units, highlight the benefit of learning
segmentation and structure simultaneously, and offer an experience-based explanation for
L1-L2 differences that relates building blocks to learning outcomes.
O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Why is acquiring a second language as an adult so difficult? Unlike children, adults rarely reach native-like proficiency in a second language. Numerous studies have
documented adult learners' difficulty in a range of linguistic domains (e.g., Clahsen & Felser, 2006; Johnson &
Newport, 1989; Moyer, 1999). Given that adults perform
better on a wide range of learning tasks, the fact that children seem to be better language learners is puzzling. Many
existing accounts attempt to explain this puzzle by focusing on the biological, neural, and cognitive differences
between children and adults (Kuhl, 2000; Lenneberg,
1967; Neville & Bavelier, 2001), and the way early neural
 Corresponding author.
E-mail address: inbal.arnon@mail.huji.ac.il (I. Arnon).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2015.07.003
0749-596X/O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

commitment shapes subsequent learning (e.g., Werker &
Tees, 1984). Differences in cognitive abilities--such as cognitive control or working memory--have also been invoked
to explain the different learning outcomes in children and
adults (Elman, 1993; Newport, 1990; Ramscar & Gitcho,
2007; Thompson-Schill, Ramscar, & Chrysikou, 2009).
Such accounts can explain the overall qualitative
difference between children and adults in language learning,
but have a harder time explaining the particular pattern of
learning outcomes observed in adult learners. Specifically,
adults are not always worse than children in learning a
novel language, and seem to struggle with certain domains
more than others. Adult learners, for instance, are generally
faster and more efficient than children in the early stages of
learning (e.g., Krashen, Long, & Scarcella, 1979), and are
often better in experimental settings (Ferman & Karni,
2010). Moreover, adults do not find all aspects of the novel

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

language equally hard: vocabulary and word order are
learned with more ease than morphological and syntactic
regularities (e.g., DeKeyser, 2005). Even within morphosyntax, certain relations are harder to master than others:
domains such as grammatical gender, article use, and classifiers pose difficulty even for highly proficient adult speakers (Johnson & Newport, 1989), including those classified as
near-native (Sorace, 2003). The currently unresolved challenge is to link specific learner characteristics to the particular learning outcomes we see in adult L2 learners. That is,
to explain what adults will find particularly hard, and why.
In this paper, we approach this language-learning
puzzle by focusing on an additional factor that may affect
L2 learning: the effect of experience and existing
knowledge on learning outcomes. We focus in particular
on the way adults' existing knowledge of words influences
the linguistic units they learn from - their early building
blocks - and how those early units shape subsequent
learning. That is, we ask how adult's prior knowledge
impacts the units they focus on and attend to in learning
a novel language. Learners are affected by the properties
of their L1 when learning a second language: for better
and worse, L1 knowledge changes how a novel language
is processed by adult learners. Recent studies using
artificial languages illustrate such effects: L1 phonotactics
impact how learners segment a novel speech stream
(Finn & Hudson Kam, 2008; Toro, Pons, Bion, & Sebastia
n-Galles, 2011), which in turn affects morphological
learning (Finn & Hudson Kam, 2015). On the positive side,
having certain properties in your L1 (e.g., tone) can
enhance learning of similar relations in a novel language
(Onnis & Thiessen, 2013; Wang & Saffran, 2014).
These studies show how the specific content of L1 influences L2 learning. Here, we focus on a broader 'burden'
that adults bring to the task of learning a second language:
their knowledge of words. Unlike infants - who are born
into a ``blooming, buzzing confusion" (William James,
1890) and have to discover the different units of language
- adults already know that words exist. This knowledge,
we suggest, impacts the linguistic units adults attend to
and use in learning a novel language. In particular, we
propose that adults' existing knowledge of words leads
them to rely less on multiword units in learning a second
language, and that this hinders learning certain grammatical relations by reducing the strength of the association
between the linguistic elements in question (we elaborate
on this below; see Arnon & Ramscar, 2012, for details). If
some of adults' difficulty is related to the units they attend
to and learn from, then manipulating their input in a way
that affects these units should lead to changes in learning
outcomes. In particular, manipulating adults' early experience in a way that directs their attention to multiword
units should enhance learning in certain domains, but
not others (as will be detailed below).
This proposal diverges from commonly held assumptions in several ways. First, it focuses on the role of existing
knowledge about language in general on L2 difficulty,
rather than on knowledge of specific L1 properties.
Second, it predicts a link between early building blocks -
the linguistic units used during learning - and specific L2
outcomes, and in doing so, it tries to offer an explanation

61

for why adults struggle more with certain aspects of the
novel language compared to others. Third, it assumes that
multiword units are building blocks for language, that is,
that speakers are sensitive not only to the properties of
sounds, morphemes and words (the linguistic elements
traditionally seen as building blocks of language), but also
to those of multiword sequences. This idea has been gaining theoretical and empirical support in recent years. The
assumption that multiword units are integral units of
language follows from single-system models of language,
where all linguistic experience - sounds, words, multiword
sequences - is processed by the same cognitive mechanisms (e.g., Bybee, 1998; Christiansen & Chater, 2015;
Elman, 2009; McClelland, 2010). Such models predict that
speakers will be sensitive to distributional information
computed at multiple granularities (between sounds,
words, and sequences of words) and draw on units of
varying sizes in language. Accordingly, there is growing
empirical evidence illustrating the parallels in processing
words and larger sequences, and showing that children
and adults are indeed sensitive to the distributional
properties of multiword units in learning and processing
(e.g., Arnon & Cohen Priva, 2013; Arnon & Snider, 2010;
Bannard & Matthews, 2008; Reali & Christiansen, 2007;
Tremblay & Baayen, 2010). Finally, this perspective on L2
difficulty has the advantage of looking at something that
can be manipulated: while we cannot undo the way a brain
or mind have developed, we can influence the units adults
attend to in learning a novel language.
We examine this proposal by looking at adult learning
of grammatical gender in an artificial language learning
(ALL) paradigm. Specifically, we use this paradigm to
experimentally manipulate whether adults' early experience with a novel language is segmented (leading to more
single word units) or unsegmented (leading to more multiword units). A previous study provided initial support
for the idea that learning from multiword units can facilitate mastery of certain grammatical relations between
words, such as the association between articles and nouns
in languages with grammatical gender (Arnon & Ramscar,
2012, described in detail in the next section). In the current
paper, we significantly expand and qualify this proposal.
We provide novel, and more direct evidence for the role
of multiword units in learning, while also showing that
learning from larger units is beneficial for learning certain
grammatical relations, but not others. Together, the studies
offer an experience-based theory of the relation between
adult's units of learning and their learning outcomes that
aims to capture and predict the particular profile of learning outcomes observed in the literature.
Grammatical gender as a case study
Grammatical gender is a system found in many languages. It assigns all nouns (including inanimate ones) to
noun classes, usually marking neighboring words for
agreement (Corbett, 1991). In Spanish, for instance, articles
have to agree in gender with the noun, while in Hebrew
only verbs and adjectives carry gender agreement. The
assignment is arbitrary in the sense that the same object
can be assigned a different gender in different languages.

62

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

In languages that mark gender, knowing a noun's gender is
essential for correct sentence construction.
Grammatical gender agreement provides a fruitful
domain to study the effect of multiword building blocks
on learning outcomes since learning differs markedly
between native speakers and L2 learners. While children
master this system relatively early (Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2007; Slobin, 1985), adult learners struggle with
it even after extensive exposure (e.g., Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2010; Scherag, Demuth, Roesler, Neville, &
Roeder, 2004). L2 learners also differ from native speakers
in their ability to use the gender information conveyed by
the article predictively. While native speakers (including
young children) can use the article to guide lexical access
- they anticipate a feminine noun following a feminine
article (e.g., Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus, & Magnuson,
2000; Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007; Van Heugten & Shi,
2009)--non-native speakers do not show these effects
(Dussias, Valdes Kroff, Guzzardo Tamargo, & Gerfen,
2013; Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2010). Generally speaking,
L2 learners seem to treat the article and noun as a less
cohesive unit: they have more difficulty selecting the
correct article in production and cannot use it to facilitate
noun recognition.
Learning grammatical gender from multiword units
Why do L2 learners have such difficulty in learning the
association between the article and the noun? We hypothesize that this has to do with their smaller reliance on
multiword units (Arnon & Ramscar, 2012). One can imagine two ways of learning the article-noun pairing. In the
`adult-like' way, learners' existing knowledge of words
leads them to treat the article and noun as two separate
units. They start out by associating the object, say `hand'
with its label mano (hand in Spanish), and only later learn
that it is a feminine noun and must therefore appear with
the feminine article `la'. In the `child-like' way, learners -
who are learning segmentation and meaning simultaneously - initially associate the entire article-noun
sequences `la-mano' with the object (hand), and then learn,
over time, that the two elements can appear separately.
Importantly, we predict that the `child-like' way of learning
leads to a greater association between the article and the
object (hand), which will lead to better learning of the
article-noun pairing.
In a recent study, Arnon and Ramscar (2012) explored
this idea computationally and experimentally. The learning
advantage of the `child-like' way was formalized within the
framework of error-driven learning, specifically using the
concept of blocking (Kamin, 1969).1 In these theories, prior
1
Note that this learning advantage can be formally captured in several
other modeling approaches, including Bayesian and connectionist frameworks. However, discriminative learning models like the one presented
here have been successfully applied in recent years to both L1 and L2
learning (Arnon & Ramscar, 2012; Ellis, 2006; Ellis & Sagarra, 2010;
Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye, Denny & Thorpe, 2010; Ramscar, Dye, & McCauley,
2013; Ramscar, Dye, Popick, & O'Donnell-McCarthy, 2011) and seem
particularly well-suited to capture the way early unit size affects what is
subsequently learned through interference, blocking and other
mechanisms.

learning can block the learning of later information by making it redundant: when an existing cue fully predicts a
response, introducing a new cue will not add information,
and will consequently make it harder to learn the association between the novel cue and the response (see Ramscar
et al., 2010; Ramscar et al., 2013). In the case of grammatical
gender, the initial association between the noun-label and
the object in the `child-like' way will block later learning
of the association between the article and the object (the
article does not add information about the object), and
reduce the association between the article and the noun.
In the `adult-like' way, in contrast, the initial association
between the article-noun sequence and the object will be
preserved, even after they are dissociated (see paper for full
details). This framework makes two clear predictions (a)
that having adults learn from larger units (making them be
more `child-like') will lead to better learning of the relation
between the article and the object when that relation is
arbitrary (as in many grammatical gender systems), and
(b) that this advantage will disappear when the article itself
adds information about the object, that is, when it carries
semantic information.
The first prediction was tested by looking at adult
learning of grammatical gender in an artificial language
and manipulating learners' early input in a way that
increased initial unit size (Arnon & Ramscar, 2012). As
predicted, participants who were exposed first to a block
of full sentences (including the article-noun sequence)
and then to a block of single nouns showed better learning of the article-noun pairing compared to participants
who were exposed first to nouns and only then to full
sentences: they were better at selecting the correct article
in a forced-choice task, and better at producing the correct article for a given noun. Even though both groups
had received exactly the same input (just in different
order), the sentence-first group showed better learning.
Similar results were obtained in simulated acquisition of
the language using a Rescorla & Wagner, 1972 model:
despite equal exposure, the association between the article and object was better when exposed first to full
sentences.
These results provide preliminary evidence for the
effect of existing knowledge and early experience on learning outcomes: they show that early exposure to larger
units (full sentences, including the article-noun sequence)
leads to better learning of grammatical gender in adult
learners. However, they have one major limitation: since
the units learners used were not directly evaluated during
learning, the study cannot establish a direct link between
the size of early building blocks and learning outcomes.
Put differently, we do not know if participants in the
sentence-first condition showed better learning because
they were more likely to treat the article and noun as a single unit. Moreover, because the full sentences contained
cues to word segmentation (there were pauses between
words), it is possible that participants in both conditions
segmented the speech stream into words from the start.
The previous study also did not test the second prediction
made by this framework: that the learning advantage will
be found only in cases when the article does not carry
semantic information.

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

The current study
The current study will extend and qualify the theoretical proposal outlined above in several important ways: (a)
by demonstrating a more direct relation between the use
of multiword units during learning and better learning
outcomes, (b) by showing how individual differences in
the tendency to extract multiword units affects learning
of grammatical relations, and (c) by showing this effect is
limited to cases where the article does not carry semantic
information. Experiment 1 will address the possible shortcomings of previous work by providing a better and more
direct manipulation of unit size, and, more importantly,
by introducing a new online measure of unit size, which
allows us to identify the units learners used during learning. Using this measure we can both (1) validate the
manipulation to see whether there is a difference in unit
size between the conditions, and (2) extend the findings
to show a direct relation between unit size and learning
outcomes: at the individual level, we predict that more
reliance on multiword units will lead to better learning.
Experiment 2 will test a novel prediction about the limits of the multiword advantage by asking whether learning
from multiword units helps also when the division of
nouns into noun classes is not arbitrary, but rather semantic (as in animate-inanimate systems). We use the exact
same language as in Experiment 1 to assess learning when
the article distinguishes between animate and inanimate
nouns. Our account predicts that learning such relations
will not be facilitated by greater reliance on multiword
units, because the article in this case carries semantic
information about the object, and is consequently predictive of it. Put differently, the benefit of learning from multiword units will disappear when there is a stronger
(semantic) cue available to map the article to the object.
In terms of blocking, the association between the article
and the object will not be blocked by an earlier association
between the noun and the object. Together, the studies
serve to expand and qualify the role of multiword units
in learning, and the effect of early units on learning outcomes. They illustrate when multiword units are and are
not advantageous in L2 learning, and demonstrate the
power of asking--given very simple assumptions about
how learning takes place--how basic features of prior
knowledge exert a profound influence on learning
outcomes.

Experiment 1
This study is modeled on the language used by Arnon
and Ramscar (2012) with several important modifications.
Instead of comparing sentences-first learning to wordsfirst learning, we introduce two novel conditions that both
involve exposure to full sentences. The difference between
the conditions is in the degree to which early stimuli are
segmented into words and, consequently, how likely learners are to extract word vs. multiword units. In the
unsegmented-first condition, participants are exposed first
to unsegmented sentences (with no pauses between
words) and only then to segmented sentences (with pauses

63

between words). We compare this to a condition where
participants hear segmented sentences first (with pauses
between words), and only then unsegmented stimuli. By
the end of the study, participants in both conditions heard
exactly the same input, just in a different order. After training, we assess learning using a forced-choice task and a
production task, both of which test participants' knowledge of the article-noun pairings (the learning measures
are identical to those used in Arnon & Ramscar, 2012). If
learning segmentation and structure simultaneously
results in more multiword units, and if this leads to better
learning, we should see better outcomes in the
unsegmented-first condition, despite the additional burden of having to segment and learn structure at the same
time.
Importantly, we introduce a new measure of building
blocks/segmentation by asking participants to type in the
stimuli they heard during learning. This measure allows
us to see if participants treat the article and noun as one
unit or two in the course of learning, and to test several
predictions. First, if early exposure to unsegmented speech
leads to more multiword units, there will be more article-
noun `words' produced by subjects in this condition.
Second, if multiword building blocks lead to better learning, then participants who were more likely to treat the
article and noun as one unit should show better learning
of the pairing between them. Confirmation of these two
predictions would provide novel evidence for the link
between unit size and learning of grammatical relations,
and for the relation between building blocks and learning
outcomes more generally.
Method and materials
Participants
Forty-four students at the Hebrew University (25
females and 19 males) participated in the study for course
credit or payment. Their age ranged from 19 to 37 (mean
age 25.9). Subjects were all native Hebrew speakers, with
no history of speech, reading or hearing disability, ADD
or ADHD. Subjects were randomly assigned to one of the
two conditions, segmented-first or unsegmented-first (22
participants in each).
Materials
The artificial language had 12 novel labels for concrete
nouns, 2 articles (fo and se), and a carrier phrase (osferpel-ti, see the Appendix A for item list). All objects had
high-frequency, early-acquired Hebrew labels. The nouns
were divided into two ``classes" and each noun only
appeared with one article. Hebrew has grammatical gender, though there is no gender agreement with articles,
unlike in our artificial language. To ensure that learning
is not affected by the gender of nouns in Hebrew (the
L1), the two noun `classes' were matched on the gender
of the nouns in Hebrew: each had an equal number of masculine and feminine nouns. There were no semantic or
phonological cues to class membership - the only cue
was distributional (which article the noun appears with).
All noun labels were two syllables long. All objects had
high frequency labels in Hebrew, were all concrete, and

64

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

all had early-acquired labels (Based on the English
Age-of-Acquisition Bristol norms, Stadthagen-Gonzalez &
Davis, 2006, which have recently been validated crosslinguistically, Luniewska, 2014). The artificial language
had a fixed word order: articles always followed the carrier
phrase and preceded the nouns (see example 1).
(1) os ferpel ti
carrier phrase

fo
article

etkot
noun

A female Hebrew speaker recorded the carrier phrase, the
articles, and the nouns separately. The elements were
synthesized to a frequency of 170 Hz to remove possible
prosodic cues to word boundaries, and concatenated using
Praat (Boersma, 2001) to create the full sentences for the
two conditions. The same recorded token of each noun,
article and carrier phrases was used throughout the
experiment. The duration of the two articles was identical
to ensure they were equally prominent. Segmented
sentences had a 250 ms pause inserted between each
element (one pause between the carrier phrase and the
article, and one between the article and the noun-label)
while unsegmented sentences had no pauses between
the elements.
In addition to the experimental items, a second set of
phrases was constructed to serve as a distractor block
between training and testing in order to ensure that the
last block before testing was identical in the two conditions. This ``distractor block" had the same carrier phrase,
but had six different objects, referred to using different
nouns, and two different articles (tid and gob). The stimuli
for this set were recorded by a male speaker, making it
easy to distinguish between the test language and the distractor block. Unlike the test language, the mapping
between articles and nouns was not consistent and each
noun could appear with both articles. Note that all the
objects, noun-labels and articles in the distractor block
were different from the ones used in the test language, in
order to minimally interfere with learning.
Procedure
The experiment was divided into two parts: learning
trials and test trials. Participants were told they would be
learning a novel language by seeing pictures and hearing
their description in that language. The experiment lasted
around 25 min (training: 15-20 min; testing: 5-7 min).
Participants were instructed to listen carefully as they
would later be tested on the language they just heard.
They were also told they would periodically be asked to
type in the last sentence they heard.
Learning trials. Fig. 1 presents the learning procedure in
the two conditions. As can be seen, participants in the
two groups were exposed to the same stimuli, but in a
different order. Participants in the unsegmented-first
condition heard unsegmented sentences first while participants in the segmented-first condition heard segmented
sentences first. Overall, participants heard 120 sentences
during learning: 60 segmented and 60 unsegmented (each
of the 12 nouns was repeated five times in each condition).

Segmented sentences had 250 ms pauses between words
while unsegmented sentences had no pauses between
words. Each sentence type (segmented and unsegmented)
appeared in a separate block - the only difference between
the conditions was which block appeared first. Following
the two learning blocks, participants in both conditions
were exposed to a distractor block with 36 sentences (six
novel objects, each repeated six times). The distractor
block was introduced to control for any recency effects in
testing, and ensure that the last block before testing was
identical in the two learning conditions.
Typing trials. On fifteen trials in each block, participants
were instructed to type the last sentence they heard (total
of 30 typing trials over the two blocks). The serial position
of typing trials in each block was the same for all participants (taken from a pre-generated sequence of 15 position
that did not allow more than two typing trials in a row).
However since stimuli presentation was randomized
across participants, each participant typed in different
sentences. Responses were recorded and later coded by a
researcher blind to experimental condition. Responses
were coded according to whether the article and noun
were typed as one or two words.
Test trials. Test trials were identical in the two conditions.
Participants completed a two alternative forced choice
task, followed by a production task. The forced-choice test
consisted of 24 trials. On each trial, participants saw a picture, heard two sentences and had to say which sentence
was the correct one in the language. They were told that
only one sentence was correct. Half of the forced-choice
trials tested participants' knowledge of the article-noun
pairing (henceforth - article trials, where the incorrect sentence had the right noun but wrong article). The other half
of the trials tested knowledge of the noun-object mapping
(noun trials, where the incorrect sentence had the wrong
noun but the right article). Each of the 12 objects appeared
once in an article trial and once in a noun trial, yielding 24
forced-choice trials. Each of the twelve noun labels
appeared four times over the course of the test: twice in
the same article trial (once as a target and once as a distractor, with different articles) and twice in two noun trials
(again, once as a target and once as a distractor). In each
trial type, half of the sentences consisted of stimuli with
250 ms breaks between words, and the other half of
sentences without breaks to ensure both stimuli types
were represented at testing. The order of the trials and
the order of the two options within each trial were
randomized for each participant.
Participants performed a production task following the
forced-choice task. In this task, participants saw a picture
and were asked to produce a full sentence describing it.
Each object appeared once, yielding 12 production trials.
Participants' responses were recorded and coded by a
researcher blind to experimental conditions. For each trial,
the article and the noun were separately coded as correct
or incorrect. Nouns and articles were coded as correct if
they did not differ from the target in more than one sound
(e.g., efkot instead of etkot was coded as correct, see Arnon
& Ramscar, 2012 for full details). Productions that differed

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

65

Fig. 1. Learning procedure in the two conditions (segmented-first on the left, unsegmented-first on the right). In the unsegmented-first condition,
participants heard a block of un-segmented sentences and then a block of segmented ones. In the segmented-first condition the order of blocks was
reversed. Each trial lasted for 3000 ms. The order of trials within blocks was randomized. Objects were changed on each trial (see Appendix A for a list of
nouns and their meanings).

from both articles in one sound (e.g., fe) were coded as
incorrect. The production of the carrier phrase was also
coded for accuracy, on a 1-3 scale (3 - fully accurate,
2 - partially accurate, 1 - not accurate).
Results and discussion
We had three measures of learning: forced-choice and
production measures from the test trials, as well as typing
measures collected during learning. In order to remove
participants who were not showing any learning, we
excluded participants who scored less than 2SD from the
mean in the noun trials in the forced-choice task, a
measure on which performance was high (86% success
before exclusion). Six participants (three in each condition)
displayed such low performance, and were therefore
excluded from further analyses. We use mixed-effect
regression models to analyze the results, using the lme4
package in R (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015).
All models had the maximal random effects structure
justified by the design (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily,
2013). Collinearity in all reported models was small
(<0.3). Categorical variables were effect coded in all analyses. Results were qualitatively identical using ANOVA (i.e.,
significant effects remained significant and non-significant
effects remained non-significant). We report mixed-effects
models because ANOVA is less appropriate for use with
binary responses (Jaeger, 2008).
Manipulation validation
We looked at the typing measures to see if indeed participants in the unsegmented-first condition relied more
on multiword units during learning. Each of the 30 typing
trials was coded for whether the participant typed the
article and noun as one word (=1) or two words (=0). We
then calculated an overall score for each participant based

on the percentage of times that he/she typed the article
and the noun as one word (one subject was excluded from
this analysis because he/she did not type full sentences as
instructed, but only the object label). Before testing our
manipulation, we first used the typing measure to make
sure that participants were learning article-noun pairings
(a grammatical gender system) in both conditions, and
were not just learning to map longer words (article + noun
'words') onto objects, without separating the two. If participants were simply learning longer words, then they
should type the article-noun as one unit throughout the
entire learning phase (even after exposure to segmented
sentences), suggesting they had not learned there are
two separate elements. Only one participant (in the
unsegmented-first condition) displayed this pattern
(typing the article-noun as one word throughout the
study), and he was removed from subsequent analyses.
All remaining participants (N = 36) typed in the article
and noun as two separate words in (at least) the last eight
trials of the learning phase. This shows that by the end of
the learning phase, all remaining participants were
treating the article and noun as two words, indicating that
they were not just learning long words.
Turning to our manipulation test, as predicted, participants in the unsegmented-first condition were more likely
to treat the article and noun as one word (M = 31%,
SD = 23%) compared to participants in the segmentedfirst condition (M = 2%, SD = 5%, t(39) = 4.42, p < 0.001).
This finding validates our manipulation: participants
exposed first to sentences without breaks perceived them
as less segmented and were more likely to treat the article
and noun as one unit.
Forced-choice trials
We ran a mixed-effect logistic regression model, with
learning condition (segmented-first vs. unsegmented-first),

66

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

trial type (article vs. noun) and article-type (fo vs. se) as
fixed effects. The model included random intercepts for
participant and item, as well as a by-subject random slope
for article-type and a by-item random slope for trial type
(the maximal random effect structure justified by the data
that converged). Overall, the effect of learning condition
was not significant (84% vs. 79%, b = .13, SE = .14, p = .34).
However, there was a marginally significant interaction
of condition and trial type (b = .19, SE = .1, p = .07). As
predicted, learning condition affected article trials, but
not noun trials (see Fig. 2): exposure to unsegmented input
first led to better learning of the article-noun pairing, but
not of the noun labels themselves. Not surprisingly, given
the difficulty of grammatical gender, both sets of participants selected the correct noun-label more often than they
selected the correct article (91% vs.72% correct, b = .61,
SE = .12, p < .001). The effect of article was also significant,
with se articles being learned better than fo articles
(B = .35, SE = .15, p < .05). This unexpected effect could
have been caused by the similarity of se to the Hebrew
demonstrative article ze (`this').
Since we predicted that learning condition will specifically enhance learning of article-noun pairings, we ran two
additional models, conducted separately for article and
noun trials, to test this prediction. The models had learning
condition (segmented-first vs. unsegmented-first), and
article-type (fo vs. se) as fixed effects. The models included
random intercepts for participant and item, as well as a bysubject random slope for article-type and a by-item random slope for condition (the maximal random effect structure justified by the data that converged). Learning
condition significantly affected accuracy in choosing the
correct article (77% vs. 66%, b = .30, SE = .15, p < .05), but
did not affect the accuracy in selecting the correct noun
(90% vs. 92%, b = .11, SE = .21, p = .58). As predicted, learning from unsegmented input led to better learning of the
article-noun pairings, but not of the noun-labels themselves. This effect was also confirmed in post hoc t-tests:
the two groups differed in their accuracy on articles
(t(35) = 2.09, p < .05), but not nouns (t(35) = 0.32, p = .74).
Production trials
We ran two mixed-effects logistic regression models for
the coded responses of articles and nouns on the production task. Both models included condition (segmentedfirst vs. unsegmented-first) and article-type (fo vs. se) as
fixed effects, as well as random intercepts for participant
and item. Three participants (one in the segmented-first
condition and two in the unsegmented-first condition)
were excluded from the analysis since they failed to understand the instructions and tried to type their answers
rather than to say them. The subsequent analysis is based
on the responses of the remaining 34 participants. Fig. 3
presents the mean percentage of correct responses for articles and nouns in the two conditions. The overall accuracy
rates in the production task were lower than in the forcedchoice task, which is not surprising given the short exposure and number of nouns learned (12). The effect of learning condition on noun and article accuracy was not
significant. While participants in the unsegmented condition were somewhat better at producing the correct article

Fig. 2. Distribution of scores, means, and SDs in the forced-choice test by
condition and trial type.

Fig. 3. Distribution of scores, means and SDs in the production test by
condition and production type.

(58% vs. 49%, see Fig. 3), this difference was not significant
(B = .25, SE = .16, p = .14). The two groups showed equal
accuracy on producing the nouns (B = .12, SE = .2, p = .54).
Because we were interested in the effect of learning
condition on the production of the correct article-noun
pairing, we conducted a follow-up analysis focusing only
on trials where the noun was produced correctly. For these
trials (N = 182), we asked whether the produced article
was correct or incorrect. We calculated the ratio of correct
articles given a correct noun in the two conditions.
Participants were more likely to produce the correct article
for a given noun in the unsegmented-first condition
compared to the segmented-first group (77% vs. 57%,
Chi-square = 6.86, p < .01; We used Chi-square and not ttest to better control for the different number of correct
nouns produced by each participant). Importantly, there
was no difference between the two conditions in the accuracy of the carrier phrase (p > 0.3): what participants
learned better in the unsegmented-first condition was
the pairing of the article and noun.
Typing trials
To test the relation between segmentation rates and
learning, we calculated a measure of under-segmentation
for each individual participant, based on the percentage

67

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75
12

Correct article trials

of typing trials (out of 30) where the article-noun were
typed as one word. As predicted, those who were worse
at segmenting the speech stream were actually better in
learning the article-noun pairing, as reflected by a significant correlation between this measure and success in the
forced-choice article trials (r = 0.45, p < 0.01): The scatter
plot for these two measures is shown in Fig. 4.
Importantly, all other correlations between this measure
and learning outcomes (forced-choice noun trials, and production measures) were smaller than 0.25, suggesting
that treating the article and noun as one unit was
specifically linked to the ability to correctly pair the
articles and nouns.
In sum, all three measures illustrate the effect of early
experience on building blocks, and document the advantage of utilizing multiword building blocks in learning
grammatical gender. In line with our predictions, we
found that participants were more likely to treat the article and noun as one unit when they were exposed first
to unsegmented sentences. More importantly, we found
this had an effect on learning: participants in the
segmented-first condition showed better learning of the
article-noun pairings. This pattern was also found on
an individual level: participants who were more likely
to treat the article-noun sequence as one word showed
better learning of the article-noun pairing. Taken
together, the findings document the predicted link
between multiword building blocks and better learning
outcomes.
Experiment 1 set out to expand on the findings in
Arnon and Ramscar (2012) by providing a more direct
manipulation of unit size, and by monitoring actual unit
size during learning. The two studies - which use a similar artificial language - converge on the positive effect of
using multiword units as early building blocks. However,
the results of the studies also differ in several interesting
respects. First, learning of the article-noun pairing was
generally better in the current study: participants in this
study were better at selecting the correct article compared to ones in the Arnon and Ramscar study (72% vs.
58% in the previous study, averaging over learning conditions). Second, the effect of the manipulation on learning
was also stronger in the current study: the difference in
correct article selection between the two learning conditions was only 7% in the previous study compared to
11% in the current one.
Two factors may have contributed to these differences.
First, participants in the current study were all native
Hebrew speakers - a language with grammatical gender,
while participants in the previous study were monolingual
English speakers - a language with no grammatical gender.
Although Hebrew does not mark articles for gender, it does
classify nouns into masculine and feminine and marks
verbs and adjectives for gender agreement. The better performance of our Hebrew speakers on a grammatical gender
learning task is consistent with findings that speakers
whose L1 has grammatical gender have an easier time
learning such systems in a second language (e.g.,
Sabourin, Stowe, & de Haan, 2006). The generally better
performance, as well as the larger difference between the
learning conditions may also reflect the strength of the

10
8
6
4
2
0
0.000

0.100

0.200

0.300

0.400

0.500

0.600

0.700

0.800

Likelihood of article-noun 'words'
Fig. 4. The correlation between the tendency to treat the article and noun
as one unit and success on forced-choice article trials.

current manipulation. Unlike the previous study, participants were not exposed to individual words but only to
sentences. Moreover, exposure to unsegmented speech
(rather than just to full sentences) may have led to more
multiword units overall, which in turn would lead to better
learning.
Overall, the two studies provide strong support for
the idea that learning from multiword units can lead to
better learning of article-noun pairings in adult learners.
But what is the mechanism that underlies this effect?
We hypothesized (here and in Arnon & Ramscar, 2012)
that learning from multiword units is beneficial because
it increases the association between the article and the
object, an association that is hard to establish when
the mapping of objects into classes is arbitrary. In such
cases, associating an object with an article-noun
sequence will make the article more predictive of the
noun than it would otherwise be. If this explanation is
correct, then the effect of building blocks on learning
should change when the article (or the grammatical element more generally) is predictive of the object in its
own right, that is, when it carries semantic information.
In these cases, multiword units are not needed to establish (or facilitate) the association between the article and
the object.
Some classifier systems provide an example of a noun
class system that reflects semantic distinctions. In
Japanese for example, different classifiers are used for
humans, animals, and inanimate objects (with subclasses
of each type; Yamamoto & Keil, 2000). Even within
grammatical gender systems where the division of nouns
into classes is mostly arbitrary (as in many Romance
languages, Corbett, 1991), there is a clear semantic component to the classification for a subset of nouns, mainly those
having biological gender like boy, girl, man, woman.
Interestingly, L2 learners seem to show a greater association
between the article and noun for such nouns: they show
similar processing patterns as native speakers only for
nouns that have biological gender (but not for ones that do
not). In these cases, they can use the gender information
on the article to predict an upcoming noun (Lew-Williams
& Fernald, 2009). These results are consistent with the
prediction of a differential effect of building blocks on
different grammatical relations, a prediction that has not
yet been tested and will be tested in Experiment 2.

68

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated an effect of building blocks
on learning outcomes. Learning from unsegmented speech
led participants to rely more on article-noun units, which
resulted in better learning. The grammatical gender system
in Experiment 1 was fully arbitrary: there were no phonological or semantic cues to class membership. In
Experiment 2 we wanted to examine what happens in a
system that assigns nouns to classes based on their semantic properties. In this study, nouns were divided into
classes based on animacy (animate vs. inanimate). We
use the same learning conditions (unsegmented-first vs.
segmented-first) but we predict a different pattern of
learning. We still expect participants to extract more article-noun `words' in the unsegmented-first condition.
However, we predict that since the grammatical element
(i.e., the article) carries inherent semantic information,
we will not find better learning in the unsegmented-first
condition, despite a greater reliance on multiword units
in learning.

Methods and materials
Participants
Forty-four students at the Hebrew University, who did
not participate in the previous study, participated in the
study for course credit or payment (30 females and 14
males). Their age ranged from 19 to 30 (mean age 23.6).
All participants were native Hebrew speakers, with no history of speech, reading or hearing disability, ADD or ADHD.
As in Experiment 1, participants were randomly assigned
to one of the two conditions: segmented-first or
unsegmented-first (22 in each condition).

Materials and procedure
In Experiment 2, we used the exact same procedure as
in Experiment 1. There were only two differences in the
materials. First, we replaced the article se with the article
si to minimize similarity to the Hebrew demonstrative ze.
If the difference between the two articles in Experiment
1 was driven by this similarity, it should not appear in
Experiment 2. Second, and more importantly, the division
of objects into noun `classes' was not arbitrary, but semantically based: the two articles distinguished between animate and inanimate nouns. In Experiment 1, all 12 nouns
referred to inanimate objects. In Experiment 2, half of the
objects (N = 6) were animate (animals) and half inanimate
(N = 6, the full list of nouns and their meaning can be found
in Appendix B). In contrast to Experiment 1, class membership was now entirely semantic - nouns referring to animate objects appeared with the article si, while nouns
referring to inanimate objects appeared with the article fo.
As in the previous study, all objects had high frequency
and early Age-of-Acquisition labels in Hebrew (all animals
names were ones learned by children under age five). All
the novel labels had two syllables. As in Experiment 1, to
ensure that, learning is not affected by the gender of nouns
in Hebrew (the L1), the two noun `classes' were matched

on the gender of the nouns in Hebrew: each had an equal
number of masculine and feminine nouns.
The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1,
with the addition of a generalization test after the two
learning tests (the forced-choice task and the production
task). Since now the mapping between nouns and objects
was not arbitrary, we could assess participants' learning
of the article-noun pairing not only for familiar nouns
(ones that appeared during training), but also for novel
items. If participants learned the semantically-based generalization, they should be able to select the correct article for novel objects, based on their animacy (select si for
animate objects and fo for inanimate ones). The generalization test consisted of 12 forced-choice trials with novel
nouns (half animate and half inanimate), all examining
the ability to choose the correct article for a novel noun
(see Appendix C for the full list of novel nouns and
meaning).
Results
As in Experiment 1, we excluded participants who
scored less than 2SD below the mean in the noun trials
of the forced choice test. Three such participants were
excluded from all reported analyses below (one in the
unsegmented-first condition and two in the segmentedfirst condition).
Manipulation validation
Again, we first used the typing measure to ensure that
participants learned the grammatical gender system and
not just to map longer 'words' to objects. If they did, then
they should have treated the article-noun as one word
throughout the experiment (even after exposure to segmented sentences). Three participants (all in the unsegmented condition) shows this pattern, and were removed
from further analyses, since we could not know that they
were learning article-noun pairings, and not just long
words. The analysis below was conducted on the remaining 38 participants.
We then tested our manipulation. As in Experiment 1,
early exposure to unsegmented sentences led to more article-noun `words': participants were more likely to treat
the article-noun as one unit in the unsegmented-first condition compared to the segmented-first condition
(unsegmented-first: M = 35%, SD = 34%; segmented-first:
M = 3%, SD = 10%; t(39) = 3.9, p < .001). As in Experiment
1, early exposure affected building blocks. We next test
the prediction that this will not affected learning in the
same way when the article carries semantic information.
Forced-choice trials: familiar items
As in Experiment 1, we ran a mixed-effect logistic
regression model, with learning condition (segmentedfirst vs. unsegmented-first), trial type (article vs. noun)
and article-type (fo vs. se) as fixed effects. The model
included random intercepts for participant and item, as
well as by-participants random slopes for trial type, and
by-item random slopes for trial type and condition. As predicted, and in contrast to Experiment 1, there was no effect
of condition on learning (82% vs. 89%, b = 0.3, SE = .24,

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

p > .2) and no interaction between condition and trial type
(b = 0.06, SE = 0.1, p > .5). Importantly, as can be seen in
Fig. 5, participants in the unsegmented-first condition
were not better than those in the segmented-first condition at selecting the correct article. Also in contrast to
Experiment 1, no effect of article (si vs. fo) was found
(p > .2), suggesting that the advantage of the article se in
the previous experiment was indeed driven by its' similarity to the Hebrew demonstrative ze.
We ran two additional models separately on the article
and noun trials with condition and article-type as fixed
effects, and with by-item and by-subject random
intercepts and by-item random slope for condition. These
models also revealed no difference between the two conditions in selecting the correct article (79% vs. 85%, b = .25,
SE = .27, p > .3) or in selecting the correct noun (86% vs.
92%, b = .44, SE = .3, p > .1). These results stands in
contrast to the results of Experiment 1, and show that
learning from unsegmented sentences does not lead to
better performance when the article-noun pairing is
semantic rather than arbitrary. Importantly, the lack of
difference between the learning conditions does not reflect
a ceiling effect: participants were not at ceiling for article
(average 82% correct) or nouns (average 89% correct).
Forced-choice trials: novel items
This part asked if participants learned the animacybased generalization. If they did, they should be able to
correctly select an article for a novel object (not seen in
training). We tested generalization by having participants
select articles for 12 novel objects, half animate and half
inanimate. We used a mixed-effect logistic regression
model with learning condition (segmented-first vs.
unsegmented-first) and article-type (fo vs. si) as fixed
effects, and random intercepts for participant and item.
As predicted, we did not find any difference in performance
between the conditions: performance in the unsegmentedfirst condition did not differ from that of the segmentedfirst group (unsegmented-first: 80% vs. segmented-first:
85%, B = 0.3, SE = .47, p > 0.5). This result shows that
there was no difference in the groups' ability to learn the
generalization and apply it to novel items. Importantly,
participants in both groups were able to apply the
generalization to novel items (significantly above chance
performance: M = 83%, SD = 23%, t-test (37) = 8.6,
p < .0001). This shows that participants did not just learn
the specific article-noun pairings presented in learning,
but learned the animacy-based classification.
Production trials
A mixed-effect logistic regression analysis similar to the
one reported for Experiment 1 was performed on the data
of the production test, which is depicted in Fig. 6. Five subjects (three from the unsegmented-first condition and
three from the segmented-first) were removed from this
analysis as they did not understand the instructions properly and tried to type in the sentences instead of saying
them. As predicted, there was no significant effect of condition on the production of articles (74% vs. 85%,
B = 1.75, SE = 1.15, p = .13) or on the production of nouns
(31% vs. 44%, B = 0.86, SE = .56, p = .12). Participants in

69

Fig. 5. Distribution of scores, means, and SDs in the forced-choice test by
condition and trial type.

Fig. 6. Distribution of scores, means and SDs in the production test by
condition and production type.

both conditions were equally likely to produce the article
and the noun correctly. Note that they are much better at
producing the articles compared to Experiment 1 - which
is not surprising given that the semantic classification of
nouns enabled subjects to produce the correct article based
on the animacy of a given item. This kind of information
was not available for participants in Experiment 1, who
had to learn a completely arbitrary mapping of items to
classes.
We also conducted the additional analysis reported
above for Experiment 1, computing the ratio of correct articles given a correctly produced noun. This analysis focused
only on trials where the noun was produced correctly
(N = 147), and asked whether the article was produced correctly or not. Unlike Experiment 1, there was no difference
between the conditions: Participants in the unsegmentedfirst condition were as likely to produce the correct article
for a given noun as those in the segmented-first group (92%
vs. 91%, Chi-square = 0.06, p > .8). Note that participants in
both conditions were very accurate in producing the correct article, which is again not surprising given the semantic classification.
Typing trials
Following Experiment 1, we calculated the correlation
between the likelihood to treat the article and noun as

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

one unit (of each individual) and the various learning
measures. All correlations were smaller than 0.2. Most
importantly, in contrast to Experiment 1, we did not find
any evidence for a correlation between the reliance on
article-noun units and performance in the forced-choice
article trials (r = 0.05, p > .7; see Fig. 7). This result means
that in contrast with Experiment 1, individuals who relied
more on multiword units were not better learners of the
article-noun pairing compared to those who relied more
on single words.
In sum, in contrast with Experiment 1, all learning measures (forced-choice for familiar and novel items, production, and typing) revealed no difference between the two
learning conditions. Participants in the unsegmented-first
condition did not show better learning than those in the
segmented-first condition.
Comparing the results of Experiment 1 and 2
The two experiments share a very similar design: in
both, participants learned an artificial language where
nouns were classified into classes, and this classification
determined article choice. In the two experiments,
participants' early exposure was manipulated in a way
that led them to learn more from multiword units
(the unsegmented-first condition) or single words
(segmented-first condition). The fundamental difference
between the experiments was whether the classification
of nouns into classes was arbitrary (Experiment 1) or
semantic (Experiment 2). As predicted, participants in the
unsegmented-first condition showed better learning of
the article-noun pairings in Experiment 1, but not in
Experiment 2. In order to directly compare the results,
we conducted additional analyses using the data from
the two studies combined. We focus on the measures
looking at how well participants learned the article-noun
pairing given this is the predicted difference between the
studies.
Forced-choice trials
We ran a mixed-effect logistic regression model on
accuracy in the article trials to see if the effect of learning
conditions was different in the two studies. We had experiment (1 vs. 2), learning condition (unsegmented-first vs.
segmented-first), and the interaction between them as
fixed factors. The model included random intercepts for
subject and item. Across the two experiments, the effect
of condition was marginally significant (B = .34, SE = .19,
p = .07). Importantly, and as predicted, we found a significant interaction between experiment and condition
(B = .29, SE = .14, p < .05): starting from unsegmented
input facilitated learning only in the first experiment. The
effect of experiment was also significant (B = .37, SE = .14,
p < .01): unsurprisingly, it was easier to learn the article-
noun pairings when they were animacy based (72% vs.
82% in Experiment 2).2

2
We ran the exact same model on the noun trials, and as expected, none
of the factors were significant. There was no effect of learning condition,
experiment and no interaction between them (all p's > 0.1).

12

Correct article trials

70

10
8
6
4
2
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Likelihood of article-noun 'words'
Fig. 7. The correlation between the tendency to treat the article and noun
as one unit and success on forced-choice article trials.

Production trials
The comparison of the production trials revealed a similar pattern. Participants in Experiment 2 were better at
producing the correct article than those in Experiment 1,
reflecting its' semantic basis (79% vs. 54%, t-test (63)
= 4.33, p < .001). More importantly, there was a different
in the effect of learning condition on accuracy.
Participants in Experiment 1, but not in Experiment 2,
were more likely to produce a correct article given a
correct noun in the unsegmented first condition (77% vs.
57%, Chi-square = 6.86, p < .01 in Experiment 1; 92% vs.
91%, Chi-square = 0.06, p > .8, in Experiment 2). This again
reflects the difference in the influence learning condition
in the two experiments.
Relation between building blocks and learning outcomes
Individuals who relied more on article-noun `words'
showed better learning of the article-noun pairing in
Experiment 1 (r = 0.45), but not in Experiment 2
(r = 0.05). We used Fisher's r-to-z transformations to compare the magnitude of the effect. As predicted, the difference in the size of the correlation coefficients between
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 was significant (Z = 1.79,
p < .05). A bigger reliance on article-noun units led to
better learning of the article-noun pairing in Experiment
1, but not in Experiment 2.
Taken together, the results of the forced-choice, production and typing measures from the two experiments converge to demonstrate that manipulating early unit size
facilitated learning of article-noun pairings when those
pairings were arbitrary (Experiment 1), but did not affect
learning when the pairings were animacy based (that is,
when the article carried semantic information).
General discussion
This paper set out to examine the effect of existing linguistic knowledge on subsequent language learning. We
hypothesized that adults' existing knowledge of words
leads them to rely less on multiword units and, therefore,
to worse learning outcomes in specific language-learning
tasks. We tested this by examining the relation between
early building blocks and learning outcomes, manipulating
whether the initial exposure to an artificial language was
segmented or not, and whether the relation to be learned

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

was arbitrary (Experiment 1) or semantically-based
(Experiment 2). In line with our predictions, the studies
showed that (a) learning from unsegmented input results
in more multiword units, (b) learning from multiword
units leads to better learning of arbitrary article-noun
pairings manifested in better group performance and in a
significant individual correlation between undersegmentation and better learning (Experiment 1), and (c)
this advantage is affected by the information conveyed
by the article, and is not found when the article carries
semantic information (Experiment 2).
These results replicate and significantly extend
previous findings on the way early units affect L2 learning
outcomes (Arnon & Ramscar, 2012). Experiment 1 provides
direct evidence for the relation between unit size and
learning of grammatical gender on both a group and individual level. By assessing units of learning during training
(using a typing measure), we show that exposure to unsegmented input leads to more multiword units and to better
learning even though participants in this condition had to
simultaneously segment and learn the pairings. The typing
measure also ensures that participants were not just
learning long words, but were instead learning about the
relation between the article and noun: by the end of
training, all participants differentiated between the article and the noun. Experiment 2 further examined the
mechanisms underlying the advantage of learning from
multiword units, and specifically, the prediction that
multiword units are not needed to establish (or facilitate)
the association between the article and the object when
the article carries semantic information and is therefore
predictive of the object. The results of Experiment 2 (which
had an identical design to Experiment 1 except for the
animacy-based classification of nouns) confirmed this
prediction. Participants were still more likely to treat the
article and noun as one unit when they were exposed first
to unsegmented sentences (based on the online typing
measure), but this had no effect on learning.
Finding an individual correlation between segmentation and learning outcomes raises interesting questions
about the relation between individual differences in segmentation and learning of grammatical relations. Several
previous studies have shown a positive relation between
segmentation abilities and some aspects of language
learning and use, both in L1 and L2. In infants, for instance,
better segmentation of an artificial speech stream was correlated with larger vocabularies (Junge, Kooijman, Hagoort,
& Cutler, 2012; Singh, Steven Reznick, & Xuehua, 2012)
while in adults, performance on a similar task was correlated with better sentence comprehension (Misyak &
Christiansen, 2012; Misyak, Christiansen, & Tomblin,
2010). This study shows the opposite effect: individuals
who segmented less (treated the article and noun as one
unit) were better learners of grammatical gender. How
can this finding be reconciled with previous ones? One
intriguing possibility is that the correlation between segmentation and learning depends on the domain to be
learned: being good at identifying words enhances learning about word properties (labels, morphological features,
as in previous studies), while being good at chunking frequently co-occurring words together improves learning

71

about the relations between them (e.g., grammatical gender, as in the current one). If so, we predict that segmentation abilities will be negatively correlated with improved
performance on L2 grammatical measures, yet may be positively correlated with other L2 measures such as vocabulary size.
Taken together, the results illustrate the differential
effect of unit-size on learning grammatical relations -
starting from multiword units facilitates learning in some
cases, but not in others - and enhance the claim that multiword units facilitate learning by increasing the association between the grammatical element and the object. If
so, their advantage will vary depending on the information
the grammatical element conveys. Given this view of
learning, we can now make concrete predictions about
how multiword units will affect L2 learning. Learning from
multiword units should be particularly beneficial for a host
of grammatical relations that are (a) not semantically
transparent in that the grammatical element does not
make an independent semantic contribution (e.g.,
gender-marked articles), and (b) hold between adjacent
words, such that the multiword unit will contain the grammatical element and the word it modifies.
Language presents us with such relations in the form of
gender agreement patterns, certain classifier systems, and
verb-preposition pairings, all of which are necessary for
native-like fluency and all of which are difficult for L2
learners to master (grammatical gender: e.g., Gruter,
Lew-Williams, & Fernald, 2012; subject-verb agreement:
Jiang, 2004; classifiers: Hansen & Chen, 2001; see
Clahsen, Felser, Sato, & Silva, 2010; DeKeyser, 2005, for
reviews highlighting such aspects as challenging for L2
learners). We predict that manipulating learners' exposure
in a way that directs them to multiword units should
enhance performance in such domains. In contrast, a
greater reliance on multiword units should not enhance
learning vocabulary items or grammatical relations like
case marking (when it is not accompanied by gender distinctions) or plural marking, all of whom seem to pose less
difficulty for L2 learners (Birdsong, 2009; Johnson &
Newport, 1989; see DeKeyser, 2012, for a review). These
predictions, which are unique to the proposal we outlined
here and seem to be consistent with patterns of L2 difficulty, need to be tested in future research.
Different accounts of L2 learning
More broadly, the studies presented here aim to offer a
first step in articulating an experience-based account of L2
difficulty. Understanding why adults struggle in learning a
second language is one of the most studied issues in language research (see DeKeyser, 2005; Mitchell, Myles, &
Marsden, 2013 for comprehensive reviews). Multiple factors have been found to influence adult learning of a second language (cognitive factors, motivational factors,
learning environment, and many more). Consequently,
any comprehensive theory of L2 learning will have to
incorporate multiple factors, explain how they interact,
and how together, they can account for the complex pattern of L2 learning outcomes. As a first step, any account
of L2 learning has to explain why adult learners generally

72

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

fail to reach native-like proficiency, why they find certain
domains harder than others and how this is linked to their
cognitive make-up and language-learning situation.
Here, we approach this long-standing puzzle by emphasizing the relation between the linguistic units employed
in learning a novel language (early building blocks) and
learning outcomes. In particular, we suggest that adults'
existing knowledge of words leads them to rely less on
multiword units in learning, and that this negatively
impacts mastery of certain grammatical relations (but
not others). This view naturally addresses two challenges
that face theories of L2 learning: the challenge of how to
link specific features of the learner to the learning outcomes observed, and the challenge of why L2 learners find
certain linguistic domains harder than others. Our proposal
predicts differential performance on varying aspects of the
novel language, and suggests that learning outcomes can
be changed (to some degree) by manipulating learners'
early input in a way that changes the units used during
learning. Moreover, the proposal provides an initial set of
testable constrains and limitations on the role of multiword units in learning, an important step in the development of any theoretical framework.
Importantly, this proposal is not intended to provide a
comprehensive theory of L2 learning. It does not explain
many patterns of L2 learning (e.g., the difference between
phonology and syntax, Granena & Long, 2013), and does
not incorporate factors known to affect learning (e.g., adults'
ability to draw on declarative learning mechanisms, Ullman,
2001). Instead, the proposal aims to demonstrate the effect
of an additional and novel factor on L2 learning: the way
prior knowledge of words leads to fewer multiword units
and impacts learning outcomes. The idea that adults may
differ from children in the units from which they learn,
and that this impacts learning outcomes builds on
Newport's seminal less-is-more hypothesis (Newport,
1988, 1990) and Elman's starting small approach (Elman,
1993), both of which highlight the link between the way
new input is represented and what can be learned from it
(see also, Monner, Vatz, Morini, Hwang, & DeKeyser, 2013).
Our account differs from previous ones in emphasizing the
role of larger, multiword units in the process of learning.
Multiword units in language learning
The finding that multiword building blocks can facilitate
learning has important theoretical implications. First, it
illustrates the effect of early experience on subsequent
learning: knowledge of word boundaries was found to affect
the seemingly unrelated domain of grammatical gender,
with unsegmented speech serving as a better starting point
for learning. Second, the findings provide novel support for
the idea that learning from multiword units is beneficial,
an idea originally proposed for explaining first language
acquisition (Abbot-Smith & Tomasello, 2006). Finally, while
not tested directly, the results are also consistent with the
claim that adults' greater difficulty in learning novel grammatical systems is related, at least to some extent, to their
smaller reliance on multiword building blocks.
The idea that children make use of multiword units in
learning language, and that adults are less likely to do so,

is consistent with several bodies of findings. Multiword
units are seen as important building blocks in usage-based
models of first language learning, where grammatical
knowledge is learned by abstracting over stored exemplars
(Abbot-Smith & Tomasello, 2006; Lieven & Tomasello,
2008). In such approaches, children are predicted to use
both words and multiword units in learning grammar.
Analyses of children's early speech provide support for this
prediction: children's early multiword utterances include
many ``frozen" sequences (up to 50%, e.g., give-me, get-itout) whose components are not used productively in other
combinations (Lieven, Pine, & Baldwin, 1997; Lieven,
Salomo, & Tomasello, 2009); similar patterns are found in
computational analyses of child speech (Borensztajn,
Zuidema, & Bod, 2009) and in studies of children's error
patterns (e.g., Kirjavainen, Theakston, & Lieven, 2009).
Recent work provides more direct evidence for the role of
multiword units in learning (Arnon, McCauley, &
Christiansen, 2015, in preparation) by showing that, like
words, multiword phrases also show Age-of-Acquisition
effects. Phrases that are acquired earlier in childhood show
processing advantages in adult speakers, illustrating their
role as units of learning.
Unlike the reports of `chunked' production in child language, the language of L2 learners is often characterized as
non-formulaic, and is fraught with non-native idioms and
collocations (e.g., put more attention to, watch up, Conklin
& Schmitt, 2012; Pawley & Syder, 1983; Wray, 2002,
2008). Even advanced learners produce fewer formulaic
sequences than native speakers in both written and spoken
production (e.g., Howarth, 1998). Even when adults do
acquire multiword sequences, they seem to use them differently in learning, memorizing a few fixed sequences (greetings, etc.) but not using them to further grammatical
development (Wray, 1999; Wray & Fitzpatrick, 2008).
Interestingly, unlike adults, children learning a second language use multiword chunks early on, and seem to use them
to further grammatical development (e.g., Hakuta, 1974;
Karniol, 1990). In a particularly detailed study, Wong
Fillmore (1976, 1979) followed five Spanish speaking
preschoolers learning English in an immersion setting (following immigration) for a year. The study documented
extensive use of multiword chunks in early production, a
pattern that stands in contrast with the ones reported for
adult L2 learners. In sum, analyses of L2 and child speech
point to a possible difference between them in the reliance
on multiword units in learning.
This idea receives further support from recent computational work that underscores the difference in building
blocks between children, adult native speakers, and L2
learners (Christiansen & McCauley, 2013). Christiansen
and McCauley (2013) use the Chunk-Based-Learner (CBL,
McCauley & Christiansen, 2011, 2014) to model language
learning. This model provides a computational implementation of children's use of chunking in language acquisition.
The model gradually builds an inventory of chunks consisting of one or more words--a ``chunkatory"--used for both
language comprehension and production. The same model
can be used to compare unit size - operationalized as the
proportion of multiword units in the ``chunkatory"
- between different speakers and populations. Consistent

73

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

with our predictions, the productions of L2 learners of
German and English are less `chunked' than matched productions by child and adult native speakers of those two
languages (Christiansen & McCauley, 2013). Taken
together, the findings reviewed provide support for the idea
that infants and adults do differ in their reliance on multiword units, and that this may explain (some of) the differences between them. Much more research is needed,
however, to substantiate this claim.
Learning multiple levels of language simultaneously
The results also raise interesting questions about the
possible benefit of learning segmentation, meaning and
grammar simultaneously. Participants in the unsegmented
condition had to segment the speech while learning its
components. Their better performance points to the possible advantage in learning multiple levels of language at the
same time (in this case, segmentation and grammar).
Learning from this kind of multilayered stimuli may also
be more similar to what infants do during actual language
acquisition (Romberg & Saffran, 2013; Sahni, Seidenberg, &
Saffran, 2010). Nonetheless, much research in the field of
language learning typically examines each process in isolation and in the absence of information from other levels
(segmentation: e.g., Newport & Aslin, 2004; rulelearning: e.g., Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, & Vishton, 1999; word
learning: e.g., Werker, Cohen, Lloyd, Casasola, & Stager,
1998), ignoring the possible interactions between the different levels. However, recent work has explored the interactions between different levels of information. In the
domain of word learning and segmentation, studies show
that segmentation and word-object mapping can be
learned in parallel after just a brief exposure, and that
exposure to visual objects facilitates segmentation
(Cunillera, Camara, Laine, & Rodriguez-Fornells, 2010).
Similarly, recent studies document the role of feedback
between levels and the importance of big to small processes in phonetic learning: It was shown that both adults
and infants use word-level information in forming phonetic categories, by assigning vowels to different categories
when they appear consistently in different words
(Feldman, Griffiths, Goldwater, & Morgan, 2013; Feldman,
Myers, White, Griffiths, & Morgan, 2013). The current
study joins existing ones in highlighting the importance
of learning multiple domains simultaneously and provides
novel evidence for the beneficial interaction between segmentation and grammatical learning.
In sum, we have provided evidence for the claim that
early exposure to unsegmented input makes learners more
likely to treat the article and noun as one unit, which in
turn leads to better learning of article-noun pairing in certain cases, but not others. These findings illustrate the
effect of experience on building blocks and the advantage
of learning certain grammatical relations from multiword
units. The findings highlight the complex interaction
between experience, building blocks, and learning outcomes, offering a new perspective as to why adults struggle with learning a second language. From an applied
perspective, our proposal has the potential to significantly
alter how we teach adults a second language. By

investigating the way early units affect learning outcomes,
and highlighting the role of larger chunks in learning, we
may gain better understanding of the process of second
language learning, and the way it differs from first
language learning.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alex B. Fine for statistical advice
and extensive feedback, Ram Frost, Stewart M. McCauley &
Morten H. Christiansen for helpful discussions, and Tamar
Johnson for her help in conducting the experiments. This
work was supported by ISF grant number 527/12 awarded
to IA.
Appendix A. Items used in Experiment 1
1. Carrier phrase: os-ferpel-ti
2. Articles: se, fo
3. Nouns:
3.1. Nouns following the article fo:
Word
gorok
panjol
toonbot
fertsot
perdip
etkot
3.2. Nouns following the article se:
Word
hekloo
hertin
geesoo
slindot
jatree
sodap

Meaning
bike
television
clock
sock
house
key
Meaning
bath
iron
hat
piano
cup
spoon

Appendix B. Items used in Experiment 2
1. Carrier phrase: os-ferpel-ti
2. Articles: si, fo
3. Nouns:
3.1. Nouns following the article fo:
Word
gorok
panjol
toonbot
fertsot
perdip
etkot
3.2. Nouns following the article se:
Word
hekloo
hertin
geesoo
slindot
jatree
sodap

Meaning
bike
television
clock
sock
house
key
Meaning
camel
cow
lion
hen
sheep
turtle

74

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75

Appendix C. Novel Items used in the generalization test
in Experiment 2
Word

Meaning

romdee
nemlik
sidpal
tilmoo
famtog
bagdee
fitloo
orteep
dalku
pugtee
gertom
pridmos

bath
iron
hat
piano
cup
spoon
donkey
dove
parrot
ladybug
snail
ant

References
Abbot-Smith, K., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Exemplar-learning and
schematization in a usage based account of syntactic acquisition.
The Linguistic Review, 23, 275-290.
Arnon, I., & Cohen Priva, U. (2013). More than words: The effect of multiword frequency and constituency on phonetic duration. Language and
Speech, 56, 349-373.
Arnon, I., McCauley S.M., Christiansen, M.H. (2015). Age-of-Acquisition
effects for multiword phrases, poster presented at the International
Workshop on Statistical Learning, BCBL, June 2015.
Arnon, I., & Ramscar, M. (2012). Granularity and the acquisition of
grammatical gender: How order-of-acquisition affects what gets
learned. Cognition, 122, 292-305.
Arnon, I., & Snider, N. (2010). More than words: Frequency effects for
multiword phrases. Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 67-82.
Bannard, C., & Matthews, D. (2008). Stored word sequences in language
learning. Psychological Science, 19, 241-248.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects
structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal.
Journal of Memory and Language, 68, 255-278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using Eigen and S4. R package version 1.1-8. <http://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4>.
Birdsong, D. (2009). Age and the end state of second language acquisition.
In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), The new handbook of second language
acquisition. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Boersma, P. (2001). Praat, a system for doing phonetics by computer. Glot
International, 5, 341-345.
Borensztajn, G., Zuidema, W., & Bod, R. (2009). Children's grammars grow
more abstract with age. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 175-188.
Bybee, J. L. (1998). The emergent lexicon. In M. C. Gruber, D. Higgins, K. S.
Olson, & T. Wysocki (Eds.), Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society
34: The panels (pp. 421-435). Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Christiansen, M. H., & McCauley, S. M. (2013). Computational
investigations of multiword chunks in language learning. Paper
presented at a symposium on multiword sequences as building blocks
for language: Insights into first and second language learning at the 35th
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Berlin, Germany.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2015). The now-or-never bottleneck: A
fundamental constraint on language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language
learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Clahsen, H., Felser, C., Sato, M., & Silva, R. (2010). Morphological structure
in native and nonnative language processing. Language Learning, 60,
21-43.
Conklin, K., & Schmitt, N. (2012). The processing of formulaic language.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 32, 45-61.
Corbett, G. G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cunillera, T., Camara, E., Laine, M., & Rodriguez-Fornells, A. (2010). Speech
segmentation is facilitated by visual cues. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63, 260-274.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson, J. S. (2000).
Linguistic gender and spoken-word recognition in French. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42, 465-480.

DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning second language grammar
difficult? A review of issues. Language Learning, 55, 1-25.
DeKeyser, R. M. (2012). Age effects in second language learning. In S. Gass
& A. Mackey (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition
(pp. 442-460). London: Routledge.
Dussias, P. E., Valdes Kroff, J. R., Guzzardo Tamargo, R. E., & Gerfen, C.
(2013). When gender and looking go hand in hand: Grammatical
gender processing in L2 Spanish. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 35, 353-387.
Ellis, N. C. (2006). Selective attention and transfer phenomena in L2
acquisition: Contingency, cue competition, salience, interference,
overshadowing, blocking, and perceptual learning. Applied
Linguistics, 27, 164-194.
Ellis, N. C., & Sagarra, N. (2010). The bounds of adult language acquisition:
Blocking and learned attention. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
32(4), 553-580.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural networks: The
importance of starting small. Cognition, 48, 71-99.
Elman, J. L. (2009). On the meaning of words and dinosaur bones: Lexical
knowledge without a lexicon. Cognitive Science, 33, 547-582.
Feldman, N. H., Griffiths, T. L., Goldwater, S., & Morgan, J. L. (2013a). A role
for the developing lexicon in phonetic category acquisition.
Psychological Review, 120, 751-778.
Feldman, N. H., Myers, E. B., White, K. S., Griffiths, T. L., & Morgan, J. L.
(2013b). Word-level information influences phonetic learning in
adults and infants. Cognition, 127, 427-438.
Ferman, S., & Karni, A. (2010). No childhood advantage in the acquisition
of skill in using an artificial language rule. PLoS ONE, 5, e13648.
Finn, A. S., & Hudson Kam, C. L. (2008). The curse of knowledge: First
language knowledge impairs adult learners' use of novel statistics for
word segmentation. Cognition, 108, 477-499.
Finn, A. S., & Hudson Kam, C. L. (2015). Why segmentation matters:
Experience-driven segmentation errors impair ``morpheme" learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Language, Memory, and Cognition.
Granena, G., & Long, M. H. (2013). Age of onset, length of residence,
language aptitude, and ultimate L2 attainment in three linguistic
domains. Second Language Research, 29, 311-343.
Gruter, T., Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2012). Grammatical gender in
L2: A production or a real-time processing problem? Second Language
Research, 28, 191-215.
Hakuta, K. (1974). Prefabricated patterns and the emergence of structure
in second language acquisition. Language Learning, 24, 287-297.
Hansen, L., & Chen, Y. L. (2001). What counts in the acquisition and
attribution of numeral classifiers? JALT Journal, 23, 90-110.
Howarth, P. (1998). Phraseology and second language proficiency. Applied
Linguistics, 19, 24-44.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from ANOVAs
(transformation or not) and towards logit mixed models. Journal of
Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (Vol. I). New York: Holt.
Jiang, N. (2004). Morphological insensitivity in second language
processing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 603-634.
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects in second
language learning: The influence of maturational state on the
acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21,
60-99.
Junge, C., Kooijman, V., Hagoort, P., & Cutler, A. (2012). Rapid recognition
at 10 months as a predictor of language development. Developmental
Science, 15, 463-473.
Kamin, L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In
B. Campbell & R. Church (Eds.), Punishment and aversive behavior. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Karniol, R. (1990). Second language acquisition via immersion in daycare.
Journal of Child Language, 17, 147-170.
Kirjavainen, M. M. M., Theakston, A. L., & Lieven, E. V. (2009). Can input
explain children's me-for-I errors? Journal of Child Language, 36,
1091-1114.
Krashen, S. D., Long, M. A., & Scarcella, R. (1979). Age, rate, and eventual
attainment in second language acquisition. TESOL Quarterly, 13,
573-582.
Kuhl, P. K. (2000). A new view of language acquisition. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 97, 11850-11857.
Lenneberg, E. H. (1967). Biological foundations of language. Wiley.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2009). Fluency in using morphosyntactic
cues to establish reference: How do native and non-native speakers
differ. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual Boston University conference on
language development.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish
make rapid use of grammatical gender in spoken word recognition.
Psychological Science, 18, 193-198.

N. Siegelman, I. Arnon / Journal of Memory and Language 85 (2015) 60-75
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2010). Real-time processing of gendermarked articles by native and non-native Spanish speakers. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 447-464.
Lieven, E. V., Pine, J., & Baldwin, G. (1997). Lexically-based learning and
early grammatical development. Journal of Child Language, 24,
187-220.
Lieven, E. V., Salomo, D., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Two-year-old children's
production of multiword utterances: A usage-based analysis.
Cognitive Linguistics, 20, 481-507.
Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Children's first language acquisition
from a usage-based perspective. In P. Robinson & N. Ellis (Eds.),
Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language acquisition
(pp. 168-196). New York and London: Routledge.
Luniewska, M. (2014). Age of acquisition norms for nouns and verbs in 22
languages. Poster presented at the International Association for the Study
of Child Language, Amsterdam.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M. (1999). Rule learning
by seven-month-old infants. Science, 283, 77-80.
McCauley, S. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2014). Acquiring formulaic
language: A computational model. The Mental Lexicon, 9, 419-436.
McCauley, S. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2011). Learning simple statistics
for language comprehension and production: The CAPPUCCINO
model. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1619-1624). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
McClelland, J. L. (2010). Emergence in cognitive science. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 2, 751-770.
Misyak, J. B., & Christiansen, M. H. (2012). Statistical learning and
language: An individual differences study. Language Learning, 62,
302-331.
Misyak, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., & Tomblin, B. J. (2010). Sequential
expectations: The role of prediction-based learning in language.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 138-153.
Mitchell, R., Myles, F., & Marsden, E. (2013). Second language learning
theories. New York: Routledge.
Monner, D., Vatz, K., Morini, G., Hwang, S.-O., & DeKeyser, R. (2013). A
neural network model of the effects of entrenchment and memory
development on grammatical gender learning. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 16, 246-265.
Moyer, A. (1999). Ultimate attainment in L2 phonology: The critical
factors of age motivation and instruction. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 21, 81-108.
Neville, H. J., & Bavelier, D. (2001). Variability of developmental plasticity.
In J. McClelland & R. Siegler (Eds.), Mechanisms of cognitive
development: Behavioral and neural perspectives. Riverton, NJ: Foris.
Newport, E. L. (1988). Constraints on learning and their role in language
acquisition: Studies of the acquisition of American Sign Language.
Language Sciences, 10, 147-172.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational constraints on language learning.
Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance I. Statistical
learning of non-adjacent dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48,
127-162.
Onnis, L., & Thiessen, E. (2013). Language experience changes subsequent
learning. Cognition, 126, 268-284.
Pawley, A., & Syder, F. H. (1983). Natural selection in syntax: Notes on
adaptive variation and change in vernacular and literary grammar.
Journal of Pragmatics, 7, 551-579.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., & McCauley, S. M. (2013). Error and expectation in
language learning: The curious absence of `mouses' in adult speech.
Language, 89, 760-793.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., Popick, H. M., & O'Donnell-McCarthy, F. (2011). The
enigma of number: Why children find the meanings of even small
number words hard to learn and how we can help them do better.
PLoS ONE, 6, e22501.
Ramscar, M., & Gitcho, N. (2007). Developmental change and the nature of
learning in childhood. Trends in Cognitive Science, 11, 274-279.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K. (2010). The
effects of feature-label-order and their implications for symbolic
learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 909-957.
Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2007). Word-chunk frequencies affect the
processing of pronominal object-relative clauses. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 60, 161-170.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning:
Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement.

75

In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory (pp. 64-99). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Romberg, A. R., & Saffran, J. R. (2013). All together now: Concurrent
learning of multiple structures in an artificial language. Cognitive
Science, 37, 1290-1320.
Sabourin, L., Stowe, L. A., & de Haan, G. J. (2006). Transfer effects in
learning a second language grammatical gender system. Second
Language Research, 22, 1-29.
Sahni, S. D., Seidenberg, M. S., & Saffran, J. R. (2010). Connecting cues:
Overlapping regularities support cue discovery in infancy. Child
Development, 81, 727-736.
Scherag, A., Demuth, L., Roesler, F., Neville, H. J., & Roeder, B. (2004). The
effects of late acquisition of L2 and the consequences of immigration
on L1 for semantic and morpho-syntactic language aspects. Cognition,
93, B97-B108.
Singh, L., Steven Reznick, J., & Xuehua, L. (2012). Infant word
segmentation and childhood vocabulary development: A
longitudinal analysis. Developmental Science, 15, 482-495.
Slobin, D. I. (1985). The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition: The
data (Vol. 1). NJ: Erlbaum.
Sorace, A. (2003). Near-nativeness. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.),
Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 130-151). Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.
Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Davis, C. J. (2006). The Bristol norms for age of
acquisition, imageability, and familiarity. Behavior Research Methods,
38, 598-605.
Thompson-Schill, S., Ramscar, M., & Chrysikou, M. (2009). Cognition
without control: When a little frontal lobe goes a long way. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 8, 259-263.
Toro, J. M., Pons, F., Bion, R. A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2011). The
contribution of language-specific knowledge in the selection of
statistically-coherent word candidates. Journal of Memory and
Language, 64, 171-180.
Tremblay, A., & Baayen, H. (2010). Holistic processing of regular fourword sequences: A behavioral and ERP study of the effects of
structure, frequency, and probability on immediate free recall. In D.
Wood (Ed.), Perspectives on formulaic language: Acquisition and
communication (pp. 151-173). London: The Continuum International
Publishing Group.
Ullman, M. T. (2001). The neural basis of lexicon and grammar in first and
second language: The declarative/procedural model. Bilingualism:
Language and cognition, 4, 105-122.
Van Heugten, M., & Shi, R. (2009). French-learning toddlers use gender
information on determiners during word recognition. Developmental
Science, 12, 419-425.
Wang, T., & Saffran, J. R. (2014). Statistical learning of a tonal language:
The influence of bilingualism and previous linguistic experience.
Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
Werker, J. F., Cohen, L. B., Lloyd, V. L., Casasola, M., & Stager, C. L. (1998).
Acquisition of word-object associations by 14-month-old infants.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 1289.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Phonemic and phonetic factors in adult
cross-language speech perception. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 75, 1866-1878.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1976). The second time around: Cognitive and social
strategies in second language acquisition. Unpublished PhD
dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1979). Individual differences in second language
acquisition. In C. J. Fillmore, D. Kempler, & S-Y. W. Wang (Eds.),
Individual differences in language ability and language behavior
(pp. 203-228). New York: Academic Press.
Wray, A. (1999). Formulaic language in learners and native speakers.
Language Teaching, 32(4), 213-231.
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic language and the lexicon. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wray, A. (2008). Formulaic language: Pushing the boundaries. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Wray, A., & Fitzpatrick, T. (2008). Why can't you just leave it alone?
Deviations from memorized language as a gauge of native-like
competence. In F. Meunier & S. Granger (Eds.), Phraseology in
language learning and teaching (pp. 123-148). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Yamamoto, K., & Keil, F. (2000). The acquisition of Japanese numeral
classifiers: Linkage between grammatical forms and conceptual
categories. Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 9, 379-409.

