Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Episodic memory does not add up: Verbatim-gist superposition
predicts violations of the additive law of probability
C.J. Brainerd a,, Zheng Wang b, Valerie F. Reyna a, K. Nakamura a
a
b

Department of Human Development, Cornell University, United States
School of Communication and Center for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, The Ohio State University, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 8 November 2014
revision received 20 June 2015
Available online 10 July 2015
Keywords:
Quantum probability
Fuzzy-trace theory
Superposition
Subadditivity
Gist memory

a b s t r a c t
Fuzzy-trace theory's assumptions about memory representation are cognitive examples of
the familiar superposition property of physical quantum systems. When those assumptions
are implemented in a formal quantum model (QEMc), they predict that episodic memory
will violate the additive law of probability: If memory is tested for a partition of an item's
possible episodic states, the individual probabilities of remembering the item as belonging
to each state must sum to more than 1. We detected this phenomenon using two standard
designs, item false memory and source false memory. The quantum implementation of
fuzzy-trace theory also predicts that violations of the additive law will vary in strength
as a function of reliance on gist memory. That prediction, too, was confirmed via a series
of manipulations (e.g., semantic relatedness, testing delay) that are thought to increase gist
reliance. Surprisingly, an analysis of the underlying structure of violations of the additive
law revealed that as a general rule, increases in remembering correct episodic states do
not produce commensurate reductions in remembering incorrect states.
O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Historically, an enduring feature of judgment-anddecision-making research has been the availability of
pre-existing normative models for human reasoning.
Specifically, the axioms of formal logic and classical probability theory have long been implemented in such
research as prescriptive benchmarks against which reasoning is gauged. As decades of experimentation in the heuristics and biases tradition have shown, reasoning routinely
violates the most basic axioms. Examples of decision making tasks that exhibit such violations include various forms
of preference, such as intertemporal choice (e.g., Killeen,
2009; Scholten & Read, 2010) and choices among risky prospects (e.g., Tversky & Fox, 1995). Examples of judgment
 Corresponding author at: G331 MVR Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY 14853, United States.
E-mail address: cb299@cornell.edu (C.J. Brainerd).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2015.06.006
0749-596X/O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

tasks that exhibit such violations include probability judgment (e.g., Rottenstreich & Tversky, 1997; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983) and frequency judgment (e.g., Fiedler,
Unkelbach, & Freytag, 2009), with the literature on probability judgment being quite extensive (see Busemeyer,
Pothos, Franco, & Trueblood, 2011; Pothos & Busemeyer,
2013). Owing to the availability of a normative model, such
violations have deep psychological significance, inasmuch
as they demonstrate that reasoning is neither logical nor
rational, in a formal sense.
Memory research, in contrast, has not drawn upon formal logic or classical probability theory as a normative
framework. For that reason, experiments that assess
whether memory conforms to axiomatic criteria of logic
and rationality have been rare (for an exception, see
Hicks, Marsh, & Cook, 2005). We have argued, however,
that experiments of that ilk can answer fundamental theoretical and empirical questions about memory (Brainerd,
Holliday, Nakamura, & Reyna, 2014; Brainerd, Reyna, &

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

Aydin, 2010). On the theoretical side, they can deliver tests
of competing principles of representation and retrieval,
principles that differ in their predictions as to whether
memory data will align with particular axioms. On the
empirical side, whether our memories are distorted in
specific ways can be shown to turn on whether memory
follows certain axioms.
These issues are elaborated in the first section, below.
There, we consider one of the central axioms of classical
probability, the additive law, which specifies that the probabilities of the components of any partition of a set of possible events must sum to 1. We note some known
violations of this law in human judgment and discuss what
the general significance of parallel violations in the domain
of episodic memory would be. As theoretical motivation
for the latter, we show that nonadditivity of episodic memories is predicted by a quantum probability model that
implements a memory representation principle (superposition of verbatim and gist traces) and a retrieval principle
(description dependency). The model has been used to
explain false memory phenomena and can identify conditions that should influence observed levels of nonadditivity. Experiments are then reported that evaluated those
predictions using two types of designs, item false memory
and source false memory.

Superposition and additive probability
Measuring violations of the additive law
Suppose that some set S of events has been partitioned
into i subsets; that is, the subsets S1, S2, . . . , Si are mutually
exclusive and exhaustive. Suppose that the sampling probabilities of these subsets are known to be p1, p2, . . . , pi; that
is, the probability of selecting an event from S1 on a random draw is p1, the probability of selecting an event from
S2 is p2, and so on. Although individual sampling probabilities are free to vary over the unit interval, the additive law
constrains the possible values that can be observed for the
components of the partition such that p1 + p2 +    + pi = 1
must be satisfied. For instance, imagine that S is an urn
containing a large quantity of marbles, whose partition is
S1 = white marbles, S2 = red marbles, and S3 = blue marbles.
If the sampling probabilities of the white and red subsets
are known to be .35 and .45, respectively, then by the additive law, the sampling probability of the blue subset must
be .20.
However, when subjects make probability judgments
about partitions of sets of real-life events, those judgments
fail to obey the additive law. Instead, the judged probabilities of the subsets are normally subadditive (p1 + p2 +
   + pi P 1; e.g., Redelmeier, Koehler, Liberman, &
Tversky, 1995), although they are occasionally superadditive (p1 + p2 +    + pi 6 1; e.g., Macchi, Osherson, &
Krantz, 1999). In an early illustration of subadditivity,
Redelmeier et al. presented the case history of a hospitalized patient to physicians and asked different groups of
them to estimate the probability of one of the following
outcomes: (a) the patient dies during the current hospitalization; (b) the patient is discharged alive, but dies within

225

1 year; (c) the patient is discharged alive and lives more
than 1 but less than 10 years; or (d) the patient is discharged alive and lives 10 years or more. Note that these
four outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive with
respect to patient mortality. Thus, the additive law
applies--so that the actual objective probabilities of these
outcomes, based on mortality statistics for patients with
this history, must sum to one. However, Redelmeier et al.
found that physicians' probability estimates summed to
much more than one, 1.64 to be precise. This pattern is
not restricted to high-stakes risky events--such as death,
gambling, stock market investment, and so forth--because
judgments about partitions of more prosaic events are also
subadditive.
The psychological significance of subadditive probability judgments is both simple and fundamental: As a general rule, people perceive the probabilities of real-life
events to be higher than their objective probabilities; they
believe that events are more likely to happen than they are.
An important consequence is that this can lead to a number of distortions in life-altering decisions. For instance,
people may fail to take appropriate risks because they perceive the chances of a negative outcome to be higher than
they are, or conversely, they may take inappropriate risks
because they perceive the chances of a positive outcome
to be higher than they are.
Turning to memory, our concern in this article lies with
whether episodic memory also violates the additive law of
probability and with the psychological significance of such
an outcome. To illustrate this possibility, consider two
familiar paradigms that figure in hundreds of prior experiments, false memory for items and false memory for
sources (e.g., Hicks & Starns, 2006; Tse & Neely, 2004). In
a typical item false memory experiment, subjects encode
some target items (e.g., a word list), and then test cues of
three types are administered: old targets (O; e.g., sofa; true
memory measures), new-similar items (NS; e.g., couch;
false memory measures), and new-dissimilar items (ND;
e.g., ocean; controls for guessing and response bias).
Subjects make a single episodic judgment about each of
these types of cues: Is it old (O?)? In a typical source false
memory experiment, on the other hand, subjects encode
target items that are presented in one of two distinct contexts (e.g., List 1 or List 2), and then test cues of three types
are administered--namely, targets from the first context
(L1), targets from the second context (L2), and
new-dissimilar items (ND). Subjects make one or both of
two episodic judgments about each type of cue. First, they
decide whether it is an old target (usually called an item
judgment), and if the response is ``old,'' they decide which
context it appeared in (usually called a source judgment).
The true memory index is the rate at which correct contexts are selected for L1 and L2 cues that are recognized
as old, the false memory index is the rate at which incorrect contexts are selected for the same cues. Both can be
corrected for bias using the rate at which the two contexts
are selected for ND cues that are recognized as old.
Consider some simple variants of the memory tests in
these two paradigms, variants that are capable of detecting
violations of additive probability but that, to the best of our
knowledge, have not been studied. In the item design,

226

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

suppose that the three types of test cues are factorially
crossed with three types of judgments: Is it old (O?); is it
new-similar (NS?); or is it new-dissimilar (ND?). In other
words, for each test cue, subjects are simply asked to
decide whether it belongs to one of the three possible episodic states of the design. In the research reported below,
to rule out the possibility that subjects' decisions might
be influenced by assumptions about the proportions of O,
NS, and ND cues on memory tests, they were informed that
test lists contained the same number of each type of cue.
For any cue, these episodic states form a partition because
the states are mutually exclusive (a cue cannot belong to
more than one of them) and exhaustive (a cue must belong
to one of them). If episodic memory obeys the additive law,
the total probability of remembering a cue as belonging to
these three states will be p(O?) + p(NS?) + p(ND?) = 1.
With respect to the source design, suppose that the
three types of test cues are factorially crossed with three
types of judgments: Is it an old item from List 1 (L1?); is
it an old item from List 2 (L2?); or is it a new item
(ND?). As in the modified item design, then, subjects are
merely asked to decide whether each test cue belongs to
one of the possible episodic states, and in the research
reported below, they were informed that the test list contained the same number of each type of cue. As in the item
design, the episodic states in the source design form a partition because a cue must belong to one of them and cannot belong to more than one. Hence, if episodic memory
obeys the additive law, the total probability of remembering a cue as being a List 1 target or a List 2 target or new
will be p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) = 1.
If the additive law is violated in these paradigms, the
psychological significance of such a finding is that people
over-remember or under-remember the events of their
lives, depending on whether the violations are in a subadditive or superadditive direction. If the probabilities are
subadditive, some event that, based on our experience
with it, belongs to episodic state Ei and does not belong
to other plausible states Ej and Ek will not only be remembered as belonging to Ei at statistically reliable levels but
will also be remembered as belonging to Ej and/or Ek at statistically reliable levels. (Statistical reliability is determined in the conventional way using performance on ND
cues to correct for guessing and bias, normally by computing signal detection indices.). It might be thought that false
memory phenomena somehow guarantee subadditivity in
item designs because NS cues are being remembered as
O, at reliable levels. That does not follow, however, because
the probability of remembering NS cues as NS may
decrease in proportion to the tendency to remember them
as O, preserving additivity. Similarly, it might be thought
that false memories in source designs somehow guarantee
subadditivity because L1 cues are remembered as being L2
and conversely, at reliable levels. Again, that does not follow because the probability of remembering L1 cues as
L1 may decrease in proportion to the tendency to remember them as L2 and the probability of remembering L2 cues
as L2 may decrease in proportion to the tendency to
remember them as L1, preserving additivity.
On the other hand, memory probabilities might be
superadditive, which would mean that people

systematically under-remember the events of their lives.
Thus, some event that, based on our experience with it,
belongs to an episodic state Ei and does not belong to other
plausible states Ej and Ek will be remembered as belonging
to Ei at statistically reliable levels but will be remembered
as belonging to Ej and/or Ek at levels that are below what
would be expected by chance.
Predicting violations of the additive law in item and source
designs
Beyond the significance of violations of the additive law
for whether we over- or under-remember experience,
there is a firm theoretical basis for studying such phenomena. It turns out that violations are forecast by representation and retrieval principles that have often been used to
explain false memory errors, fuzzy-trace theory's (FTT)
notions of parallel, dissociated storage and retrieval of verbatim and gist traces (e.g., Brainerd & Reyna, 2005).
According to these ideas, as events are encoded subjects
store dissociated verbatim and gist traces of them in parallel. On subsequent memory tests or reasoning problems,
verbatim and gist traces are accessed in a parallel, dissociated fashion. A number of effects that are predicted by
these assumptions, including some counterintuitive ones,
have been reported in the false memory literature (for a
review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005) and in the
judgment-and-decision-making literature (for a review,
see Reyna & Brainerd, 2011). On a memory probe, performance can be based on retrieval of verbatim traces or gist
traces or both or neither, and even though the two types of
traces are stored for the same event, they generate different response patterns over different memory probes for
the same test cue.
For instance, consider the target cue sofa, along with the
probes O? and NS? FTT assumes that the traces that are
retrieved are determined by the test cue, rather than by
the probe that is administered in connection with the cue
(Brainerd, Gomes, & Moran, 2014). If sofa produces verbatim retrieval, regardless of whether it also produces gist
retrieval, it is unambiguously identified as being a target,
yielding responses to O? and NS? that are mutually consistent--accept and reject, respectively. If sofa produces gist
retrieval without verbatim retrieval, it is unambiguously
identified as being either a target or a related distractor,
but gist is indeterminate with respect to which it is. In this
situation, FTT posits that subjects' perceptions of sofa's episodic state are different for different probes, and their
responses are governed by a principle that Brainerd et al.
(2010) referred to as description dependency: Sofa is perceived to be a target when the probe asks if it is a target
(O?) and such probes are accepted, but it is perceived to
be a related distractor when the probe asks if it is a related
distractor (NS?) and such probes are also accepted. Note
that each of these responses, by itself, is consistent with
the information that has been retrieved from memory. It
is only when the two responses are considered as a pair
that an inconsistency emerges.
In recent work quantum probability (QP) models, parallel
dissociated processing of verbatim and gist traces has been
discussed as a cognitive instance of the superposition

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

property of physical quantum systems (Brainerd, Holliday,
et al., 2014; Brainerd, Wang, & Reyna, 2013; Busemeyer &
Bruza, 2012). It is equivalent to saying that the two types
of traces are superposed in memory, in much the same
way that the vertical and horizontal components of electron
spin are superposed (Gerlach & Stern, 1922). Consequently,
the aforementioned assumptions about memory representation and retrieval can be modeled with the QP formalism,
and when such a model is in place, it can be analyzed to
derive principled, axiomatic predictions about episodic
memory. Based on earlier proposals by Brainerd et al.
(2013; see related proposals by Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012;
Denolf & Lambert-Mogiliansky, submitted for publication;
Lambert-Mogiliansky, 2014; Trueblood & Hemmer,
submitted for publication; see Appendix A for a discussion),
we developed such a model, called quantum episodic memory (QEM), for the item and source paradigms. When the
simplest version of this model (QEMc), which implements
the assumption of compatibility of memory test probes,
was analyzed, it predicted that memory judgments would
violate the additive law in both paradigms and that violations would be in a subadditive direction. The details of
QEMc are relegated to Appendix A. Here, we present its main
features and predictions in intuitive language.
As in QP models of other cognitive tasks (e.g., Bruza,
Wang, & Busemeyer, 2015; Nelson, Kitto, Galea, McEvoy,
& Bruza, 2013; Pothos & Busemeyer, 2013; Wang,
Busemeyer, Atmanspacher, & Pothos, 2013), QEMc uses
vector spaces to capture FTT's distinctions. The memory
vector space for item false memory experiments, which
is illustrated in Fig. 1, is generated by three orthonormal
basis vectors |Vi, |Gi, and |Ni. (The vector space can be arbitrarily high-dimensional, but for simplicity of illustration, a
three-dimensional space is used in the illustration.) For
any test cue C, |Vi is a verbatim vector that matches its surface form, |Gi is a gist vector that matches its semantic/relational content, and |Ni, is a vector that does not
match either the cue's surface form or its semantic/relational content. The cue induces a perceived memory state,
SC, which QEMc represents as a vector |SCi in the memory
space, where |SCi is a superposition of the three basis vectors: |SCi = vC|Vi + gC|Gi + nC|Ni. In this expression, vC, gC,
and nC are probability amplitudes (scalars, weighting
parameters) that represent the respective strengths of the
three types of traces. By the axioms of QP, the probabilities
of verbatim, gist, or nonmatching traces being retrieved for
C are obtained by squaring the corresponding probability
amplitudes, so that those probabilities are |vC|2, |gC|2, and
|nC|2, respectively. Because these are the only possible outcomes in this memory space, the additive law must be satisfied when their squared probability amplitudes are
summed: |vC|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1.
It turns out that QEMc predicts that regardless of
whether C is an O, NS, or ND item and regardless of what
the empirical values of |vC|2, |gC|2, and |nC|2 may be, the
total probability of remembering it as belonging to each of
these states will exceed 1; that is, subadditivity is a fundamental property of episodic memory under verbatim-gist
superposition. This is shown for each type of cue in the
upper half of Table 1, where QEMc's expressions for
accepting O?, NS?, and ND? probes, respectively, for each

227

type of cue are displayed. First, note that for each type of
cue i, its total acceptance probability over the three episodic states, is always of the form |vi|2 + |gi|2 + |gi|2 +
|ni|2 = 1 + |gi|2 P 1, where the values of the individual
terms fall somewhere in the unit interval and reflect the
magnitudes of the contributions of verbatim traces, gist
traces, and nonmatching traces, respectively. Thus, subadditivity is predicted a priori, without fitting the model to
data or estimating its parameters. Second, note that the
reason QEMc predicts subadditivity is that |gi|2 appears
twice in each total probability expression.1 Regardless of
what the values of vi, gi, and ni may be, this forces subadditivity mathematically because |vC|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1. Third,
the reason that |gi|2 appears twice in each total probability
expression derives from FTT's principles of representation
and retrieval (Brainerd et al., 2013): According to those principles: (a) an O cue will be perceived as O on O? probes (first
line of Table 1) but as NS on NS? probes (second line) if the
cue retrieves its gist trace but not its verbatim trace; (b) an
NS cue will be perceived as O on O? probes (fifth line of
Table 1) but as NS on NS? probes (sixth line) if the cue
retrieves the gist trace of a related target but not its verbatim trace; and (c) an ND cue will be perceived as O on O?
probes (ninth line of Table 1) but as NS on NS? probes (tenth
line) if the cue retrieves the gist trace of a related target but
not its verbatim trace.2
According to the QEMc implementation of FTT, the
additive law will be violated by all three types of cues,
not just by targets, because the model's total probability
expression has the same form for NS and ND cues as for
O cues. Another important prediction is that the amount
of subadditivity that is observed for any cue will be directly

1
As discussed in Appendix A, the probabilities of remembering a cue as
belonging to each state are determined by subspaces within the overall
vector space that is generated by the basis vectors |Vi, |Gi, and |Ni. Those
subspaces are picked out by projection operations, which project the
memory state SC onto the subspace that is spanned by the trace vectors that
lead to acceptance of a particular probe--for instance, the V and G trace
vectors when the cue is a target and the probe is O? or the G trace vector
when the cue is a target and the probe is NS? Thus, technically, in QEMc, it
is the projection operations for individual probes that do the critical work
of creating subadditivity by using the G vector twice, once for O? probes
and again for NS? probes. See Appendix A for details.
2
In the QEMc model in Appendix A, the same three-dimensional vector
space is used for O, N-S, and N-D cues. For O items, however, a more
complex five-dimensional space is possible that includes verbatim and gist
vectors for other semantically-related targets. For example, in an experiment in which subjects are exposed to study lists on which some of the
targets share salient semantic relations (e.g., Experiment 1), an O cue (e.g.,
seat) might retrieve its own verbatim and gist traces, and it might retrieve
verbatim and gist traces of related targets (e.g., chair). Now, there are two
verbatim vectors, |Vi and |Vri, two gist vectors, |Gi and |Gri, and a
nonmatching vector |Ni. The perceived memory state becomes |SCi = vC|SCi = vC|Vi + vC,r|Vri + gC|Gi + gC,r|Gri + nC|Ni. The squared probability amplitudes of these vectors are |vC|2, |vC,r|2, |gC|2, |gC,r|2, and |nC|2, respectively, and
the sum of the probability amplitudes is |vC|2 + |vC,r|2 + |gC|2 + |gC,r|2 + |nC|2 = 1.
Importantly, this more complex model makes the same predictions about
violations of the additive law as the three-dimensional model because over the
three episodic states, the total probability that an O cue is accepted as belonging
to these states is | v C| 2 + |vC,r |2 + |gC |2 + |gC |2 + |gC,r| 2 + |gC,r| 2 + |n C| 2 = 1 +
|gC|2 + |gC,r|2 P 1. Thus, O cues are predicted to violate the additive law as
long as either |gC|2 > 0 or |gC,r|2 > 0, and the amount of violation is directly
proportional to the values of |gC|2 and |gC,r|2. In fact, as shown in Appendix A,
this subadditivity is predicted for any cue.

228

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

A 3-Dimensional Vector Space

0.25
Projector Mo,y
(determined by
the probe O)

0.2

Memory state vector Sc
(determind by the cue C)

0.15

0.1

1
Subspace for evaluating probe O
0.9
(spanned by V and G basis
vectors)
0.8

0.05

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4 V
0.3
0.2
0.1

Projection Mo,y*Sc
(the squared length is
the probability of the "yes" response
to the probe O)

0
1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

G

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

Fig. 1. The quantum probability representation of fuzzy-trace theory's principles of parallel, dissociated storage and retrieval of verbatim and gist traces.
The vector space can be arbitrarily high-dimensional--as in vector spaces for feature matching models--although for simplicity of illustration, a simple
three-dimensional vectors space is used in this example.

proportional to the strength of gist traces because it is the
gist retrieval term |gi|2 that causes subadditivity in the first
place. (Subadditivity is also inversely proportional to the
strengths of verbatim and nonmatching traces because
the value of |gi|2 is jointly constrained by the values of
|vi|2 and |ni|2.) That opens an attractive avenue for experimentation on the model. In the false memory literature, a
number of manipulations have been studied that are
intended to strengthen gist memory relative to verbatim
memory, such as the presentation of several targets that
share the same meaning and administration of delayed
memory tests (for a review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005).
QEMc makes the straightforward prediction that such
manipulations ought to increase observed levels of subadditivity. Therefore, some well-known examples were
included in the experiments that are reported later.
Finally, returning to the modified source paradigm, subadditivity is also predicted there, for the same reasons that
it is predicted for the item paradigm. The QEMc model for
source designs is the same as the item model, except that
there are now two verbatim trace vectors, |V1i and |V2i
(see Appendix A). That is because O items have been
presented in two distinct contexts, which means that
the vector space for source memory is generated by the
four orthonormal basis vectors, |V1i, |V2i, |Gi, and |Ni.
For any cue C, the expression for its perceived memory
state, which is a superposition of these vectors, is
SC = vC1|V1i + vC2|V2i + gC|Gi + nC|Ni. As before, the probability amplitudes vC1, vC2, gC, and nC represent the strengths of
the corresponding verbatim, gist, and nonmatching traces,
and these parameters are subject to the constraint that
|vC1|2 + |vC2|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1.
The additive law of probability can be tested for this
design by summing the individual probabilities of remembering a cue as belonging to each of the three mutually

exclusive and exhaustive episodic states; that is, using
the metric p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?). According to QEMc,
this sum is given by |vC1|2 + |vC2|2 + |gC|2 + |gC|2 +
|nC|2 = 1 + |gC|2 P 1. Thus, subadditivity is predicted for
the source paradigm and for the same reason as before:
The gist term contributes twice to the total probability
expression--so that as long as gist memory is involved,
subadditivity is predicted. The psychological reasons for
that are also the same as before, as can be seen in the lower
half of Table 1.
Models that do not predict violations of the additive law
QEMc's predictions about violations of the additive
law, specifically subadditivity, are not common among
memory models. Indeed, true (parameter-free, a priori)
predictions that memory will violate this law do not follow
from some classical models that are well known to readers.
This includes what, historically, has been the most
influential model of item recognition, the one-process
signal detection model (e.g., Glanzer & Adams, 1990)
and what, historically, has been the most influential model
of source recognition, Batchelder and Riefer's (1990)
source-monitoring model. We briefly describe each of
these models before considering an important interpretive
point, which is that QEMc's predictions about violations of
the additive law should be not be equated with recent
studies of disjunction fallacies in false memory for items
and sources.
Signal detection model
Taking the item design first, the signal detection model
represents the memory information in simple item

229

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245
Table 1
Subadditivity of episodic memory as predicted by the quantum model of fuzzy-trace theory in false memory and source-monitoring experiments.
Memory judgment

Trace vector
|Vi

|Gi

|Ni

|vO|2
0
0

|gO|2
|gO|2
0

0
|vO|2 + |gO|2
0
|gO|2
|nO|2
|nO|2
|vO|2 + |gO|2 + |gO|2 + |nO|2 > 1

Cue = New-similar
O?
NS?
ND?
Total memory probability

|vns|2
0
0

|gns|2
|gns|2
0

0
|vns|2 + |gns|2
0
|gns|2
|nns|2
|nns|2
|vns|2 + |gns|2 + |gns|2 + |nns|2 > 1

Cue = New-dissimilar
O?
NS?
ND?
Total memory probability

|vnd|2
0
0

|gnd|2
|gnd|2
0

0
|vnd|2 + |gnd|2
0
|gnd|2
|nnd|2
|nnd|2
|vnd|2 + |gnd|2 + |gnd|2 + |nnd|2 > 1

|vL1-1|2
|vL1-2|2
0

|gL1|2
|gL1|2
0

0
|vL1-1|2 + |gL1|2
0
|vL1-2|2 + |gL1|2
|nL1|2
|nL1|2
|vL1-1|2 + |vL1-2|2 + |gL1|2 + |gL1|2 + |nL1|2 > 1

|vL2-1|2
|vL2-2|2
0

|gL2|2
|gL2|2
0

0
|vL2-1|2 + |gL2|2
0
|vL2-2|2 + |gL2|2
|nL2|2
|nL2|2
|vL2-1|2 + |vL2-2|2 + | gL2|2 + | gL2|2 + |nL2|2 > 1

1. Item false memory experiment
Cue = target
O?
NS?
ND?
Total memory probability

2. Source false memory experiment
Cue = List 1 target
List 1?
List 2?
New?
Total memory probability
Cue = List 2 target
List 1?
List 2?
New?
Total memory probability

Vector sum

Note. |Vi, |Gi, and |Ni are unit-length vectors for verbatim, gist, and nonmatching traces, respectively, which form an orthonormal basis in a threedimensional space where memory judgments are made in false memory and source-monitoring experiments. In both types of experiments, the vc, gc, and nc
parameters are scalars that multiply the |Vi, |Gi, and |Ni vectors, respectively, giving the magnitudes of these vectors, subject to the constraint that
|vc|2 + |gc|2 + |nc|2 = 1 for the item false memory paradigm and |vc-1|2 + |vc-2|2 + |gc|2 + |nc|2 = 1 for the source false memory paradigm. Psychologically, the vc,
gc, and nc parameters correspond to the strength/accessibility of verbatim, gist, and nonmatching traces, respectively, for the test cue c. The subscript c runs
over O (old), NS (new-similar), and ND (new-dissimilar) cues in false memory experiments, and in general, the scalars have different values for the three
types of cues. The subscript c runs over L1 (List 1), L2 (List 2), and ND (new-dissimilar) cues in source-monitoring experiments designs, and in general, the
scalars have different values for the three types of cues.

recognition experiments, in which only O and ND test cues
are administered, as a pair of Gaussian distributions of
familiarity values--one for O and one for ND (the O and
ND distributions in Fig. 2). In an item false memory experiment in which NS test cues are also administered, a third
Gaussian distribution is added (the NS distribution in
Fig. 2). When a target cue is presented for test, the subject
samples a familiarity value from the O distribution and
generates a response by setting a decision criterion along
the strength axis. Because the mean strength of the O distribution is greater than the mean strength of the NS distribution, different decision criteria will be needed,
depending on whether only O cues, only NS cues, or neither can be accepted,
If the probe is O?, the subject sets a ``strong'' decision
criterion, CH in Fig. 2, and responds affirmatively if the
sampled familiarity value equals or exceeds that criterion.
The probability density of such a value is given by the
cumulative Gaussian probability integral UO,CH, which runs
from CH to +1 in the O distribution. If the probe is NS?, the
subject sets a ``strong'' decision criterion and a ``weak''
decision criterion, CL and CH in Fig. 2, and responds affirmatively if the sampled value equals or exceeds CL but falls
below CH. The probability density of such a value is given

CL

ND

CH

NS
O

Fig. 2. Signal detection representation of memory information in the item
false memory paradigm. O, NS, and ND are Gaussian distributions of
familiarity values for old cues, new-similar cues, and new-dissimilar cues,
respectively. CH and CL are decision criteria. CH is the sole decision
criterion on O? probes, for O, NS, and ND cues. CL is the sole decision
criterion for all three types of cues on ND? probes. However, both CH and
CL are used for all three types of cues on NS? probes.

230

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

by the cumulative probability integral UO,CL-CH, which runs
from CL to CH in the O distribution. Last, if the probe is ND?,
the subject sets a single ``weak'' decision criterion, CL in
Fig. 2, and responds affirmatively if the sampled value falls
below that criterion. The probability density of such a
value is given by the cumulative probability integral
UO,CL, which runs from 1 to CL in the O distribution.
Thus, the total probability p(O?|O) + p(NS?|O) + p(ND?|O)
is the sum of the three cumulative probability integrals.
It is easy to see that this sum is just the cumulative
probability density from 1 to +1 of the O distribution,
which is 1 by the definition of a probability distribution.
It is also easy to see that parallel demonstrations can be
given for NS and ND cues, using cumulative probability
integrals for the NS and ND distributions, so that the
model predicts that p(O?|NS) + p(NS?|NS) + p(ND?|NS)
and p(O?|ND) + p(NS?|ND) + p(ND?|ND) will satisfy the
additive law, too.
Although this standard model predicts that all three
types of cues will satisfy the additive law, ad hoc adjustments are possible that will accommodate violations in
either the subadditive or superadditive direction. In particular, suppose that two ``strong'' criteria are permitted, one
for O? probes and one for NS? probes, and that two ``weak''
criteria are permitted, one for NS? probes and one for ND?
probes. Now, the model can accommodate additivity, subadditivity, and superadditivity, but at the cost of not being
able to predict any of these patterns.
Source-monitoring model
Turning to the source design, Batchelder and Riefer's
(1990) source model postulates five processes to account
for performance: (a) a detect-old process that identifies
whether a cue is old (parameter D1 for List 1 targets and
parameter D2 for List 2 targets); (b) a source memory process that operates when cues are detected to be old and
identifies them as belonging to List 1 or List 2 (parameter
d1 for List 1 and parameter d2 for List 2), (c) a guessing process that operates when cues are detected to be old and
attributes them to List 1 or List 2 when the source memory
process fails to identify their source (with probability g),
(d) a second guessing process that operates when cues
are not detected to be old and attributes them to the old
and new states (with probabilities b and 1  b, respectively), and (e) a third guessing process that decides
whether items that have been guessed to be old belong
to List 1 or List 2 (with probability a). This model's expressions for acceptance of L1?, L2?, and ND? probes, for L1, L2,
and ND cues appear in Table 2.
Algebraic manipulation of the expressions in Table 2 for
each cue shows that this model does not make determinant predictions of subadditivity, additivity, or superadditivity for the present source false memory paradigm.
Instead, like the adjusted signal detection model, it can
account for any of these patterns post hoc when its parameters have certain values, but it does not predict any of
them. For ND cues (last three lines of Table 2), the sum
of the probabilities of accepting the three probes is
1 + b(2a  1), from which it is apparent that whether this
sum is subadditive, additive, or superadditive depends on

Table 2
Additivity of source-monitoring judgments as predicted by Batchelder and
Riefer's (1990) model of source memory.
Cue/probe

Model expression

Cue: List 1 target
L1?
L2?
ND?

D1d1 + D1(1  d1)g + (1  D1)ba
D1(1  d1)g + (1  D1)ba
1  D1  (1  D1)(1  b)

Cue: List 2 target
L1?
L2?
ND?

D2(1  d2)g + (1  D2)ba
D2d2 + D2(1  d2)g + (1  D2)ba
1  D2  (1  D2)(1  b)

Cue: Distractor
L1?
L2?
ND?

ba
ba
1b

whether parameter a is greater than, equal to, or less than
.5. For L1 and L2 cues, the model does not make determinant predictions either. In each instance, the sum of the
probabilities of accepting the three probes is
1 + Di[di + 2(1  di)g  1] + (1  Di)b(2a  1). From this, it
is clear that whether the sum is subadditive, additive, or
superadditive depends on whether the empirical values of
the di + 2(1  di)g  1 term and the (2a  1) term are positive, zero, or negative. The latter term will be positive, zero,
or negative accordingly as the parameter a is greater than,
equal to, or less than .5. Whether the former term is positive, zero, or negative depends on the empirical values of di
and g. For instance, it is easy to see that if di is held constant at .3, this term will be negative when g < .61, zero
when g = .61, and positive when g > .61.
Disjunction fallacies in item and source memory
QEMc's parameter-free predictions about violations of
the additive law should not be conflated with another nonadditivity phenomenon in item and source memory--
namely, disjunction fallacies. Disjunction fallacies were
originally studied in probability judgment by Tversky and
Koehler (1994). They refer to situations in which subjects
make probability judgments about (a) two or more mutually exclusive events (the probability of dying from cancer;
the probability of dying from heart disease) versus (b) an
equivalent disjunctive event (the probability of dying from
either cancer or heart disease). The axioms of probability
theory say that the sum of the probabilities of two mutually exclusive events must equal the probability of their
disjunction. Usually, this equality does not hold, with the
sum of the nondisjunctive probabilities typically being
greater than the disjunctive probability (subadditivity)
but sometimes being smaller (superadditivity; see Fox,
Ratner, & Lieb, 2005).
Recently, memory analogues of disjunction fallacies
have been studied with both item and source memory,
using the conjoint-recognition paradigm and a multinomial model that is defined over that paradigm. In the item
version of the paradigm (Brainerd et al., 2010), subjects
respond to three probes about test cues, two nondisjunctive probes (Is it a target? Is it a related distractor?) and
a disjunctive probe (Is it either a target or a related

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

distractor?). In the source version of the paradigm
(Brainerd, Reyna, Holliday, & Nakamura, 2012), subjects
also respond to two nondisjunctive probes (Was it presented on List 1? Was it presented on List 2?) and a disjunctive probe (Was it presented on either List 1 or List
2?). In either version, the sum of the probabilities of
accepting the two mutually exclusive probes should equal
the probability of accepting the disjunctive probe. Instead,
subadditivity has predominated. Brainerd et al. (2010) and
Brainerd, Gomes, et al. (2014) found that the conjoint
recognition model and a related model (dual recollection)
were able to fit such data for item false memory, and
Brainerd et al. (2012) found that the conjoint recognition
model was able to fit such data for source false memory.
More recently, Kellen, Singmann, and Klauer (2014) found
that the two-high-threshold source memory (2HTSM)
model was also able to fit such data for source false
memory.
The research that we report in the present article differs
from this prior work in two key ways, one empirical and
the other theoretical. The empirical difference is that tests
of disjunction fallacies are not tests of the additive law.
Tests of the additive law ask whether the empirical probabilities of events that partition a sampling space sum to 1,
whereas tests of disjunction fallacies ask whether two logically equivalent probabilities are also equal empirically.
The fact that the latter tests reveal disjunction fallacies
does not mean that the former tests will reveal violations
of the additive law for either item or source false memory.
As Brained, Holliday, et al. (2014) pointed out, disjunction
fallacies may occur simply because disjunctive probes are
less effective retrieval cues than nondisjunctive probes.
This feature is absent from tests of the additive law, as
described earlier, because all probes are nondisjunctive.
The theoretical difference between the present research
and prior work on disjunction fallacies is that whereas true
predictions were not tested in prior work, they are tested
in the present research. For all three types of cues in item
and source designs, we saw that QEMc makes true (i.e.,
parameter-free, a priori) predictions that the additive law
will be violated in the subadditive direction. In contrast,
the models that have been fit to the data of disjunction fallacy experiments do not make parameter-free predictions,
and like the adjusted signal detection model and the
1HTSM model, they allow the relation between disjunctive
and nondisjunctive probabilities to be additive, subadditive, or superadditive, depending on the empirical values
of their parameters. With the conjoint recognition and dual
recollection models, the specific relation that is observed
depends on the values of their bias/guessing parameters
(see Brainerd et al., 2010, 2012; Brainerd, Gomes, et al.,
2014). With 2HTSM, the specific relation that is observed
depends on the values of its bias/guessing parameters
and its memory parameters (see Kellen et al., 2014).
Finally, although these alternative models do not make
true predictions about the additive law, there is an important conceptual similarity between QEMc and two of the
models (conjoint recognition and dual recollection) at the
level of the psychological processes that foment subadditivity. In QEMc, we saw that subadditivity in item and
source false memory should increase as its gist parameter

231

increases and/or its verbatim parameter decreases. The
conjoint recognition and dual recollection models also contain verbatim and gist parameters, and when their equations are analyzed, they, too, expect that item and source
false memory will move in a subadditive direction as gist
parameters increase and/or verbatim parameters decrease.
Differently, the 2HTSM model predicts that source memory
will move in a subadditive direction when the values of its
source guessing parameters move in opposite directions.

Experiment 1: item false memory
To our knowledge, the question of whether memory
judgments about a specific type of cue (say, O) are additive
over a partition of its possible episodic states has not been
directly evaluated. Therefore, we conducted a large-scale
evaluation, using a basic type of false memory design that
involved Deese/Roediger/McDermott (DRM) lists (cf. Gallo,
2010). In standard versions of this design, subjects study a
series of such lists, are then administered a series of test
cues consisting of O, NS, and ND items, and finally, they
respond to O? probes for all of those cues. In our design,
in order to evaluate the additive law, the three types of test
cues were factorially crossed with O?, NS?, and ND?
probes.
We know that QEMc predicts that episodic memory will
violate the additive law in a particular way (subadditivity
rather than superadditivity) and that there is a specific
process mechanism for that prediction--namely, superposition of verbatim and gist memories. Because the gist
component of the superposition is what ostensibly forces
nonadditivity, QEMc expects that nonadditivity will be
more pronounced in conditions that increase reliance on
gist memory. We attempted to generate converging evidence on this principle by including three manipulations
that have been used in several prior experiments to manipulate reliance on gist memory (see Brainerd & Reyna,
2005): (a) O cues versus NS cues, (b) O and NS cues versus
ND cues, and (c) whether or not a cue on a delayed test had
been previously tested.
Concerning a, the first manipulation takes advantage of
the simple fact that the ratio of gist to verbatim retrieval
should be higher for critical distractors than for O cues.
That is because critical distractor cues (e.g., chair) match
DRM lists' semantic content better than any single target
(e.g., couch) owing to the way these lists are constructed
(see Barnhardt, Choi, Gerkens, & Smith, 2006), and critical
distractor cues do not match the surface structure of any
of the targets. Concerning b, ND cues obviously provide a
poorer match to DRM lists' semantic content than either
targets or critical distractors do and, hence, violations of
additivity should be less marked for ND cues. Concerning
c, this manipulation takes advantage of the fact that over
time, memory for targets' surface structure becomes inaccessible more rapidly than memory for their semantic content (Kintsch, Welsch, Schmalhofer, & Zimny, 1990), and
that this difference can be amplified by prior testing.
Specifically, although prior memory tests help to preserve
access to both verbatim and gist memories over time, the
gist-preservation effect is substantially larger and the

232

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

spread between the two preservation effects is larger for
NS cues than for O cues (Bouwmeester & Verkoeijen,
2011; Brainerd & Reyna, 1996), which is presumably
because the meaning content but not the surface form of
NS cues was presented. In any case, it follows that on
delayed tests, reliance on gist memory should be greater
for cues that have been previously tested than for cues that
have not been.
Method
Subjects
The subjects were 260 undergraduates who participated to fulfill a course requirement.
Materials and procedure
The target materials were 24 DRM lists drawn from the
Roediger, Watson, McDermott, and Gallo (2001) pool of 55
lists. Each list contains 15 semantically-related words (e.g.,
table, sit, legs, seat, couch, desk, recliner, sofa, wood, cushion,
swivel, stool, sitting, rocking, bench) that are forward associates of the critical distractor (chair). Norms for true recall,
false recall, true recognition, and false recognition for these
55 lists are reported in Roediger et al. For the present
experiment, we chose the 24 lists that produced the highest levels of false recognition of critical distractors. These
lists supplied the items that were presented during the
study phase, and they also supplied the O and NS cues
for the immediate and 1-week delayed memory tests.
The experiment consisted of two sessions--an initial
one, in which all of the lists were presented for study
and an immediate memory test for half of the lists was
administered, and a 1-week delayed session, in which a
memory test for all of the lists was administered. During
the study phase, the first 6 words from each of the 24 lists
were presented, for total of 144 items. (For example, the
presented words for the chair list were table, sit, legs, seat,
couch, and desk.). During the first session, following general
memory instructions, each subject studied all 24 lists, with
the individual lists being presented in random order.
Presentation was visual, on a computer screen, at a 2.5-s
rate with an 8-s pause following each 6-word DRM list.
Just prior to presentation, the subject was informed that
he or she would be viewing a series of 24 short word lists
and that a memory test would be administered after all of
the lists had been presented. Next, the 24 lists were presented in random order. Presentation began with the
phrase ``first list'' appearing in the center of the screen.
The six words of the first list were then presented. After
the 8-s pause following the first list, the phrase ``next list''
appeared in the center of the screen, followed by the six
words of the next list. The procedure of list presentation
alternating with 8-s pauses continued until all 24 lists
had been presented.
After the lists had been presented, the subjects read a
page of instructions, which explained that the cues on
the upcoming test would consist of words that they had
just seen in the presented lists (O), unpresented words
whose meanings were similar to those of the presented
lists (NS), and words that were unrelated to the presented
lists (ND). Subjects were told that 1/3 of the test cues

would be O, 1/3 would be NS, and 1/3 would be ND.
Illustrations of each type of cue were provided in the
instructions, which also explained that the subjects would
be answering one of three types of questions about each
test cue: (a) Is it an old word that you saw on one of the
lists (O?)? (b) Is it a new word whose meaning is similar
to one of the lists (NS?)? (c) Is it a new word whose meaning is not similar to any of the lists (ND?)? The three questions were illustrated with further example words.
Following instructions the subject responded to a
72-item self-paced visual recognition test for 12 (randomly
selected) of the 24 DRM lists, with testing of the other 12
being delayed for 1 week. The composition of the 72 test
cues was as follows: (a) 24 O cues (2 per list, randomly
selected), (b) 24 NS cues (12 the critical distractors for
the tested lists and 1 other related distractor for each list),
(c) 24 ND cues. With respect to category b, it is common in
DRM research to include other related distractors as well
as critical distractors as NS cues on test lists (e.g.,
Brainerd et al., 2010). The standard method of generating
other related distractors for a DRM list is to select them
from among list words that are not presented for study.
In our case, because we presented DRM lists that consisted
of 6 words apiece, a related distractor for each list was
obtained by selecting one of the unpresented words from
positions 7-15 of that list (e.g., sofa or stool for the chair
list). As also traditional in this type of research, the ND cues
were obtained by randomly sampling words from positions 1-6 from unpresented lists in the Roediger et al.
(2001) pool. The three types of episodic probes were factorially varied over the 24 targets, the 12 critical distractors,
the 12 related distractors, and the 24 unrelated distractors.
A delayed memory test was administered 1-week later.
The delayed test consisted of a total of 144 test cues
administered in random order and was composed of two
subtests. One subtest was simply a repetition of the immediate test; that is, the same O, NS, and ND cues, with the
same probes for each cue. The other was for the 12 DRM
lists that had not been tested 1-week earlier. That subtest
was also composted of 72 cues: (a) 24 O cues (2 per previously untested list, randomly selected), (b) 24 NS cues (the
critical distractors for the previously untested lists and a
related distractor for each previously untested list), (c) 24
new ND cues. As before, the ND cues were drawn from
words in positions 1-6 of unpresented lists in the
Roediger et al. (2001) pool. Also as before, the three types
of episodic probes were factorially varied over the 24 targets, the 12 critical distractors, the 12 related distractors,
and the 24 unrelated distractors. At the start of the delayed
session, the subject read a page of detailed instructions
that reminded him/her of the word lists that had been presented a week earlier and explained that the purpose of the
session was to respond to another memory test like the
one that had been administered a week earlier. As on the
immediate test, the instructions explained that the cues
on the test would consist of words that they had seen in
the presented lists, unpresented words whose meanings
were similar to those of the presented lists, unpresented
words that were unrelated to the presented lists, and 1/3
of the test cues would be each of these types.
Illustrations of each type of cue were again provided, and

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245
Table 3
Acceptance probabilities in Experiment 1 (SDs in parentheses).
Test cue

Immediate test
O
NS
Critical
Related
ND

Memory judgment
O?

NS?

ND?

Sum

.53(.19)

.43(.19)

.26(.16)

1.22

.55(.31)
.28(.21)
.17(.18)

.60(.26)
.54(.18)
.34(.22)

.21(.22)
.41(.21)
.62(.19)

1.36
1.23
1.13

cues
.50(.19)

.35(.18)

1.33

.57(.26)
.49(.19)
.38(.23)

.23(.22)
.44(.20)
.58(.25)

1.36
1.42
1.21

.56(.22)

1.25

.48(.30)
.62(.25)
.68(.22)

1.30
1.25
1.11

Delayed test - previously tested
O
.49(.17)
NS
Critical
.55(.28)
Related
.48(.22)
ND
.28(.20)

Delayed test - previously untested cues
O
.33(.19)
.36(.21)
NS
Critical
.38(.28)
.44(.27)
Related
.34(.22)
.29(.19)
ND
.23(.21)
.33(.24)

Note. O = old words from DRM lists, NS = new but similar words (DRM
critical distractors or related distractors), and ND = new unrelated words.

the instructions again explained the three types of questions that the subject would be answering. Following these
instructions, the subject responded to the probes for the 96
test cues, using the same self-procedure as before.
Results
Descriptive statistics for the various Cue  Probe combinations appear in Table 3, for the immediate condition
and the two delayed conditions (previously untested versus previously tested). We report the results for the immediate and delayed tests separately.
Immediate test
In our design, test cues for targets, critical distractors,
related distractors, and unrelated distractors were administered for half the DRM lists at the end of Session 1. The
relevant descriptive statistics are displayed at the top of
Table 3, with the statistic that was used to test the additive
law appearing in the sum column on the far right. It can be
seen that all of the values in the sum column fell out in
accordance with QEMc's predictions inasmuch as all were
subadditive. At a finer-grained level, they also fell out in
accordance with the notion that subadditivity increases
in proportion to gist reliance: Subadditivity was more
marked for critical distractors than for any of the other
three types of cues, and it was more marked for targets
and related distractors than for unrelated distractors.
Initially, we conducted a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) of the sum values for the four types of cues,
which produced a highly reliable effect, F(3, 780) = 29.18,
MSE = .08, partial g2 = .10, p < .0001. Follow-up analyses
(paired-samples t tests) revealed that the level of subadditivity was higher for critical distractors than for any of the
other three types of cues, as expected on theoretical
grounds. The mean value of the three test statistics was
t(260) = 5.92, p < .0001). In addition, subadditivity was

233

higher for targets than for unrelated distractors,
t(260) = 4.40, p < .0001, and higher for related distractors
than for unrelated distractors, t(260) = 4.69, p < .0001, but
did not differ for targets versus related distractors. The
ordering of the sum values, then, was the same as the likely
order of reliance on gist memory.
Although the sum values differed reliably, the question
remains as to whether all of them were reliability greater
than zero, as QEMc predicts. To test that hypothesis, we
computed a one-sample t test for each of the four types
of cues, using 1 as the predicted value of the sum index.
The tests showed that the observed value was greater than
the predicted value for targets, t(260) = 13.15, p < .0001, for
critical distractors, t(260) = 13.40, p < .0001, for related distractors, t(260) = 11.83, p < .0001, and for unrelated distractors, t(260) = 6.42, p < .0001. Thus, all four types of
cues failed to obey the additive law.
Next, what about violations of the additive law among
individual subjects? There are two general scenarios that
could produce the above findings. According to one, which
is what QEMc would expect, most subjects' sum values
conform to the p(O?) + p(NS?) + p(ND?) > 1 rule--it is the
modal pattern, in other words. According to the second
scenario, however, there are two groups of subjects, with
most subjects' exhibiting additivity but a minority exhibiting extreme subadditivity. Although both scenarios can
produce the above group results, they would obviously
lead to different theoretical interpretations. Therefore, we
examined the sum values of individual subjects for all four
types of cues and simply counted the numbers of values
that satisfied the p(O?) + p(NS?) + p(ND?) > 1 rule. The
results favored the first scenario, in which most values
conform to this rule. The numbers of subjects (out of
260) whose sum values followed the rule were 200
(p < .0001 by a sign test), 174 (p < .0001 by a sign test),
180 (p < .0001 by a sign test), and 148 (p < .02 by a sign
test), for targets, critical distractors, related distractors,
and unrelated distractors, respectively. Hence, regardless
of cue, more than half of the sum values satisfied the rule.
One-week delayed tests
Of the original 260 subjects, 40 failed to return for the
delayed test, for an attrition rate of 15%. On the delayed test,
all of the test cues that had appeared on the immediate test
were readministered with the same probe questions as
before. In addition, the delayed test included cues for targets, critical distractors, related distractors, and unrelated
distractors for the 12 DRM lists that were not tested during
Session 1. Thus, all 24 lists were included on the delayed
test, with half them having been previously tested and half
not having been previously tested. The relevant descriptive
statistics for previously tested and untested lists are displayed in the middle and bottom of Table 3, respectively,
with sum statistics again appearing on the far right. It can
be seen that all eight of the sum values were subadditive,
as QEMc predicts. Note that these data are consistent with
the notion that prior memory tests selectively preserve gist
memories: The mean sum value was greater for previously
tested cues that for previously untested ones.
First, we computed a 2 (previously tested versus
untested)  4 (cue: target, critical distractor, related

234

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

distractor, unrelated distractor) ANOVA of the sum values.
This produced a main effect for prior testing,
F(1, 219) = 36.97, MSE = .13, partial g2 = .14, and a main
effect for cue, F(3, 219) = 48.28, MSE = .06, partial g2 = .18,
p < .0001. The mean sum value was higher for previously
tested than for previously untested cues, of course. With
respect to the ordering of the sum values for the four types
of cues, mean values were lower for unrelated distractors
than for targets, t(219) = 7.55, p < .0001, for critical distractors, t(219) = 7.16, p < .0001, and for related distractors,
t(219) = 8.99, p < .0001. In addition, the mean sum for targets was lower than the mean sum for related distractors,
t(219) = 3.10, p < .002, but targets did not differ from critical distractors and critical distractors did not differ from
related distractors. In addition, the ANOVA produced a
small Prior Test  Cue interaction, F(3, 219) = 3.10,
MSE = .08, partial g2 = .01, p < .03. The reason was that the
sum statistics for targets versus related distractors only
differed reliably for previously tested cues.
Turning to the question of whether all of the sum values
were reliably greater than 1, as QEMc predicts, they were.
For previously tested cues, one-sample t tests produced
rejections of the null hypothesis that p(O?) + p(NS?) +
p(ND?) 6 1 for targets, t(218) = 18.31, p < .0001, for critical
distractors, t(219) = 12.52, p < .0001, for related distractors,
t(219) = 18.42, p < .0001, and for unrelated distractors,
t(219) = 10.51, p < .0001. The results were similar for
previously untested cues. One-sample t tests produced
rejections of the null hypothesis that p(O?) + p(NS?) +
p(ND?) 6 1 for targets, t(219) = 14.48, p < .0001, for critical
distractors, t(219) = 10.61, p < .0001, for related distractors,
t(219) = 13.02, p < .0001, and for unrelated distractors,
t(219) = 4.97, p < .0001. Hence, regardless of whether cues
had been tested a week earlier, all four types of cues failed
to obey the additive law.
However, as we saw, this does not mean that violation
of the additive law was the modal pattern at the level of
individual subjects. Therefore, we again examined the
sum values of individual subjects for all four types of cues
and counted the numbers of values that satisfied the
p(O?) + p(NS?) + p(ND?) > 1 rule, doing so separately for
previously tested versus untested cues. The results again
showed that most sum values conformed to this rule. The
numbers of subjects (out of 220) whose sum values
followed the rule for previously tested cues were 200 for
targets (p < .0001 by a sign test), 156 for critical distractors (p < .0001 by a sign test), 186 for related distractors
(p < .0001 by a sign test), and 167 for unrelated distractors
(p < .0001 by a sign test). The numbers of subjects whose
sum values followed the rule for previously untested cues
were 173 for targets (p < .0001 by a sign test), 145 for critical distractors (p < .0001 by a sign test), 168 for related
distractors (p < .0001 by a sign test), and 126 for unrelated
distractors (p < .03 by a sign test). As before, then, more
than half of the sum values satisfied the rule for all cues.
Summary
The additive law was violated everywhere--in every
condition in which it was possible to evaluate it. This
was true at the level of individual subjects, as well as at
the level of mean values of the sum index. Additional

findings were consistent with the hypothesis that such violations result from reliance on gist memory because sum
values were more subadditive in conditions in which gist
reliance should have been greater. For instance, on the
immediate test, subadditivity was more marked for cues
whose meaning content had been encoded during the
study phase (targets, critical distractors, and related distractors) than for cues whose meaning content had not
been encoded (unrelated distractors), and subadditivity
was more marked for critical distractors than for other
types of cues. On the delayed test, subadditivity was again
more marked for cues whose meaning content had been
encoded during the study phase than for cues whose
meaning content had not been encoded, and it was also
more marked for cues that had been tested a week earlier
than for cues that had not been tested.
Although the predicted violations of the additive law
were confirmed everywhere, there was one feature of the
data that is inconsistent with QEMc. It can be seen in
Table 1 that the model imposes constraints on the relative
magnitude of p(O?) and p(NS?), such that the latter cannot
be larger than the former for any of the types of test cues.
In Table 3, however, there are four cells in which
paired-samples t tests showed that p(NS?) was reliably larger than p(O?): in the immediate test cell for related distractors and in the immediate, delayed-untested, and
delayed-tested cells for unrelated distractors. The likely
reason is a phenomenon that has been studied in the false
memory literature and is termed recollection rejection
(e.g., Brainerd, Reyna, & Estrada, 2006) or recall-to-reject
(e.g., Gallo, 2004). The phenomenon in question is that test
cues, whether distractors or targets, can sometimes
retrieve verbatim traces of related targets, as when the
cue salad retrieves a verbatim trace of soup, and this causes
subjects to classify the cue as NS rather than O or ND.
This effect can be easily incorporated into QEMc by
switching to a four-dimensional vector space that includes
a second verbatim vector. (Recall that the vector space for
source false memory is four-dimensional, with two
verbatim vectors; see Appendix A.) For any given cue
i = O, NS, or ND, the two verbatim vectors are |Vii, the
vector for the cue's verbatim trace, and |Vi,ri, the vector
for the verbatim trace of a related cue. QEMc's item false
memory expressions (upper half of Table 1) are then
revised in a minimal way: The NS? expression for O, NS,
and ND becomes |vi,r|2 + |gi|2. Now, the relation between
p(O?) and p(NS?) is unconstrained because it will
depend on the relative magnitude of |vi|2 and |vi,r|2, but
parameter-free subadditivity predictions are preserved
because the total probability expression for each cue is
|vi|2 + |vi,r|2 + |gi|2 + |gi|2 + |ni,r|2 = 1 + |gi|2.

Experiment 2: false memory for source
Next, we investigated whether the additive law is also
violated in source designs, as QEMc anticipates. We implemented the same procedure of administering separate
probes for the members of an exhaustive set of mutually
exclusive episodic states in an otherwise standard
source-monitoring design (e.g., cf. Kurilla & Westerman,

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

2010). Subjects studied two lists of words that were
accompanied by distinctive contextual details, followed
by a recognition test containing three types of cues: targets
from List 1 (L1), targets from List 2 (L2), and new items
(ND). On the recognition test, three types of probes that
formed a partition of these cues' possible episodic states
(L1?, L2?, and ND?) were factorially crossed with the three
types of cues.
The focal prediction, of course, is that source memory
will violate the additive law everywhere and will follow
the p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) P 1 rule instead. In addition,
as in Experiment 1, we included manipulations that were
designed to test the hypothesis that gist processing
strengthens this pattern. There were three in all. The most
direct and obvious one was categorization. In the false
memory literature, a common method of enhancing memory for semantic gist (cf. Brainerd & Reyna, 2007; Gallo,
2004; Howe, 2006, 2008; Smith, Gerkens, Pierce, & Choi,
2002) is to present lists that contain exemplars of some
familiar taxonomic categories (e.g., animal, food, furniture,
and vehicle names). That method was used in the present
experiment, with eight exemplars from each of 12 taxonomic categories being distributed over the two study lists.
The lists also contained other targets that were unrelated
to each other and that did not belong to any of the taxonomic categories. Naturally, the expectation was that violations of the additive law would be less marked for
these unrelated targets than for category exemplars
because reliance on gist processing would be more pronounced for category exemplars.
The second manipulation, which was more subtle, was
whether, for each of the 12 taxonomic categories, its 8
exemplars appeared together in a single block on one of
the lists or appeared in 2 blocks of 4 exemplars, with
one block on List 1 and one block on List 2. The logic
behind this manipulation is straightforward. Prior
source-monitoring studies show that when multiple targets on lists share salient meanings, subjects are apt to process test cues' semantic gist as a basis for source judgments
(Arndt, 2012). For example, suppose that List 1 words are
printed in red, List 2 words are printed in blue, and all
the exemplars of the furniture category appear on List 1.
Subjects can make accurate source judgments about a test
cue such as desk by simply remembering that the furniture
words were on first (red) list. This form of gist processing is
a very efficient method of enhancing source accuracy, as it
is easier to remember that furniture words appeared on
List 1 than it is to retrieve criterial contextual details for
desk. However, this can also impair source discrimination
if the focal meaning originated from both sources (e.g.,
bed, couch, desk, and table appeared on List 1 and chair,
dresser, loveseat, sofa appeared on List 2).
As mentioned in connection with the first manipulation,
we assumed that the presence of blocks of meaning-sharing targets on study lists would increase gist processing for
test cues that were category exemplars, ensuring robust
violations of the additive law. With respect to the second
manipulation, those violations should be even more
marked for categories that were exemplified on both lists
than for categories that were exemplified on only one list.
The reason is simple. In the present design, the additive

235

law is evaluated for a given cue by the sum
p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?). If all the furniture exemplars
appear on List 1, gist processing with the test cue desk will
produce good source discrimination (p(L1?) > p(L2?)), but
if half the exemplars, including desk, appear on List 1 and
half appear on List 2, gist processing will selectively elevate
p(L2?). If p(L1?) and p(ND?) remain roughly constant,
p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) will be larger for two-block category exemplars than for one-block category exemplars.
The final manipulation was list order, and it also grows
out of the results of some recent source-monitoring experiments that focused on the relative contributions of verbatim and gist memory to performance (Brainerd, Holliday,
et al., 2014; Brainerd et al., 2012). In those experiments,
multinomial models and other techniques were used to
measure how verbatim and gist processing on source tests
varied as function of selected factors. One factor that had
consistent effects was list order: Verbatim memory for target cues was always better and tended to override the
effects of other manipulations when cues had appeared
on List 2 as compared to List 1. That verbatim memory
would be superior for List 2 targets was not surprising theoretically because previous research had suggested that
verbatim memory is quite sensitive to retroactive interference (Barnhardt et al., 2006). In the present experiment,
this translates into predictions about violations of the
additive law--explicitly, that they will be less marked for
List 2 targets, owing to greater reliance on verbatim memory, and consequently, this will reduce the effectiveness of
the first two manipulations.
Method
Subjects
The subjects were 70 undergraduates who participated
to fulfill a course requirement.
Materials and procedure
The words on the study and test lists were drawn from
production norms for Van Overschelde, Rawson, and
Dunlosky's (2004) revision of the Battig and Montague
(1969) categorized word pools. The Van Overschelde
et al. norms contain word pools for 70 common taxonomic
categories. The items that were selected from these norms
for inclusion on the study and test lists that were administered to individual subjects came from the first eight frequency positions for each category. The study lists that
were generated for individual subjects consisted of two
types of targets: (a) words from multiple-exemplar categories and (b) words from single exemplar categories.
Concerning a, if a target such as drums, for instance, were
from a multiple-exemplar category, seven other targets
from that category (clarinet, flute, guitar, piano, saxophone,
trumpet, violin) would also appear on the study lists.
However, if a target such as salt were from a
single-exemplar category, no other target from that category (e.g., no other seasoning) would appear on either list.
The subjects studied two lists of words, presented at a
2.5 s rate. There was a 10 s pause between lists, with each
word appearing in 50 point font in the center of a computer screen. The subjects were told that the lists were

236

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245
Table 4
Acceptance probabilities in Experiment 2 (SDs in parentheses).
Test cue

Memory judgment
L1?

L2?

ND?

Sum

List 1
Targets
Multiple exemplar - List 1
Multiple exemplar - both lists
Single exemplar
Distractors

.73(.22)
.69(.25)
.60(.24)
.18 (.18)

.41(.27)
.67(.22)
.40(.28)
.17(.19)

.24(.22)
.18(.20)
.23(.24)
.73(.26)

1.38
1.54
1.23
1.08

List 2
Targets
Multiple exemplar - List 2
Multiple exemplar - both lists
Single exemplar
Distractors

.21(.26)
.29(.30)
.33(.29)
.16(.21)

.65(.25)
.66(.27)
.60(.29)
.16(.17)

.27(.25)
.18(.20)
.25(.27)
.72(.26)

1.13
1.13
1.18
1.07

Note. L1? = presented on the first list, L2? = presented on the second list, ND? = not presented.

completely different; that no word would appear on List 2
that appeared on List 1 and vice versa. As usual in
source-monitoring designs, different contextual details
accompanied the two lists. The words on List 1 were
printed in a different distinctive font (e.g., Broadway,
Niagara, Script) against a different background color (e.g.,
white, pink, blue) than the words on List 2. Each list began
with an opening buffer of three unrelated words and ended
with a closing buffer of three words. The list itself--that is,
the words that were presented between the opening and
closing buffers--was composed of 54 items. List 1 consisted
of 8 exemplars of each of four taxonomic categories (e.g.,
sports, trees), for a total of 32 words, plus 4 exemplars of
each of two taxonomic categories (e.g., cities, furniture)
for a total of 8 words, plus 14 words that were exemplars
of single-exemplar categories. The latter 14 words were
unrelated to each other and were not members of any of
the 12 multiple-exemplar categories. List 2 consisted of 8
exemplars of each of four taxonomic categories that had
not appeared on List 1 (e.g., metals, relatives), for a total
of 32 words, plus the remaining 4 exemplars of the two
taxonomic categories for which 4 exemplars appeared on
List 1 (e.g., cities, furniture) for a total of 8 words, plus 14
words that were exemplars of single-exemplar categories.
Similar to List 1, the latter 14 words were unrelated to each
other and were not members of any of the 12
multiple-exemplar categories.
The study lists were followed by test instructions,
which reiterated that the two lists had not shared any
words, explained that the memory test would present
three types of cues (L1, L2, and ND), and explained that
exactly one-third of the test cues would be of each type.
The instructions stated that the subject would be asked
to make one of three types of judgments about each
cue--I saw it on the first list (L1?), I saw it on the second
list (L2?), or I did not see it on either list (ND?)--so that
the probability that any of these judgments would be correct by chance was always one-third. The instructions contained examples of hypothetical list words, of the three
types of cues, of the three types of judgments, and of correct answers for each Cue  Judgment combination. The
test list that was administered to individual subjects

consisted of the following cues: (a) 3 targets from each of
the 4 one-block List 1 multiple-exemplar categories (12
cues in all); (b) 3 targets from each of the 4 two-block
List 1 multiple-exemplar categories (12 cues in all); (c)
12 of the 14 single-exemplar targets from List 1; (d) 18
unpresented words that were arbitrarily designated as
List 1 unrelated distractors; (e) 3 targets from each of the
4 one-block List 2 multiple-exemplar categories (12 cues
in all); (f) 3 targets from each of the 4 two-block List 2
multiple-exemplar categories (12 cues in all); (g) 12 of
the 14 single-exemplar targets from List 2; (h) a further
18 unpresented words that were arbitrarily designated as
List 2 unrelated distractors. Thus, the test list was composed of 108 cues, with 8 groups of cues (a-h). The cues
in each group were factorially crossed with the three types
of probes (L1? L2? ND?), so that each type of probe question was administered for the same number of cues in each
group. Concerning the unrelated distractors in groups d
and h, these 36 cues were selected from of the remaining
Van Overschelde et al. (2004) categories by randomly sampling 18 of those categories and then randomly sampling 2
exemplars from frequency positions 1-8 of each category.
Following instructions, the subject responded to a
self-paced visual recognition test on which The 108
Cue  Probe combinations were presented in random
order. Subjects simply agreed or disagreed with each
probe, accordingly as they thought it was true or false for
the indicated cue.
Results
Descriptive statistics for the various Cue  Probe combinations appear in Table 4, with the sum statistic that is
used to evaluate the additive law appearing in the far right
column. The major results that stand out in Table 4 are
that, as in Experiment 1, the additive law was violated
everywhere it was possible to test it, and it was always violated in a subadditive direction. Another clear result is that
violations of additivity were always less pronounced for
target cues for which verbatim memories were presumably stronger: The mean value of the sum statistic for the
three types of target cues (one-block multiple-exemplar,

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

two-block multiple-exemplar, single-exemplar) was 1.15
for List 2 versus 1.38 for List 1. Further, the prediction that
violations of additivity would be more robust for
multiple-exemplar categories (stronger gist memory) than
for single-exemplar categories (weaker gist memory) was
born out at a general level because the overall average of
the sum statistic was 1.30 for multiple-exemplar categories versus 1.20 for single-exemplar categories.
However, this pattern depended on whether strong verbatim memories were competing with gist memories as it
was only evident for List 1 targets.
First, we conducted a 2 (list: 1 versus 2)  4 (cue:
one-block multiple-exemplar categories, two-block multiple exemplar categories, single-exemplar categories, unrelated distractors) ANOVA of the sum values. This produced
main effects for list, F(1, 69) = 34.65, MSE = .14, partial
g2 = .33, p < .0001, and for cue, F(3, 207) = 12.32,
MSE = .14, partial g2 = .15, p < .0001. It also produced a
List  Cue interaction, F(3, 207) = 9.13, MSE = .13, partial
g2 = .11, p < .0001. As mentioned, the list main effect was
due to the fact that the average value of the sum statistic
was larger on List 1 than on List 2. The cue main effect
was due to the fact that the average value of the sum
statistic was larger for targets from multiple-exemplar categories than for targets from single-exemplar categories or
for distractors. Post hoc analysis of the List  Cue interaction
revealed
that
the
sum
statistics
for
multiple-exemplar categories were strongly affected by
which list a cue appeared on. Specifically, post hoc tests
showed that the sum value was greater on List 1 that on
List 2 for targets from one-block multiple-exemplar categories
(t(69) = 6.36,
p < .0001)
and
two-block
multiple-exemplar categories (t(69) = 4.49, p < .0001), but
not for targets from single-exemplar categories
(t(69) = .79) or distractors (t(69) = .20).
As also mentioned, variability in sum values as a function of the strengths of gist memories was different for
List 1 than for List 2, and in fact, such variability was confined to List 1 cues. For List 1 cues, post hoc analysis of the
List  Cue interaction revealed that (a) the sum value was
smaller for unrelated distractors than for any of the three
types of targets (mean t(69) = 5.45, p < .0001), (b) the
sum value was smaller for targets from single-exemplar
categories than for either of the types of targets from
multiple-exemplar
categories
(mean
t(69) = 3.53,
p < .005), and (c) the sum value was smaller for targets
from multiple-exemplar categories that only appeared on
List 1 than for targets from multiple-exemplar categories
that appeared on both lists (t(69) = 2.39, p < .01). All of
these findings are congruent with earlier QEMc predictions: The first shows that additivity was more strongly
violated by targets than by distractors, the second that
additivity was more strongly violated by targets for which
strong gist memories were available, and the third that
additivity was more strongly violated when strong gist
memories were not associated with a single source.
None of these patterns was detected for List 2 cues, as
can be seen by inspecting the small differences between
cues types in the sum column of Table 4. In this experiment, then, it seemed that when strong verbatim memories were available for cues, that fact trumped the effects

237

that would otherwise have been produced by differences
in the strengths of gist memories.
Next, although all 8 of the sum values in Table 4 are >1,
that does not establish that any of them are reliably so.
Therefore, we computed one-sample t tests for these sums,
using a predicted value of 1 as the null hypothesis. For List
1, this null hypothesis was rejected for targets from
one-block multiple-exemplar categories (t(69) = 11.14,
p < .0001), targets from two-block multiple-exemplar categories
(t(69) = 8.37,
p < .0001),
targets
from
single-exemplar categories (t(69) = 4.83, p < .0001), and
distractors (t(69) = 2.41, p < .01). For List 2, the same null
hypothesis was rejected for targets from one-block
multiple-exemplar categories (t(69) = 2.82, p < .003), targets from two-block multiple-exemplar categories
(t(69) = 3.30, p < .001), targets from single-exemplar categories (t(69) = 2.86, p < .003), and distractors (t(69) = 1.94,
p < .03). Therefore, notwithstanding the less marked violations of the additivity on List 2, all four types of cues failed
to obey the additive law on both lists.
Finally,
what
about
individual
subjects?
Is
p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) > 1 the modal pattern, or do most
subjects' exhibit additivity while a minority exhibit
extreme subadditivity? To answer that question, we examined the sum values of individual subjects for all four types
of cues and simply counted the numbers of values that satisfied the p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) > 1 rule. For List 1, the
numbers of subjects (out of 70) whose sum values followed
the rule were 57 (p < .0001 by a sign test) for one-block
multiple-exemplar
categories,
53
for
two-block
multiple-exemplar categories (p < .0001 by a sign test),
43 for single-exemplar categories (p < .04 by a sign test),
and 36 for distractors (n.s.). For List 2, however, where,
as we saw, the mean values of the sum statistic were much
smaller than for List 1, the numbers of subjects (out of 70)
whose sum values followed the rule were 32 for one-block
multiple-exemplar
categories,
33
for
two-block
multiple-exemplar categories, 33 for single-exemplar categories, and 32 for distractors. None of the latter values was
reliably above .5, of course.
Summary
Source memory tests focus on a more precise, verbatim
type of content than the tests in item false memory
experiments, inasmuch as accuracy depends on retrieving
contextual details that are arbitrarily mapped with individual targets. Nevertheless, the results of Experiment 2
resembled those of Experiment 1 when it came to (a)
whether the probabilities of remembering cues as belonging to the members of a partition of their possible episodic
states violate the additive law, (b) whether variability in
the robustness of those violations is connected to variability in the relative strengths of verbatim and gist memories,
and (c) whether those violations are in a subadditive or
superadditive direction.
General discussion
QEMc is a quantum probability implementation of FTT's
principles of parallel dissociated storage and retrieval of

238

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

verbatim and gist traces. Unlike some other models, it predicts a priori that episodic memory will violate the additive
law of probability--that the observed probabilities of
remembering a cue as belonging to the members of a partition of its possible episodic states (e.g., O, NS, ND) will not
sum to 1 but, instead, will exceed 1. For instance, this pattern is anticipated for two common types of memory
experiments, false memory for items and for sources. In
both instances, the reasons are connected to the notion
that gist processing can support memory for incompatible
members of a partition--remembering a cue as being both
O and NS in item designs or as being both L1 and L2 in
source designs--whereas verbatim processing does not.
Specifically, as discussed in Appendix A and as illustrated
in Fig. 1, QEMc represents a cue's perceived episodic state
as a vector |SCi, which is the sum of the three basis vectors
vC|Vi, gC|Gi, and nC|Ni in item experiments and the sum of
the four basis vectors vC1|V1i, vC2|V2i, gC|Gi, and nC|Ni in
source experiments. Quantum probability rules require
that the squared values of the scalars that multiply the vectors in each expression (whatever those values may be)
must sum to unity; that is, |vC|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1 and
|vC1|2 + |vC2|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1, which is just a mathematical
way of saying that on a memory test, a cue will retrieve
information from the three types of traces (V, G, N).
However, the model's expressions (Table 1) for the total
probability that cue Ci will then be remembered as belonging to any of its possible episodic states are
|vCi|2 + |gCi|2 + |gCi|2 + |nCi|2 = 1 + |gCi|2 P 1 for item memory
and |vCi1|2 + |vCi2|2 + |gCi|2 + |gCi|2 + |nCi|2 = 1 + |gCi|2 P 1 for
source memory. The origin of these expressions is theoretical rather than mathematical because they follow from
FTT's assumption that gist processing can cause O, NS,
and ND cues to all be remembered as both O and NS in
item designs and can cause L1, L2, and ND cues to all be
remembered as both L1 and L2 in source designs. It is the
fact that for theoretical reasons, |gCi|2 must appear twice
in total memory probability expressions that forces subadditivity. Consequently, two other straightforward predictions are that total memory probability will become
progressively more subadditive as reliance on gist processing increases (i.e., as |gCi|2 increases relative to |vCi|2, |vCi1|2,
or |vCi2|2) and progressively less so as reliance on verbatim
processing increases (i.e., as |vCi|2, |vCi1|2, or |vCi2|2 increase
relative to |gCi|2). Theoretically, such results can be produced by manipulations that directly increase |gCi|2 by
enhancing gist processing or by manipulations that indirectly increase |gCi|2 by impairing verbatim processing
(List 1 targets versus List 2 targets in Experiment 2).
As the memory literature does not contain systematic
tests of the additive law, we evaluated such predictions
using item and source designs. Both used standard procedures that can be found in prior studies, with one key
exception: On memory tests, the usual types of test cues
were factorially crossed with probes that formed a partition of the cues' possible episodic states (O, NS, or ND in
item false memory and L1, L2, or ND in source false memory). Across experiments, there was consistent confirmation of QEMc's prediction that total memory probabilities
are subadditive rather than additive. Twelve such probabilities could be computed in Experiment 1, and 8 could be

computed Experiment 2. All were reliably greater than
one. Within experiments, variations in subadditivity were
congruent with the notion that it increases in proportion
to the level of gist processing and decreases in proportion
to the level of verbatim processing. To illustrate that idea,
subadditivity was always more marked for critical distractors than for other types of cues in Experiment 1, and subadditivity was more marked for targets and related
distractors than for unrelated distractors. As further illustrations, subadditivity was more marked in Experiment 2
for targets for which strong gist memories had been stored
(targets from multiple-exemplar categories) when verbatim memory was weak (List 1), although not when it was
strong (List 2).
To conclude, we return to the psychological significance
of the fact that episodic memory violates the additive law,
and that it is subadditive instead. Beyond the important
fact that QEMc can predict this a priori, we saw that, psychologically, it means that we over-remember events
because we remember them as belonging to too many episodic states. Concretely, when discussing what you had for
lunch, you may correctly remember drinking a Coke (O?
probe) and incorrectly remember not drinking a Coke
(NS? probe), or when discussing when you last ate a hamburger, you may correctly say that it was at lunch yesterday (L1? probe) and incorrectly say that it was at dinner
(L2? probe). We conclude this article by considering two
points that delve more deeply into the theoretical meaning
of the maxim that we over-remember experience. The first
is the exact form that over-remembering takes, which
turns out to be a pattern of very conservative compensatory relations between correct and incorrect episodic
states. The second is that conservative compensation
between correct and incorrect episodic states accounts
for a classic but counterintuitive finding about false memory, which is that levels of true and false memory are often
found to be uncorrelated.
Conservative compensation
The additive law implies close titration among the
probabilities of remembering an item as belonging to the
various members of a partition of its possible episodic
states; increases in one are balanced by decreases in
others. For instance, recall that in Experiment 1 (also in
Experiment 2) there was a chance probability of 1/3 that
a given probe (O?, NS?, ND?) was correct for a given cue,
and thus, there was an objective, quantitative definition
of learning--namely, increases above 1/3 in acceptance
rates for correct states and decreases below 1/3 in acceptance rates for incorrect states. Suppose that the subjects
had been assigned to three conditions: (a) control; (b)
no-study + three-cue test; and (c) one-item study +
three-cue test. The control condition is just the procedure
for Experiment 1. In condition b, subjects do not study
any targets, but simply respond to a test that consists of
one O cue (e.g., seat), one NS cue (e.g., chair), and one ND
cue (e.g., sweet). They receive the same memory test
instructions as the controls, including the fact that the
probability that any given test cue is an O, NS, or ND item
is 1/3. The test cues are then administered, with O?, NS?,

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

and ND? probes being factorially varied over cues and subjects. Condition c is identical to condition b, except that
subjects receive a one-item study list on which the target
cue (seat) appears, just before the memory test. We know
how the control data will turn out (Table 3), but what
about conditions b and c?
In the no-study condition, subjects have nothing to go
on other than the baseline probabilities, and hence, the
average acceptance probabilities over subjects should be
roughly p(O?) = p(NS?) = p(ND?) = 1/3, for targets, critical
distractors, related distractors, and unrelated distractors.
Thus, the additive law is satisfied. In the one-item study
condition, the memory test is administered immediately
after seat is studied, and hence, we should find: (a)
p(O?) = 1 and p(NS?) = p(ND?) = 0 for seat; (b) p(NS?) = 1
and p(O?) = p(ND?) = 0 for chair; and (c) p(ND?) = 1 and
p(O?) = p(NS?) = 0 for sweet. Again, the additive law is satisfied, and it is because there have been precise tradeoffs,
relative to the no-study condition, between increases in
memory for correct states versus decreases in memory
for incorrect states. The key point that as a principle of episodic memory, the additive law requires that increases in
true memory for correct episodic states be compensated
by commensurate reductions in false memory for incorrect
states.
Unlike the one-item study condition, we know that in
the control condition, p(O?) for targets, p(NS?) for critical
and related distractors, and p(ND?) for unrelated distractors will all be far from unity. However, the additive law
may still be satisfied because, as we just saw, this turns
on whether learning produces compensatory adjustments
between acceptance rates for correct versus incorrect episodic states. On the one hand, the study list clearly produced learning of correct episodic states for all cues
because p(O?) for targets, p(NS?) for critical and related
distractors, and p(ND?) for unrelated distractors were well
above the 1/3 baseline. However, the additive law was not
satisfied because the degree of compensation in memory
for incorrect states was conservative. A dramatic feature
of this pattern is that in our experiments, the relation
between increases in memory for correct states and
decreases in memory for incorrect states was completely
noncompensatory in most instances.
For targets, restricting attention to the immediate test
and the delayed test for previously tested items, where
p(O?) was much higher than baseline, it can be seen in
Table 3 that there were no compensating decreases in memory for incorrect states. The average value of p(O?) was .51,
while the average value of p(ND?), .31, was not reliably
below baseline, and the average value of p(NS?), .47, was
well above it. For critical distractors, p(NS?) was well
above baseline in all three testing conditions (M = .54),
but similar to targets, there were no compensating
decreases in memory for the two incorrect states: The
average value of p(ND?), .31, was not reliably below baseline, while the average value of p(O?), .49, was well above
it. The picture was similar for related distractors. p(NS?)
was well above baseline (M = .44), but there were no compensating decreases in memory for the two incorrect
states: The average value of p(O?), .37, was not reliably different than baseline, while the average value of p(ND?),

239

.49, was well above it. Unrelated distractors were the only
cues that displayed any evidence of compensatory tradeoffs for correct versus incorrect states. p(ND?) was well
above baseline (M = .64) and p(O?) was well below baseline (M = .23), but compensation was still conservative
because p(NS?) was not reliably below baseline (M = .35).
Conservative compensation was also present in the
source-monitoring experiment, but it was somewhat less
marked. For List 1 targets, the picture was similar to that
for O and NS cues in the false memory experiment.
p(L1?) was well above the 1/3 baseline (M = .67), but
p(L2?) was also well above baseline (M = .49). However,
p(ND?) exhibited compensation because it was reliably
below baseline (M = .22). Compensation was better for L2
targets and best of all for unrelated distractors (as in
Experiment 1). For L2 targets, p(L2?) was much higher than
baseline (M = .64), p(L1?) was slightly below baseline
(M = .28), and p(ND?) was substantially below baseline
(M = .23). For unrelated distractors, p(ND?) was much
higher than baseline (M = .73), p(L1?) was substantially
below baseline (M = .17), and p(L2?) was also substantially below baseline (M = .17). Nevertheless, compensation was still conservative for L2 targets and for
unrelated distractors because, it will be remembered,
p(L1?) + p(L2?) + p(ND?) > 1 for both types of cues.
One can summarize the overall pattern of compensation
among episodic states in three statements. First, increases
in memory for correct states and decreases memory for
incorrect states are not symmetrical. Second, on the contrary, there were instances in both experiments in which
memory for an incorrect state actually increased as memory for a cue's correct state increased. Third, the extent to
which the relation between memory for correct and incorrect states was noncompensatory was correlated with the
likelihood that subjects were relying on gist memories,
which can be exemplified by three features of the data.
One is that compensation was less conservative in the
source experiment than in the item experiment. The memory test had more of a gist slant in the item experiment,
where all probes involved item memory, than in the source
experiment, where 1/3 involved item memory. A second
illustration is that compensation was least conservative
for unrelated distractors. Naturally, unrelated distractors
are poorer retrieval cues for gist memories than either targets or related distractors. A third illustration is that with
targets and related distractors, compensation between correct and incorrect episodic states was never observed when
there was a good chance that subjects would rely on gist
memories (i.e., with target, critical distractor, and related
distractor cues in Experiment 1 and with L1 cues in
Experiment 2).
How conservative compensation explains true-false memory
independence
Finally, an instructive by-product of conservative compensation is that it accounts for a classic but perplexing
finding in the false memory literature--namely, that the
relation between true and false memory is not what is
expected by common sense and many memory theories.
In that literature, true memory and false memory refer to

240

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

memory for different cues, as distinct from remembering
correct and incorrect states for the same cue. Also, the
exact content of true and false memory differs for item
experiments versus source experiments. In a traditional
item design, as we know, only O? probes are administered,
so that true memories are target hits and false memories
are false alarms to related distractors. Note that both
involve item memory. In the most commonly used source
design in the false memory literature, only L1? probes
are administered. That design is the Loftus (1975; Loftus,
Miller, & Burns, 1978) misinformation paradigm, which
emulates the forms of suggestive questioning that are
prominent features of police interviews and interrogations
of witnesses. The two encoding contexts are L1 = observing
a series of events that may have legal implications, such as
a video of an automobile accident, and L2 = responding to
questions about those events, some of which state that
events were observed that were not. Memory tests follow
and as in police investigations, the focus is squarely on
memory for observed events. Two types of probes have
been used on such tests. Originally, as in our Experiment
1, Loftus (1975) administered separate accept-reject
probes for observed and suggested events, with correct
acceptances of L1 events being the true memory measure
and incorrect acceptances of L2 suggestions being the false
memory measure. In later experiments, multiple-choice
probes were administered that pitted observed events
against suggested ones (e.g., ``Did you see a Yield sign or
a Stop sign in the video?''). Here, the true memory measure
is the acceptance rate for the L1 choice relative to its acceptance rate in probes that pit it against a distractor event
(e.g., ``Did you see a Yield sign or a Slow sign in the
video?''), whereas the false memory measure is the acceptance rate for the L2 choice relative to its acceptance rate in
probes that pit it against a distractor event (e.g., ``Did you
see a Stop sign or a Slow sign in the video?''). Regardless
of which measures are used, the true and false memory
measures involve source memory rather than item
memory.
We have powerful expectations, which are grounded in
commonsense beliefs about how experience must affect
memory, that there should be strong negative correlations
between true and false memory (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005).
Objectively, experience is symmetrical in the information
it conveys about correct and incorrect episodic states; that
is, as it specifies items' correct states (true memory), it
automatically specifies their incorrect states (false memory). These symmetrical effects are completely transparent
when, as in our experiments, correct and incorrect states
form a partition because such states are logically incompatible. For instance, logically, a test cue cannot be a distractor if it is a target or a target if it is a distractor
because an item cannot be both presented and not presented. Intuitively, then, it would seem that better memory
for items' correct states should mean better memory for
their incorrect states because, strictly speaking, they are
the same thing. It follows that in traditional item and
source designs, measures of true and false memory ought
to exhibit strong negative correlations. For instance, in an
item design in which desk but no other article of furniture
appears on the study list, it is objectively established that

desk is O while table, sofa, chair, and so forth are NS. If
our intuition is correct, then, levels of false acceptance of
O? for table, sofa, and chair (false memory measures) will
drop as correct acceptance of O? for desk (true memory
measure) rises. Similarly, in a misinformation design in
which Yield sign appears in the video and Stop sign
appears during the question period, it is objectively established that Yield sign is L1 and Stop sign is L2. Again, if our
intuition is correct, levels of false acceptance of L1? for
Stop sign will drop as levels of correct acceptance of L1?
for Yield sign rise.
These are not the modal patterns in the literature, however. It has long been known that when correlations
between subjects' rates of true and false memory are computed, the modal pattern is that the correlations are not
reliable (e.g., Brainerd & Reyna, 1996, 2005; Reyna &
Kiernan, 1994). Although modest negative correlations
have occasionally been reported for certain materials
(e.g., Roediger et al., 2001), so have modest positive correlations for the same materials (e.g., Brainerd, Reyna, &
Forrest, 2002). These points are well illustrated by the data
of our experiments. For L1 probes in Experiment 2, the
mean correlation between acceptance rates for L1 cues
(true memory) and L2 cues (false memory) was .08, and
for L2 probes, the mean correlation between acceptance
rates for L2 cues (true memory) and L1 cues (false memory) was .03. Neither was reliable, of course. In
Experiment 1, the correlation between O? acceptance rates
for targets and related distractors was not reliable, while
there was a small but reliable positive correlation between
O? acceptance rates for targets and critical distractors. Like
the larger literature, then, the data of our experiments are
at odds with the intuitive expectation of robust negative
correlations.
The reason why our intuition is wrong is obscured by
conventional item and misinformation designs, but it is
revealed by the pattern of conservative compensation that
emerged in our designs. As we just saw, robust negative
correlations have been predicted in conventional designs
because it is thought that experience drives down memory
for a cue's incorrect episodic states as it drives up memory
for its correct state, regardless of whether the cue is a true
or false memory item. However, that assumption is untestable in conventional designs because (a) only memory for
the correct state is measured for true memory items and
(b) only memory for one incorrect state is measured for
false memory items. In our experiments, memory for correct and incorrect states was measured for all items, and
the assumption proved to be false. Following the study list
in Experiment 1, p(O?) for targets (true memory items) and
p(NS?) for critical and related distractors (false memory
items) had all increased to well above baseline. However,
there were no complementary decreases in p(O?) for critical and related distractors, which would have been needed
to produce negative correlations between p(O?) for targets
versus p(O?) for critical and related distractors. Thus,
although knowing that a critical or a related distractor is
NS is logically the same thing as knowing that it is not
O?, episodic memory does not see it that way.
Much the same conclusion follows from the compensation analysis of Experiment 2. On the one hand, following

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

the two study lists, the two true memory measures, p(L1?)
for L1 targets and p(L2?) for L2 targets, were both well
above baseline, so that their correct states could be
remembered at reliable levels. Again, however, what
would be needed to confirm our intuition of robust negative correlations between p(L1?) for L1 targets versus L2
targets and between p(L2?) for L2 targets versus L1 targets
are complementary decreases in p(L1?) for L2 targets and
p(L2?) for L1 targets. As in Experiment 1, that is precisely
what did not happen. One of the false memory measures,
p(L2?) for L1 targets, actually increased to well above baseline, while the other, p(L1?) for L2 targets, decreased by
only a small amount.
Much has been written in the false memory literature
about the surprising lack of strong negative correlations
between true and false memory. Actually, this was one of
the key findings that the supplied the impetus for
dual-trace accounts of false memory, such as fuzzy-trace
theory (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). Without delving into
the wider evidence for such theories, or for other explanations, our data suggest that the general reason for the lack
of correlation is that the manner in which episodic memory learns from experience is only partly logical. The logical part is that experience, in the form of the study lists
in memory experiments, always increases true memory
for correct episodic states. Further, it is not necessary for
items to be directly experienced for this improvement to
occur because in Experiment 1, p(NS?) was far above baseline for critical and related distractors, and in both experiments, p(ND?) was far above baseline for unrelated
distractors. On the other hand, the illogical part is that
the same experience does not produce commensurate
decreases in false memory for incorrect states.
Sometimes it produces decreases that lag behind increases
in true memory for correct states (e.g., L2 targets in
Experiment 2 and unrelated distractors in both experiments). At other times, it produces no decreases, and
sometimes, it even increases false memory for incorrect
states (e.g., L1 targets in Experiment 2 and critical and
related distractors in Experiment 1). In short, although,
logically, the effects of experience are symmetrical when
it comes to the identifying correct and incorrect episodic
states, their memory counterparts are dissociated.
Acknowledgments
Preparation of this article was supported by National
Institutes of Health grant 1RC1AG036915 to the first and
third authors, and by National Science Foundation grant
SES-1153846 and Air Force Office of Scientific Research
grant FA9550-12-1-0397 to the second author. We thank
David Kellen for his comments on an earlier version of this
paper.
A. Quantum episodic memory (QEM)
We describe a QP formalization of FTT, specifically a
model that assumes compatibility of memory measures.
The model makes principled, parameter-free, a priori predictions about violations of the additive law in the

241

direction of subadditivity in experiments on item false
memory and source false memory. The data sets to which
the model is applied in this paper are posted at http://
www.human.cornell.edu/hd/brainerd/research.cfm.
FTT
has previously been formalized using variants of multinomial processing models and signal detection models,
which are based on classical probability rules (see
Brainerd, Gomes, et al., 2014). Those models were able to
account for many false memory phenomena, including a
subadditivity phenomenon that is described in the text
(memory disjunction fallacies). However, as also noted in
the text, those models do not make true (parameter-free,
a priori) subadditivity predictions, and instead, they only
account for such phenomena ex post facto by fitting the
models to data using parameter values estimated from
the data. The same is true of another multinomial model
that was mentioned in the text, which has been used to
account for memory disjunction fallacies (Kellen et al.,
2014).
FTT can be formalized with QP, owing to the fact that
there is a natural affinity between QP's principles and
FTT's assumptions about memory (Brainerd et al., 2013;
Wang et al., 2013). For instance, the notion of parallel, dissociated storage and retrieval of verbatim and gist traces is
a cognitive instantiation of the superposition property of
physical quantum systems. Crucially, the present QP model
of FTT predicts violations of the additive law in an a priori
manner, based on quantum principles, rather than
accounting for them ex post facto. This is a significant theoretical advance, relative to prior work on nonadditivity in
memory. Moreover, the QP model of FTT relies on the same
quantum principles that have been used to explain a variety of other puzzling cognitive phenomena (for reviews,
see Bruza et al., 2015; Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012;
Busemeyer & Wang, 2015; Pothos & Busemeyer, 2013;
Wang et al., 2013).
The QP implementation of FTT is quite simple inasmuch
as it uses a single psychological state (the memory state)
for any memory test cue to generate different contextualized probability distributions under different memory
probe conditions. Its core features, called quantum episodic memory (QEM), were sketched in Brainerd et al.
(2013). To make determinant predictions about specific
paradigms, QEM is used to construct specific FTT models
for those paradigms. Those models can be specified for
either incompatible or compatible memory measures
(e.g., the O? and NS? probes in Experiment 1). In QP, compatibility means that two measures can be taken simultaneously and their order of administration does not affect
their observed probabilities (Bruza et al., 2015;
Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Wang & Busemeyer, 2013;
Wang, Solloway, Shiffrin, & Busemeyer, 2014). Whether
the probes that are administered on memory tests are
compatible or not is an empirical question (Busemeyer &
Wang, 2014). This can be evaluated in at least three ways:
(a) the prediction that the order of probe administration
should not affect acceptance probabilities if the probes
are compatible can be tested (Busemeyer & Wang, 2014;
Wang & Busemeyer, 2013); (b) the prediction that violations of the additive law should always be in a subadditive
direction if the probes are compatible can be tested

242

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

(Brainerd et al., 2013; Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012;
Busemeyer & Trueblood, 2010); and (c) tests of the
comparative fit of compatible versus incompatible
models to data can be computed. Some initial work
along these lines has recently been conducted (Denolf &
Lambert-Mogiliansky,
submitted
for
publication;
Trueblood & Hemmer, submitted for publication), but so
far, the results are inconclusive. Thus, the data that are
necessary to decide between compatibility and incompatibility do not currently exist.
Therefore, it is reasonable to begin with models that
predict simpler data, in the sense of predictions a and b,
and to move to models that predict more complex data
when this is forced by new theories or findings.
Mathematically, this is the version of QEM with a compatibility assumption. Crucially, the compatibility version suffices to make parameter-free, a priori predictions about
violations of the additive law for both item false memory
and source false memory, thereby making the model
highly falsifiable. To highlight the model's compatibility
assumption, we label this version of QEM as QEMc and
the version with the incompatibility assumption as QEMi.
As shown below, QEMc predicts a surprising pattern in
false item and source memory: Memory judgments about
individual events will not be additive over an exhaustive
set of mutually exclusive episodic states and, instead, will
be subadditive. The model also predicts that observed
levels of subadditivity will covary with the strengths of gist
traces that are retrieved on memory tests. We demonstrate
this for item false memory (Experiment 1) first. Then, we
briefly demonstrate the same points for source false
memory.
A.1. The QEMc model for item false memory
The basic methodology, of which there are numerous
examples in the memory literature, runs as follows.
Subjects encode a set of memory targets, most often a
word list, after which they respond to a recognition test
composed of three types of test cues: old (target) cues
(O; e.g., sofa); new-similar cues (NS; e.g., couch); and
new-dissimilar cues (ND; e.g., ocean). NS cues share salient
features of targets and serve as false memory measures,
whereas ND cues do not and serve as guessing/bias
indexes. In the standard design, subjects make just one
type of judgment about each type of cue--namely, they
decide whether it is old (O?). In the novel design that we
used, the three types of cues were factorially crossed with
three types of probes that partitioned the set of all possible
episodic states that a cue could belong to: O?; new-similar
(NS?); and new-dissimilar (ND?). These states are obviously exhaustive and mutually exclusive because, logically,
a cue must belong to one of them and cannot belong to
more than one of them.
Similar to QP models of judgment and decision making
(Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012), QEMc implements FTT's memory principles in vector spaces, in which the probabilities
of making different types of memory responses are measured with projection operations. The FTT vector space
for false item memory experiments, which is illustrated
in Fig. 1, is three-dimensional and is generated by the trio

of unit length basis vectors, jVi, jGi and jNi. (It is important
to note that the vector space can be arbitrarily
high-dimensional, although for simplicity of illustration, a
three-dimensional vector space is used in Fig. 1.) These
vectors represent verbatim, gist, and nonmatching traces,
respectively. In other words, they are representations of
episodic traces that, respectively, match a cue's surface
form, match its semantic/relational content, or do not
match either. When a test cue C is presented to a subject,
it induces a perceived memory state, SC. QEMc represents
this memory state as a vector in the three-dimensional
space that is a superposition of the three basis vectors:

jSC i 1/4 v C  jVi  g C  jGi  nC  jNi:

A1

This memory state vector is subject to the mathematical
constraint |vC|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1, and the subscript C
denotes the specific test cue, which can be O, NS, or ND.
The parameters vC, gC, and nC are scalars that multiply
the respective memory vectors, and psychologically, they
represent the strengths of the three types of traces.
(Technically, they are ``probability amplitudes'' of accepting the O?, NS?, and ND? probes, respectively.)
Conceptually, as discussed in Brainerd et al. (2013), the
superposition state in Eq. (A1) captures the fuzziness and
uncertainty that is associated with memory judgments.
Note that the subscript C indicates that a distinct memory
state vector is generated for each of the three types of cues,
with corresponding amplitudes vC, gC, and nC, where C = O,
NS, or ND. In other words, the memory state vector
depends on the specific test cue that is presented, which
means that vC, gC, and nC have different values for O, NS,
and ND cues. For instance, based on prior FTT research
(see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005), O cues are better retrieval
cues than ND cues for both verbatim and gist traces (so
that vC and gC are larger for O than for ND cues), and NS
cues are better retrieval cues than ND cues for both verbatim and gist traces (so that vC and gC are larger for NS than
for ND cues).
When a cue C is presented and before a probe question
is posed, the cue's perceived episodic state can be O, NS, or
ND with probabilities |vC|2, |gC|2, and |nC|2, respectively.
Based on the axioms of QP, these probabilities must sum
to 1 because these possible states are mutually exclusive
and exhaustive. This constraint has psychological meaning: It captures subjects' knowledge (which is reiterated
to them in the instructions that they receive) that C must
belong to exactly one of the three states, so that information from the, jVi, jGi and jNi basis vectors is retrieved
on memory tests. In addition, a cue's perceived episodic
state can be an uncertain one in which the subject remembers C as being ``either O or NS'' (a disjunction, e.g.,
Brainerd et al., 2013) with probability |vC|2 + |gC|2. This also
has psychological meaning: It captures the common experience of knowing that something about C is old but of
being unsure whether it is actually a target or a new item
that preserves salient features of a target, such as membership in a taxonomic category.
As indicated, O, NS, and ND cues were factorially
crossed with O?, NS?, and ND? probes in our experiment,
with the subject accepting or rejecting each probe.
According to QP, the probability of accepting a probe can

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

be interpreted as projecting the memory state to the subspace used to evaluate the probe question in the vector
space, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The projectors that generate
the probabilities of accepting a probe are denoted MO,y,
MNS,y, and MND,y, respectively. Each of these projectors is
a diagonal matrix. The matrices are MO,y = diag[1, 1, 0],
MNS,y = diag[0, 1, 0], and MND,y = diag[0, 0, 1]. In other words,
the MO,y matrix picks out the jVi and jGi vectors of Eq. (A1),
the MNS,y matrix picks out the jGi vector, and the MND,y
matrix picks out the jNi vector. All of this is translated into
the response probabilities that are given for O, NS, and ND
cues in Table 1 of the article. Here, it is worth emphasizing
that in QEMc, the cue elicits the memory state, and the
probe determines the projector used to answer the
question.
In our item false memory design, empirical tests of the
additive law can be obtained for each of the three cues by
summing the individual probabilities of remembering it as
belonging to each of the mutually exclusive and exhaustive
episodic states; that is, by finding the total probability that
a cue is remembered as being an O, NS, or ND item. QEMc
predicts
that
this
sum
must
be
subadditive,
p(O?) + p(NS?) + p(ND?) > 1 for all three cues, as long as
there is some gist memory. (Importantly, note that the
model predicts that this pattern will extend to events that
are not directly experienced.) That prediction falls out as
follows. Under QP axioms, the probability of accepting an
O? probe for cue C (C can be O, NS, or ND) is the squared
magnitude of the projection that is obtained by projecting
the memory state SC to the subspace spanned by the V and
G trace vectors (because matching of either verbatim information or gist information or both would support acceptance of an O? probe): kM O;y jSC ik2 1/4 jv C j2  jg C j2 . This is
illustrated in Fig. 1. As shown there, the V, G, and N axes
are the three vectors spanning the three-dimensional
memory vector space. The subspace for accepting O?
probes is the plane spanned by the vectors jVi and jGi.
The red line is the memory state vector that is elicited by
the cue C, which has a value (a coordinate or ``probability
amplitude'') on each of the three basis vectors (the V, G,
and N axes). Those values are the scalars vC, gC, and nC.
The probability of accepting O? probes is obtained by first
projecting the memory state SC to the subspace for evaluating O? as ``accept'' and then taking the square of the magnitude (or more generally, of the length) of that projection.
Similarly, the probability of accepting NS? probes for
cue C is, kM NS;y jSC ik2 1/4 jg C j2 and the probability of accepting ND probes is kM ND;y jSC ik2 1/4 jnC j2 . In these two cases,
in Fig. 1, the subspaces for evaluating the ``accept'' answer
to NS? probes and the ``accept'' answer to ND? probes are
the one-dimensional rays G and N, respectively. The probability of accepting NS? probes is obtained by squaring the
magnitude of the projection of the memory state vector to
the ray G, and the probability of accepting ND? probes is
obtained by squaring the magnitude of the projection of
the memory state vector to the ray N.
Then, for a cue C, the sum of the probability of accepting
all three probes equals jv C j2  jg C j2  jg C j2  jnC j2 1/4 1
jg C j2 P 1. Thus, QEMc predicts violations of the
additive rule of classical probability theory, specifically,

243

subadditivity. In addition, the model predicts that the
greater the reliance on gist traces in making memory judgments (i.e., the larger the value of |gC|2), the larger the subadditivity effect will be. This means that manipulations
that increase the strength of gist traces relative to verbatim
traces or that simply encourage gist retrieval on memory
tests should also increase observed levels of subadditivity.
Some manipulations of that sort were included in our
experiments.
Before we describe the QEMc model for the source false
memory paradigm, we note, for the sake of completeness,
that QEMc also predicts another subadditivity phenomenon that is described in the text, disjunction fallacies.
It is easy to see that the sum of the probabilities of accepting each of the mutually exclusive events (O? and NS?)
equals jv C j2  jg C j2  jg C j2 . However, when directly judging
the disjunction of these vents (O or NS?), the acceptance
probability under QEMc is jv j2  jgj2 , as explained earlier.
Obviously, that probability is smaller than the sum of the
nondisjunctive probabilities: jv C j2  jg C j2 < jv C j2  jg C j2 
jg C j2 . Thus, this other memory subadditivity phenomenon
is also predicted a priori by QEMc.
A.2. The QEMc model for source false memory
Next, we briefly generalize the preceding results to our
modified source false memory procedure. In the conventional procedure, as mentioned, subjects first encode two
(or more) sets of memory targets, with each set being
accompanied by distinctive contextual cues. For instance,
as in the research that we report, the targets are often presented as two word lists, with the words on one list being
presented in fonts/colors/positions that differ from the
fonts/colors/positions in which the words on the other list
are presented. After encoding the two sets of targets, subjects respond to a recognition test composed of three types
of test cues: old (target) cues from List 1 (L1; e.g., potato);
old cues from List 2 (L2; e.g., baseball); and new-dissimilar
cues (ND; e.g., crown). Subjects first make an old-new
(item) recognition decision about a cue. Next, they make
a source judgment (L1 or L2?) about this cue only if it is
recognized as old. In the novel design that we used, similar
to our false memory design, the three types of test cues
were factorially crossed with three types of source probes
that partitioned the set of possible episodic states that a
cue could belong to: (a) the cue was presented on List
1(L1?); (b) the cue was presented on List 2 (L2?); and (c)
the cue was not presented (ND?). As in the item false memory design, these states are obviously exhaustive and
mutually exclusive.
The details of the QEMc model for this design are the
same as for the item false memory design, except for one
feature: There are two verbatim memory vectors, jV 1 i
and, jV 2 i which accommodate the fact that targets are presented in two distinct contexts rather than one. Thus, the
vector space for the source design is generated by the quartet of unit length basis vectors, jV 1 i, jV 2 i, jGi and, jNi which
represent List 1 verbatim traces, List 2 verbatim traces, gist
traces, and nonmatching traces, respectively. As before, a
test cue C induces a perceived memory state, SC, which

244

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245

the model represents as a vector in the four-dimensional
space that is a superposition of the four memory vectors:

jSC i 1/4 v C1  jV 1 i  v C2  jV 2 i  g C  jGi  nC  jNi:

A2

As in Eq. (A1), Eq. (A2) is subject to the constraint that
|vC1|2 + |vC2|2 + |gC|2 + |nC|2 = 1, which reflects subjects'
knowledge that a cue must be from List 1, or from List 2,
or new. The subscript C runs over L1, L2, and ND test cues.
The scalars in Eq. (A2) have the same psychological meaning as before (i.e., they capture the strengths of the traces).
Empirically, the additive law of probability can be
tested for this source design by summing the individual
probabilities of remembering a cue as belonging to each
of the three mutually exclusive and exhaustive episodic
states; that is, by finding the total probability that a cue
is remembered as being an L1, L2, or ND item. As before,
the model predicts that this sum must be subadditive as
long as gist memory is involved, that p(L1?) + p(L2?) +
p(ND?) will be >1. This can be seen as follows. Suppose that
an item is presented as a test cue. The probabilities of
accepting each of the three probes are determined, once
again, by projecting the perceived memory state to the
subspace that is spanned by the trace vectors that are
picked out by the probe. The relevant projectors for
accepting the three probes L1?, L2?, and ND? are
ML1,y = diag[1, 0, 1, 0], ML2,y = diag[0, 1, 1, 0], and MND,y =
diag[0, 0, 0, 1], respectively. In other words, the ML1,y
diagonal picks out the |V1iand |Gi vectors of Eq. (A2), the
ML2,y diagonal picks out the |V2iand |Gi vectors, and the
MND,y diagonal picks out the |Ni vector. Therefore,
the model says that the sum of the individual probabilities
of accepting the individual probes for the test cue C is

jv C1 j2  jv C2 j2  jg C j2  jg C j2  jnC j2 1/4 1  jg C j2 P 1:
From this, it is clear that memory is predicted to violate
additive probability in source as well as in item false memory. Note that the QP model for the source design also predicts that the greater the reliance on gist traces, the larger
the subadditivity effect will be.
References
Arndt, J. (2012). False recollection: Empirical findings and their
theoretical implications. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 56,
81-124.
Barnhardt, T. M., Choi, H., Gerkens, D. R., & Smith, S. M. (2006). Output
position and word relatedness effects in a DRM paradigm: Support for
a dual-retrieval process theory of free recall and false memories.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 213-231.
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1990). Multinomial processing models
of source monitoring. Psychological Review, 97, 548-564.
Battig, W. F., & Montague, W. E. (1969). Category norms for verbal items
in 56 categories: A replication and extension of the Connecticut
norms. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 80, 1-46.
Bouwmeester, S., & Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L. (2011). Why do some children
benefit more from testing than others? Gist trace processing to
explain the testing effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 65, 32-41.
Brainerd, C. J., Gomes, C. F. A., & Moran, R. (2014). The two recollections.
Psychological Review, 121, 563-599.
Brainerd, C. J., Holliday, R. E., Nakamura, K., & Reyna, V. F. (2014).
Conjunction illusions and conjunction fallacies in episodic memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
40, 1610-1623.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (1996). Mere memory testing creates false
memories in children. Developmental Psychology, 32, 467-476.

Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2005). The science of false memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2007). Explaining developmental reversals
in false memory. Psychological Science, 18, 442-448.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Aydin, C. (2010). Disjunction fallacies in
episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 36, 711-735.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Estrada, S. (2006). Recollection rejection of
false narrative statements. Memory, 14, 672-691.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Forrest, T. J. (2002). Are young children
susceptible to the false-memory illusion? Child Development, 73,
1363-1377.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., Holliday, R. E., & Nakamura, K. (2012).
Overdistribution in source memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 413-439.
Brainerd, C. J., Wang, Z., & Reyna, V. F. (2013). Superposition of episodic
memories: Overdistribution and quantum models. Topics in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 773-799.
Bruza, P. D., Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2015). Quantum cognition: A
new theoretical approach to psychology. Trends in Cognitive Science.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Bruza, P. D. (2012). Quantum models of cognition and
decision. Cambridge University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E. M., Franco, R., & Trueblood, J. S. (2011). A
quantum theoretical explanation for probability judgment errors.
Psychological Review, 118, 193-218.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Trueblood, J. S. (2010). Quantum model for conjoint
recognition. In Quantum informatics for cognitive, social, and semantic
processes: Papers from the AAAI fall symposium (pp. 32-39). Arlington,
Virginia: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Wang, Z. (2014). Quantum cognition: Key issues and
discussion. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 1-4.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Wang, Z. (2015). What is quantum cognition, and how
is it applied to psychology? Current Directions in Psychological Science,
24, 163-169.
Denolf, J., & Lambert-Mogiliansky, A. (submitted for publication). Bohr
complementary memory types.
Fiedler, K., Unkelbach, C., & Freytag, P. (2009). On splitting and merging
categories: A regression account of subadditivity. Memory &
Cognition, 37, 383-393.
Fox, C. R., Ratner, R. K., & Lieb, D. S. (2005). How subjective grouping of
options influences choice and allocation: Diversification bias and the
phenomenon of partition dependence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 134, 538-551.
Gallo, D. A. (2004). Using recall to reduce false recognition: Diagnostic
and disqualifying monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 120-128.
Gallo, D. A. (2010). False memories and fantastic beliefs: 15 years of the
DRM illusion. Memory & Cognition, 38, 833-848.
Gerlach, W., & Stern, O. (1922). Das magnetische moment des
silberatoms. Zeitschrift fur Physik, 9, 353-355.
Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1990). The mirror effect in recognition
memory: Data and theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 5-16.
Hicks, J. L., Marsh, R. L., & Cook, G. I. (2005). Task interference in timebased, event-based, and dual intention prospective memory
conditions. Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 430-444.
Hicks, J. L., & Starns, J. J. (2006). The roles of associative strength and
source memorability in the contextualization of false memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 54, 39-53.
Howe, M. L. (2006). Developmentally invariant dissociations in children's
true and false memories: Not all relatedness is created equal. Child
Development, 77, 1112-1123.
Howe, M. L. (2008). Visual distinctiveness and the development of
children's false memories. Child Development, 77, 1112-1123.
Kellen, D., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2014). Modeling source-memory
overdistribution. Journal of Memory and Language, 76. UAGE Volume:
76 Pages: 216-236. Published: OCT 2014.
Killeen, P. R. (2009). Additive-utility model of delay discounting.
Psychological Review, 116, 602-619.
Kintsch, W., Welsch, D., Schmalhofer, F., & Zimny, S. (1990). Sentence
memory: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 29,
133-159.
Kurilla, B. P., & Westerman, D. L. (2010). Source memory for unidentified
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 36, 398-410.
Lambert-Mogiliansky, A. (2014). Comments on episodic superposition of
memory states. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 63-66.
Loftus, E. F. (1975). Leading questions and eyewitness report. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 560-572.

C.J. Brainerd et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 84 (2015) 224-245
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. J. (1978). Semantic integration of
verbal information into visual memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4, 19-31.
Macchi, L., Osherson, D., & Krantz, D. H. (1999). A note on superadditive
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 106, 210-214.
Nelson, D. L., Kitto, K., Galea, D., McEvoy, C. L., & Bruza, P. D. (2013). How
activation, entanglement, and searching a semantic network
contribute to event memory. Memory & Cognition, 41, 797-819.
Pothos, E. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). Can quantum probability provide
a new direction for cognitive modeling? Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
36, 255-327.
Redelmeier, D. A., Koehler, D. J., Liberman, V., & Tversky, A. (1995).
Probability judgment in medicine: Discounting unspecified
alternatives. Medical Decision Making, 15, 227-231.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (2011). Dual processes in decision making
and
developmental
neuroscience:
A
fuzzy-trace
model.
Developmental Review, 31, 180-206.
Reyna, V. F., & Kiernan, B. (1994). The development of gist versus
verbatim memory in sentence recognition: Effects of lexical
familiarity, semantic content, encoding instructions, and retention
interval. Developmental Psychology, 30, 178-191.
Roediger, H. L., III, Watson, J. M., McDermott, K. B., & Gallo, D. A. (2001).
Factors that determine false recall: A multiple regression analysis.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 385-407.
Rottenstreich, Y., & Tversky, A. (1997). Unpacking, repacking, and
anchoring: Advances in support theory. Psychological Review, 104,
406-415.
Scholten, M., & Read, D. (2010). The psychology of intertemporal
tradeoffs. Psychological Review, 117, 925-944.
Smith, S. M., Gerkens, D. R., Pierce, B. H., & Choi, H. (2002). The roles of
associative responses at study and semantically guided recollection at

245

test in false memory: The Kirkpatrick and Deese hypotheses. Journal
of Memory and Language, 47, 436-447.
Trueblood, J. S., & Hemmer, P. (submitted for publication). Comparison of
quantum models for the episodic over-distribution effect in conjoint
recognition.
Tse, C. S., & Neely, J. H. (2004). Assessing activation without source
monitoring in the DRM false memory paradigm. Journal of Memory
and Language, 53, 532-550.
Tversky, A., & Fox, C. R. (1995). Weighing risk and uncertainty.
Psychological Review, 102, 269-283.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs. intuitive reasoning:
The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Review,
9, 293-315.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: A nonextensional
representation of subjective probability. Psychological Review, 101,
547-567.
Van Overschelde, J. P., Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2004). Category
norms: An updated and expanded version of the Battig and Montague
(1969) norms. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 289-335.
Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). A quantum question order model
supported by empirical tests of an a priori and precise prediction.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 689-710.
Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H., & Pothos, E. M. (2013). The
potential of using quantum theory to build models of cognition. Topics
in Cognitive Science, 5, 672-688.
Wang, Z., Solloway, T., Shiffrin, R. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Context
effects produced by question orders reveal quantum nature of human
judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(26),
9431-9436.

