Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: 2327-3798 (Print) 2327-3801 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Reversing expectations during discourse comprehension
Ming Xiang & Gina Kuperberg
To cite this article: Ming Xiang & Gina Kuperberg (2015) Reversing expectations during
discourse comprehension, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 30:6, 648-672, DOI:
10.1080/23273798.2014.995679
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.995679

Published online: 24 Dec 2014.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1256

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 21 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 2015
Vol. 30, No. 6, 648-672, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.995679

Reversing expectations during discourse comprehension
Ming Xianga* and Gina Kuperbergb,c
a
Language and Processing Laboratory, Department of Linguistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60615, USA; bNeurocognition
Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA; cDepartment of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Bldg 149, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA

(Received 9 July 2014; accepted 24 November 2014)
In two event-related potential experiments, we asked whether comprehenders used the concessive connective, even so, to
predict upcoming events. Participants read coherent and incoherent scenarios, with and without even so, e.g. `Elizabeth had
a history exam on Monday. She took the test and aced/failed it. (Even so), she went home and celebrated wildly', as they
rated coherence (Experiment 1) or simply answered intermittent comprehension questions (Experiment 2). The semantic
function of even so was used to reverse real-world knowledge predictions, leading to an attenuated N400 to coherent versus
incoherent target words (`celebrated'). Moreover, its pragmatic communicative function enhanced predictive processing,
leading to more N400 attenuation to coherent targets in scenarios with than without even so. This benefit however, did not
come for free: the detection of failed event predictions triggered a later posterior positivity and/or an anterior negativity
effect, and costs of maintaining alternative likelihood relations manifest as a sustained negativity effect on sentence-final
words.
Keywords: discourse processing; concessive connectives; prediction; event structures; N400; P600; late negativity; ERP

Successful language comprehension draws heavily upon
our experience in the real world. This real-world knowledge, stored within long-term memory, is recruited by the
comprehension system to aid the construction of a
discourse model. It tells us whether what we hear or
read is plausible, implausible, true or false. Moreover, as
language unfolds online, we continually draw upon this
stored knowledge to facilitate our comprehension of
sentences describing familiar events or states (MarslenWilson, Brown, & Tyler, 1988; McRae, Ferretti, and
Amyote, 1997; Warren & McConnell, 2007), as well as
discourse describing familiar relationships between events
and states (Keenan, Baillet, & Brown, 1984; Singer &
Halldorson, 1996; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983).
At the same time, however, language offers us the
remarkable ability to construct discourse models that do
not necessarily conform to our real-world knowledge.
Moreover, there is emerging evidence that such models
can sometimes (although not always) facilitate the processing of incoming words during comprehension (Nieuwland, 2013; Nieuwland & Martin, 2012; Nieuwland & van
Berkum, 2006). For simplicity, we will refer to any such
discourse model as an `alternative world model' - a
separate set of events and relations that are established in
some mental space that is different from the default realworld knowledge, stored within long-term memory.1 For
example, when reading Harry Potter, we may well expect
to encounter events of magic and wizardry that are quite

*Corresponding author. Email: mxiang@uchicago.edu
(c) 2014 Taylor & Francis

different from our everyday reality. And, if asked to
entertain the possibility, `if humans were living on the
moon...', we would not be surprised to hear about facts
and events that are quite different from what happens on
planet Earth.
Concessive connectives and `even so'
Importantly, we do not only construct alternative world
models when reading fiction or carrying out counterfactual reasoning. We use such models all the time during
everyday communication through our use of small words
or phrases, like but, however, even so and although. These
so-called concessive connectives set up an alternative
world model by introducing a presupposition (Lagerwerf,
1998; Lakoff, 1971) or conventional implicature (Grice,
1975) that an upcoming proposition will contrast with, or
contradict, a previously held assumption or expectation
based on world knowledge (Blakemore, 2002; Lakoff,
1971). The rich inherent meaning of these lexical items
also provides the comprehender with explicit information
about how the upcoming proposition should be linked to
its preceding discourse context. In this sense, they
function to pragmatically constrain the incremental process of discourse comprehension, helping us to infer the
relevance of any upcoming information (Blakemore,
2002; Wilson & Sperber, 1993). This pragmatic constraining function sets concessive connectives apart from the
fictional scenarios or counterfactuals mentioned above.

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
These also set up alternative world models. However, they
do not necessarily provide sufficient linguistic information
about exactly how upcoming propositions will link to the
discourse context.
Although concessive connectives are often used in
everyday communication, there have been very few
psycholinguistic studies examining their influences on
online comprehension (but see Murray, 1994, 1997). In
the present study, we examine the effects of one particular
concessive connective on word-by-word discourse comprehension - even so. Even so is a concessive connective
that is commonly used to link propositions across sentence
boundaries. It is derived from the scalar term, even, which
introduces a presupposition that the event under discussion is very low in its likelihood, but asserts that the
utterance is nevertheless true (Karttunen & Peters, 1979).
At the discourse level, even so inherits the scale-reversing
property of even: it functions to establish an alternative
world model in which the possible causal relationships
between events are reversed from what would follow from
our real-world knowledge. In addition, as discussed
above, even so, like other concessive connectives, acts to
pragmatically constrain the discourse context by `narrowing down' the number of potential relationships to
those that causally opposite-to-expected (see Noveck &
Spotorno, 2013, for a more general discussion of this type
of `narrowing down' effect in communication and discussed further below).
To illustrate the scale-reversing function of even so,
consider the four types of three-sentence scenarios shown
in Table 1. In the scenarios where the final sentence does
not begin with Even so (the `plain scenarios'), coherence
arises purely from the real-world relationship between the
particular event described in the final sentence and the
events and states described in the preceding context. For

649

example, in the plain coherent scenario, `... Elizabeth
took the test and aced it. She went home and celebrated...', our real-world knowledge tells us that these
events are causally related, whereas in the plain incoherent
scenario, `... Elizabeth took the test and failed it. She went
home and celebrated...', it tells us that these events are
unlikely to follow on from one another.
In the scenarios where the final sentence begins with
Even so (the `even-so scenarios'), these relationships are
reversed: coherence is evaluated in relation to the alternative world model set up under even so, rather than realworld knowledge. For example, the even-so coherent
scenario, `... Elizabeth took the test and failed it. Even
so, she went home and celebrated...', is coherent, despite
the fact that the relationships between the events/states
described do not match our long-term real-world knowledge. And the even-so incoherent scenario, `... Elizabeth
took the test and aced it. Even so, she went home and
celebrated...', is incoherent, despite the fact that the
events described are consistent with our real-world
knowledge.
In the present study, we asked participants to read
discourse scenarios similar to those described above. Based
on a large psycholinguistic literature showing that we are
able to integrate multiple linguistic cues quickly and
incrementally during online word-by-word language comprehension (e.g. Altmann & Steedman, 1988; MacDonald,
Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995; Traxler, Bybee, &
Pickering, 1997; van Berkum, 2009), we expected that
comprehenders would integrate even so relatively quickly
to establish an alternative world model. Our main questions
concerned whether, when and how comprehenders would
use this alternative world model to predict and process
incoming information as it unfolded, word by word.

Table 1. Example stimuli and characteristics.
Scenario type
(n = 45 per
condition)
1. Coherent
2. Incoherent
3. Even-so
Coherent
4. Even-so
Incoherent

Example
Elizabeth had a history exam on Monday. She took the test
and aced it. She went home and celebrated wildly
Elizabeth had a history exam on Monday. She took the test
and failed it. She went home and celebrated wildly
Elizabeth had a history exam on Monday. She took the test
and failed it. Even so, she went home and celebrated wildly
Elizabeth had a history exam on Monday. She took the test
and aced it. Even so, she went home and celebrated wildly

SSV of
critical worda

Clozeb

Constraintb

Coherence
ratingsc

0.179 [0.078]

0.42 [0.32]

0.52 [0.26]

4.8 [0.2]

0.174 [0.079]

0.03 [0.09]

0.40 [0.24]

1.7 [0.4]

0.174 [0.079]

0.31 [0.28]

0.44 [0.25]

3.3 [1.0]

0.179 [0.078]

0.04 [0.11]

0.40 [0.24]

2.4 [1.0]

Note: Means are shown with standard deviations in square brackets. The critical word in each of the example sentences is underlined (although this was
not the case in the experiment itself).
a
LSA was used to calculate SSV between the critical word and its preceding content words.
b
Cloze probability and constraint are represented as the proportion of total responses from 40 participants.
c
Coherence ratings, on a 1-5 scale, were collected during the ERP recording session in Experiment 1. 5: very coherent; 1: incoherent.

650

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

Prediction, generative models and event-related
potentials
The term prediction has been used by different researchers
in different ways. While early models assumed that it
necessarily entailed committing to specific lexical items
(Forster, 1981) in a strategic, all-or-nothing fashion (we
either predict or we don't) (Becker, 1980, 1985), here we
make no such assumptions. We use the term prediction
and expectation interchangeably and conceive of prediction as influencing a Bayesian prior - an assessment of the
probability of accessing information at a particular
representational level ahead of encountering all the
linguistic information required to activate, retrieve or
compute this representation. We assume that predictions
are generated at multiple levels of representation and that
rather than being deterministic, they are probabilistic in
nature: that is, multiple predictions at a particular representational level are held with differing probabilities that
add up to 100% in total. Thus, a very strong prediction
corresponds to a near-certain (e.g. 99%) probability of
belief in a particular upcoming representation, and a weak
prediction corresponds to many low probability beliefs in
multiple possible upcoming representations.
We view such probabilistic predictions as a consequence of a dynamic hierarchical generative process
by which our brains draw upon high-level stored representations and contextual information to construct a
generative model that best explains the sensory input we
encounter. This type of framework is proving powerful not
only for understanding language processing (e.g. Farmer,
Brown, & Tanenhaus, 2013; Feldman, Griffiths, & Morgan, 2009; Fine, Jaeger, Farmer, & Qian, 2013; Hale,
2001; Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, in press; Kuperberg, 2014;
Levy, 2008; Norris, 2006; Norris & McQueen, 2008) but
also many other aspects of perception and cognition
(Clark, 2013; Friston, 2005; Griffiths, Kemp, & Tenenbaum, 2008; Jacobs & Kruschke, 2011; Rao & Ballard,
1999). According to this framework, probabilistic predictions are propagated from higher- to lower-level representational layers, and any residual error between these
predictions and the input to each layer (implicit prediction
error) serves as the feed-forward signal from lower to
higher-level representational layers. This implicit prediction error (or Bayesian surprise) is, in turn, used to update
our predictions in an ongoing attempt to refine the
generative model and `explain away' the bottom-up input
(see Kuperberg, 2014).
In this study, we are primarily concerned with activity
at three layers of representation (see Kuperberg, 2013, for
discussion): (1) event sequences, which describe our
knowledge about the necessary and likely temporal,
spatial, causal and other relationships that link multiple
events and states together to form sequences of events,
sometimes known as scripts, frames or narrative schemas

(Fillmore, 2006; Schank & Abelson, 1977; Sitnikova,
Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2008; Zwaan & Radvansky,
1998); (2) event structures, which describe our finegrained knowledge about specific events (e.g. in an
`arresting' event, it is more likely that a policeman arrests
a burglar than the other way around, McRae et al., 1997),
our knowledge about similar events (e.g. the similarities
between a `teaching event' and an `instructing' or
`mentoring' event), as well as our coarser-grained knowledge about the prototypical semantic-thematic roles
(Agent, Patient, Experiencer, Stimulus, etc.) played by
participants in actions and states (Jackendoff, 2002); and
(3) semantic (or conceptual) features, which describes our
knowledge of the perceptual features and functional
properties of conceptual entities and categories, e.g. our
knowledge that a `boy' has the properties of being
<human>, <male>, <young>, etc.
These representational layers interface with one another
through statistical dependencies that describe the regularities between them, and, during language processing,
predictions generated at higher layers influence the priors
at lower layers through these dependencies. Thus, at any
given time, the situation-level representation of context will
interact with our stored knowledge of event sequences,
influencing probabilistic predictions about upcoming event
structures, which will, in turn influence probabilistic
predictions about upcoming semantic features (indeed,
this propagation of implicit predictions may sometimes
continue down to lower representational layers, including
word-form, pre-lexical and perceptual representations).
We conceive of even so as exerting its influence at the
event sequence layer of representation by explicitly
signalling to the comprehender to expect an opposite-toexpected causal relationship. Under the framework we just
described, this prediction will propagate down to constrain
the prior probability distribution at the event structure
layer, narrowing it down from including many different
kinds of event structures (with causal, spatial, temporal
and other relationships with the context) that are each held
with relatively low probabilities, to a specific type of
event structure that is held with higher probability. This, in
turn, will lead to strong (high probability) predictions
about upcoming semantic features at the representation
layer below.
One way of examining how these types of probabilistic
predictions interact with incoming information as it
unfolds in real time is through event-related potentials
(ERPs) -an online neural measure of cognitive processing.
It has been proposed that ERPs associated with auditory
speech processing are a direct reflection of implicit
prediction error within a hierarchical predictive coding
system (Friston, 2005; Wacongne, Changeux, & Dehaene,
2012; Wacongne et al., 2011), and recent evidence
suggests that this may also be true of semantic processing
(Rabovsky & McRae, 2014), with different ERP

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
components reflecting both the representational level of
a prediction error (Kuperberg, 2014) and the certainty of
our original predictions (Kuperberg, 2013, 2014). In this
study, we focus on three sets of ERP components: the
N400, the posterior late positivity or P600 and the late
negativities.
The N400 is a negative-going waveform with a centroparietal scalp distribution, seen between 300 and 500 ms
after word onset. It reflects changes in activity within
semantic memory that are induced by incoming stimuli
(Kutas & Federmeier, 2011), and it can be formalised as
reflecting implicit prediction error at the level of semantic
features (Rabovsky & McRae, 2014). Of particular
relevance to the present study is evidence that the
amplitude of the N400 can be influenced by implicit
predictions generated at higher representational levels
(e.g. event sequences or event structures). If an incoming
word's coarse-grained (Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2008; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2011, 2012) or
finer-grained (Ferretti, Kutas, & McRae, 2007; Metusalem
et al., 2012; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012) semantic
features match these implicit predictions, the N400 evoked
by that word is attenuated. Moreover, pragmatic communicative cues (for example, commas, e.g. Nieuwland,
Ditman, & Kuperberg, 2010, Experiment 2, or speech
dysfluencies, e.g. Corley, MacGregor, & Donaldson,
2007) can play an important role in determining whether
or not comprehenders are able to fully use a discourse
context and stored event knowledge to generate implicit
predictions leading to facilitated semantic processing
during online comprehension.
Although the N400 is influenced by predictions
generated at the event structure layers, and it reflects
implicit prediction error at the level of semantic features, it
is actually not directly sensitive to prediction errors at the
event structure layer itself (see Kuperberg, 2013, for
discussion and Federmeier, Wlotko, De Ochoa-Dewald,
& Kutas, 2007; Lau, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2013; Van
Petten & Luka, 2012, for consistent evidence). Rather, the
costs of disconfirmed predictions at the level of event
structure manifest as waveforms that peak after the N400
time window.
The first of these is a posteriorly distributed late positivegoing ERP component - the so-called P600, which peaks
between 500 and 800 ms after stimulus onset (Kuperberg,
2007). Although the P600 was originally characterised as
the ERP component produced by words that violated the
syntactic constraints of predicted events structures
(Hagoort, Brown, & Groothusen, 1993; Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992, 1993), it is now clear that it can also be
evoked by violations of strong semantic constraints on
event structure (see Kuperberg, 2007, for a review).
Specifically, it is triggered when the sentential or discourse
context encourages a strong near-certain prediction for a
particular event structure (a prediction with near-100%

651

probability), and this conflicts with the event structure that
is computed by initial attempts to integrate the bottom-up
input. It may reflect prolonged attempts to (re)-analyse the
context and input to come up with a new discourse model
(Kuperberg, 2007; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012). In
Bayesian terms, it may reflect `unexpected surprise' that
triggers a switch to a new generative cause at the level of
event sequences that better explains (and allows us to
rapidly adapt to) the input (see Courville, Daw, &
Touretzky, 2006; Qian, Jaeger, & Aslin, 2012; Yu, 2007;
Yu & Dayan, 2005; discussed by Kuperberg, 2013, 2014).
The second set of waveforms that can be seen when
event structure predictions are disconfirmed by an input is
a group of late negativities, which also peak past the N400
time window and often have a more widespread or frontal
distribution than the N400. Unlike the P600, these late
negativities are not evoked by violations of a single nearcertain event structure prediction. Rather, they are seen
when the context constrains for one event structure with
medium-high probability and another event structure with
lower probability, and the bottom-up input leads the less
probable event structure to be selected (e.g. Baggio, Van
Lambalgen, & Hagoort, 2008; Bott, 2010; Lee & Federmeier, 2006, 2009; Paczynski, Jackendoff, & Kuperberg,
2014; Wittenberg, Paczynski, Wiese, Jackendoff, &
Kuperberg, 2014; Wlotko & Federmeier, 2012). In this
sense, they correspond to implicit prediction error at the
level of event structures (see Kuperberg, 2014).
In the present study, we examined these ERPs to ask
four questions about how and when predictions established by even so are used during online discourse
processing.
1. Reversed and enhanced semantic expectations under
even so?
Our first question was whether, under even so, our implicit
predictions about upcoming semantic features, if any,
would be based on an alternative world model or based
on the stored long-term real-world knowledge. Previous
studies using other constructions that set up alternative
world models have provided different answers to this
question. Sometimes, stored long-term real-world knowledge appears to dominate the initial stages of semantically processing incoming words, as indexed by the N400.
For example, in a study of counterfactuals, Fergurson
et al. (2008, Experiment 2) asked participants to read
sentences like, `If cats were not carnivores, families could
feed their cats a bowl of fish/carrots...'. They showed that
the real-world consistent (but alternative world inconsistent) word, fish, elicited a smaller N400 than the real-world
inconsistent (but alternative world consistent) word,
carrots (see also Ferguson, Sanford, & Leuthold, 2008,
Experiment 1 and Ferguson & Sanford, 2008, for related
eye tracking results). At other times, however, an

652

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

alternative world model can override long-term real-world
knowledge to facilitate semantic processing of incoming
words (e.g. Nieuwland, 2013; Nieuwland & Martin, 2012;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006; also see Ferguson &
Breheny, 2011; Hald, Steenbeek-Planting, & Hagoort,
2007). For example, in another study of counterfactuals,
Nieuwland and Martin (2012; also see Nieuwland, 2013)
asked participants to read sentences like, `If NASA had
not developed its Apollo Project, the first country to land
on the moon would have been Russia/America surely',
and showed that the N400 was smaller to Russia than to
America.
One factor that seems to be crucial in determining
whether we draw upon long-term real-world knowledge or
an alternative world model to facilitate subsequent semantic processing is whether the discourse context is
pragmatically constraining - that is, whether it provides
explicit information about how the upcoming proposition
will be linked to it. This is nicely illustrated by the
counterfactual experiments described above. In the study
by Ferguson et al. (2008, Experiment 2), the preceding
discourse context does not constrain for a particular event
or state: people will have quite different opinions (or little
to say) about the most likely thing that people will feed
a non-carnivorous cat. In the studies by Nieuwland and
Martin (2012) and Nieuwland (2013), however, the
discourse is more constraining: given how well known
the America-Russia space race is, most people will expect
the upcoming event to describe the opposite of what
actually happened.
Returning to the present study, we hypothesised that
the pragmatic constraining function of even so would lead
comprehenders to draw upon the alternative world model
established and generate strong (high probability) predictions about an upcoming real-world inconsistent event and
semantic features consistent with this event, leading to
more semantic facilitation of congruous incoming words.
Indeed, given this pragmatic constraining function, these
predictions might be stronger (higher probability) than
those generated in the plain scenarios.
To test these hypotheses, we examined the modulation
of the N400 across two contrasts. First, we compared the
coherent and incoherent even-so scenarios. If comprehenders reverse their expectations under the scale-reversing
function of even so, then we should see a smaller N400
(more semantic facilitation) to critical words like celebrated in the even-so coherent (but real-world inconsistent) scenarios (e.g. `... Elizabeth took the test and failed
it. Even so, she went home and celebrated...'). Second,
we contrasted the even-so and the plain coherent scenarios. If comprehenders enhance their semantic expectations under the pragmatic constraining function of even so,
then we should also see a smaller N400 to celebrated in
the even-so coherent scenarios than in the coherent plain

scenarios (e.g. `... Elizabeth took the test and aced it. She
went home and celebrated...').
2. Costs of disconfirmed event structure predictions
under even so?
Our second question was whether we would see any
evidence in the ERP waveform of encountering input that
disconfirmed any high probability predictions of upcoming event structures established under even so. As noted
above, the costs of violating event structure predictions do
not manifest directly on the N400 itself (Federmeier et al.,
2007; Kuperberg, 2013; Lau et al., 2013; Van Petten &
Luka, 2012), but appear later, on components that peak
past the N400 time window -a stage at which the event
structure has been fully computed from the bottom-up
input.
We considered two possibilities. The first was that even
so would lead comprehenders to generate a single strong
high certainty prediction for one specific type of event
that has a real-world inconsistent causal relationship with
the preceding event. On this account, if integration of the
bottom-up input yields a real-world consistent causal
relationship, the resulting conflict would trigger prolonged
attempts to (re)-analyse the context and input to come up
with a new discourse model (Kuperberg, 2007, 2013).
This might manifest as a larger posteriorly distributed late
positive-going P600 to targets like celebrated in incoherent even-so scenarios than in incoherent plain scenarios.
The second possibility was that, rather than commit
with near-100% certainty to a single real-world inconsistent event structure under even so, comprehenders would
consider the possibility of encountering a real-world
consistent event structure with some lower probability.
On this account, integration of the bottom-up input would
ultimately select the less probable but real-world consistent structure over the more probable but real-world
inconsistent structure, and this selection cost might
manifest as a larger late anteriorly distributed sustained
negativity to targets in the incoherent even-so scenarios
than in the incoherent plain scenarios (e.g. Baggio et al.,
2008; Bott, 2010; Paczynski et al., 2014; Wittenberg et al.,
2014). Note that the two possibilities outlined above are
not mutually exclusive because the certainty of event
structure prediction might vary between participants and/
or between trials.
3. Wrap-up costs of assessing overall discourse
coherence against the alternative world established
under even so
Our third question was whether even so would lead to
independent costs associated with assessing a discourse
model that is coherent under a set of likelihood relations
that differ from our default real-world knowledge. These

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
costs might not necessarily be apparent at the point of the
critical word itself. However, they might manifest later as
a sustained negativity on the sentence-final word - the
point at which overall discourse coherence is `wrapped
up' and evaluated.
A larger sustained negativity is often seen on the final
words of sentences that are implausible (versus plausible)
in relation to real-world knowledge, even when the
implausibility or anomaly occurs mid-sentence (e.g. De
Grauwe, Swain, Holcomb, Ditman, & Kuperberg, 2010;
Ditman, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2007; Hagoort, 2003;
Hagoort & Brown, 2000). This is presumably because it is
harder to assess overall coherence if the overall discourse
model mismatches long-term real-world knowledge than if
it matches real-world knowledge. If similar wrap-up costs
are incurred when the comprehension system evaluates
overall coherence against a set of reversed likelihood
relationships established under even so (the alternative
world model), this would predict a larger sustained
negativity effect on sentence-final words in the even-so
scenarios than in the plain scenarios, even when both are
coherent. Moreover, it should be even harder to come up
with a final representation of meaning when overall
coherence is evaluated against a set of reversed likelihood
relationships, and the scenario turns out to be incoherent,
predicting the largest sustained negativity on the final
words of the even-so incoherent scenarios.

4. Effects of task
Our final set of questions concerned the effects of task on
comprehending both the plain and the even-so scenarios.
Task can influence processing in several different ways. It
can influence the degree to which comprehenders attend
to different aspects of discourse, including the semantic
relationships between propositions. This can, in turn,
influence the strength/certainty of our predictions, which,
as discussed above, can influence the neural mechanisms
engaged at multiple stages of processing. To examine the
effects of task in this study, we carried out two experiments. In Experiment 1, participants were asked to
explicitly rate the coherence of each discourse scenario.
In Experiment 2, participants were asked to read the
scenarios and to answer intermittent comprehension questions about their content.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants read the four types of threesentence scenarios described in Table 1. The factors of
Coherence and Even-so were fully crossed, and we
measured ERPs on both critical words (e.g. celebrated)
as well as on the final words of the third sentence. After
each scenario, participants explicitly judged the coherence

653

of the final sentence in relation to the previous context.
This encouraged them to pay close attention to the internal
semantic relationships between the propositions.
Importantly, we matched general schema-based semantic relationships between the critical word and the
`bag of words' in the context across all four conditions
using latent semantic analysis (LSA, see the section
`Methods'). This allowed us to determine whether readers
based their expectations on specific types of relationships
between events, e.g. the fact that students are likely to
celebrate after doing well on exams (Kuperberg, Paczynski, & Ditman, 2011; St. George, Mannes, & Hoffman,
1997; Yang, Perfetti, & Schmalhofer, 2007), or on more
general, unstructured word associations based around a
particular schema (Schank & Abelson, 1977), e.g. the
general association between successful/failed exams and
parties afterwards (see Otten & van Berkum, 2007;
Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012, for discussion).2
Our starting point was the plain scenarios. We asked
whether, with these task instructions, readers would
generate predictions about likely upcoming events/states,
leading to facilitated semantic processing of incoming
words whose semantic features were associated with these
events. Based on a previous study in which we contrasted
causally coherent and incoherent plain discourse scenarios
while participants carried out a similar explicit coherence
judgement task. (Kuperberg et al., 2011), we hypothesised
that we would see a smaller N400 on critical words in the
plain coherent than in the plain incoherent scenarios.
Having established how the plain scenarios were
processed, we then turned to the effects of even so. We
make the following hypotheses based on the discussion in
the General Introduction: (1) If comprehenders are able to
draw upon the alternative world model previously generated under even so, and use this to reverse their predictions about the real-world likelihood of upcoming events,
the N400 should be smaller to critical words in the
coherent than the incoherent even-so scenarios, just as in
the plain scenarios; indeed, if predictions established
under even so are stronger (higher probability) than in
the plain scenarios, then the N400 to critical words in the
coherent even-so scenarios should be even smaller than in
the coherent plain scenarios. (2) If even so leads to strong
reverse predictions about upcoming events, then disconfirmation of these event predictions by the bottom-up
input should lead to prolonged neural costs (past the N400
time window) to critical words in the even-so incoherent
versus the plain incoherent scenarios. Finally, (3) if,
during sentence-final wrap-up, evaluating coherence
against the temporary alternative world model established
under even so incurs more costs than evaluating coherence
against long-term real-world knowledge, then sentencefinal words in the even-so coherent scenarios should
produce a larger negativity than sentence-final words in

654

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

the plain coherent scenarios; moreover, this negativity
should be still larger on sentence-final words in the
incoherent even-so scenarios.

Methods
Construction and characterisation of stimuli
One hundred and eighty sets of two-sentence scenarios
were constructed, each with four conditions (45 scenarios
per condition; see Table 1). In all scenarios, a critical word
appeared in the final sentence but before the sentence-final
word. The number of words between the critical word and
the sentence-final word varied between 0 and 3 across
trials, but was matched between conditions within a
scenario. The number of words between the critical word
and the sentence initial word (excluding Even so) mostly
varied between 1 and 4 words (with only a few scenarios
with more than four words), but once again this was
matched between conditions within a scenario.
The four conditions were constructed by crossing two
factors: Even-so (the presence or absence of the phrase,
Even so at the beginning of the final sentence: plain or
even-so scenarios) and Coherence (the coherence of the
critical word in relation to its preceding context: coherent
or incoherent scenarios). In the plain coherent and the
plain incoherent conditions, the final sentence was identical: differences in coherence arose because of differences
in the first two sentences. In the even-so scenarios,
coherence was reversed: the original plain coherent
scenarios became the even-so incoherent scenarios, and
the original plain incoherent scenarios became the even-so
coherent scenarios. The critical word was thus identical in
all four conditions.
Lexical predictability of critical words and lexical
constraint of discourse contexts: offline cloze norming
The 180 sets of scenarios were counterbalanced across
four lists using a Latin Square design. For each scenario,
the critical word and all words following it were removed
and replaced by an ellipsis, e.g. `Elizabeth had a history
exam on Mon. She took the test and aced it. She went
home and...'. Cloze ratings of these stems were conducted
as an online survey using SurveyMonkey.com, with
participants recruited from Tufts University and other
neighbouring areas. Participants were asked to read the
scenario stems and to complete the unfinished last
sentence by writing down the most likely ending. Initially,
40 native English speakers (30 female, 10 male, average
age: 23.3) participated (10 per list). Cloze probabilities for
each of the four scenario types were calculated based on
the percentage of respondents who produced a word that
matched the critical word exactly. Based on the initial
results, we modified 13 of the scenarios that did not show
any difference between coherent and incoherent scenarios

and carried out a second cloze study on these 13 new
items with another set of 40 native English speakers (29
female, 11 male, average age: 26.2). We used these 13
new items to replace the old 13 items and then recalculated the cloze probability for each item across the entire
stimulus set.
Cloze probabilities for each scenario type are given in
Table 1. A 2 x 2 repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with Coherence and Even-so as within-items
factors revealed a main effect of Coherence, F(1, 179) =
329, p < .001, and a main effect of Even-so, F(1, 179) =
22, p < .001. There was also an interaction between the
two factors, F(1, 179) = 21, p < .001. Follow-up paired ttests examining effects of Coherence at each level of
Even-so showed that, as expected, the even-so and the
plain coherent scenarios had significantly higher cloze
probabilities than their corresponding incoherent conditions [plain coherent vs. plain incoherent: t(179) = 16, p <
.001; even-so coherent vs. even-so incoherent: t(179) =
13, p < .001], but that the difference in cloze probability
between the coherent and incoherent conditions was larger
in the plain than in the even-so scenarios. Follow-up ttests examining effects of Even-so at each level of
Coherence showed that the cloze probability of critical
words in the plain coherent scenarios was significantly
higher than in the even-so coherent scenarios, t(179) = 5,
p < .001, but that there was no significant difference in
cloze probability between the plain and even-so incoherent scenarios, t(179) = 0.16, p > .8.
In addition to calculating cloze probabilities, we also
calculated the contextual lexical constraint for each type
of scenario context by finding the most common completion across participants who saw that context, regardless
of whether or not it matched the critical word, and tallying
the number of subjects who provided this completion, see
Table 1. For example if, for a given scenario, our designed
critical word was `disappointed' and 3 out of 10 people
provided `disappointed' as their answer, then the cloze
probability would be 0.3 for this scenario, but if 5 out of
the 10 people provided `confused' as their answer, then
the lexical constraint probability for this context would be
0.5. A 2 x 2 repeated-measures ANOVA with Coherence
and Even-so as within-items factors again revealed a main
effect of Coherence, F(1, 179) = 22, p < .001, a main
effect of Even-so, F(1, 179) = 5.7, p < .05, and an
interaction between the two, F(1, 179) = 7.4, p < .01.
Follow-up paired t-tests showed that the lexical constraint
of the plain coherent contexts was greater than the plain
incoherent contexts, t(179) = 5, p < .001, while the
difference between the even-so coherent and incoherent
contexts was only marginally significant, t(179) = 1.9, p <
.06. In addition, the lexical constraint of the plain coherent
contexts was greater than the even-so coherent scenario
contexts, t(179) = 3.6, p < .001, but there was no

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
difference in lexical constraint between the plain and
even-so incoherent scenario stems, t(179) = 0.76, p > .9.
Latent semantic analysis
LSA, a measure of semantic relatedness, Landauer &
Dumais 1997; Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998) was
carried out on the final stimulus set, on a term-to-term
basis, to examine the semantic similarity values (SSVs)
between the critical word and previous content words
across the context of each scenario. A paired t-test
revealed no significant differences between the plain
coherent and plain incoherent scenarios, t(179) = 1.55,
p > .10. Note that, because of how the stimuli were
constructed, SSVs were the same for the plain coherent
and even-so incoherent conditions, and for the plain
incoherent and even-so coherent conditions. See Table 1
for SSVs in all four scenario types.
Set-up of lists for the ERP experiment
The final set of experimental scenarios was divided into
four lists, counterbalanced using a Latin Square design.
During the ERP experiment, each participant viewed only
one list and therefore only one condition of each scenario,
but across all participants, each scenario and critical word
was seen in all four conditions. Each list had 180
scenarios, 45 from each condition. The order of items
was randomised within each list separately.
Participants in the ERP experiment
Twenty-nine native English speakers initially participated
in the ERP study (two participants were subsequently
excluded for extensive ocular and muscular artefacts, see
below). All participants were undergraduate students
recruited from local universities. They were all righthanded, as assessed using the Edinburgh handedness
inventory (Oldfield, 1971), with normal or corrected-tonormal vision, and no history of neurological disorders.
Participants were paid for their participation and gave full
consent according to the guidelines of the Tufts University
Human Subjects Committee. The 27 subjects included in
the data analysis had an average age of 20 years (SD: 1.7)
and 14 were males.
Stimulus presentation
Participants sat in a quiet and dimly lit room, separated
from the experimenter and control computers. Their task
was to rate each scenario on a 1-5 scale, based on how
naturally the third sentence followed on from the previous
two sentences. For half of the participants, a score of 1
meant `it does not follow at all' and 5 meant `it follows
very naturally'; and for the other half, the scoring was
reversed for counterbalancing purpose. Before starting the

655

experiment, each participant read 12 practice scenarios to
ensure that they understood the task.
Stimuli were presented on a computer monitor, in white
font, centred on a black background Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the four lists. Each trial
began with the word `READY' on the screen, which cued
the participant to press a button to begin reading the threesentence scenario. The first two context sentences were
presented one after another as whole sentences. Participants read these two sentences at their own pace, pressing
a button to move on to the second sentence. They then
saw a fixation cross (`+') in the middle of the screen for
500 ms, followed by a blank screen for 100 ms, and then
the last sentence was presented word by word. Each word
was centred in the middle of the screen and was presented
for 350 ms, followed by an interstimulus interval (ISI) of
150 ms. In the even-so scenarios, the phrase Even so was
presented as a whole. Because it consists of two words, it
appeared on the screen for 400 ms followed by an ISI of
150 ms. The last word of the final sentence appeared with
a period and was presented for 800 ms. A 400 ms ISI
followed this final word, and then a `?' appeared on the
screen which cued participants to make their rating
responses. Participants indicated their responses by pressing one of the five buttons on the response pad.
ERP recording
The EEG response was recorded from 29 electrodes
(Electro-Cap International, Inc., Eaton, OH; see Figure 1
for montage). Additional electrodes were placed below the
left eye and at the outer canthus of the right eye to monitor
vertical and horizontal eye movements. There were also
two mastoid electrodes (A1, A2) and the EEG signal was
referenced to the left mastoid online. The EEG signal was
amplified by an Isolated Biometric Amplifier (SA Instrumentation Co., San Diego, California) with a band pass of
0.01-40 Hz. It was continuously sampled at 200Hz and
the impedance was kept below 5k Ohm.
ERP analysis
Trials contaminated with eye artefact (with max-min
amplitudes exceeding 70 v, as well as visual inspection)
or amplifier blockage were excluded from analyses. After
artefact rejection, averaged ERPs, time-locked to critical
words, were obtained by calculating the mean amplitude
(relative to a 100 ms pre-stimulus baseline). At the critical
word, we carried out analyses across two time windows.
To capture the peak of the N400 in all four conditions, we
used a 350-450 ms time window. To capture the late
positivity/P600 in all four conditions, and to avoid
component overlap with the earlier N400 effect, we used
a 600-800 ms time window. Examination of the waveforms also revealed a late, sustained anteriorly distributed

656

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

negativity effect, which we captured between 800 and
1000 ms. At the sentence-final word, visual inspection of
the waveform revealed a prolonged negativity, which was
captured with a 300-1000 ms time window.
We initially carried out two omnibus repeated-measures
ANOVAs in which the scalp was subdivided into several
3-electrode regions along its anterior - posterior distribution, at both mid and peripheral sites (each region
contained 3-electrode sites, see Figure 1). In the midregions omnibus ANOVA, the within-subject variables
were Coherence (two levels: coherent, incoherent), Evenso (two levels: plain, even-so) and Region (five levels:
prefrontal, frontal, central, parietal, occipital). In the
peripheral regions omnibus ANOVA, the within-subjects
variables were Coherence (two levels: coherent, incoherent), Even-so (two levels: plain, even-so), Region (two
levels: frontal, parietal) and Hemisphere (two levels: left,
right). For further follow-ups, we focused on the subgroup
of regions that showed most modulation across conditions
(smallest p-values; largest F-values in omnibus ANOVAs
analyses carried out in each region).
In each subgroup of regions, we carried out 2 (Coherence) x 2 (Even-so) x Region ANOVAs; any interactions
between Coherence and Even-so were followed up by (1)
by examining the effects of Coherence at each level of
Even-so and (2) by examining the effects of Even-so at
each level of Coherence. In all analyses, the Greenhouse
and Geisser (1959) correction was applied to repeated
measures with more than one degree of freedom, and a
significance level of alpha = .05 was used for all
comparisons.

Results
Behavioural results
The coherence ratings for each of the four scenario types are
given in Table 1. A 2 x 2 ANOVA confirmed a significant
main effect of Coherence, F(1, 26) = 131, p < .001. It also
revealed a main effect of Even-so, reflecting higher overall
coherence ratings in the plain than the even-so scenarios, F
(1, 26) = 33, p < .001. In addition, there was a significant
interaction between these two variables, F(1, 26) = 33,
p < .001. Planned follow-up comparisons examining the
effects of Coherence on the plain and even-so scenarios
separately indicated that, as expected, the coherent scenarios were always rated as significantly more coherent than
the incoherent scenarios [plain: coherent vs. incoherent: t
(26) = 32, p < .001; even-so: coherent vs. incoherent: t(26)
= 2.45, p < .05], although the difference was larger in the
plain than in the even-so scenarios. Follow-ups examining
the effects of Even-so in the coherent and incoherent
scenarios separately showed that the coherent plain scenarios were rated as more coherent than the coherent even-so
scenarios, t(26) = 7.6, p < .001, and the incoherent plain
scenarios were rated as more incoherent than the incoherent
even-so scenarios, t(26) =-2.9, p < .01. In other words, the
plain coherent and plain incoherent scenarios were rated as
more coherent and incoherent respectively than their
corresponding even-so scenarios, which received ratings
that were in between these two extremes.

Event-related potentials
Critical word
At the critical word, 20% of trials were rejected for
artefact (plain coherent: 19%; plain incoherent: 19%;
even-so coherent 20%; even-so incoherent: 20%). A 2 x
2 within-subjects ANOVA showed that the rejection rate
did not differ between the coherent and incoherent
scenarios [no main effect of Coherence F(1, 26) < .1,
p > .9], or between the even-so and plain scenarios [no
effect of Even-so F(1, 26) = .9, p > .3]. There was also no
interaction between these two factors, F(1, 26) < .1,
p > .9.
N400: 350-450 ms

Figure 1. Electrode montage, showing each 3-electrode region
used for analysis. Regions in dark grey were part of the midregions omnibus ANOVA and regions in light grey were part of
the peripheral regions omnibus ANOVA.

There was a main effect of Coherence, reflecting a
widespread N400 effect across the even-so and plain
scenarios [mid-regions: F(1, 26) = 40.8, p < .001;
peripheral regions: F(1, 26) = 36.7, p < .001], which
was largest in frontal, central and parietal mid-regions
(interaction between Coherence and Region in the midregions analysis, F(4, 104) = 4.3, p < .01, with follow-ups
showing the effect of Coherence in each of these three
regions, Fs > 23, p < .001. To determine how effects of
Coherence were modulated by Even-so, we collapsed

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
across these three frontal, central and parietal mid-regions
(9-electrode sites in total).
In this 9-electrode region, Coherence was modulated
by Even-so [Coherence x Even-so interaction: F(1, 26) =
5.4, p < .05]. There were significant N400 effects of
Coherence in both the plain scenarios, F(1, 26) = 7, p <
.05, and the even-so scenarios, F(1, 26) = 40, p < .001.
However, the magnitude of the N400 effect in the even-so
scenarios was larger than in the plain scenarios (see Figure
2B). This larger N400 Coherence effect was driven by a
smaller N400 to coherent critical words in the even-so
than the plain coherent scenarios, F(1, 26) = 5.3, p < .053
(see Figure 3A; note that voltage map in Figure 3A shows
a positivity between 350 and 450 ms because the plain
condition was subtracted from the even-so condition). In
contrast, there was no difference in the N400 evoked by
incoherent critical words in the plain and even-so incoherent scenarios, F(1, 26) < 1, p > .4 (see Figure 3B).
Late posterior positivity/P600: 600-800 ms
Collapsed across the even-so and plain scenarios, there
was a P600 effect over parietal (left, right and mid) and
mid-occipital regions [interactions between Coherence and
Region in the mid-regions analysis, F(4, 104) = 9.5, p <
.001, and in the peripheral regions analysis, F(3, 78) =
14.2, p < .001, with follow-ups showing the effect of

657

Coherence in each of these four regions, all Fs > 6.8, ps <
.05]. To determine how the effect of Coherence was
modulated by Even-so, we collapsed across these four
regions: left, mid and right parietal and mid-occipital
regions (12-electrode sites in total).
In this 12-electrode parietal-occipital region, there was
a three-way interaction between Coherence, Even-so and
Region, F(2, 52) = 4.9, p < .05. Follow-ups showed a
P600 effect of Coherence in both the plain scenarios [at
left and right parietal regions, F(1, 26)s > 4.7, ps < .05
Figure 2A], and in the even-so scenarios [at the right
parietal region and the mid-occipital region, F(1, 26)s >
6.4, ps < .05, Figure 2B]. Once again, the effect was larger
in the even-so scenarios than in the plain scenarios. This
time, however, the larger effect in the even-so scenarios
was driven by a larger late positivity to incoherent even-so
than incoherent plain critical words [Figure 3B, in the
occipital region, F(1, 26) = 8.2, p < .01, and in the right
parietal region, F(1, 26) = 4.3, p < .05]; there was no
significant difference in the late positivity evoked by
coherent critical words in the even-so and plain coherent
scenarios in any of these regions (all ps > .05, Figure 3A).
Late anterior negativity: 800-1000 ms
Analysis within this time window revealed an Even-so x
Coherence x Region interaction in the mid-regions analysis,

Figure 2. Grand-averaged waveforms to critical words in Experiment 1 (coherence rating task) showing effects of Coherence at
electrodes Fz, Cz and Pz.
Panel A: waveforms to critical words in plain coherent (black solid) and plain incoherent (red dotted) scenarios.
Panel B: waveforms to critical words in even-so coherent (black solid) and even-so incoherent (red dotted) scenarios.
Voltage maps show differences in ERPs between incoherent and coherent critical words (incoherent minus coherent) between 350-450
ms (N400) and 600-800 ms (P600).

658

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

Figure 3. Grand-averaged waveforms to critical words in Experiment 1 (coherence rating task) showing effects of Even-so at electrodes
Fz, Cz and Pz.
Panel A: waveforms to critical words in coherent plain (black solid) and coherent even-so (blue dotted) scenarios.
Panel B: waveforms to critical words in incoherent plain (black solid) and incoherent even-so (blue dotted) scenarios.
Voltage maps show differences in ERPs between even-so and plain critical words (even-so minus plain) between 350-450 ms and 600-
800 ms.

F(4, 104) = 16.6, p < .001. Some of this effect was driven by
the late positivity effect continuing into the late time
window at the posterior-parietal site. But in the prefrontal
region (electrode sites FP1, FP2, FPz), there was a larger
negativity to critical words in the even-so incoherent
scenarios than in the other three scenarios [all ts(26) > 2.6,
ps < .05, see Figures 2 and 3].

Sentence-final word
At the sentence-final word, 28% of trials were rejected for
artefact (plain coherent 24%; plain incoherent: 27%; evenso coherent: 29%; and even-so incoherent: 32%). There
was a near-significant effect of Coherence [F(1, 26) = 4.0,
p = .056] because there were slightly more rejected
incoherent than coherent trials, and an effect of Even-so
[F(1, 26) = 9.8, p < .01] because there were slightly more
rejected even-so than plain trials, but there was no
interaction between the two factors.
Sentence-final negativity: 300-1000 ms
Activity on the sentence-final words was captured over a
prolonged 300-1000 ms time window, shown in Figure 4.
As expected, there was a larger sustained negativity on

sentence-final words in the incoherent than the coherent
scenarios [main effects of Coherence: mid-regions, F(1,
26) = 24, p < .001; peripheral regions, F(1, 26) = 15, p <
.01 analyses]. In addition, there was a main effect of
Even-so, with a larger negativity on sentence-final words
in the even-so than the plain scenarios [mid-regions: F(1,
26) = 24, p < .001; peripheral regions: F(1, 26) = 15, p <
.01]. Finally, in the mid-regions analysis, there was an
interaction between Even-so, Coherence and Region, F(4,
104) = 3.4, p < .05. To follow-up this three-way
interaction, we carried out pair-wise comparisons at two
6-electrode regions: posterior (combining the parietal and
occipital 3-electrode regions) and frontal (combining the
frontal and central 3-electrode regions).
In the posterior 6-electrode region, the final words of
the even-so incoherent scenarios evoked the largest
negativity (differing significantly from the three other
conditions, Fs > 13, ps < .01), while the final words of the
plain coherent scenarios evoked the smallest negativity.
The final words of the plain incoherent and even-so
coherent scenarios each evoked medium-sized sustained
negativities, which were smaller than in the even-so
incoherent scenarios (Fs > 13, ps < .01), but larger than
in the plain coherent scenarios (Fs > 4, ps < .05). In the

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

659

the plain scenarios. In addition, in the even-so scenarios,
we also saw an effect of coherence on a late anterior
negativity between 800 and 1000 ms. At the sentencefinal word, we saw effects of both Coherence and Evenso. Finally, the pattern of these ERP findings across the
four conditions dissociated from participants' offline
behavioural coherence judgements of the same sentences.
We discuss each of these findings in turn.
The plain scenarios

Figure 4. Grand-averaged waveforms to sentence-final words
in Experiment 1 (coherence rating task). ERPs to sentence-final
words in all four conditions are shown at electrodes Fz, Cz and
Pz. Plain coherent: black solid line; plain incoherent: blue dashed
line; even-so coherent: green solid line; even-so incoherent: red
dotted line.

The significant N400 effect of Coherence in the plain
scenarios is consistent with our previous findings (Kuperberg et al., 2011), in which we contrasted causally
coherent and incoherent plain discourse scenarios while
participants carried out a similar explicit coherence
judgement task. Just as in this previous study, the N400
in this study was attenuated on the coherent critical words,
even though its general schema-based semantic relatedness with the preceding context (as operationalised by
LSA) was matched with the incoherent scenarios (see
Table 1). This tells us that, when participants actively
attend to discourse relationships, they are able to construct
a full discourse model from the context, use this model to
access stored information about event relationships, and
generate predictions about likely upcoming events and
their associated semantic features, leading to facilitated
processing of incoming words whose semantic features
match these predictions.
In the present study, the N400 effect was followed by a
small P600 effect, which we did not see in our previous
study (Kuperberg et al., 2011). The reason for this is
unclear, but one possibility is that the presence of the
even-so scenarios themselves encouraged comprehenders
to engage in additional analysis in attempts to make sense
of all incoherent sentences (see endnote 6).
The even-so scenarios

frontal 6-electrode region, however, there was no difference in the amplitude of the negativities evoked by
sentence-final words of the even-so coherent, even-so
incoherent and plain incoherent scenarios (Fs < 3, ps >
.05), which all evoked a more negative waveform than the
sentence-final words of the coherent plain scenarios (Fs >
6, ps < .05).

Discussion
In this experiment, participants made explicit judgements
about the coherence of each scenario. In both the plain and
the even-so scenarios, we saw both N400 and P600 effects
of coherence on the critical words. In the even-so
scenarios, however, both these effects were larger than in

The N400 attenuation to critical words in the coherent
versus incoherent even-so scenarios indicates that readers
were able to draw upon the alternative world model set up
under even so rather than stored long-term real-world
knowledge, to facilitate semantic processing of upcoming
words. Moreover, our finding that the N400 Coherence
effect was actually larger in the even-so than the plain
scenarios, and that this was due to an attenuation of the
N400 to the even-so coherent (versus plain coherent)
critical words, indicates that the event structure and
semantic predictions, set up under even so, were stronger
(higher probability) than those generated in the plain
scenarios on the basis of default world knowledge. We
argue that this is because even so narrowed down
the number of potential upcoming event structures to
those that were causally real-world inconsistent, unlike in

660

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

the plain scenarios where they may have considered
multiple possible upcoming event structures (based on
causal, spatial and temporal relationships with the preceding context), each with lower probability.
The larger P600 on critical words in the incoherent
even-so than in the incoherent plain scenarios suggests
that, when these high probability predictions were violated, prolonged neural costs were incurred. More specifically, we argue that, under even so, at least on some trials,
comprehenders predicted a real-world inconsistent event
with high certainty (near-100% probability), and that the
P600 was triggered by conflict between this event
structure and the structure produced by initial attempts to
integrate incoming critical words. We suggest that the
P600 itself reflected prolonged attempts to integrate the
context and critical words to construct a new discourse
model (see Kuperberg, 2007, 2013; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012).4
In addition to producing the late posteriorly distributed
positivity/P600 effect, we also saw evidence of a late
sustained anteriorly distributed negativity effect on critical
words in the incoherent even-so (versus the incoherent
plain) scenarios. We suggest that, at least on some even-so
trials, comprehenders kept alive the possibilities of both a
real-world inconsistent and a real-world consistent
upcoming event structure. That is, the late sustained
anterior negativity effect reflected the maintenance of
these alternative event structures and the process of
selecting the (less probable) real-world consistent event
structure as the bottom-up information from the critical
word was integrated (see Baggio et al., 2008; Lee &
Federmeier, 2009; Paczynski et al, 2014; Wittenberg et al.,
2014, for similar interpretations of late sustained negativities in other situations).

The sentence-final word
Our findings at the sentence-final word suggest that the
costs of generating an alternative world model under even
so did not come for free: in addition to the prolonged
sentence-final negativity effect in the incoherent (versus
coherent) plain scenarios, we also saw a larger sentencefinal negativity effect in the even-so coherent scenarios
than in the plain coherent scenarios. Moreover, at posterior sites, the effects of Coherence and Even-so appeared to
be additive: the sentence-final negativity effect was
maximal in the even-so incoherent scenarios, indicating
that still more wrap-up costs were incurred when the
integration of the sentence-final word mismatched the
alternative world model that had been originally anticipated under even so (at frontal sites, the negativities
evoked by the sentence-final words in the even-so
coherent, even-so incoherent and plain incoherent scenarios were all of the same magnitude).

Dissociation between online ERP findings and offline
behavioural data
The pattern of ERP findings at the critical word dissociated from the pattern of offline discourse coherence
ratings across the four conditions: despite clear semantic
facilitation (a smaller N400) on critical words in the evenso versus the plain coherent scenarios, participants rated
the same even-so coherent scenarios as less coherent than
the plain coherent scenarios (3.3 vs. 4.8, Table 1).
Moreover, despite prolonged neural costs associated with
processing the even-so (versus plain) incoherent critical
words, participants rated the same even-so incoherent
scenarios as less incoherent than the plain incoherent
scenarios (2.4 vs. 1.7, Table 1).
We think that these dissociations arose because participants' offline retrospective coherence judgements about
the coherence of the even-so scenarios were influenced by
their long-term real-world knowledge. For example, the
even-so incoherent scenario, `Elizabeth took the test and
aced it. Even so, she went home and celebrated' sounds
quite odd, but the relationship between the events themselves matches real-world knowledge, and this may have
led participants to rate it as less incoherent than the
incoherent plain scenarios. Similarly, although the even-so
coherent scenario, `Elizabeth took the test and failed it.
Even so, she went home and celebrated' sounds quite
natural, the real-world relationship between the two main
events mismatches our real-world knowledge; given time
to think about its coherence, this mismatch may have led
participants to rate it as less coherent than the plain
coherent scenarios.
We also suggest that similar factors influenced the
cloze ratings of the even-so scenarios, which also
dissociated from the online ERP data. For example,
when asked to produce a specific word after the context,
`Alice was walking home from work at night. A stranger
was following her. Even so, she felt...', although 5 out of
the 10 participants that were given this particular item
produced the word `safe', one participant actually produced `uncomfortable', suggesting that, during these
offline cloze judgements, some participants might have
ignored even so altogether and continued the sentence on
the basis of the default real-world event relations.
Another factor to consider is that, on a substantial
subset of the items, although participants clearly had
committed to a continuation that was semantically inconsistent with the default real-world knowledge, they did not
necessarily converge on exactly the same lexical item. For
example, for the scenario, `John tried out for the comedy
troupe. His lines were all mumbled and unintelligible.
Even so, the director asked him to...', the target critical
word was `join', but some participants produced other
coherent options, such as `stay'.

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
Together, these findings underline two important
points. First, online neural activity does not always mirror
participants' offline coherence judgements and cloze
ratings: our ERP results suggest that, with limited time
before the next word appeared, online semantic facilitation
of the mid-sentence critical words, as reflected by the
amplitude of the N400, was driven by the alternative
world model established under even so, whereas our
offline ratings, and, as discussed above, neural activity at
the sentence-final word, were partially driven by longterm real-world knowledge. Second, they show that
enhanced prediction for a particular type of event does
not necessarily imply prediction or commitment to one
specific lexical item. We will return to the relationships
between cloze ratings, lexical prediction, event structure
prediction, semantic facilitation and N400 modulation in
the General Discussion.
Experiment 2
In this second experiment, we presented a new set of
participants with the same experimental stimuli. This time,
however, participants were asked simply to read the
scenarios and answer intermittent, randomly dispersed
comprehension questions about these scenarios.
Once again, our starting point was the plain scenarios.
In Experiment 1, and in our previous study examining the
use of real-world causal knowledge across sentence
boundaries (Kuperberg et al., 2011), we showed that,
when explicitly asked to judge coherence, readers are able
to retrieve and use quite specific knowledge about likely
relationships between real-world events to predict upcoming events and facilitate semantic processing of incoming
words consistent with these events, as reflected by an
attenuation of the N400. This, however, does not imply
that we always use event knowledge to facilitate semantic
processing of incoming words during online comprehension; there are times in which semantic processing can be
driven primarily by more general stored knowledge about
unstructured schema-based semantic relationships
between words or concepts (see Kuperberg et al., 2011;
Lau et al., 2013; Otten & van Berkum, 2007; Paczynski &
Kuperberg, 2012, for discussion). Whether we use context
to go beyond this more general unstructured schema-based
knowledge depends on whether we are able to establish a
deep discourse representation of the context and use this
to retrieve and predict stored upcoming event representations before the semantic features of the incoming word
becomes available. This, in turn, depends on many factors
(see General Discussion). One of these factors is task
demands.
Thus, in Experiment 2, our first question was whether,
in the plain scenarios, without an explicit task requirement
to judge coherence, readers would still be able to construct
a deep discourse model to predict upcoming events and

661

facilitate semantic processing of incoming critical words.
Alternatively, semantic processing of critical words might
simply be driven by an interaction between whatever
contextual representation had been constructed at the time
the bottom-up semantic input became available and more
general, unstructured schema-based stored semantic relationships. As LSA was matched between the coherent and
incoherent plain scenarios, this would predict no difference between the N400 produced by critical words in the
two conditions.
Having established how the plain scenarios were
processed with a comprehension task, we then asked
about the effect of even so. Our question here was whether
readers would still be able to reverse and enhance their
semantic expectations, as they did in Experiment 1. If so,
then we should see similar semantic facilitatory effects on
the N400 to those seen in Experiment 1: a smaller N400
on critical words in even-so coherent versus even-so
incoherent scenarios, and a smaller N400 on critical words
in even-so coherent versus plain coherent scenarios,
despite these being matched on schema-based lexical
relationships. We might also see evidence of costs of
disconfirmed event structure predictions, manifested as
prolonged ERP effects past the N400 time window.
Finally, we asked whether, in the absence of an explicit
coherence judgement, we would still see a sentence-final
wrap cost associated with even so.
Methods
Participants and procedure
Twenty-five undergraduates initially participated in
Experiment 2 (inclusion criteria were the same as in
Experiment 1). Three subjects were subsequently
excluded from data analysis because of extensive ocular
movements. Two additional subjects were excluded
because we later found out that they had participated in
our earlier stimuli norming studies. We report data from
the remaining 20 subjects (9 males and 11 females; mean
age: 20).
The procedure of this experiment was largely the same
as for Experiment 1. The only difference was that, after
the 400 ms ISI that followed the final word of each trial,
no prompt appeared to cue participants to give an explicit
coherence rating. Rather, on 25% of trials, a comprehension question appeared, requiring a yes/no response,
which probed participants' understanding of the scenarios.
For instance, in the example scenario in Table 1,
participants received the question, `Did Elizabeth care
how she did on the test?' The planned correct answer for
this particular question was `yes' for the plain coherent
and the even-so incoherent versions, and `no' for the plain
incoherent and the even-so coherent versions. Throughout
the stimuli set, the `yes' and `no' answers were counterbalanced so that participants did not anticipate a `yes' or

662

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

`no' answer for a particular condition. Participants were
told in advance that only some of the scenarios would be
followed by a comprehension question, and that they
simply needed to read and understand each discourse
scenario and answer the questions when they came up.

Results
Behavioural results
Overall accuracy in answering the comprehension questions was 87% (SD: 4.41%). A 2 x 2 repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed no main effects of either Coherence or
Even-so (all Fs < 1, ps >.6), but there was a significant
interaction between the two factors, F(1, 19) = 22, p <
.001. Paired t-tests showed that participants were significantly more accurate on questions following the plain
coherent scenarios (91.72%, SD: 8.07) than the plain
incoherent scenarios (80.88%; SD: 14.56), t(19) = 3.2, p <
.01, but they were less accurate on questions following the
even-so coherent (82.51%; SD: 8.97) than the even-so
incoherent scenarios (92.08%; SD: 5.43), t(19) = 3.7, p <
.01. Tests examining the effect of Even-so on the coherent
and incoherent scenarios separately confirmed this pattern:
questions following the plain coherent scenarios were
answered more accurately than those following the evenso coherent scenarios, t(19) = 3.2, p < .01, but questions
following the plain incoherent scenarios were answered
less accurately than those following the even-so incoherent scenarios, t(19) = 3.2, p < .01.

Event-related potentials
Critical word
At the critical word, 17% of trials were rejected for
artefact. A 2 x 2 repeated-measures ANOVA showed no
effect of Coherence or Even-so on the rejection rate and
no interaction between the two factors (all Fs < 1, p > .4).
N400: 350-450 ms
Within the 350-450 ms time window, there was a threeway interaction between Coherence, Even-so and Region
(approaching significance in the mid-regions ANOVA, F
(4, 76) = 2.5, p = .09, and significant in the peripheral
regions ANOVA, F(1, 19) = 5.5, p < .05). Follow-ups
showed a two-way interaction between Coherence and
Even-so in the mid-parietal and the two peripheral parietal
regions (all Fs > 4.8, ps < .05).
Further follow-ups, collapsing across the mid-parietal
and the two peripheral parietal regions (9 electrodes),
revealed no N400 effect of Coherence in the plain
scenarios [F(1, 19) < .1, p > .6; Figure 5A],5 but a clear
N400 effect of Coherence in the even-so scenarios [F(1,
19) = 9.3, p < .01, Figure 5B]. As in Experiment 1, this
larger N400 coherence effect in the even-so scenarios was

largely driven by an attenuation of the N400 to critical
words in the coherent even-so (vs. coherent plain)
scenarios [F(1, 19) = 4.2, p < .05; see Figure 6A; again
the voltage map in Figure 6A shows a positivity between
350 and 450 ms because the waveforms evoked in the
plain scenarios was subtracted from those evoked in the
even-so scenarios]; there was no significant difference in
the N400 evoked by the critical words in the incoherent
even-so and the incoherent plain scenarios [F(1, 19) = 3.4,
p > .05, Figure 6B].
P600: 600-800 ms
Collapsed across the plain and even-so scenarios, there
was a Coherence x Region interaction in the 600-800 ms
window [mid-regions: F(4, 76) = 4.3, p < .05; peripheral
regions: F(1, 19) = 11.3, p < .01], with follow-ups
showing P600 effects in mid-parietal, mid-occipital and
right occipital regions [F(1, 19)s > 7, p < .05]. There were
no further interactions involving Coherence and Even-so
over these regions (p > .4), indicating that the magnitude
of the P600 Coherence effect did not differ between the
even-so and the plain scenarios.
Late anterior negativity: 800-1000 ms
Analysis within this time window revealed an Even-so x
Coherence x Region interaction in the mid-regions analysis
[F(4, 76) = 5.1, p < .05]. Follow-ups at the prefrontal region
showed marginally larger negativities to critical words in
the even-so incoherent scenarios, relative to the even-so
coherent scenarios [t(19) = 1.9, p < .08] and the plain
incoherent scenarios [t(19) = 2, p < .06], but not to the plain
coherent scenarios [t(19) < 1, p > .3; see Figures 5 and 6].
Sentence-final word: 300-600 ms
At the sentence-final word, 26% of trials were rejected for
artefact. A 2 x 2 within-subjects ANOVA showed no
effect of Coherence, Even-so and no interaction between
the two factors (all Fs < 2, p > .2). Visual inspection of the
ERP waveform on the sentence-final word suggests that
there were effects of both Coherence and Even-so, but
these effects were not as prolonged as in Experiment 1.
We therefore chose the 300-600 ms time window for data
analysis.
The waveforms for the sentence-final word are presented in Figure 7. The mid-regions omnibus ANOVAs
revealed a main effect of Coherence [mid-regions: F(1, 19)
= 4.8, p < .05] while the peripheral regions ANOVA
showed a main effect of Coherence [F(1, 19) = 6.0, p < .05]
and a marginal interaction between Coherence and Region
[F(1, 19) = 4.1, p < .06]. There were also main effects of
Even-so [mid-regions: F(1, 19) = 4.7, p < .05; peripheral:
F(1, 19) = 5.0, p < .05], as well as interactions between
Even-so and Region [mid-regions: F(4, 76) = 3.7, p < .05;
peripheral: F(1, 19) = 4.6, p < .05].

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

663

Figure 5. Grand-averaged waveforms to critical words in Experiment 2 (comprehension task) showing effects of Coherence at
electrodes Fz, Cz and Pz.
Panel A: waveforms to critical words in plain coherent (black solid) and plain incoherent (red dotted) scenarios.
Panel B: waveforms to critical words in even-so coherent (black solid) and even-so incoherent (red dotted) scenarios.
Voltage maps show differences in ERPs between incoherent and coherent critical words (incoherent minus coherent) between 350-450
ms (N400) and 600-800 ms (P600).

To determine how this negativity was modulated across
the four sentence types, we carried out pair-wise comparisons in the same 6-electrode posterior (parietal-occipital)
and 6-electrode anterior (central-frontal) regions as in
Experiment 1. In the posterior region, the pattern of effects
was similar to that seen in Experiment 1, but modulation
was generally weaker. Sentence-final words of the even-so
incoherent scenarios again appeared to evoke the largest
negativity. This was significantly larger than the negativity
produced by sentence-final words in the plain coherent
scenarios, F(1, 19) > 12, p < .01, and marginally larger
than the sentence-final negativities of the plain incoherent
and even-so coherent scenarios (Fs < 4, ps < .08). These
latter conditions each produced negativities that were
marginally larger than in the plain coherent scenarios
(Fs < 3, ps < .1), but that did not differ from one another,
F(1, 19) < 1, p > .9. In the anterior 6-electrode region, the
pattern was similar to that seen in Experiment 1: the final
words of even-so incoherent, even-so coherent and plain
incoherent scenarios each produced significantly larger
sustained negativities than the final words of the plain
coherent scenarios (all Fs > 6, ps < .05), and the amplitude
of these negativities did not differ from one another (all
Fs < 2, ps > .2).

Discussion
In this experiment, a different set of participants read the
same stimuli as in Experiment 1, this time answering
intermittent comprehension questions about the scenarios,
rather than explicitly rating their causal coherence. On
these intermittent trials, comprehension questions following the plain coherent scenarios were answered more
accurately than those following the even-so coherent
scenarios, but questions following the plain incoherent
scenarios were answered less accurately than those
following the even-so incoherent scenarios. This mirrors
the pattern of offline behavioural judgements seen in
Experiment 1 (see Discussion of Experiment 1 for a
possible interpretation). We also saw some similarities, as
well as some differences, between the two experiments in
the pattern of ERP results.
The plain scenarios
In the plain scenarios, we saw no N400 effect of
coherence at all. This contrasts with the findings of an
N400 coherence effect in two previous experiments that
examined processing of LSA-matched plain scenarios
using a coherence judgement task: Experiment 1 and
Kuperberg et al. (2011). We suggest that, in the absence of

664

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

Figure 6. Grand-averaged waveforms to critical words in Experiment 2 (comprehension task) showing effects of Even-so at electrodes
Fz, Cz and Pz.
Panel A: waveforms to critical words in coherent plain (black solid) and coherent even-so (blue dotted) scenarios.
Panel B: waveforms to critical words in incoherent plain (black solid) and incoherent even-so (blue dotted) scenarios.
Voltage maps show differences in ERPs between even-so and plain critical words (even-so minus plain) between 350-450 ms and
600-800 ms.

any explicit requirement to judge discourse coherence,
comprehenders did not construct a deep representation of
context in time to access stored information about likely
upcoming event relationships and predict upcoming
events and semantic features before the semantic features
of the incoming words became available (see Kuperberg
et al., 2011; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012, for discussion). This is not to say that context was not used at all;
however, it served mainly to activate more general
schema-based semantic relationships rather than specific
knowledge about events. As LSA - a measure of these
schema-based semantic relatedness between the critical
word and its context - was matched between the coherent
and incoherent plain scenarios, this meant that there was
no difference in N400 amplitude evoked by critical words
in the plain coherent and incoherent scenarios (see Hoeks,
Stowe, & Doedens, 2004; Kolk, Chwilla, van Herten, &
Oor, 2003; Kuperberg, 2007; Kuperberg et al., 2003;
Kuperberg, Caplan, Sitnikova, Eddy, & Holcomb, 2006;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2005; Paczynski & Kuperberg,
2012, for other examples of the N400 not patterning with
overall coherence or plausibility). Of note, however, as in
Experiment 1, we did see a P600 effect on the critical
words in the incoherent versus coherent plain scenarios.6

The even-so scenarios
Unlike in the plain scenarios, we did see a reduction of the
N400 to coherent versus incoherent critical words in the
even-so scenarios. In other words, despite the coherent
and incoherent scenarios also being matched on lexical
schema-based relationships, and there being no explicit
requirement to judge coherence, comprehenders were able
draw upon the alternative world model established under
even so and use this to predict upcoming real-world
unexpected events and facilitate the semantic processing
of incoming words.
Unlike in Experiment 1, we did not see an enhanced
P600 effect to the incoherent even-so versus incoherent
plain critical words. We suggest that this was because,
with a comprehension task, comprehenders were less
likely to commit, with near certainty, to one specific
type of event continuation under even so, leading to less
conflict when the even-so incoherent critical words came
to be integrated. There was, however, a near-significant
late sustained anterior negativity effect for this contrast.
Sentence-final words
Finally, on sentence-final words, we observed effects of
both Even-so and Coherence. At posterior sites, these

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

665

words in the even-so coherent than the plain coherent
scenarios. To our knowledge, this is the first study to show
that a concessive connective can lead both to a reversal and
an enhancement of online semantic expectations during
discourse comprehension. Here we return to the four sets of
questions outlined at the end of the General Introduction.
We will then consider the more general implications of our
findings for understanding the neurocognitive mechanisms
engaged in online discourse comprehension, as well as for
understanding the functional significance of the N400, and
subsequent ERP components.

Figure 7. Grand-averaged waveforms to sentence-final words
in Experiment 2 (comprehension task). ERPs to sentence-final
words in all four conditions are shown at electrodes Fz, Cz and
Pz. Plain coherent: black solid line; plain incoherent: blue dashed
line; even-so coherent: green solid line; even-so incoherent: red
dotted line.

effects again seemed to be additive, with the largest
negativity produced by sentence-final words in the evenso incoherent scenarios. This suggests that additional
wrap-up costs were incurred as participants drew upon a
different likelihood scale (the alternative world established
under even so), rather than real-world knowledge, to
evaluate final discourse coherence, even when participants
did not explicitly judge discourse coherence.

General discussion
In two experiments, we asked when and how comprehenders use the concessive connective, even so during online
discourse comprehension. Our findings on the N400 were
clear: in both experiments, the N400 was smaller to critical
words in the even-so coherent than the even-so incoherent
scenarios. Moreover, the N400 was also smaller to critical

1. Even so reverses and enhances semantic predictions
during online discourse comprehension
Our first question was whether the reversed set of
likelihood relations set up under the scalar reversal
function of even so would lead to reversed semantic
expectations, thereby facilitating the initial stages of
accessing or retrieving the semantic features of congruous
incoming words. Our findings clearly indicate that they
could: in both experiments, the N400 in the even-so
scenarios was smaller to critical words that were coherent
than those that were incoherent in relation to their context,
even though the message conveyed in the coherent evenso scenarios mismatched long-term real-world knowledge.
These findings are consistent with previous studies of
fictional scenarios and counterfactuals, showing that
comprehenders can use alternative world models set up
by a discourse context to modulate (Hald et al., 2007) and
even fully reverse expectations based on real-world
knowledge, so long as these contexts are pragmatically
constraining (cf. Fergurson et al., 2008, Experiment 2, and
Nieuwland et al., 2012; Nieuwland, 2013). What distinguishes the present findings from this previous work is
that both the set-up of the alternative world model and the
pragmatic discourse constraint were determined by a
simple, but yet semantically rich, concessive connective.
Indeed, even so seemed to have set up stronger
expectations that those generated in the plain scenarios:
in both experiments, the N400 was smaller to critical
words in the coherent even-so than in the coherent plain
scenarios (see Murray, 1994, for consistent behavioural
results). In the plain scenarios, where there was no
pragmatic cue to indicate what type of upcoming event
they might encounter, comprehenders are likely to have
entertained multiple possibilities, each with a relatively
low probability. We argue that, under even so, they are
more likely to have predicted a specific type of event
structure (one that was causally inconsistent with realworld knowledge) with fairly high probability. This
constraining function of even so, in turn, led to a higher
probability of predicting the semantic features associated
with incoming words in the even-so coherent scenarios
and more semantic facilitation when these features were

666

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

accessed (see Lau et al., 2013, for evidence that top-down
semantic prediction can lead to a reduced N400 to
expected words, even in single word contexts). This, of
course, raises the question of whether this type of
enhanced expectation effect is unique to concessive
connectives, or whether it is also induced by other
discourse connectives like `and so' or `because', which
do not reverse expectations but also specify a specific
relationship between events and states. We are currently
carrying follow-up studies to address this question
directly.

2. Costs of disconfirmed event predictions under even so
Further evidence that even so led comprehenders to
predict a particular event type with higher probability
than in the plain scenarios comes from the prolonged
processing costs (activity past the N400 time window)
observed when such predictions were disconfirmed by
the input. Of note, we saw two such effects -a late
posteriorly distributed P600 effect (seen just in Experiment 1) and a late anteriorly distributed negativity effect
(significant in Experiment 1 and near-significant in
Experiment 2).
We suggest that the P600 was produced on trials in
which comprehenders committed with high certainty
(near-100% probability), to a real-world inconsistent
event. When this highly certain prediction was violated,
the resulting conflict between the predicted real-world
inconsistent and bottom-up real-world consistent event
structure triggered prolonged attempts to integrate the
incoming word to construct a new situation model. The
interpretation of the late anterior negativity effect is less
clear. However, one possibility is that it was produced on
trials in which comprehenders considered both the possibility that they would encounter a real-world inconsistent upcoming event structure (with relatively high, but not
near-certain probability) and a real-world consistent event
structure (with lower probability), and that it reflected the
cost of selecting a (less probable) real-world consistent
event structure and suppressing the more probable realworld inconsistent event structure, as the critical word was
integrated. Similar late negativity effects have been
associated with selecting relatively low probability specific events (Wlotko & Federmeier, 2012) as well as
selecting `alternative' or non-canonical event structures,
such as in aspectual coercion (Bott, 2010; Paczynski et al.,
2014), aspectual shift (Baggio et al., 2008), light verb
constructions (Wittenberg et al., 2014), ambiguous noun-
verb homographs (Lee & Federmeier, 2006, 2009) and
non-literal language or jokes (e.g. Coulson & Kutas, 2001;
Coulson & Van Petten, 2007).

3. The assessment of overall coherence against the
`alternative world' established under even so leads to
costs at sentence-final wrap-up
Our third question was whether the establishment of an
alternative world model under even so, would lead to
delayed processing costs. We found that it did. These costs
manifest as a prolonged negativity effect of even so on
sentence-final words. This sentence-final negativity effect
was qualitatively similar to the wrap-up effect of coherence seen in both the even-so and the plain scenarios, and,
at posterior sites, the two effects were additive. This
suggests that some wrap-up costs were incurred when the
final discourse model was evaluated against a set of nondefault likelihood event relations established under even
so, and that even more wrap-up costs were incurred when
this overall discourse model was found to be incoherent.
In both experiments, the additive effects of Even-so
and Coherence were evident primarily at posterior sites.
At more frontal sites, the final words of the coherent evenso, incoherent plain, and incoherent even-so scenarios all
evoked a negativity effect of the same magnitude, which
was larger than that seen in the coherent plain scenarios.
We suggest that this more frontal component of the
sentence-final negativity reflected a general engagement
of working memory resources that maintained multiple
representations, rather than actually evaluating them
against each other for coherence. If this interpretation is
correct, then it would suggest that there would be similar
working memory costs associated with maintaining both
the real-world and alternative world model under even so
much earlier in the sentence (see King & Kutas, 1995;
Kluender & Kutas, 1993; Munte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2008; van Berkum, Brown,
Hagoort, & Zwitserlood, 2003, for evidence of early onset
and sustained negativity effects associated with maintaining multiple representations within working memory over
multiple words). In the present study, we were unable to
address this question because corresponding words in the
even-so scenarios and the plain scenarios were confounded by baseline differences (the even-so scenarios started
with a connective, whereas the plain scenarios did not). It
will therefore be important to address this in future
studies. It will also be important to determine whether
there are costs associated with even so itself - the point at
which the presupposition of a reversed likelihood scale
was calculated - and to determine how such costs might
manifest in the ERP waveform.

4. Task can impact multiple stages of online discourse
comprehension
Finally, our findings show that task made an important
difference to how both the plain and even-so scenarios
were processed, at multiple stages of comprehension.

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
In the plain scenarios, task influenced the type of stored
real-world knowledge that was used to influence semantically processing of incoming words. With a requirement to
explicitly judge discourse coherence (Experiment 1), comprehenders were able to construct a deep situation-level
representation of context and use it to access their stored
knowledge of real-world event relationships to predict
upcoming events and semantic features, thereby facilitating
semantic processing of incoming coherent words. With no
such requirement, however, comprehenders simply drew
upon their more general stored knowledge about unstructured relationships between words/concepts within a particular schema. Because these schema-based relationships
were matched (through LSA) between conditions, we saw
no N400 amplitude difference between critical words of the
plain coherent and incoherent scenarios [Experiment 2; also
see Experiment 3 in endnote 6, in which we also saw no hint
of a coherence N400 effect on the plain scenarios when we
pooled together results on the two plain scenarios from a
larger number of participants (n = 36)].
In the even-so scenarios, task made less of a qualitative
difference to N400 modulation. This is because the pragmatic communicative constraint of even so led comprehenders to narrow down their expectations and anticipate a realworld inconsistent event structure, regardless of whether
there was an explicit task requirement to focus on discourse
relationships. On the other hand, task did make some
difference to the neural mechanisms that comprehenders
engaged when these event structure predictions were
violated: the enhancement of the P600 on the even-so
(versus plain) incoherent critical words was only seen when
participants made active judgements (Experiment 1). We
suggest that this is because the requirement to judge
coherence, together with the discourse pragmatic function
of even so, led comprehenders to commit with near certainty
to a specific type of event structure, ahead of integrating the
critical word, at least on some trials. As discussed above,
this, in turn, led to more conflict as the real-world consistent
critical word was integrated, which triggered additional
bottom-up attempts to integrate the incoming word, leading
to increased P600. This is consistent with frameworks
holding that task is one of several factors that can lower
the threshold for triggering a P600 effect to semantically
incoherent words that conflict with alternative analyses
(e.g. Kuperberg, 2007). It is also consistent with previous
work suggesting that the P600 is closely linked to comprehenders' detection of incoherence (e.g. Sanford, Leuthold,
Bohan, & Sanford, 2011).

General implications and functional relevance of the
N400 and P600 in discourse comprehension
Beyond speaking to the specific role of concessive connectives in discourse comprehension, our findings highlight

667

some general points about the functional significance of the
N400 and later ERP components.
First, our findings underline the fact that, while N400
modulation often patterns with offline ratings of semantic
discourse coherence, this is by no means always the case
(see Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2011, 2012 and references
therein for many other examples). In the present study, we
saw no N400 effect of coherence at all in the plain
scenarios in Experiment 2. Furthermore, in both experiments, the N400 coherence effect was larger in the evenso than the plain scenarios, despite the difference in
coherence ratings being larger in the plain scenarios.
The reason why the N400 does not always pattern with
offline coherence or plausibility ratings is because it is not
a direct reflection of a process of evaluating a representation of discourse meaning against stored knowledge in
order to asses `plausibility' or `coherence' during online
comprehension (see also Kuperberg, Choi, Cohn, Paczynski, & Jackendoff, 2010; Paczynski & Kuperberg,
2011, 2012, for further discussion). Rather, is best
characterised as reflecting changes in the activity within
semantic memory induced by incoming words (Kutas &
Federmeier, 2011; DeLong et al., 2011; Lau et al., 2008),
or the implicit semantic prediction error in shifting from a
prior to a posterior distribution of semantic features on the
basis of new input (Rabovsky & McRae, 2014). Whether
or not the N400 will pattern with coherence or plausibility
will therefore depend on the prior distribution of semantic
features, which as we have argued, will depend on the
probability of predicting a particular event structure just
before a target's semantic features become available. The
probability/strength of such prediction at the event structure layer will depend on many factors (see Kuperberg
et al., 2011, and references therein for discussion). In this
study, we have highlighted the pragmatic constraining
function of certain words (here, even so) as well as task
demands.
This study also underlines the fact that the N400 is
sensitive to implicit predictions of semantic features, but
that this does not always or necessarily equate to lexical
pre-activation or prediction (the co-activation of semantic
features together with phonological or orthographic form
and sometimes syntactic features). Of course, semantic
and lexical expectations often go hand-in-hand: we have
known for some time that lexical predictability/constraint,
as operationalised by cloze probability, is an important
determinant of N400 amplitude (e.g. Federmeier et al.,
2007; Kutas & Hillyard 1984). However, the two can be
dissociated. For example, a context can constrain for a
particular group of semantic features without necessarily
constraining for a specific lexical item (e.g. Federmeier &
Kutas, 1999; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2011, 2012), and it
is possible for comprehenders to predict a particular event
structure, without necessarily predicting a specific lexical
item (see Kuperberg, 2013, for discussion). Moreover, as

668

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

discussed in Experiment 1, offline cloze ratings may not
necessarily reflect fast word-by-word lexical prediction.
Finally this study also adds to the growing evidence
that activity within the N400 time window does not
always reflect the final stages of semantically integrating
an incoming word into its context. We have argued that
the late posterior positivity/P600 ERP component is
triggered by the conflict between a strong (near-certain)
prediction and bottom-up input that violates this prediction, and that it reflects a switch to a new (generative)
model (representation relationships between events) as the
incoming word is integrated into the context.7 We have
also suggested that the late negativity effect is evoked
when we predict more than one event or event structure,
and the less probable of these event structures is selected
as the incoming word is integrated. If these interpretations
are correct, then this would imply that different individuals, at different times, might use exactly the same
context to predict event structures with different strengths/
certainties, leading them to mount either a P600 or a late
anterior negativity response if these predictions are
violated. It would also imply that these responses are
likely to vary within individuals, with a given comprehender engaging quite different mechanisms depending on
the degree to which their wider linguistic (and nonlinguistic) environment encourages strong or weak prediction (see Kuperberg, 2013, 2014, for discussion; and
Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, in press, for a formalisation in the
domain of speech perception). It will be important for
future studies to examine this type of inter- and intraindividual variation more closely.

Conclusion
To conclude, we have shown that the concessive connective, even so, leads to a reversal of expectations such that
comprehenders can use discourse-internal information to
override the effects of stored long-term world knowledge.
Moreover, comprehenders are able to make maximal use
of the pragmatic discourse constraint of even so to
enhance their expectations about the upcoming events,
leading to facilitated semantic processing of incoming
words, even in contexts that are not highly lexically
constraining, as indexed by cloze probability. This benefit
of even so, however, did not come for free: we also
observed global costs of constructing and maintaining an
alternative world under even so, manifesting on the final
word of the scenarios. Together, our results show that,
although stored knowledge provides an important background for language comprehension, we are nonetheless
able to use concessive connectives to construct, constrained and integrate new information into an abstract
mental model amazingly quickly, even when this model
mismatches our real-world experience.

Acknowledgement
The authors thank Abigail Swain, Eric Fields, Kristina Fanucci
for their assistance in data collection, and Ellen Lau and Einat
Shetreet for their helpful comments.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health
(R01MH071635 to G.R.K.).

Notes
1. Our use of `alternative world model' in this sense should not
be confused with the concept of `possible worlds' in formal
semantics.
2. In fact, most studies of sentence and discourse processing
have not matched general schema-based lexical relationships
in this way and have therefore not been able to distinguish
between these two possibilities (see Kuperberg et al., 2011;
Otten & van Berkum, 2007; Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012,
for discussion). For example, even in the classic example of
an N400 effect, `She liked to take her coffee with cream and
sugar/dog' (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980), the attenuation of the
N400 to sugar (versus dog) could, in theory, be driven by its
closer semantic relationship with the general schema of coffee
drinking, rather than by a more specific expectation of the
most likely thing, after cream, that someone would put inside
her coffee. Those studies that have used such schemamatched stimuli reveal a mixed picture, as discussed further
in Experiment 2.
3. To exclude the possibility that the smaller N400 to critical
words in the even-so coherent versus the plain coherent
scenarios was driven purely by their later position in the
sentence (see Van Petten & Kutas, 1990, for effects of word
position on the N400), we looked at the N400 on the word
following the critical word. We found no difference between
these two conditions between 350 and 450 ms, F(1, 26) =
0.66, p > .4, suggesting word position alone did not produce
this N400 difference.
4. Note that the enhanced P600 was driven entirely by a larger
P600 to the incoherent critical words in the even-so (versus
plain) scenarios, and that there was no P600 difference
between the coherent even-so and plain scenarios. This
indicates that the enhanced N400 reduction in the coherent
even-so (versus the plain) scenarios cannot be simply
explained by temporal and spatial overlap between the N400
and the P600 components at the scalp surface: if the N400 to
coherent critical words in the even-so (versus plain) scenarios
was being artificially `pulled down' by an overlapping P600,
we would have seen a larger (more positive-going) P600 to
these coherent even-so (versus coherent plain) critical words.
5. A potential concern is that the lack of a N400 may be due to
overlap of an earlier positivity. Visual inspection of more
electrodes did indeed show that, at some of the central-
posterior electrode sites, there was an early positivity between
approximately 200-350 ms that appeared larger to critical
words in the plain incoherent scenarios than the plain
coherent scenarios. We carried out statistics within this time
window to contrast these two conditions, collapsing across
the 5-electrode sites where this effect seemed to be largest

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
(CP1, CP2, Pz, P3, P4), but found no significant effect, F(1,
19) = 2.2, p > .1. In addition, we also redid the N400 analysis
within the 350-450 ms time window, with a new baseline
between 200 and 300 ms, i.e. we re-baselined right before the
N400 time window. If the early difference masked the N400
in some way, we might expect to see a N400 difference
emerge between the plain coherent and plain incoherent
scenarios. This is not what we found: the effect of Coherence
in the plain scenarios was non-significant, F(1, 19) < .1, p >
.5, but remained significant in the even-so scenarios, F(1, 19)
= 6.1, p < .05. Based on these two analyses, we think it is
unlikely an early divergence in the waveforms masked the
N400 effect in the plain scenarios.
6. A potential concern is that the absence of a N400 effect in
Experiment 2 was due to a lack of statistical power due to the
smaller number of participants run in Experiment 2 than in
Experiment 1 (20 vs. 27). It is also possible that, in both
Experiments 1 and 2, the P600 seen to the plain scenarios was
due to the presence of so many even-so incoherent scenarios
in the experimental environment, which may have encouraged
comprehenders to engage in additional analysis to all types of
incoherent critical words. Finally, the presence of this P600 in
the plain scenarios may have masked any N400 on the scalp
surface due to component overlap. To address these three
concerns, we carried out an additional Experiment 3 in which
a new group of 16 individuals read the same plain scenarios,
but with no even-so scenarios in the experimental set. They
carried out the same comprehension task as used in Experiment
2. Results are reported in Supplementary material at: http://
www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/kuperberglab/publications.htm. To
summarise our findings: (1) we saw no N400 or P600
coherence effect (although, as in Experiments 1 and 2, we did
see a prolonged negativity effect on the sentence-final word of
the incoherent versus coherent plain scenarios, indicating that
participants were engaged in comprehending the sentences)
and (2) when we pooled the ERPs evoked by critical words
in the plain scenarios of Experiments 2 and 3 to give a total
of 36 participants (exceeding the number of participants in
Experiment 1), we still did not see any sign of a N400 effect.
Based on these results, it seems unlikely that statistical power
alone explains the absence of N400 in Experiment 2, or that
the absence of the N400 effect in Experiment 2 was simply
an artefact of component overlap. Finally, the absence of a
P600 effect in Experiment 3 provides some preliminary
support for the idea that the large number of even-so
scenarios in the wider experimental environment, leading
to the P600 effect to the plain scenarios in both Experiments
1 and 2, although this is speculative and requires systematic
follow-up.
7. In some of our previous discussions of the P600 component,
we have described these type of near certainty event predictions as arising from a `semantic memory based analysis', i.e.
stemming from the interaction between context and real-world
knowledge stored in long-term semantic memory. By definition, incoming words that violate strong semantic memorybased predictions will, when fully integrated, yield an event
representation that is highly implausible/impossible (see Paczynski & Kuperberg, 2012, for recent discussion). What the
present study shows is that a P600 can also be produced when
event predictions are based on an `alternative world model' and
full integration of a target word outputs a discourse representation that is highly incoherent but not necessarily `implausible'
with respect to real-world knowledge.

669

References
Altmann, G., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with context
during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30, 191-238.
doi:10.1016/0010-0277(88)90020-0
Baggio, G., Van Lambalgen, M., & Hagoort, P. (2008). Computing
and recomputing discourse models: An ERP study. Journal of
Memory and Language, 59(1), 36-53. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.
02.005
Becker, C. A. (1980). Semantic context effects in visual word
recognition: An analysis of semantic strategies. Memory &
Cognition, 8, 493-512. doi:10.3758/BF03213769
Becker, C. A. (1985). What do we really know about semantic
context effects during reading? In D. Besner, T. G. Waller, & E.
M. McKinnon (Eds.), Reading research: Advances in theory
and practice (Vol. 5, pp. 125-169). Toronto: Academic Press.
Blakemore, D. (2002). Relevance and linguistic meaning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2008). An
alternative perspective on "semantic P600" effects in language comprehension. Brain Research Reviews, 59, 55-73.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2008.05.003
Bott, O. (2010). The processing of events. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents,
and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 36, 181-204. doi:10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Corley, M., MacGregor, L. J., & Donaldson, D. I. (2007). It's the
way that you, er, say it: Hesitations in speech affect language
comprehension. Cognition, 105, 658-668. doi:10.1016/j.
cognition.2006.10.010
Coulson, S., & Kutas, M. (2001). Getting it: Human eventrelated brain response to jokes in good and poor comprehenders. Neuroscience Letters, 316(2), 71-74. doi:10.1016/
S0304-3940(01)02387-4
Coulson, S., & Van Petten, C. (2007). A special role for the right
hemisphere in metaphor comprehension: An ERP study. Brain
Research, 1146, 128-145. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2007.03.008
Courville, A. C., Daw, N. D., & Touretzky, D. S. (2006).
Bayesian theories of conditioning in a changing world.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 294-300. doi:10.1016/j.
tics.2006.05.004
De Grauwe, S., Swain, A., Holcomb, P. J., Ditman, T., &
Kuperberg, G. R. (2010). Electrophysiological insights into
the processing of nominal metaphors. Neuropsychologia, 48,
1965-1984. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.03.017
DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., Groppe, D. M., & Kutas, M.
(2011) Overlapping dual ERP responses to low cloze
probability sentence continuations. Psychophysiology, 48,
1203-1207. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.01199.x
Ditman, T., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2007). An
investigation of concurrent ERP and self-paced reading
methodologies. Psychophysiology, 44, 927-935. doi:10.1111/
j.1469-8986.2007.00593.x
Farmer, T. A., Brown, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2013). Prediction,
explanation, and the role of generative models in language
processing. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 211-212.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X12002312
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other name:
Long-term memory structure and sentence processing. Journal
of Memory and Language, 41, 469-495. doi:10.1006/
jmla.1999.2660
Federmeier, K. D., Wlotko, E. W., De Ochoa-Dewald, E., &
Kutas, M. (2007). Multiple effects of sentential constraint on
word processing. Brain Research, 1146, 75-84. doi:10.1016/
j.brainres.2006.06.101

670

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

Feldman, N. H., Griffiths, T. L., & Morgan, J. L. (2009). The
influence of categories on perception: Explaining the perceptual magnet effect as optimal statistical inference. Psychological Review, 116, 752-782. doi:10.1037/a0017196
Ferguson, H. J., & Breheny, R. (2011). Eye movements reveal
the time-course of anticipating behaviour based on complex,
conflicting desires. Cognition, 119, 179-196. doi:10.1016/j.
cognition.2011.01.005
Ferguson, H. J., & Sanford, A. J. (2008). Anomalies in real and
counterfactual worlds: An eye-movement investigation. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 609-626. doi:10.1016/j.
jml.2007.06.007
Ferguson, H. J., Sanford, A. J., & Leuthold, H. (2008). Eyemovements and ERPs reveal the time course of processing
negation and remitting counterfactual worlds. Brain Research,
1236, 113-125. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.099
Ferretti, T. R., Kutas, M., & McRae, K. (2007). Verb aspect and
the activation of event knowledge. Cognition, 33, 182-196.
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.33.1.182
Fillmore, C. (2006). Frame semantics. In D. Geeraerts (Ed.),
Cognitive linguistics. Basic readings (pp. 373-400). Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter. (Originally published in Linguistics in
the morning calm. 1982. Linguistic society of Korea (ed.),
Seoul: Hanshin Publishing Company, pp. 111-137).
Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. A., & Qian, T. (2013). Rapid
expectation adaptation during syntactic comprehension. PLoS
One, 8(10): e77661. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077661
Forster, K. I. (1981). Priming and the effects of sentence and
lexical contexts on naming time: Evidence for autonomous
lexical processing. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 465-495. doi:10.1080/14640748108400804
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
360, 815-836.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95-112.
doi:10.1007/BF02289823
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3, pp. 41-58).
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Griffiths, T. L., Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). Bayesian
models of cognition. In Ron Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge
handbook of computational cognitive modeling (pp. 59-100).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hagoort, P. (2003). Interplay between syntax and semantics
during sentence comprehension: ERP effects of combining
syntactic and semantic violations. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 883-899.
Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. M. (2000). ERP effects of listening to
speech: Semantic ERP effects. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1518-
1530. doi:10.1016/S0028-3932(00)00052-X
Hagoort, P., Brown, C., & Groothusen, J. (1993). The syntactic
positive shift (SPS) as an ERP measure of syntactic
processing. In S. M. Garnsey (Ed.), Language and cognitive
processes. Special issue: Event-related brain potentials in
the study of language (Vol. 8, pp. 439-483). Hove: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Hald, L. A., Steenbeek-Planting, E. G., & Hagoort, P. (2007).
The interaction of discourse context and world knowledge
in online sentence comprehension. Evidence from the N400.
Brain Research, 1146, 210-218. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2007.
02.054
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Language technologies (NAACL'01),

Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg,
PA (pp. 1-8).
Hoeks, J. C. J., Stowe, L. A., & Doedens, G. (2004). Seeing
words in context: The interaction of lexical and sentence
level information during reading. Brain Research: Cognitive
Brain Research, 19(1), 59-73. doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.
2003.10.022
Jacobs, R. A., & Kruschke, J. K. (2011). Bayesian learning
theory applied to human cognition. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(1), 8-21. doi:10.1002/wcs.80
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of language: Brain, meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Karttunen, L., & Peters, S. (1979). Conventional implicature. In C.
K. Oh and D. A. Dinneen (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 11:
Presuppositions (pp. 1-55). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Keenan, J. M., Baillet, S. D., & Brown, P. (1984). The effects of
causal cohesion on comprehension and memory. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23(2), 115-126.
doi:10.1016/S0022-5371(84)90082-3
King, J. W., & Kutas, M. (1995). Who did what and when?
Using word- and clause-related ERPs to monitor working
memory usage in reading. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 7, 376-395. doi:10.1080/0169096890840
6365
Kleinschmidt, D., & Jaeger, F. (in press) Robust speech
perception: Recognizing the familiar, generalizing to the
similar, and adapting to the novel. Psychological Review.
Kluender, R., & Kutas, M. (1993). Bridging the gap: Evidence
from ERPs on the processing of unbounded dependencies.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 196-214. doi:10.1016/
0010-0277(72)90028-5
Kolk, H. H. J., Chwilla, D. J., van Herten, M., & Oor, P. J. W.
(2003). Structure and limited capacity in verbal working
memory: A study with event-related potentials. Brain and
Language, 85(1), 1-36. doi:10.1016/S0093-934X(02)00548-5
Kuperberg, G. R. (2007). Neural mechanisms of language
comprehension: Challenges to syntax. Brain Research,
1146, 23-49. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.12.063
Kuperberg, G. R. (2013). The pro-active comprehender: What
event-related potentials tell us about the dynamics of reading
comprehension. In B. Miller, L. Cutting, & P. McCardle
(Eds.), Unraveling the behavioral, neurobiological, and genetic components of reading comprehension (pp. 176-192).
Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes.
Kuperberg, G. R. (2014). What event-related potentials tell us
about predictive coding in language comprehension: A
commentary on Rabovsky & McRae, "Simulating the N400
ERP component as semantic network error: Insights from a
feature-based connectionist attractor model of word meaning" (Manuscript under review).
Kuperberg, G. R., Caplan, D., Sitnikova, T., Eddy, M., &
Holcomb, P. J. (2006). Neural correlates of processing
syntactic, semantic, and thematic relationships in sentences.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 21, 489-530.
doi:10.1080/01690960500094279
Kuperberg, G. R., Choi, A., Cohn, N., Paczynski, M., &
Jackendoff, R. (2010). Electrophysiological correlates of
complement coercion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
22, 2685-2701. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21333
Kuperberg, G. R., Holcomb, P. J., Sitnikova, T., Greve, D., Dale,
A. M., & Caplan, D. (2003). Distinct patterns of neural
modulation during the processing of conceptual and syntactic
anomalies. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 272-293.
doi:10.1017/S0048577299971202
Kuperberg, G. R., Paczynski, M., & Ditman, T. (2011).
Establishing causal coherence across sentences: An ERP

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 1230-1246.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.123.2.162
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2011). Thirty years and
counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component of the
event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of
Psychology, 62, 621-647. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.
093008.131123
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences:
Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity. Science, 207,
203-205. doi:10.1126/science.7350657
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during
reading reflect word expectancy and semantic association.
Nature, 307, 161-163. doi:10.1038/307161a0
Lagerwerf, L. (1998). Causal connectives have presuppositions
(PhD thesis). Catholic University of Brabant, Holland
Academic Graphics, The Hague.
Lakoff, G. (1971). On generative semantics. In D. Steinberg &
L. Jakobovits (Eds.), Semantics: An interdisciplinary reader
in philosophy, linguistics and psychology (pp. 232-296).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition,
induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological
Review, 104, 211-240. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.104.2.211
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284. doi:10.1080/01638539809545028
Lau, E. F., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2013)
Dissociating N400 effects of prediction from association in
single word contexts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25,
484-502. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.054
Lau, E. F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network
for semantics: (de)constructing the N400. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9, 920-933. doi:10.1038/nrn2532
Lee, C., & Federmeier, K. D. (2006). To mind the mind: An
event-related potential study of word class and word class
ambiguity. Brain Research, 1081, 191-202. doi:10.1016/j.
bandl.2007.06.002
Lee, C.-L., & Federmeier, K. D. (2009). Wave-ering: An ERP
study of syntactic and semantic context effects on ambiguity
resolution for noun/verb homographs. Journal of Memory
and Language, 61, 538-555. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2009.08.003
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2007.05.006
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution.
Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.doi:10.1037/0033295X.101.4.676
Marslen-Wilson, W., Brown, C. M., and Tyler, L. K. (1988).
Lexical representations in spoken language comprehension.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 3(1), 1-16. doi:10.1080/
01690968808402079
McRae, K., Ferretti, T. R., and Amyote, L. (1997). Thematic
roles and verb-specific concepts. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 12, 137-176. doi:10.1080/016909697386835
Munte, T. F., Schiltz, K., & Kutas, M. (1998). When temporal
terms belie conceptual order: An electrophysiological analysis. Nature, 3, 71-73.
Murray, J. D. (1994). Logical connectives and local coherence.
In R. F. Lorch & E. J. O'Brien (Eds.), Sources of cohesion in
text comprehension (pp. 107-125). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Murray, J. D. (1997). Connectives and narrative text: The role of
continuity. Memory & Cognition, 25, 227-236. doi:10.3758/
BF03201114

671

Nieuwland, M. S. (2013). "If a lion could speak...": Online
sensitivity to propositional truth-value of unrealistic counterfactual sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 68(1),
54-67. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2012.08.003
Nieuwland, M. S., Ditman, T., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2010). On
the incrementality of pragmatic processing: An ERP investigation of informativeness and pragmatic abilities. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 324-346. doi:10.1016/j.
jml.2010.06.005
Nieuwland, M. S., & Martin, A. E. (2012). If the real world were
irrelevant, so to speak: The role of propositional truth-value
in counterfactual sentence comprehension. Cognition, 122
(1), 102-109. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2011.09.001
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2005). Testing the
limits of the semantic illusion phenomenon: ERPs reveal
temporary semantic change deafness in discourse comprehension. Cognitive Brain Research, 24, 691-701.
doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.04.003
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2006). When peanuts
fall in love: N400 evidence for the power of discourse.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1098-1111.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.123.2.162
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). The
neurocognition of referential ambiguity in language comprehension. Language and Linguistics Compass, 2, 603-630.
doi:10.1111/j.1749-818X.2008.00070.x
Norris, D. (2006). The Bayesian Reader: Explaining word
recognition as an optimal Bayesian decision process. Psychological Review, 113, 327-357. doi:10.1037/0033295X.113.2.327
Norris, D., & McQueen, J. M. (2008). A Bayesian model of
continuous speech recognition. Psychological Review, 115,
357-395. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.115.2.357
Noveck, I., & Spotorno, N. (2013). Narrowing. In L. Goldstein
(Ed.) Brevity (pp. 280-296). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97-
113. doi:10.1016/0028-3932(71)90067-4
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of Memory
and Language, 31, 785-806. doi:10.1016/0749-596X(92)
90039-Z
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1993). Event-related potentials
and syntactic anomaly: Evidence of anomaly detection during
the perception of continuous speech. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 8, 413-437. doi:10.1080/01690969308407584
Otten, M., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2007). What makes a
discourse constraining? Comparing the effects of discourse
message and scenario fit on the discourse-dependent N400
effect. Brain Research, 1153, 166-177. doi:10.1016/j.
brainres.2007.03.058
Paczynski, M., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2011) Electrophysiological
evidence for use of the animacy hierarchy, but not thematic
role assignment, during verb-argument processing. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 26, 1402-1456. doi:10.1080/
01690965.2011.580143
Paczynski, M., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2012). Multiple influences
of semantic memory on sentence processing: Distinct effects
of semantic relatedness on violations of real-world event/
state knowledge and animacy selection restrictions. Journal
of Memory and Language, 67, 426-448. doi:10.1016/j.
jml.2012.07.003
Paczynski, M., Jackendoff, R., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2014). When
events change their nature. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 26, 1905-1917. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2014.02.002

672

M. Xiang and G. Kuperberg

Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). Learning to
represent a multi-context environment: more than detecting
changes. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 228. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2012.00228
Rabovsky, M., & McRae, K. (2014). Simulating the N400 ERP
component as semantic network error: Insights from a featurebased connectionist attractor model of word meaning. Cognition, 132(1), 68-89. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2014.03.010
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the
visual cortex: A functional interpretation of some extraclassical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1),
79-87. doi:10.1038/4580
Sanford, A. J., Leuthold, H., Bohan, J., & Sanford, A. J. S.
(2011). Anomalies at the borderline of awareness: An ERP
study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 514-523.
doi:10.1037/0096-1523.24.6.1656
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals,
and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge
structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Singer, M., & Halldorson, M. (1996). Constructing and validating motive bridging inferences. Cognitive Psychology, 30(1),
1-38. doi:10.1006/cogp.1996.0001
Sitnikova, T., Holcomb, P., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2008).
Neurocognitive mechanisms of human comprehension. In
T. F. Shipley & J. M. Zacks (Eds.), Understanding events:
How humans see, represent, and act on events (pp. 639-
683). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
St. George, M., Mannes, S., & Hoffman, J. E. (1997). Individual
differences in inference generation: An ERP analysis. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 776-787. doi:10.1162/jocn.
1997.9.6.776
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information during spoken language comprehension. Science, 268, 1632-1634. doi:10.1126/science.7777863
Traxler, M. J., Bybee, M. D., & Pickering, M. J. (1997).
Influence of connectives on language comprehension: Eyetracking evidence for incremental interpretation. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental
Psychology, 50, 481-497. doi:10.1080/027249897391982
van Berkum, J. J. A. (2009). The neuropragmatics of "simple"
utterance comprehension: An ERP review. In U. Sauerland &
K. Yatsushiro (Eds.), Semantics and pragmatics: From
experiment to theory (pp. 276-316). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., Hagoort, P., & Zwitserlood, P.
(2003). Event-related brain potentials reflect discourse-referential ambiguity in spoken language comprehension. Psychophysiology, 40, 235-248. doi:10.1111/1469-8986.00025

van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse
comprehension. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Van Petten, C., & Kutas, M. (1990). Interactions between
sentence context and word frequency in event-related brain
potentials. Memory & Cognition, 18, 380-393. doi:10.3758/
BF03197127
Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Prediction during language
comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP components.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 83, 176-190.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.09.015
Wacongne, C., Changeux, J.-P., & Dehaene, S. (2012). A
neuronal model of predictive coding accounting for the
mismatch negativity. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 3665-
3678. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5003-11.2012
Wacongne, C., Labyt, E., van Wassenhove, V., Bekinschtein, T.,
Naccache, L., & Dehaene, S. (2011). Evidence for a
hierarchy of predictions and prediction errors in human
cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108, 20754-20759. doi:10.1073/pnas.1117807108
Warren, T., & McConnell, K. (2007). Investigating effects of
selectional restriction violations and plausibility violation
severity on eye-movements in reading. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 14, 770-775. doi:10.3758/BF03196835
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (1993). Linguistic form and relevance.
Lingua, 90(1-2). 1-25. doi:10.1016/0024-3841(93)90058-5
Wittenberg, E., Paczynski, M., Wiese, H., Jackendoff, R., &
Kuperberg, G. (2014). The difference between "giving a
rose" and "giving a kiss": Sustained neural activity to the
light verb construction. Journal of Memory and Language,
73, 31-42. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2014.02.002
Wlotko, E. W., & Federmeier, K. D. (2012). So that's what you
meant! Event-related potentials reveal multiple aspects of
context use during construction of message-level meaning.
NeuroImage, 62(1), 356-366. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2012.04.054
Yang, C. L., Perfetti, C. A., & Schmalhofer, F. (2007). Eventrelated potential indicators of text integration across sentence
boundaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(1), 55-89. doi:10.1037/02787393.33.1.55
Yu, A. J. (2007). Adaptive behavior: humans act as Bayesian
learners. Current Biology, 17(22), R977-980. doi:10.1016/j.
cub.2007.09.007
Yu, A. J., & Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation,
and attention. Neuron, 46(4), 681-692. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.
2005.04.026
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 162-185. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.123.2.162

