C Cambridge University Press 2014 doi:10.1017/S1366728914000704
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 18 (2), 2015, 350-355 

RESEARCH NOTE

The bilingual advantage in the
Stroop task: simultaneous vs.
early bilinguals

L AU R A S A B O U R I N
Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa

S A N TA V I N E RT E
Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa

(Received: July 23, 2013; final revision received: August 28, 2014; accepted: August 29, 2014; first published online 22 October 2014)

The Stroop task has become a popular paradigm in investigations of bilingual cognitive control. While several studies show a
cognitive control advantage for bilinguals, recent studies have countered these findings. The present study investigates two
factors that may account for conflicting results: participant grouping and task difficulty. While we find no differences between
simultaneous and early bilinguals (age groups traditionally both classified as "early" bilinguals) when the task uses only one
language, we find a significant difference between the two when languages are mixed. We suggest treating the two groups as
distinct, and note the importance of the bilingual context.
Keywords: cognitive control, bilingualism, Stroop task, simultaneous bilinguals, early bilinguals

Introduction
The Stroop task (Stroop, 1935) has become a widelyused paradigm in many studies (see McLeod, 1991).
In the original task, participants were shown words
written in different coloured inks, and asked to name the
colour of the ink. This was easy in the control condition
(naming colour patches), and even easier in the congruent
condition, where the written word and ink colour matched
(i.e., the word red written in red ink). However, the task
was considerably more challenging in the incongruent
condition, which consisted of a mismatch (i.e., the word
red written in green ink). This slower naming latency
for incongruent trials is termed the "Stroop effect", and
has been attributed to the competition created by the
automatic process of reading interfering with the process
of colour naming (McLeod & MacDonald, 2000). This
task has often been used in discussions of automaticity in
language processing (e.g., Cohen, Dunbar & McClelland,
1990; Tzelgov, Henik & Leiser, 1990), and has also been
used to demonstrate the advantages of bilingualism on
cognitive control - a set of processes that include, but are
not limited to, inhibition, attention, monitoring, conflict
resolution, and selection.
There is evidence that in the bilingual lexicon,
both languages are active during both comprehension
(Marian & Spivey, 2003) and production (Kroll, Bobb


We would like to thank Sameer Ratti, Yu Ying Li and Natalie Ho for
their help with testing participants. We further thank all members of
the Brain and Language Lab for discussions during the setting up and
implementing of this research. We also thank Greg Poarch and one
anonymous reviewer for comments on an earlier version of this paper.
This research was supported by a SSHRC grant to the first author.

& Wodniecka, 2006). With two simultaneously active
language systems, bilinguals must use cognitive control
skills to pay attention to the linguistic environment, select
the appropriate language, inhibit the inappropriate one,
and manage the conflict between the two. This experience
in managing two languages may give them an advantage in
general cognitive control skills. The bilingual advantage
was shown by Bialystok, Craik and Luk (2008), who used
the Stroop task to demonstrate that bilinguals show better
interference suppression compared to their monolingual
counterparts. Similarly, Zied, Philippe, Pinon, HavetThomassin, Ghislaine, Roy and Le Gall (2004) found
that more proficient bilinguals were better at inhibiting
interference than less proficient bilinguals. Furthermore,
the bilinguals tested by Bialystok et al. (2008) showed
not only less interference in incongruent trials, but also
showed an advantage in congruent trials, suggesting that
inhibitory control is not the only skill to benefit from
bilingualism. Attentional skills have also been implicated
(Costa, Hernandez & Sebastian-Galles, 2008; Marzecova,
Asanowicz, Kriva & Wodniecka, 2013; also see Bialystok,
Craik & Luk, 2012), although the specific mechanism
behind the advantage remains unclear (see Hilchey &
Klein, 2011).
Recently, however, the entire notion of a bilingual
advantage has been questioned. Using several linguistic
and non-linguistic tasks, Paap and Greenberg (2013)
fail to find an advantage for young adult bilinguals.
Using the Stroop task, Kousaie and Phillips (2012) also
find no bilingual advantages in a sample of younger
and older bilinguals, and Coderre, Van Heuven and
Conklin (2013) only find an advantage under very specific
testing conditions. Despite these studies to the contrary,

Address for correspondence:
Laura Sabourin, Linguistics Department, University of Ottawa, 70 Laurier Ave. E. Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada
Laura.Sabourin@uottawa.ca

Bilingualism and Cognitive Control
discounting the existence of a bilingual advantage may be
premature, especially in light of studies that continue to
find advantages. It is worthwhile to instead examine some
of the factors, such as Age of Acquisition (AoA) and task
difficulty, that could influence the bilingual advantage.
A variation of AoA, the Age of Immersion
(AoI) provides an interesting avenue for investigation.
Heidlmayr, Moutier, Hemforth, Courin,Tanzmeister and
Isel (2014) and Coderre et al. (2013) both identify AoI in
the second language (L2) as a possible factor in Stroop
task performance; while the former study finds no effects
of L2 AoI, the latter does find such effects. However, this
factor has received little attention in the literature. The
current study focuses specifically on AoI, and also makes
an argument for identifying simultaneous bilinguals as a
specific separate group in studies of bilingualism.
Looking at AoA, Tao, Marzecova, Taft, Asanowicz
and Wodniecka (2011) provide an excellent summary of
various studies and the ages used to classify bilinguals
as "early" and "late". Many studies follow the traditional
classification of "early" as being an AoA of 6 years and
under. This, however, fails to capture any differences from
the potentially distinct group of simultaneous bilinguals,
whose experience of "second" language acquisition
differs from early sequential bilinguals. Simultaneous
bilinguals acquire two languages from birth, with no
language preceding the other; thus, rather than having
an L1 and an L2, they essentially have two L1s. One
possible view, that we test here, is whether differences
may be found between early sequential bilinguals and
simultaneous bilinguals.
We hypothesize that simultaneous bilinguals, having
only one system that includes both languages from the
beginning, may show no conflict due to no need to mediate
between two different language systems. However, early
sequential bilinguals, have developed (at least partially)
one language system before the next system is developed.
Although the result may be that representations are shared
in the bilingual mental lexicon for both simultaneous and
early bilinguals (Sabourin, Brien & Burkholder, 2014),
there are still differences in how the language systems
develop. Because there are two systems in conflict, the
early sequential bilinguals may need to use cognitive
control to mediate the conflict, strengthening these skills
as a consequence. These differences in experience may
bring about differences in cognitive control skill; however,
grouping simultaneous and early sequential bilinguals
together fails to capture these differences.
Finally, task difficulty may also contribute to the mixed
results for cognitive control. A number of studies use
young adult participants, but as has been often noted
(e.g., Costa et al., 2008), this group is at the peak of
cognitive control already, unlike children and older adults,
who have shown a considerable boost from bilingualism
(see Bialystok et al., 2012). Thus, the task challenge may

351

be insufficient to elicit any advantages in young adults,
although advantages may become apparent in a bilingual
environment. This was shown by Wu and Thierry (2013),
who used single-language and mixed-language contexts,
and found better non-linguistic cognitive control abilities
in the mixed-language context.
The current study aims to examine the effects of
a little-explored variable, AoI, on bilingual cognitive
control using the Stroop task. This paradigm enables
us to investigate cognitive control in a bilingual setting,
as well as vary the task difficulty by presenting both
languages individually or together. Furthermore, we
aim to distinguish the differences between simultaneous
and early sequential bilinguals. While having similar
language skills, these two groups differ in their manner of
acquisition of both languages, which we hypothesize leads
to differences in cognitive control ability. We predict that
the integrated single system of simultaneous bilinguals
will result in smaller cognitive control advantages due
to a decreased need to exercise control mechanisms as
a result of less conflict, while early sequential bilinguals
will show the typically-reported greater advantages due to
practice in managing two conflicting language systems.
Furthermore, we predict that advantages will be more
pronounced in the mixed-language task due to its
increased difficulty.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-one English-French bilinguals (5 male) between
the ages of 18 and 24 (M = 19.0, SD = 1.7) participated
in the current experiment. Participants were recruited
through the university's Integrated System of Participation
in Research (ISPR) and received 1 point credit for their
psychology class. All were native speakers of English
who have been immersed in French from an early age, and
some reported speaking or having studied other languages
(Spanish, n = 4; Arabic, n = 1). By self-rating, no
language other than English or French was at a level
of intermediate or higher, nor had been learned before
puberty.
Based on answers to a Language Background
Questionnaire (Sabourin & Members of the University
of Ottawa ERPLing Lab, 2009), participants were divided
into 2 groups reflecting their Age of Immersion (AoI) in
French: SIMULTANEOUS, defined as an AoI of 0 years of
age (n = 14), reflecting immersion in both English and
French from birth; and EARLY, defined as AoI between one
and six years (n = 17), reflecting immersion in a French
environment at a young age. All participants reported
using English and French on a daily basis, and rated
their proficiency in both languages using a self-rating 5point scale for oral comprehension and production, written

352

Laura Sabourin and Santa Vinerte

Table 1. Participant Groups.

Group

N

Age

Age of
First
Exposure
to French

Simultaneous
Early

14
17

18.8
19.1

0
4.2

Age of
Immersion
in French
(years)

English
Proficiency
(% on
Cloze test)

Self-rated
English
proficiency
(/20)

French
Proficiency
(% on
Cloze test)

Self-rated
French
proficiency
(/20)

Birth
1-6

84.3
81.1

19.1
20.0

71.0
41.9

18.6
14.9

proficiency and writing proficiency for a maximum score
of 20. Objective measures of proficiency (Brown, 1980;
Tremblay, 2011) reflected these self-ratings. Please refer
to Table 1 for detailed participant group information.

Stimuli
A bilingual Stroop task was programmed using
Presentation (Neurobehavioral Systems). Stimuli were
presented using a desktop computer and a 19-inch screen.
Participants used a button box to respond.
The stimuli words used were red, yellow, green, black,
silver, and white for English, and rouge, jaune, vert, noir,
argent, and blanc, for French. Six colours were chosen
to increase the difficulty of the task. Additionally, table,
chair, fork, spoon, house, and book were included as
control items in the English task, and arbre, chaise, stylo,
livre, maison, and souris were included as control items
in the French task to obtain baseline reading RTs. Words
were presented in capital letters in size 60 Times New
Roman font in the centre of the screen, and could appear
in either the Control (a control item in any colour font),
Congruent (i.e., the word "red" presented in red font), or
Incongruent (i.e. the word "red" presented in green font)
condition.
Three separate experiments were created. First,
an English Stroop task, which consisted of English
Control, English Congruent, and English Incongruent
items intermixed. Second, a French Stroop task, which
consisted of French Control, French Congruent, and
French Incongruent items intermixed. Finally, a Mixed
Language Stroop task, in which all of the aforementioned
conditions appeared intermixed. Pseudo-randomization
was employed to ensure that identical colours and words
were not repeated twice in succession. The English
and French tasks contained 25 trials each of Control,
Congruent, and Stroop trials, for a total of 75 trials for each
task. The Mixed Language task consisted of 25 trials each
of the English and French Control, English and French
Congruent, and English and French Incongruent trials, for
a total of 150 trials for the task. Each task was preceded
by 15 practice trials. Furthermore, the three tasks were

Figure 1. Sample trial.

counterbalanced for order of presentation and separated
by an interspersed task lasting approximately 5 minutes.

Procedure
Participants filled out a consent form and the language
background questionnaire, and were then invited into
a sound-attenuated room to begin the experiment. The
task was explained in English by the researcher, such
that participants were told that they would see words in
different colours appear in the middle of the screen. They
were asked to press the button that corresponded to the
colour of the font of the word they saw on the screen
(e.g. if the word "red" appears in green font, participants
have to press the green button). These instructions also
appeared on the screen in front of the participant. The
researcher remained in the room during practice trials to
give the participant an opportunity to ask questions. Once
the practice trials were over and there were no further
questions, the researcher left the room and the experiment
began.
Each trial began with a fixation cross in the middle of
the screen for 250ms. This was followed by the onset of
the target. Once the target appeared on screen, it remained
there until the participant responded or 4000ms had
elapsed (see Figure 1). RTs and Accuracy were recorded
and analysed. At the end of each task was a self-timed
break. Once participants were ready to resume, they
pressed a button on the button-box.
Participants completed the tasks in random order. An
initial practice block of 15 trials was completed before the

Bilingualism and Cognitive Control

353

Figure 2. Main effect of congruency by language. Error bars represent Standard Error. A represents Experiment 1, the
English task, and B represents Experiment 2, the French task.

first task. Practice blocks of 5 trials each were completed
before each subsequent task. Altogether, the experimental
tasks took approximately 15 minutes to complete.
Results
Experiment 1. English Stroop Task
Results of the English Stroop task reveal that while
there was an effect of Congruency (Control, Congruent,
and Incongruent; F(2, 58) = 17.28, p<.001), there
was no significant interactions between Congruency and
AoI (p = .878). This demonstrates that the expected
inhibition (calculated as the difference between mean
RTs in the incongruent and control conditions) and
facilitation (difference between mean RTs in congruent
and control conditions) effects to English stimuli were
found regardless of the language experience of the
participants. See Figure 2A below.
Experiment 2. French Stroop Task
Results of the French Stroop task reveal that while
there was an effect of Congruency (F(2, 58) = 17.28,
p<.001), there were no significant interactions between
Congruency and AoI (p = .559). This demonstrates
that, as expected and just as in the English Stroop task,
inhibition and facilitation effects were present and that
this, again, does not differ by language experience. See
Figure 2B.
Experiment 3. Mixed-Language Stroop Task
An examination of the Mixed-Language Stroop task
reveals a different overall pattern from the two single-

language tasks. Similar to the single-language tasks,
results showed an effect of Congruency (p<.001)
indicating the expected inhibition (mean difference =
52.8ms, p = .001) and facilitation effects (mean difference
= 40.6ms, p = .002).
However, in the mixed-language task (Figure 3), this
congruency effect interacted with Language (F(2, 58)
= 3.45); p = .039), and showed a trend of interacting
with AoI (F(2, 58) = 3.01; p = .073). And, importantly,
a significant 3-way interaction between Congruency,
Language, and AoI (F(2, 58) = 4.89; p = .011) was
found. In order to interpret the 3-way interaction, separate
Congruency by Language ANOVAs were run for each AoI
group.
For the Early bilinguals, a main effect of Congruency
was found (F(2, 32) = 16.49, p<.001) indicating again
the expected inhibition (mean difference = 62.8ms,
p = .006) and facilitation (mean difference = 67.3ms,
p = .001) effects. This congruency effect interacted
with the language of the stimuli (F(2, 32) = 5.12,
p = .014) such that only a facilitation effect was found
for the English stimuli (mean difference = 111.8ms,
p = .001), while for the French stimuli, only an inhibition
effect was found (mean difference = 81.2ms, p =
.001).
For the Simultaneous bilinguals, a main effect of
congruency was also found (F(2, 26) = 4.53, p = .032),
but for this group this effect was only due to significant
inhibition effects (mean difference = 42.8ms, p = .043).
This congruency effect only marginally interacted with
the language of the stimuli (F(2, 26) = 3.38, p = .054).
This marginal interaction reflected only inhibition effects
for the English stimuli (mean difference = 72.5ms, p =
.003) and neither inhibition nor facilitation effects (ps>.3)
for the French stimuli.

354

Laura Sabourin and Santa Vinerte

Figure 3. Average Reaction Times for Experiment 3 in each language by AoI. Simultaneous bilinguals are shown on the left
and Early bilinguals are shown on the right. Error bars represent Standard Error. Asterisks represent a significant difference
from the control condition.

Discussion
Looking at Figure 2, it can be seen that while the expected
congruency effect is present, there are no differences
between simultaneous and early bilinguals when only one
language is required for the task. This is consistent with
the lack of effects found by Kousaie and Phillips (2012)
in their Stroop task, which used English only. This may
in part be due to an insufficiently challenging task for the
young adults (despite 6 colours being used to increase
the difficulty level), as the pattern of effects differs from
that of the mixed language task, which combines both
languages and is arguably more challenging in nature.
Different patterns in the single-language and mixedlanguage condition were also reported by Wu and Thierry
(2013), who note that the mixed-language condition
"shifted the executive control system to an enhanced
functional level" in a study of non-linguistic control with
young adults (p. 13535).
Looking at Figure 3, the expected congruency effect
is still present, but we also find a three-way interaction
between the AoI, Language, and Congruency. For the
early sequential bilinguals, we find a strong facilitation
effect in their L1, although there are no significant
effects of interference in this dominant language. The
opposite is found in their L2, French, where there is
little facilitation, but a much larger interference effect. For
simultaneous bilinguals, the pattern is different: there is
neither interference nor facilitation in French, but a small
effect of inhibition in English is seen. We hypothesize that

the simultaneous bilinguals are better able to focus on the
task of determining the colours and ignoring the language
differences presented in the mixed language task while
the early sequential bilinguals have a more difficult time
blocking out the written stimuli. While this may arguably
be due to proficiency effects, we hypothesize that it is
more likely due to AoI and bilingual context effects.
These different patterns of facilitation and inhibition
suggest to us that even though both simultaneous and early
bilinguals have acquired two languages from an early age,
there are differences in underlying processing. Thus, the
common practice of grouping these two distinct groups
together may in part contribute to the inconsistencies
observed in cognitive control studies. In particular,
the facilitation effect seen in early bilinguals and the
inhibition seen in simultaneous bilinguals in English may
cancel each other out if the two groups are combined. To
fully understand the differences between these two groups,
correlational analyses would be beneficial; however, due
to the small sample size, we restrict ourselves to treating
the data as categorical.
In addition to observing an effect of AoI, the current
study also notes a distinct effect of the task. While no
effect was seen in single-language tasks, it appears in the
mixed-language task. This may be due to the increased
difficulty, but it may also add evidence regarding the
importance of language context. Among the few studies
that examine context, Wu and Thierry (2013) also varied
the language context by placing a flanker task between
single-language and mixed-language blocks, and results

Bilingualism and Cognitive Control
showed better interference suppression in mixed-language
blocks. Expanding on the idea of context, Green (2011)
discusses what he terms the "behavioural ecology of
bilingual speakers", which refers to the differences in
how a community of bilinguals use their two languages.
This is expanded into three distinct contexts in the
Adaptive Control Hypothesis (Green & Abutalebi, 2013),
with single-language context, dual-language context, and
dense code-switching contexts identified. Each context
places different demands on processing and control.
In our task, the differences in results between singleand mixed-language tasks may reflect not only the demand
of the immediate language context, but also the AoI
differences may reflect the language context that our
bilinguals find themselves in: simultaneous and early
bilinguals in the Ottawa area often find themselves in
mixed-language environments, and as a result of this
language experience, it is particularly in mixed-language
contexts where their specific skills can be observed. Thus,
context and environment appear to play an important role
in processing.

References
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control
and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34 (4), 859-873.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2012). Bilingualism:
consequences for mind and brain. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16 (4), 240-250.
Brown, J. D. (1980). Relative merits of four methods for scoring
cloze tests. The Modern Language Journal, 64 (3), 311-
317.
Coderre, E. L., Van Heuven, W.J.B., & Conklin, K. (2013). The
timing and magnitude of Stroop interfernce and facilitation
in monolinguals and bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 16 (2), 420-441.
Cohen, J.D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J.L. (1990). On the
control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
account of the Stroop effect. Psychological Review, 97 (3),
332-361.
Costa, A., Hernandez, M., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2008).
Bilingualism aids in conflict resolution: Evidence from the
ANT task. Cognition, 106, 59-86.
Green, D.W. (2011). Language control in different contexts:
the behavioral ecology of bilinguals speakers. Frontiers
in Psychology, 2:103, 1-4.
Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in
bilinguals: the adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 25 (5), 515-530.
Heidlmayr, K., Moutier, S., Hemforth, B., Courin, C.,
Tanzmeister, R., & Isel, F. (2014). Successive bilingualism
and executive functions: The effect of second language use
on inhibitory control in a behavioural Stroop Colour Word
task. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17 (3), 630-
645.

355

Hilchey, M.D., & Klein, R.M. (2011). Are there bilingual advantages on nonlinguistic interference tasks? Implications for
the plasticity of executive control processes. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 18, 625-658.
Kousaie, S., & Phillips, N.A. (2012). Aging and bilingualism:
Absence of a "bilingual advantage" in Stroop interference
in a nonimmigrant sample. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65 (2), 356-369.
Kroll, J.F., Bobb, S.C., & Wodniecka, Z. (2006). Language
selectivity is the exception, not the rule: Arguments
against a fixed locus of language selection in bilingual
speech. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 9 (2), 119-
135.
MacLeod, C.M. (1991). Half a century of research in the Stroop
effect: An integrative review. Psychological Bulletin, 109
(2), 163-203.
MacLeod, C.M., & MacDonald, P.A. (2000). Interdimensional
interference in the Stroop effect: uncovering the cognitive
and neural anatomy of attention. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4 (10), 383-391.
Marian, V. & Spivey, M. (2003). Competing activation in
bilingual language processing: Within- and betweenlanguage competition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 6 (2), 97-115.
Marzecova, A., Asanowicz, D., Kriva, L., & Wodniecka,
Z. (2013). The effects of bilingualism on efficiency
and lateralization of attentional networks. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 16 (3), 608-623.
Paap, K.R., & Greenberg, Z.I. (2013). There is no coherent
evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive processing.
Cognitive Psychology, 66 (2), 232-258.
Sabourin, L. and members of the ERPLing Laboratory. (2009).
Language Background Questionnaire. Unpublished Document, ERPLing Laboratory.
Sabourin, L., Brien, C., & Burkholder, M. (2014). The effect of
age of L2 acquisition on the organization of the bilingual
lexicon: Evidence from masked priming. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 17 (3), 542-555.
Stroop, J.R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643-
662.
Tao, L., Marzecova, A., Taft, M., Asanowicz, D., & Wodniecka,
Z. (2011). The efficiency of attentional networks in early
and late bilinguals: The role of age of acquisition. Frontiers
in Psychology, 2, 1-19.
Tremblay, A. (2011). Proficiency assessment standards in second
language acquisition research: "Clozing" the gap. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 33, 339-372.
Tzelgov, J., Henik, A., & Leiser, D. (1990). Controlling Stroop
interference: Evidence from a bilingual task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 760-771.
Wu, Y.J., & Thierry, G. (2013). Fast modulation of executive
function by language context in bilinguals. Journal of
Neuroscience, 33 (33), 13533-13537.
Zied, K.M., Philippe, A., Pinon, K., Havet-Thomassin, V.,
Ghislaine, A., Roy, A., & Le Gall, D. (2004). Bilingualism
and adult differences in inhibitory mechanisms: Evidence
from a bilingual Stroop task. Brain and Cognition, 54, 254-
256.

