Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 2016, 38, 739-769.
doi:10.1017/S027226311500039X

TRAINING ENGLISH LISTENERS TO
IDENTIFY PITCH-ACCENT PATTERNS
IN TOKYO JAPANESE

Irina A. Shport
Louisiana State University

The high-variability training paradigm (multiple words, phonetic contexts, and talkers) has been successful for perceptual learning of
tone contrasts. Here, it is extended to training native English listeners
on Tokyo Japanese pitch-accent contrasts. Participants had no previous experience with lexically contrastive pitch patterns. They learned
to identify three pitch patterns in disyllabic Japanese words: 1st-syllable
accented, 2nd-syllable accented, and unaccented. Immediate feedback was provided to the training group but not to the control group.
The results showed an effect of training on pitch-pattern identification
accuracy that was also generalized to new words spoken in new contexts. In contrast, the control group improved only on the 1st-syllable
accented pattern. Error analysis suggested that the unaccented pattern is the most difficult to identify. The results are discussed in terms
of native language bias and individual bias affecting second language
learning in the prosodic domain.

Tokyo Japanese is a pitch-accent language, in which a word is either
accented on a particular syllable or unaccented. Pitch patterns may
be lexically contrastive as in the following examples of the 1st-syllable
accented, 2nd-syllable accented, and unaccented words: hachi "eight" -
hachi "bowl" - hachi "bee." Two major functions of the pitch accent are
Susan Guion-Anderson passed away in December 2011. Her input in this project was
invaluable, and this paper is dedicated to her memory and lasting legacy in the field
of second language acquisition. Many thanks are extended to Kaori Idemaru, Melissa
Redford, and Vsevolod Kapatsinski for their comments on an earlier version of this
paper, and to Lisi Oliver, Susan Weinstein, Anna Pucilowski, and three anonymous
reviewers for their comments on the latest version. The content and all mistakes are
the sole responsibility of the author.
(c) Cambridge University Press 2015

739

740

Irina A. Shport

(a) a distinctive function, that is, signaling difference in lexical meaning,
and (b) a culminative-delimitative function, that is, defining the phrase
by signaling prominent units in a phrase (Beckman, 1986, pp. 11-44).
It has been argued that in modern Tokyo Japanese the distinctive function of the accent is less important than the culminative-delimitative
function (Beckman, 1986). The meaning of homophones may be distinguished easily in context. In addition, in many minimal pairs, one member
is less frequent in speech than the other. For these reasons, along with
the pedagogical traditions and time constraints in a second language
classroom, learners of Japanese are almost never explicitly taught pitch
patterns. As a result, even advanced learners of Japanese rarely acquire
the pitch-accent contrasts (see Ayusawa, 2003, for the review of relevant studies).
Acquisition of pitch-accent contrasts, however, is important for second language learners of Japanese for several reasons. First, at the word
level, approximately 13% of relatively short words (1-4-mora) are distinguished only by their accentual patterns, and all pattern types are
equally distributed in high-familiarity words (Kitahara, 2001). This suggests that the distinctive function of the pitch accent is not negligible.
Second, research shows that native speakers of Tokyo Japanese do use
pitch-accent information in spoken-word recognition (Cutler & Otake,
1999; Sekiguchi & Nakajima, 1999). Third, at the phrase level, pitch
patterns of words along with boundary and phrasal tones form larger
prosodic units such as accentual phrases (Pierrehumbert & Beckman,
1988; Venditti, 2005). If a learner of Japanese has not acquired lexical
pitch patterns, then the prosody of larger units will also be distorted.
Infelicitous word- or phrase-level prosody may be detrimental to
speech intelligibility and processing (Ito & Speer, 2008).
The goal of this study was to examine how adult nonnative listeners
perceive Japanese pitch patterns when they are at the initial stage of
learning, and whether they can improve in the perceptual identification
of novel pitch patterns with training and feedback. The question of prosodic learning in speakers of a typologically different language is of linguistic and pedagogical interest, and this study was the first to examine
it in a pitch-accent language using the high-variability training (HVT)
paradigm.
ACQUISITION OF PITCH-ACCENT CONTRASTS BY ADULT LEARNERS
Japanese lexical pitch-accent contrasts and phrasal intonation are
known to be challenging for learners of Japanese in both perception
and production (Ayusawa, 2003). Specifically, American English learners
tend to produce unaccented Japanese words as accented on the first
syllable or on the penultimate syllable, which suggests a difficulty with

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

741

the unaccented pitch pattern (Ueyama, 2000). Perception errors reported
in previous studies are quite different. Many of these studies used the
Tokyo Japanese Accent Listening Test, in which listeners are asked to
identify the accented mora in a word, if any (Arai, 1997; Ayusawa, 2003;
Hirata, Ayusawa, Nakagawa, & Odaka, 1997; Nishinuma, Arai, & Ayusawa,
1996). A common finding across these studies is that learners of Japanese
identified the unaccented pattern with relatively higher accuracy than a
variety of accented patterns, either in isolated or sentence-embedded
words. It has been suggested that unaccented patterns are simpler,
meaning that the presence of the accent is literally additional to the
unaccented pattern, thus increasing the processing effort required by
listeners (Nishinuma, 1997). This result, however, may also be explained
by the nature of the task and by listener strategies. The chance of identifying the absence of the accent is 50% (accented and unaccented answer
options), whereas the chance of identifying the location of the accent
varies from 50% in three-syllable words (1st- or 2nd-syllable accented)
to 20% in five-syllable words (1st-, 2nd-, 3rd-, 4th-, or 5th-syllable accented).
Listeners may also choose not to mark the location of the accented
mora if they are unsure. This last possibility alone would lead to the
higher identification accuracy for the unaccented pitch pattern than for
any of the accented patterns.

The Role of Similarity in Perceptual Learning
The notion of similarity is often invoked to explain why some nonnative
sound categories are learned better than others. The theoretical assumption here is that listeners perceive nonnative sounds in relation to native
sound categories (perceptual assimilation model: Best & Tyler, 2007;
native language magnet model: Kuhl & Iverson, 1995). The degree of perceived similarity is used to predict the degree of perceptual assimilation,
discrimination, and, ultimately, learning of nonnative sounds. The current
theories of speech perception were originally developed for segments, but
they have been applied to lexical tones as well (Francis, Ciocca, Ma, &
Fenn, 2008; Halle, Chang, & Best, 2004; So & Best, 2010). The perceived
similarity between native and nonnative prosodic categories has not been
directly assessed in previous research, but it has been discussed on the
basis of articulatory similarity, in terms of fundamental frequency (F0) contours. So and Best (2010), for example, described selected Mandarin and
Cantonese tones as similar to each other, and selected Mandarin tones and
Japanese pitch patterns as similar with the exception of their temporal
realization: one syllable in Mandarin versus at least two syllables in
Japanese. In both examples, two languages with lexically contrastive F0
contours (i.e., the same distinctive function) are compared.

742

Irina A. Shport

In contrast to the preceding examples, a similarity assessment between
prosodic categories in two typologically different languages, such as
Japanese and English, is complicated. Japanese lexical pitch patterns
and English intonation patterns differ in the level at which F0 contours
may be contrastive (word level in Japanese vs. phrase level in English)
and in their function (signaling a difference in lexical meaning in
Japanese, but not in English). Japanese lexical pitch patterns and English
stress patterns, by contrast, may be viewed at the same word level but
they differ in their acoustic-phonetic cues (Beckman, 1986). It has been
suggested that English listeners may perceive lexical pitch patterns as
(a) nonlinguistic melodic variations, (b) speech patterns evocative of
native language patterns but uncategorizable, or (c) speech patterns
evocative of native language patterns and categorizable (Halle et al.,
2004, pp. 416-418; So & Best, 2010, p. 289). In this study, the first possibility was ruled out for listeners because we explained to them that
pitch patterns have a distinctive function in Japanese. The last possibility, of a perceptual assimilation between Japanese pitch patterns and
English stress patterns, was considered, following previous work by
Nishinuma that is discussed in the following text.
Nishinuma (1997) used a comparison between Japanese pitch patterns and English stress patterns to explain the outcomes in his study.
He suggested that the relatively high identification accuracy for Japanese
2nd-syllable accented words by English listeners was due to the similarity in the location of the F0 peak between these words and 2nd-syllable
stressed words in English (e.g., tabemono "food" and apparently). The
peak location criterion, however, fails to explain why the English listeners showed lower identification accuracy for the 1st- than the 2ndsyllable accented words in the same study (e.g., tabemono "food" and
kare kara "from him"). The F0 peak location is similar in Japanese 1stsyllable accented words and English 1st-syllable stressed pattern
(e.g., kare kara "from him" and category). Thus, by Nishinuma's logic,
the patterns of the 1st-syllable accented words should be identified
equally well, which was not the case. Note that F0 peak location is not
the only element that makes F0 contours similar or dissimilar to one
another. F0 contours of the Japanese lexical pitch patterns are described
in detail in the following text.

Acoustic Cues to Japanese Lexical Pitch Patterns
Pitch accent in Tokyo Japanese is a high-low accent, which is implemented as an F0 peak near the end of the accented mora followed by a
steep F0 fall. This steep F0 fall is the fundamental acoustic correlate of
the pitch accent in production and the primary acoustic cue to accent

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

743

in perception (Pierrehumbert & Beckman, 1988; Sugito, 1982a; Sugiyama,
2012; Venditti, 2005). In disyllabic words, the presence of the F0 fall differentiates between accented and unaccented words, and the location
of the F0 peak differentiates between 1st- and 2nd-syllable accented
words (Figure 1). In productions of some native speakers, the contrast
between 2nd-syllable accented and unaccented words may be sometimes neutralized (Shport, 2014; Sugito, 1982b; Sugiyama, 2012; Vance,
1995).
Pitch-accent contrast is also a building block of phrasal intonation in
Tokyo Japanese. The presence and location of the accent changes the
prosody of an accentual phrase, the smallest prosodic grouping defined
by a phrasal high tone and a boundary low tone at the end of the phrase
(Venditti, 2005, p. 180). Because lexical and phrasal prosody interact,
cues to pitch-accent contrasts in multiword phrases may include more
than just the location of an F0 peak and the presence of an F0 fall. They
may also include F0 peak height, phrase-initial F0 rise to the peak, and the
degree of F0 fall across the phrase. Specifically, the F0 peak has a larger
value for the lexical high tone of the pitch accent than the phrasal high
tone; accented phrases have a greater degree of the phrase-initial F0 rise
than their unaccented counterparts; and the F0 fall is steeper in accented
phrases than in unaccented phrases due to the lowering of all tonal targets
following the lexical pitch accent in a phrase (Pierrehumbert & Beckman,
1988; Sugito, 1982b; Sugiyama, 2012). Figure 2 illustrates these cues to
the accentually contrastive mori words in four sentential contexts. The
differences in the peak heights and the F0 rises to the peak are clearer
in the contexts A, C, and D than in the context B. The difference in the
degree of F0 fall after the mori words is clearer in the contexts A-B than
in the contexts C-D. In sum, these additional cues to pitch-accent contrasts may be helpful to listeners of Japanese at least in some sentential
contexts. In this study, accentually contrastive words were embedded
in sentences in order to provide listeners with all possible cues to pitchaccent contrasts.

Figure 1. Averaged F0 contours of words produced by three native
speakers of Tokyo Japanese (18 words x 3 pitch patterns x 3 repetitions).
F0 was measured at the vowel midpoints in disyllabic words (V1, V2)
and the following one-syllable particle or copula (V3).

744

Irina A. Shport

Figure 2. F0 contours of four sentences with the word mori produced
by AK, a native speaker of Tokyo Japanese. Three contours in each
panel represent the sentence with three pitch patterns of the word mori
(1st-syllable accented: dashed green lines; 2nd-syllable accented: solid
blue lines; unaccented: solid red lines). Vertical lines show the approximate boundaries of mori with the following particle or copula.
Native Language Bias in the Perception of F0 Fall
Lifelong native language experience alters perceptual attention to acoustic characteristics of other language sound patterns in adult listeners
(Gandour & Harshman, 1978; Kuhl & Iverson, 1995). Attentional bias
(a learned way of speech processing) has been observed for both segmental and prosodic nonnative contrasts. As for word-level prosodic
contrasts, experimental evidence shows that native listeners of tone languages attend more to the acoustic dimension of F0 change than nonnative tone listeners do (Francis et al., 2008; Gandour & Harshman, 1978;
Guion & Pederson, 2007; Wayland & Guion, 2004). Judging dissimilarity
in pairs of tones, native listeners of tone languages like Mandarin, Thai,
Cantonese, and Taiwanese pay attention to both F0 peak height and characteristics of F0 change, whereas native listeners of nontone languages
like English mostly rely on F0 height information. This finding holds true
not only for the perception of lexical tones but also for the perception of
lexical pitch-accent contrasts (Shport, 2015). Native listeners of Tokyo
Japanese use both of the F0 peak location and F0 fall cues to categorize
pitch-accent patterns, whereas English listeners naive to Japanese mostly
rely on the former cue. This way of processing phonetic information may
negatively affect the learning of lexical pitch patterns, especially the differentiation between unaccented and accented ones.

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

745

Although English listeners pay insufficient attention to the F0 fall cue
in categorization of pitch patterns, they easily discriminate the patterns
with and without the F0 fall (Hirano-Cook, 2011; Shport, 2015). This suggests that English listeners learn to ignore the cues irrelevant to the
lexical prosody of their native language. Without a doubt, they do encounter the F0 fall in successions of high and low tones in the intonation patterns of English. (The reader is referred to the inventory of pitch accents
in Mainstream American English in Beckman, Hirschberg, & ShattuckHufnagel, 2005). However, for English listeners, the F0 fall is associated
with pitch accents at postlexical level and prosodic groupings different
from the Japanese accentual phrase. The question therefore arises as to
whether English listeners can learn to recognize the F0 fall, specifically,
its presence and location within a word, as contrastive at the lexical
level in a foreign language such as Japanese.

Individual Differences in the Perception of Lexical Prosody
Large individual variability among listeners with similar native language
and language learning experiences has been consistently reported in
previous research (Chandrasekaran, Sampath, & Wong, 2010; Goss, 2015;
Hirano-Cook, 2011; Iverson & Evans, 2009; Iverson, Hazan, & Bannister,
2005; Nishinuma et al., 1996; Shport, 2014, 2015; Wang, Spence, Jongman, &
Sereno, 1999). This suggests that the individual characteristics of learners
due to nonlinguistic experiences and general cognitive abilities also affect
perceptual learning. One relevant finding is that musicians are better at
processing language-related pitch variations than nonmusicians (Cooper
& Wang, 2012; Wong & Perrachione, 2007). This may be explained by
their sharpened sensitivity to pitch variation, which is developed during
musical training and applied to pitch perception in a second language.
Taking this into account, information about participants' musical backgrounds was collected in the current study's questionnaire. Information
on other experiences that may contribute to learning pitch patterns,
such as learning foreign languages, academic achievement as indicated
by GPA, and interest in linguistics as indicated by participants' choice of
major, was also recorded. These individual variables were not manipulated in the experimental design, and their examination was exploratory.
TRAINING ON PITCH-ACCENT PATTERNS
As described previously, attention to the F0 fall is necessary for distinguishing Japanese pitch patterns. Previous research has shown that native
language biases in tone perception by adult listeners can be overcome

746

Irina A. Shport

with exposure and training (Chandrasekaran et al., 2010; Francis et al.,
2008; Guion & Pederson, 2007; Wang et al., 1999; Wayland & Guion,
2004). The practical question is to what degree focused training facilitates this process. Many elements of the training design may be varied
in hopes of a better outcome, including types of task, feedback, and
training materials. Identification training with feedback improves the
identification and discrimination accuracy of pitch patterns (Francis
et al., 2008; Hirano-Cook, 2011; Wang et al., 1999); a mere repetition
of an identification test in longitudinal studies without feedback,
however, does not necessarily yield an improvement (Arai, 1997;
Goss, 2015; Hirata et al., 1997). Stimulus words presented in a sentential context facilitate perception and learning as compared to stimuli
presented in isolation, perhaps due to the availability of both wordlevel and phrase-level acoustic cues to the contrast (Hirata, 1999;
Lee, Tao, & Bond, 2009; Nishinuma et al., 1996). Training on stimuli
that include multiple words, phonetic contexts, and talkers has been
effective for the learning of nonnative sounds (Lively, Logan, & Pisoni,
1993). This HVT was used successfully for training English listeners
in Japanese syllabic morae and pitch accent (Hirata, 1999), Cantonese
tones (Francis et al., 2008), and Mandarin tones (Chandrasekaran et al.,
2010; Wang et al., 1999).
The effectiveness of HVT for sound category learning is well established,
although its superiority as compared to other training paradigms and
its benefits for different types of learners have been questioned (Iverson &
Evans, 2009; Iverson et al., 2005; Perrachione, Lee, Ha, & Wong, 2011).
In line with exemplar-based models of speech perception, it was originally assumed that acoustic-phonetic stimulus variability encourages
learners to focus their attention on the most robust perceptual cues for
identifying a foreign sound category across various phonetic environments and talkers (Lively et al., 1993). Iverson and Evans argued, however, that HVT encourages listeners to apply their native-language
categories more consistently to nonnative speech, rather than to reweight
acoustic cues that are relevant to the identification of a nonnative sound
(2009, p. 875). Perrachione et al. (2011) showed that HVT produces
different levels of learning achievement in high-aptitude learners and
low-aptitude learners, where aptitude is measured in a pitch-pattern
perception test. Specifically, HVT may impair learners with weaker perceptual abilities relative to low-variability training, although learners
still improve in their ability to generalize learning to novel stimuli. The
authors suggested that the best training paradigm for a diverse group of
learners is the HVT where stimuli are blocked by talker, "because perceptually strong learners benefit from globally high stimulus variability,
while perceptually weak learners require low trial-by-trial variability"
(2011, p. 469). This design is adopted in the current study's training
procedure.

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

747

The effect of perceptual training of American English learners on
Japanese pitch patterns has been investigated by Hirata (1999) and
Hirano-Cook (2011). Unlike typical HVT studies, both of these studies
used complex training procedures focusing on a comparison of the
improvement in perception and production abilities in intermediatelevel learners of Japanese. Hirata trained learners in pitch patterns
and rhythm, using immediate computer-mediated feedback. In the
perception pre- and posttests, learners completed an identification
task in which they matched the pitch and rhythmic pattern of a word
with one of nine prosody graphs (i.e., visual representations of the
nine possible patterns in the stimuli). In training, learners imitated
words, until the F0 contours in their productions matched with those of
provided models. After 10 training sessions, the learners' performance
in correctly identifying pitch patterns improved by 18%. Hirano-Cook
used a variety of teaching strategies as well as a combination of production and perception tasks to train students on 20 four-syllable
Japanese words with four accentual patterns. After six training sessions (three hours total), the learners' performance in marking the
location of pitch accent (i.e., the methodology similar to the Tokyo
Japanese Accent Listening Test) improved on average by 18%, similarly to Hirata (1999). This complex training did not provide highly
variable input.
In pitch-pattern identification tasks, listeners may be asked to match
the auditory stimuli to (a) the visual representations of pitch patterns,
such as iconic arrows keys, schematic diagrams, and pitch tracks
(Goss, 2015; Hirata, 1999), (b) images of objects that those auditory
stimuli represent (Hirano-Cook, 2011), or (c) the orthographical representations of words (Chandrasekaran et al., 2010; Cooper & Wang,
2012; Francis et al., 2008; Hirano-Cook, 2011; Wong & Perrachione,
2007). The choice of the response representation depends on listeners'
second language proficiency and the goal of the task. The orthographical representation is ruled out for naive listeners who do not have
vocabulary knowledge in the target language. Image representations
are used in tasks focused on the lexical learning of target words. Graphic
representations are used in tasks focused on pitch-pattern awareness.
Importantly, pitch-pattern identification accuracy in the latter task
type was found to significantly predict tone-word learning proficiency
(Cooper & Wang, 2012; Goss, 2015; Wong & Perrachione, 2007). This
means that when participants learn to map audio stimuli and visual
representations of pitch patterns, they also learn to abstract and categorize those patterns as applicable to word learning. Wong and Perrachione pointed to this "phonetic-phonological-lexical continuity
for speech learning, such that more basic auditory abilities (phoneme
discrimination) mediate performance on higher level auditory tasks
(word learning), consistent with bottom-up models of speech perception"

748

Irina A. Shport

(2007, p. 566). In this study, visual representations of pitch patterns
were used in all tasks under the assumption of the aforementioned
continuity.

THIS STUDY
Extending previous work on Japanese lexical prosody, this study used
an experimental approach to investigate perceptual learning of pitch
patterns in disyllabic words of Tokyo Japanese. English listeners naive
to lexically contrastive pitch patterns represented the initial stage of
learning a pitch-accent language. They were trained to identify the 1stsyllable accented pattern (F0 fall after the first syllable), the 2nd-syllable
accented pattern (F0 fall after the second syllable), or the unaccented
pattern (no F0 fall). Target words, sentential contexts, and talkers were
varied to provide listeners with multiple opportunities to notice the
acoustic-phonetic realization of the three target pitch patterns. Listeners
also received computer-mediated, trial-by-trial feedback on their
responses during the training.
The effect of the training was evaluated by comparing the trainees'
performance in both pretest and posttest, and also by the trainees'
ability to generalize their knowledge to new words and new talkers
(Lively et al., 1993; Wang et al., 1999). Two predictions on the overall
effect of training were made:
1. The difference between pretest and posttest scores would be greater in
participants who underwent training as compared to participants who
did not, indicating a greater improvement with training than with mere
exposure.
2. The difference between trainees and controls would also be observed in generalization tests where listeners apply their knowledge to new words and
new talkers (gen-1 and gen-2 tests, hereinafter), indicating the generalization
of training-induced learning.

The identification accuracy and the degree of perceptual learning were
expected to vary among the 1st-syllable accented, 2nd-syllable accented,
and unaccented pitch patterns (Ayusawa, 2003; Gandour & Harshman,
1978; Nishinuma et al., 1996). Specifically, we predicted that:
3. The unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented patterns would be confused
frequently due to the similarity of their F0 contours.
4. The unaccented pattern would be the most difficult for naive English listeners, perhaps, because (a) the accented patterns have potentially more
salient cues than the unaccented pattern, such as higher F0 peaks, and
(b) English listeners pay more attention to F0 height than to the direction
of F0 change.

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

749

The identification accuracy of pitch patterns was also predicted to vary
with the sentential context due to the interactions between word- and
phrase-level cues to the pitch-accent contrasts:
5. Pitch patterns of words in the sentence-medial position would have the highest identification scores due to multiple acoustic cues available to the listener
(F0 fall after the accented mora, F0 peak height, phrase-initial F0 rise, overall
F0 fall in a sentence).

No specific predictions were tested with regard to the expected individual
variation in perceptual learning. Individual variation was only explored
using information on linguistic, musical, and academic background that
was self-reported by participants in a questionnaire.

METHODS
Participants
Forty-nine native speakers of American English with no reported speech
or hearing impairments participated in the study for course credit.
They were randomly assigned to either a control or training group.
The participants completed a questionnaire that included questions
on demographics, academic achievement (GPA), foreign languages
(languages learned, self-estimated proficiency, length and context of
learning), and musical expertise (instrumental or vocal, self-estimated
proficiency, length and context of practice). All participants had studied one or more foreign languages, in a classroom setting only, from age
12 or older. In order to control for previous experience with lexically
contrastive pitch patterns, data from participants who had studied
Japanese or another tone language were excluded. This left 19 people in
the control group (10 females, 9 males) and 19 people in the training
group (13 females, 6 males).
In addition, six female native speakers of Tokyo Japanese were recruited
by word of mouth. At the time of the study, the Japanese participants
were using English actively in a study-abroad setting. However, their
mean length of residence in the United States did not exceed one year,
and their age of arrival was no earlier than 19.

Stimuli
Table 1 shows the stimuli used in this study: seven Japanese sentences
(e.g., "I can write __.") containing 12 target words (e.g., hashi, tsuru, mori,

750

Irina A. Shport

Table 1. Test stimuli: Target words produced in sentential contexts by
different talkers
Pitch Pattern
Test
(Talker) Word

1st-syllable acc.

2nd-syllable acc.

Unaccented

Sentence
1, 2, 3

5, 6, 7

aki
hashi
kaku
Posttest tsuru
umi
(CH)

 autumn
 chopsticks
 core
 crane
 sea

 weariness
 bridge
 stroke
 () vine
 pus

waki

 ()
harmonious

 side

 opening
 edge
 status
 to fish
 giving
birth
 boiling

hari
kaki
maku
mori
mushi
yoku

 needle
 oyster
() to sow
 guard
 to ignore
 well

 beam
 () fence
 membrane
 leaking
 steaming
 greed

 straining
 persimmon
 to wrap
 woods
 insect
 next

Pretest
(CH)

Gen-1
(AK)
Gen-2
(KC)

Notes. Gen-1 = test of generalization 1, gen-2 = test of generalization 2. The carrier sentences are listed
as follows (sentence 4 was used in training only). Pitch accent is marked with acute accent.
1. __ ga kakemasu. "(I) can write __."
2. Watashi wa __ ga kakemasu. "I can write __."
3. __ ga ne. "It's __, you know."
(4. __ ni chuuishite kudasai. "Please pay attention to __.")
5. __ o kurikku shite. "Click on ___."
6. __ ga hatsuon shiyasui? "Is ___ easy to pronounce?"
7. Are wa __ na no? "Is that __?"

yoku) each carrying each of the three pitch patterns (1st-syllable accented,
2nd-syllable accented, and unaccented). Three repetitions of all of the
sentences with the target words were elicited as responses in short
scripted dialogues produced by six native speakers of Tokyo Japanese
(referred to as talkers, hereafter): three women (RS, AK, KC) and three
men (CH, TM, TN). The recordings of RS, TM, TN and the recordings of
sentence 4 were used for training only, as described in the following
section. Recordings were made using a Marantz recorder and a Shure
microphone in a sound-attenuated booth. RMS amplitude was later
adjusted to be identical for all sound files.
Pitch-accent patterns of the target words were confirmed with the
NHK accent pronunciation dictionary (NHK, 1998). Three of the words
had a double pronunciation norm: tsuru or tsuru "vine," kaku or kaku
"stroke," and yoku or yoku "next." For each of these words, the pattern
that fit the stimuli design in Table 1 was recorded. In all sentential contexts, the target words were followed by function words that did not
alter the pitch patterns (the case particles wa, ga, o, ni or present-tense

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

751

copula na). An examination of the F0 contours in Praat (Boersma &
Weenink, 2010) confirmed that all talkers produced the three-way contrasts in each word triplet, though their phonetic realization varied
slightly by talker. Figure 1 shows F0 contours of the words used in tests
(talkers CH, AK, KC; contours are averaged across three productions).
F0 contours of the words used in training were similar but they are not
shown here for the sake of space.
The target words were played to the participants in their sentential
contexts in order to facilitate perceptual learning by providing additional
phrase-level acoustic cues to pitch-accent contrasts (Pierrehumbert &
Beckman, 1988; Sugito, 1982b; Vance, 1995) and phonetic variability in
the stimuli (Hirata, 1999; Lee et al., 2009; Nishinuma et al., 1996). The list
of sentences in Table 1 shows that they varied in the position of the
target word (sentence-initial in 1, 3-6 vs. sentence-medial in 2, 7); the
accentual type of the following lexical word (accented in 4, 5 vs. unaccented in 1-2, 6); and the type of sentence-final boundary tones (low tones
in sentences 1-2 and 4, high tones in questions 6-7, high insisting-rise
tones in 3, 5). Figure 2 shows examples of F0 contours in four sentences
produced by the female talker AK. Overall, the sentential F0 contours
were similar among all talkers, although in unaccented phrases (e.g., mori
ga kakemasu) the talkers had a slightly varying degree of decrease in F0
after the phrasal high tone.
The stimuli in Table 1 are divided into pre-/posttest and generalization
tests. (Pre-/posttest stimuli were also used in training, with an addition
of sentential context 4 and stimulus recordings by talkers RS, TM, and TN.)
These are two different sets of stimuli because successful training would
imply not only a higher accuracy at posttest as compared to pretest, but
also generalization to new stimuli (Lively et al., 1993; Wang et al., 1999).
The gen-1 test assessed trainees' ability to generalize to new stimuli
spoken by talker AK, who was familiar from training; gen-2 test assessed
their ability to generalize to new stimuli spoken by talker KC, whose
voice was completely unfamiliar to the participants. The structural novelty of the sentential contexts in gen tests as compared to pre-/posttest
is that sentences 6-7 are questions, with question boundary tones
unheard by listeners and thus potentially interacting with their perception of the pitch patterns of the target words. (A suggestion to use nonquestions for training and questions for generalization tests was made
in Ayusawa, 2003.)
THREE-ALTERNATIVE FORCED-CHOICE IDENTIFICATION TASK
The task was conducted in a quiet room, one listener at a time. Participants
were asked to match the pitch pattern of a target word heard through
headphones with the graphic representation of the pattern displayed on

752

Irina A. Shport

the computer screen. In each trial, first, an underlined target word was
displayed in isolation on the computer screen, in Romanized transcription for English listeners and in Japanese orthography for Japanese listeners. This was done to orient the listener's attention toward the target
word. The next (response) slide displayed the word in a carrier sentence along with three diagrams of possible pitch patterns for English
listeners (Figure 3A). As discussed in the introduction, visual representations of pitch patterns were used in this nonlexical task under the
assumption of a phonetic-phonological-lexical continuity (Cooper &
Wang, 2012; Wong & Perrachione, 2007). Also, it was the only way to
represent pitch patterns to English listeners naive to Japanese. The slide
for Japanese listeners included orthographical representations of words
because for this group pitch-pattern information is a part of a lexical
word's representation, and leaving out the lexical word could have been
confusing (Figure 3B).
A recording of the sentence was played to the participants with a onesecond delay after the response slide display, again, in order to give
listeners time to orient their attention toward the target word (e.g., hashi)
in the sentence (e.g., Watashi wa hashi ga kakemasu). English listeners
were instructed to identify the pitch pattern of the target word and
Japanese listeners were instructed to identify the word by clicking the
mouse on one of the three diagrams presented on a computer screen.
Response time was limited to four seconds; one second after they clicked,

Figure 3. Presentation of response choices in the pitch-pattern identification task.

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

753

the next target word was displayed. Listeners were instructed to respond
as quickly and as accurately as they could, and to make their best guess
if they were unsure.
During the training, each trial started as described previously, but after
a trainee's response the feedback was displayed: Correct! The right answer
was __ or Incorrect. The right answer was __. The feedback was displayed
along with a diagram of the correct answer. After a one-second delay,
listeners heard the audio file of the trial one more time.
EXPERIMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURE
At the beginning of the experiment, the distinctive function of pitch patterns was explained to all participants because the English listeners
were unfamiliar with Japanese, and the Japanese listeners did not necessarily have any metalinguistic awareness of pitch-accent contrasts.
The listeners were told that, in tone languages like Japanese or Chinese,
all words have specific pitch patterns that differentiate the meaning of
words consisting, otherwise, of the same sounds, and that these patterns have to be learned. This was illustrated by audio-recordings of the
word higashi and three visual representations of the pitch patterns in
this word: higashi "Mr. Higashi," higashi "dry Japanese sweets," and higashi
"East." Listeners had a practice task with the word higashi at the beginning of each test or training session, the point of which was to remind
them of the pitch patterns and the task, and to introduce the sentential
contexts with translations to the English listeners who, otherwise, could
have been overwhelmed during the task.
All English participants completed the pretest on one day and the
posttest, gen-1, and gen-2 tests on another day. In each of these tests,
the 162 trials were blocked by sentence (3 pitch patterns x 6 words x 3
sentences x 3 repetitions). Within each block, the stimulus presentation
order was randomized. The order of the gen-1 and gen-2 tests was counterbalanced. The Japanese participants, by contrast, took the pretest,
gen-1, and gen-2 in one day, all in counterbalanced order, so that each
test was taken as the first one by two participants.
The training phase of the experiment took one hour over the course
of three days. The training sessions were at least a day apart. The first
and second sessions had 144 trials each (3 pitch patterns x 6 words x 2
sentences x 4 talkers), blocked by talker and sentence in order to facilitate perceptual learning in different learner types (Perrachione et al.,
2011). Within each block, the stimuli were randomized. The third session served as a review of all of the training materials, plus an additional
sentential context 4 (3 pitch patterns x 6 words x 4 sentences). The
trials were blocked by sentence, and randomly drawn from the pool of
recordings by four talkers within each block. (Not all 288 recorded stimuli

754

Irina A. Shport

were played due to a limitation in overall participation time as determined by the subject recruitment procedure.) Whereas the training
group underwent three training sessions between the pretest and posttest, the control group was engaged in another task with Japanese pitch
patterns, so that overall exposure time to pitch patterns was the same
for both groups.
RESULTS
The total number of trials attempted by the English listeners in all tests
was 24,624 (3 pitch patterns x 6 words x 3 sentences x 3 repetitions x 4
tests x 2 groups x 19 listeners). Listeners' responses were coded as correct or incorrect; 208 no-response trials were coded as missing. The
percentage of correct responses per test, pitch pattern, and sentential
context was calculated for each listener, and used for graphic displays
of pattern identification accuracy (Figures 4-6). Data from the six native
Japanese listeners (pretest, gen-1, and gen-2 tests) are presented in figures and tables for rough comparison only. These data were not used
in the statistical analyses due to the small number of subjects in this
group, and due to this study's focus on perceptual learning in second
language listeners.
The results are reported in the following text in four sections: the
overall effect of training (hypotheses 1-2); the uneven learning of the
three target pitch patterns (hypotheses 3-4); the role of sentential context in pattern identification (hypothesis 5); and individual differences
in task performance.

Overall Improvement and Generalization
To investigate the effect of training on pattern identification accuracy,
English listeners' responses were submitted to mixed-effects logistic
regression analysis with Group (2) and Test (4) as fixed factors, and
Listener as a random factor. The analysis yielded a significant effect of
Test [F(3, 24.62) = 72.38, p < .001], and the interaction between Test and
Group [F(3, 24.62) = 9.70, p < .001]. The variance estimate for the effect
of Listener was also significant [Wald Z = 4.18, p < .001]. The significant
interaction was further examined in contrast analyses, with Bonferroni
corrections for multiple comparisons. Specifically, we examined the effect
of Group at pretest and the effect of Group on the paired score at pretest
and the other tests (i.e., three possible contrasts for the interaction).
The difference between controls and trainees was significant in posttest
and gen-1 test, as compared to pretest (p < .001 for both comparisons).

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

755

No significant group difference was observed either at pretest, or in
gen-2 as compared to pretest.
These statistical analyses confirmed what is evident in Figure 4. Although
the pretest scores were similar in the training and control groups, the
improvement in accuracy from pretest to posttest was greater in trainees
than in controls (11% vs. 4% gain, respectively). Thus, training generated
greater improvement than mere exposure. The difference between
pretest and gen-1 scores was also greater in trainees than in controls
(10% vs. 3% gain, respectively). This indicates that learning was generalized to new words in new sentential contexts spoken by the familiar
talker AK. However, there was no group difference in the gen-2 test: 1%
accuracy loss in trainees and 4% accuracy loss in controls, as compared
to the pretest. This indicates that learning did not generalize to new
stimuli produced by an unfamiliar talker KC. This could be because
(a) at this stage of learning, new voices are in general confusing for the
listeners, or (b) circumstantially, KC produced the pitch patterns in a less
perceptually contrastive way for native English listeners than AK did.
A visual comparison of panels B and C in Figure 1 seems to support
the second explanation. Two noticeable differences between the talkers
stand out. First, the location of the F0 peak is delayed until the second
vowel in the 1st-syllable accented patterns produced by AK, but not
by KC. Second, the unaccented pattern has a rising F0 contour for AK,
but not for KC. This might make the unaccented pattern perceptually
different from the two accented patterns in AK's productions more
than in KC's productions. A post hoc regression analysis on gen-1 and
gen-2 scores with Group (2), Test (2), and Pattern (3) as fixed factors, and
Listener as a random factor yielded a significant interaction between
Test and Pattern [F(2, 12.30) = 3.05, p = .047], whereas the main effect of
Group and the interaction between all three factors were not significant.
This can be seen in Figure 5: the difference in accuracy scores between

Figure 4. Identification accuracy by test. Error bars indicate  1 SE.

756

Irina A. Shport

Figure 5. Identification accuracy by pattern. Error bars indicate  1 SE.

the unaccented and 1st-syllable accented patterns tended to be larger
in gen-2 than in gen-1 (15% vs. 10% difference); the difference between the
unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented patterns was also larger in gen-2
than gen-1 (20% vs. 15%). This suggests that the identification accuracy
of the unaccented pattern was higher for the voice of the gen-1 talker, AK,
than for the voice of the gen-2 talker, KC.
Note that the differences in listeners' responses to these two talkers
cannot be attributed to overly exaggerated pitch-accent contrasts in
AK versus KC for three reasons. First, the average F0 range in the lexical
pitch patterns was 70-75 Hz for both talkers (AK: 238-313 Hz or 4.7
semitones; KC: 200-272 Hz or 5.3 semitones). Second, the F0 peak of the
pitch accent in the 1st- and 2nd-syllable accented patterns was obviously higher than the phrasal peak of the unaccented pattern in both
talkers' productions. Third, a visual examination of the native listeners'
data in Figure 4 also shows lower scores in gen-2 than in gen-1. This
evidence was taken to support the hypothesis that KC produced the
contrastive patterns in a way that did not facilitate their identification
by listeners.
IMPROVEMENT BY PITCH PATTERN
Given similar improvements from pretest to posttest and gen-1, only
the analyses of pretest-gen-1 data and pretest-gen-2 data are reported
here to show improvements in identification accuracy of each of the
pitch patterns. In the presence of significant interactions between pattern and other factors, separate regression analyses were conducted
for each pattern. In addition, confusability of the patterns was examined in an error analysis of listeners' responses in pretest and gen-1
test.
The analysis of pretest and gen-1 accuracy scores with Group (2),
Test (2), and Pattern (3) as fixed factors, and Subject as a random factor

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

757

yielded a significant effect of Pattern, as well as Pattern interactions
with all other factors [p < .001]. Pairwise comparisons showed that
whereas no differences existed at pretest, the 2nd-syllable accented
pattern was identified with a higher accuracy than the unaccented pattern at the gen-1 test: 73% vs. 58%, respectively (p = .001). Next, separate
analyses were conducted for each of the patterns to examine the effect
of training on identification accuracy scores. A regression for the unaccented pattern yielded a significant interaction between Test and Group
only, [F(1, 4.10) = 22.86, p < .001]. A regression for the 1st-syllable accented
pattern yielded a significant effect of Test only, [F(1, 4.10) = 35.36, p < .001].
A regression for the 2nd-syllable accented pattern yielded a significant
effect of Test [F(1, 4.10) = 66.10, p < .001], and the interaction between
Test and Group [F(1, 4.10) = 12.86, p < .001]. The variance estimate for the
random effect of Listener was significant in all three analyses [p < .001].
Figure 5 illustrates these results: as compared to pretest, trainees
improved in their identification of all three patterns; controls, however,
improved in their identification of the 1st-syllable accented pattern only.
This suggests that learning to differentiate the unaccented and 2ndsyllable accented patterns is induced by training, and not mere exposure to the pitch-accent contrast.
The analysis of pretest and gen-2 accuracy scores also yielded a
significant effect of Pattern, as well as Pattern interactions with all other
factors [p  .007]. The regressions on identification accuracy scores for
the unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented patterns yielded a significant
effect of Test ([F(1, 4.10) = 75.89, p < .001] and [F(1, 4.10) = 6.03, p = .014],
respectively), and interaction between Test and Group ([F(1, 4.10) =
8.23, p = .004] and [F(1, 4.10) = 9.55, p = .002], respectively). A regression
for the 1st-syllable accented pattern yielded a significant interaction
only, [F(1, 4.10) = 15.72, p < .001]. Figure 5 shows that, as compared to
pretest, trainees' accuracy in identification of the unaccented pattern in
the gen-2 test decreased, but not as dramatically as controls' accuracy.
Controls significantly improved in their identification of the 1st-syllable
accented pattern, but trainees did not. By contrast, trainees significantly improved in their identification of the 2nd-syllable accented pattern, but controls did not. This indicates that even in the arguably most
difficult test of this study (new stimuli and new talker), trainees retained
their lead, especially, for the unaccented pattern. The unequal identification accuracy across patterns in six Japanese listeners may be attributed to neutralization of the unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented
contrast in some contexts (Shport, 2014; Sugito, 1982b; Sugiyama, 2012;
Vance, 1995).
Next, the types of errors made by the listeners in pretest and gen-1
test were analyzed using confusion matrices. Table 2 shows that the
English controls improved in their identification of the accented patterns, but not the unaccented one (55% at pretest and 50% at gen-1).

758

Table 2.
Group

E Control

E Training

J Native

Irina A. Shport

Confusion matrices of the pitch patterns at pretest and gen-1
(a) Pretest response (%)

(b) Gen-1 response (%)

Pattern

Unacc.

1st
acc.

2nd
acc.

Pattern

Unacc.

1st
acc.

2nd
acc.

Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.
Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.
Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.

55
17
18
59
15
16
63
3
26

14
56
17
15
64
25
3
91
4

28
27
65
26
22
60
34
6
70

Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.
Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.
Unacc.
1st acc.
2nd acc.

50
10
12
65
9
11
78
1
17

17
66
17
10
71
13
2
93
4

34
25
71
26
21
76
20
6
80

Notes. E = English, J = Japanese, Unacc. = unaccented, 1st acc. = 1st-syllable accented, 2nd acc. = 2ndsyllable accented.

The unaccented pattern was more frequently confused with the 2ndsyllable accented than with the 1st-syllable accented pattern. English
trainees showed the same pattern of confusibility, although they
improved in their identification of the unaccented pattern with training
(59% at pretest and 65% at gen-1). These observations suggest the
English listeners were not sensitive enough to the F0 fall that distinguishes the unaccented pattern from the accented ones (Shport,
2015). Note that the native Japanese participants mainly confused the
unaccented pattern and the 2nd-syllable accented pattern with each
other, but not the 1st-syllable accented pattern. The mutual confusion
of these two patterns by Japanese native listeners suggests that the
source of confusion in this group was not restricted to the acoustic
cue of the F0 fall. It may be related to the partial neutralization of the
contrast between the two patterns. A conclusive interpretation, however,
cannot be drawn from a small sample of six native Japanese participants
in this study.
THE ROLE OF SENTENTIAL CONTEXT FOR PATTERN
IDENTIFICATION
The role of context was examined for trainees only, at pretest and gen-1
test. Two separate regression analyses on trainee accuracy scores at
pretest and gen-1 test were conducted with Sentence (3) and Pattern (3)
as fixed factors, and Subject as a random factor. The analysis of the pretest scores yielded a significant effect of Sentence [F(2, 3.07) = 6.67,
p = .001], the interaction between Pattern and Sentence [F(4, 3.07) = 8.56,

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

759

p < .001], and the random effect of Listener [Wald Z = 2.83, p = .005].
Pairwise comparisons showed that the sentential context mattered
only for the identification of the unaccented pattern [p < .001]. The top
panel of Figure 6 illustrates that unaccented words were identified significantly better in the Watashi wa ___ ga kakemasu context than in the
other two sentences. This result may be attributed to additional acoustic cues that aid identification of the unaccented pattern in the sentencemedial position. These cues may include a relatively small F0 reset in the
beginning of the second accentual phrase (___ ga kakemasu), when it
starts from an unaccented word (compare the F0 maxima in the sentences
in Figure 2).
A regression on gen-1 scores yielded a significant effect of Sentence
[F(2, 3.07) = 8.64, p = .001], Pattern [F(2, 3.07) = 14.52, p = .001], the interaction between them [F(4, 3.07) = 4.04, p = .003], and the effect of Listener
[Wald Z = 2.86, p = .004]. Pairwise comparisons showed that the __ ga

Figure 6. Trainees' identification accuracy in three sentential contexts:
A. pretest; B. Gen-1 test. Error bars indicate  1 SE.

760

Irina A. Shport

hatsuon shiyasui? context facilitated the identification of both unaccented
and 2nd-syllable accented patterns [p  .006]. The bottom panel of
Figure 6 illustrates this finding. Comparing the sentence effect at pretest
and gen-1 test, it appears that the accuracy was comparable in interrogative contexts (__ ga hatsuon shiyasui?) and noninterrogative contexts
(Watashi wa ___ ga kakemasu). This suggests that learning was generalized to questions, where the presence of a different boundary tone could
have been--but, significantly, was not--distracting for the listeners.
Taken together, the results suggest that the context, which follows an
unaccented word, may influence the perception of the word's pitch pattern. What may define the easiest contexts identified in the preceding
text and illustrated in Figure 2A and 2B is that the target word is separated from the final boundary tone by a relatively large amount of unaccented segmental material, ga kakemasu and ga hatsuon shiyasui. Thus,
the unaccented words are followed a F0 plateau that extends over several
syllables up to the boundary tone, undisturbed by other pitch accents.
Consequently, the difference between the F0 contours in unaccented and
accented phrases may be easily detectable at both word and phrase
levels. In contrast, this difference presents itself only at the word level in
sentences such as Are wa _ na no? where only two syllables separate the
target word from the phrase end (Figure 2C), or __ o kurikku shite! where
the target word is followed by the accented word kurikku (Figure 2D).
In sum, the unaccented word pattern seems to be easier to identify in
relatively long unaccented accentual phrases than in short unaccented
or accented phrases. The sentence-medial position of the word did not
facilitate the identification of pitch patterns per se.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
In all of the regression analyses reported in the preceding text, the random effect of listener was significant. These individual differences were
explored further at the initial and final (for this study) stages of learning,
as captured by (a) pretest scores and (b) the difference between gen-1 and
pretest scores, which were indicative of improvement while controlling
for initial-stage individual differences. First, the pretest scores were examined. Second, to examine whether individual experiences correlated with
pattern identification accuracy, one-tailed Spearman rank-order correlation analyses were conducted for the pretest scores, the pretest-gen-1
score difference, and the following variables: GPA, number of languages
learned, years of experience in second language learning and use, number
of musical instruments played, and years of experience in instrument use.
The analysis of the pretest scores of all English participants showed
that their distribution was bimodal. An approximate threshold of 60%
correct responses divided the participants in low-scoring and high-scoring

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

761

subgroups, with respective means of 45% (SD = 6.9) and 76% (SD = 8.0).
In fact, the overall accuracy of some high-scoring English listeners even
exceeded the accuracy of Japanese native listeners: compare the maximum pretest score of 90.1% in the control group, 89.5% in the training
group, and 82.7% in the Japanese native group. This suggests that there
were latent factors influencing individual test performance at the very
onset of learning. (Note that these individual differences did not affect
the interpretation of the overall improvement results because each of the
control and training groups had 10 low-scoring participants and 9 highscoring participants.)
The score range of all English listeners was 27% to 90% in pretest and
28% to 91% in gen-1 test. The pretest scores of controls and trainees
significantly correlated with the number of years studying foreign languages [r = .38, p = .01]. The trainees' score gains between the pretest
and gen-1 correlated with the number of years playing musical instruments [r = .35, p = .02], and with the number of musical instruments
played [r = .38, p = .01]. None of the correlations between the score gain
and individual variables were significant for the control group. Taken
together, these results suggest that once the initial exposure to the
novel prosodic categories has occurred, music training may facilitate
the learning of pitch-accent patterns, whereas general academic skills
(as indexed by GPA) and language learning experience (as indexed
by the number of languages learned and years of exposure) may not
be relevant to the learning gain.
DISCUSSION
Prosodic Learning of Lexical Pitch Patterns on Average
The goal of this training experiment was to examine whether English
listeners can learn to identify contrastive lexical pitch patterns in disyllabic Japanese words embedded in carrier sentences. The high variability
in training materials originated from three different sources--target
words, sentential contexts, and talkers; it was expected to facilitate
learning (Chandrasekaran et al., 2010; Francis et al., 2008; Lively et al.,
1993). In this study, the identification accuracy from pretest to posttest
increased by 11% in the training group and by 4% in the control group,
which was a significant between-group difference. Thus, our first prediction regarding the overall positive effect of HVT prosodic training
was borne out. Similar improvement in trainees but not controls was
observed in the gen-1 test, which contained new words and sentences
produced by a talker familiar to the listeners from training. This change
was indicative of generalized learning, and partially supported the second
prediction. The magnitude of training-induced improvement, however,

762

Irina A. Shport

was slightly smaller in the current study than the 17% to 18% improvement in previous HVT studies (Francis et al., 2008; Hirata, 1999; Wang
et al., 1999). This was not surprising, considering the limited length of
one-hour training in this study as compared to five hours in Hirata (1999)
and Wang et al. (1999), and 10 hours in Francis et al. (2008).
The second prediction was supported only partially because learning
did not generalize to new stimuli spoken by an unfamiliar talker (gen-2
test). Two interpretations of this result are possible. First, short training
was not sufficient for generalization to new voices; or second, the new
talker, KC, had a less perceptually contrastive pronunciation of the target
prosodic contrast for the listeners. These interpretations are not mutually exclusive. The latter one was supported by (a) a post hoc analysis
comparing the identification accuracy in the gen-1 test (speaker AK) and
the gen-2 test (speaker KC) and (b) the identification accuracy data of
native Japanese participants. Variation among native Japanese talkers
in conveying the lexical pitch-accent contrast has been reported before
in the literature (Beckman, 1986; Cutler & Otake, 1999; Hirano-Cook,
2011; Shport, 2014; Vance, 1995). For instance, Cutler and Otake observed
that one talker in their experiment produced lexical pitch contrast in a
less differentiated way than the other two talkers, which corresponded
to a lower identification accuracy of test words by native Japanese listeners (1999, p. 1881). Shport (2014) described that some native speakers
of Tokyo Japanese produce unaccented words with the pitch accent on
the word-final syllable, whereas other speakers have a reverse tendency.
This variation cannot be explained by contextual effects or by speakers'
exposure to dialects other than Tokyo Japanese. All of the participants
in Shport's study were raised and lived in prefectures where the Tokyotype Japanese was dominant, and other dialects with different accentual
systems were not spoken in their families.

Unequal Learning of New Lexical Pitch Patterns
Three target categories in this study were the 1st-syllable accented pattern
(F0 fall after F0 peak in or right after the first syllable), the 2nd-syllable
accented pattern (F0 fall after F0 peak in or right after the second syllable),
and the unaccented pattern (no F0 fall). Not all of these patterns, however,
were perceived and learned equally well. The notion of similarity between
native and nonnative prosodic categories may be invoked for explanations of why perceptual asymmetries in lexical tones exist in nonnative
tone listeners (Halle et al., 2004; So & Best, 2010). It is, however, undetermined which English prosodic categories the Japanese lexical pitch
patterns may assimilate to--intonation patterns, stress patterns, or both.
If we assume perceptual assimilation between lexical pitch and stress

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

763

patterns (Hirano-Cook, 2011; Nishinuma, 1997), then the 1st-syllable
accented and 2nd-syllable accented Japanese patterns would be expected
to map on the 1st-syllable and 2nd-syllable stressed English patterns,
and as such would be easily distinguishable from one another. The unaccented pattern, however, would be the most dissimilar from English
stress patterns (as it has a slightly rising or plateau F0 contour), and it
would have been easy to learn if not for the similarity of the F0 contours
in the unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented patterns of Tokyo Japanese
(Best & Tyler, 2007).
The results of this study showed that the 1st- and the 2nd-syllable
accented patterns were identified better than the unaccented pattern by
native English listeners. However, they were still frequently confused
with each other (13% of confusion errors or more). This suggests that,
even if these Japanese pitch patterns are assimilated to English stress
patterns, their high-accuracy discrimination is not guaranteed. Consistent with predictions 3-4 in this study, the unaccented pattern was
most confusable with the 2nd-syllable accented pattern and the most
difficult for English listeners to learn. Using the Perceptual Assimilation
Model, one may argue that the poor discrimination of Japanese unaccented and 2nd-syllable accented patterns may be explained by their Category Goodness assimilation to the closest English pattern, that is, the
2nd-syllable stressed (Best & Tyler, 2007, p. 23). Perhaps the 2nd-syllable
accented pattern was perceived as a better exemplar, and the unaccented
pattern was perceived as a poor exemplar of this English category. The
confusability of the unaccented and the 2nd-syllable accented patterns
did not rule out, however, its confusability with the 1st-syllable accented
pattern (10% of confusion errors or more). This latter finding suggests,
then, that the unaccented pattern also assimilates to the 1st-syllable
stressed English pattern as a poor exemplar of this English category.
In other words, one nonnative sound (the unaccented pitch pattern) may
be a poor exemplar of two native categories (English stress patterns),
with assimilation preference for one native category over the other.
The pattern confusion described may have resulted from insufficient
attention of English listeners to the F0 fall, the main acoustic cue differentiating the unaccented and accented patterns (Shport, 2015). English
listeners may be challenged to apply the F0 fall cue for categorization
of lexical pitch patterns because of cross-linguistic mismatches in the
function of F0 fall in Tokyo Japanese and English. This interpretation is
in line with previous findings for tone languages (Francis et al., 2008;
Gandour & Harshman, 1978; Guion & Pederson, 2007; Wayland & Guion,
2004). This relative inattentiveness to the F0 fall at the lexical level may be
a native language bias acquired through years of native language use.
An alternative explanation of the unaccented pattern difficulty and
confusability would presume an intrinsic difference in representations of
falling and rising (or level) tones. It appears that both native and nonnative

764

Irina A. Shport

listeners of tone languages identify falling F0 contours better than rising
(or high plateau) contours, which may be interpreted as a general response
bias. For instance, in Mandarin, the falling tone 4 has been reported to
have the highest accuracy in perception, whereas the rising tone 2 has
been reported to have the lowest accuracy in both native and nonnative
listeners (Lee et al., 2009; Wang et al., 1999). In the current study, both
of the accented Japanese patterns with the F0 fall had a higher identification accuracy than the unaccented pattern without the F0 fall in English
listener responses. Masaki, Takasawa, and Arai (2001) also found that
native Japanese listeners were more sensitive to falling than rising synthesized F0 contours. This conclusion was drawn from categorical perception of falling F0 movement, which was consistently perceived as the
accented pattern, versus noncategorical perception of rising F0 movement, which was accompanied by inconsistent listener responses. Further
studies are needed to examine whether rising and falling F0 contours
have different auditory representations, which may introduce a universal
response bias in perception of pitch patterns.
It is interesting to note that in this study the unaccented pattern was
neither the most difficult nor the easiest for English listeners at the very
first exposure, that is, at pretest. With more exposure in the control
group, the unaccented pattern was identified with the lowest accuracy as
compared to the other two patterns. With training and feedback, accuracy
in the identification of this pattern improved while still lagging behind the
other two patterns. Identification of the unaccented pattern was also the
most affected by the sentential context in which it occurred. Thus, conforming to the fourth prediction, the unaccented pattern is arguably the
most difficult for English listeners, at least, at the initial stage of learning.
This conclusion is consistent with the results in Hirano-Cook (2011) who
found that neither her trainees nor controls improved in the recognition
of the pitch-accent absence in unaccented words.

Individual Differences among Adult Learners
Because the averaged group performance is the most common way to
summarize the identification accuracy data, individual differences among
participants are often overlooked. Persistently, however, large individual
variability in nonnative listeners with similar language background has
been observed in speech perception and training studies: for example,
the 30% to 83% range for English vowel identification in native Spanish
listeners (Iverson & Evans, 2009); the 42% to 89% range for Mandarin
tone identification in native English listeners (Wang et al., 1999); the
27% to 90% range at pretest for Japanese pitch-pattern identification
in native English listeners (this study). The range data is not available

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

765

in Nishinuma et al. (1996) and Hirano-Cook (2011), but they had to divide
their 2nd- and 3rd-year English-speaking learners of Japanese in subgroups due to individual variability in the task of identifying Japanese
pitch-accent location. An approximate threshhold of 60% correct responses
that Hirano-Cook (2011) used for her low-scoring and high-scoring groups
is strikingly similar to the one used in the current study.
Individual differences among the English listeners emerged from
the very onset of this study, when some of them were able to achieve
identification accuracy comparable with native Japanese listeners. This
excellent performance could not be explained by the history of learning
Japanese or other tone language. Perhaps the high-scoring listeners
had relatively high auditory sensitivity to F0 variations and were able to
consistently apply some of their native language criteria to categorization of nonnative patterns. Supporting evidence for this conjecture
comes from the previous finding that higher-scoring learners attend
more to pitch direction in Mandarin tones than lower-scoring learners
(Chandrasekaran et al., 2010). Goss (2015) showed that acoustic sensitivity measures, such as the ability to discriminate pure tones, predict
the improvement in categorization of pitch patterns in beginning Englishspeaking learners of Japanese. Interestingly, Goss found the same predictive relationship for native Japanese speakers, which suggests that
auditory sensitivity to F0 variations matters even after years of experience
with lexical pitch patterns. This is consistent with the finding of large
variability in both English listeners naive to Japanese and native Japanese
listeners in this study.
The fact that native Japanese listeners did not score at ceiling in this
study may be surprising; however, similar results have been reported
before: 85% accuracy, on average, in the Tokyo Japanese Accent Listening
Test (Ayusawa, 1999); 61% accuracy in a 4AFC task of pitch-pattern categorization (Goss, 2015). These outcomes are not unique to Japanese:
Khouw and Ciocca (2007), for example, found that native Cantonese
listeners had 58% to 70% perception accuracy in identification of level
tones, and 75% to 84% accuracy in identification of contour tones. Goss
(2015) suggested that relatively low identification accuracy in nonlexical tasks with visual presentation of pitch patterns may be a by-product
of the task format rather than a reflection on reduced perceptual ability.
Namely, lexical pitch patterns may be an inalienable part of word knowledge for native listeners, making the abstraction of pitch patterns and
assigning visual labels to them difficult. The question of how individual
attentional biases interact with the native language attentional bias and
the auditory sensitivity bias requires further research.
The examination of individual differences was exploratory in this study.
One interesting observation was that traditionally examined subject
variables, such as previous experience with music and musical instruments, may not correlate with preexisting differences in pitch pattern

766

Irina A. Shport

perception in adult listeners, as reflected in their pretest scores. However,
these variables may come to play during the training process, as was
indicated by significant correlations between the music experience and
the learning gain.

Implications for Second Language Learning of Japanese Pitch
Patterns
The first and most encouraging finding in this study is that English
learners can improve in their perception of the Japanese pitch-accent
contrasts even after an hour of training. Learning of pitch patterns is
asymmetric in that some patterns are learned better than the others.
The unaccented pattern seems to be particularly challenging. English
listeners may or may not learn to perceive the unaccented pattern with
great accuracy; however, this pattern is the most difficult to identify for
native Japanese listeners as well. Therefore, it is unreasonable to expect
perfect accuracy in multiple-choice tasks such as identification of the
lexical pitch patterns.
The finding that the unaccented pattern was the most poorly identified
does not mean that the difference between the accented and unaccented
patterns cannot be perceived by beginning learners of Japanese (Shport,
2015). They may be able to better attend to the distinction in productions
of certain speakers and in certain contexts. Input quality matters for
learning of new prosodic categories, with some native speakers being
more effective models than others (compare AK and KC in this study).
Sentential context matters too in that the unaccented pattern may be
identified best when it is followed by other unaccented words resulting in
an F0 plateau contour (e.g., Watashi wa __ ga kakemasu or __ ga hatsuon
shiyasui). The context preceding the target pitch pattern does not seem
to affect listeners' perceptual judgments (Kitahara, 2001, for Japanese),
or at best, its effect is considerably weaker than that of the following
context (Francis, Ciocca, Wong, Leung, & Chu, 2006, for Cantonese).
Thus, the fifth hypothesis in this study, namely, that pitch patterns of
words in the sentence-medial position would have the highest identification scores, was not supported, but a positive effect of a different
context type was found for the unaccented pitch pattern. This role of
input quality for learning goes along with the facilitative effect of the
perceptual fading technique in training where at the beginning listeners
interact with stimuli exaggerated along relevant for categorization
acoustic-phonetic dimensions that are gradually reduced over training
(e.g., Iverson et al., 2005). In general, providing input where the target
pitch patterns are maximally contrastive in terms of their acoustic manifestation may be beneficial at the beginning stages of learning.

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

767

Lastly, teachers of Japanese as a foreign language need to provide
explicit instructions about the pitch-accent contrasts, because mere exposure to pitch patterns is not likely to lead to learning of the contrast
(Arai, 1997; Ayusawa, 2003; Goss, 2015; Hirata et al., 1997). The acquisition
of lexical prosody may enable second language learners to distinguish
between (or at least to be aware of) homophones such as hana "nose"
and hana "flower," which constitute about 13% of short words in the
Japanese lexicon (Kitahara, 2001). It may also help learners to better recognize prosodic groupings in the language such as accentual phrases,
and thus result in a more effective speech parsing.
Received 15 August 2014
Accepted 1 September 2015
Final Version Received 18 September 2015
REFERENCES
Arai, M. (1997). The results of a longitudinal survey on the perception of the Tokyo
accent: American learners living in Kyoto. Spoken Japanese language education:
Looking to the 21st century (pp. 73-79). Tokyo: The National Language Research
Institute.
Ayusawa, T. (1999). Interlanguage studies: Japanese learners' sound systems. Journal of
the Phonetic Society of Japan, 3, 4-12.
Ayusawa, T. (2003). Acquisition of Japanese accent and intonation by foreign learners.
Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan, 7, 47-58.
Beckman, M. E. (1986). Stress and non-stress accent. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Foris.
Beckman, M. E., Hirschberg, J., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (2005). The original ToBI
system and the evolution of the ToBI framework. In S.-A. Jun (Ed.), Prosodic typology:
The phonology and intonation of phrasing (pp. 9-54). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Best, C. T., & Tyler, M. D. (2007). Nonnative and second-language speech perception.
In O.-S. Bohn & M. Munro (Eds.), Language experience in second language speech
learning (pp. 13-34). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2010). Praat: doing phonetics by computer (Version 5.1)
[Computer software]. Available from http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/.
Chandrasekaran, B., Sampath, P. D., & Wong, P. C. M. (2010). Individual variability in
cue-weighting and lexical tone learning. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
128, 456-465.
Cooper, A., & Wang, Y. (2012). The influence of linguistic and musical experience
on Cantonese word learning. Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 131,
4756-4769.
Cutler, A., & Otake, T. (1999). Pitch accent in spoken-word recognition in Japanese. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 105, 1877-1888.
Francis, A. L., Ciocca, V., Ma, L., & Fenn, K. (2008). Perceptual learning of Cantonese
lexical tones by tone and non-tone language speakers. Journal of Phonetics, 36,
268-294.
Francis, A. L., Ciocca, V., Wong, K. U., Leung, H. Y., & Chu, C. Y. (2006). Extrinsic context
affects perceptual normalization of lexical tone. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 119, 1712-1726.
Gandour, J. T., & Harshman, R. A. (1978). Crosslanguage differences in tone perception:
A multidimensional scaling investigation. Language and Speech, 21, 1-33.
Goss, S. J. (2015). The effects of internal and experience-based factors on the perception of
lexical pitch accent by native and nonnative Japanese listeners (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Ohio State University, Columbus.

768

Irina A. Shport

Guion, S. G., & Pederson, E. (2007). Investigating the role of attention in phonetic learning.
In O.-S. Bohn & M. Munro (Eds.), Language experience in second language speech learning
(pp. 57-77). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Halle, P. A., Chang, Y.-C., & Best, C. T. (2004). Identification and discrimination of Mandarin
Chinese tones by Mandarin Chinese vs. French listeners. Journal of Phonetics, 32,
395-421.
Hirano-Cook, E. (2011). Japanese pitch accent acquisition by learners of Japanese: Effects
of training on Japanese accent instruction, perception, and production (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Hirata, E., Ayusawa, T., Nakagawa, C., & Odaka, K. (1997). Longitudinal study of the effects
of prosodic education as seen in the results of the Tokyo Japanese Accent Listening
Test. Spoken Japanese language education: Looking to the 21st century (pp. 61-72).
Tokyo: The National Language Research Institute.
Hirata, Y. (1999). Acquisition of Japaneser rhythm and pitch accent by English native
speakers (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Chicago, Chicago.
Ito, K., & Speer, S. R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of intonation: Eye movements during
instructed visual search. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 541-573.
Iverson, P., & Evans, B. G. (2009). Learning English vowels with different first-language
vowel systems II: Auditory training for native Spanish and German speakers. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 126, 866-877.
Iverson, P., Hazan, V., & Bannister, K. (2005). Phonetic training with acoustic cue manipulations: A comparison of methods for teaching English /r/-/l/ to Japanese adults.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118, 3267-3278.
Khouw, E., & Ciocca, V. (2007). Perceptual correlates of Cantonese tones. Journal of
Phonetics, 35, 104-117.
Kitahara, M. (2001). Category structure and function of pitch accent in Tokyo Japanese
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Indiana University, Bloomington.
Kuhl, P. K., & Iverson, P. (1995). Linguistic experience and the Perceptual Magnet Effect.
In W. Strange (Ed.), Speech perception and linguistic experience: Issues in cross-language
research (pp. 121-154). Timonium, MD: York Press.
Lee, C.-Y., Tao, L., & Bond, Z. S. (2009). Speaker variability and context in the identification
of fragmented Mandarin tones by native and non-native listeners. Journal of Phonetics,
37, 1-15.
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify
English /r/ and /l/. II: The role of phonetic environment and talker variability in
learning new perceptual categories. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 94,
1242-1255.
Masaki, A., Takasawa, M., & Arai, T. (2001). Akzentwahrnehmung von Japanern bei
technisch kontrollirten F0-Konturen [Accent perception by Japanese listeners in
manipulated F0 Contours]. Sophia Linguistica: Working Papers in Linguistics, 48,
213-224.
NHK (1998). Nihongo hatsuon akusento jiten [Pronunciation and accent dictionary of
Japanese]. Tokyo: Japan Broadcast Publishing Co.
Nishinuma, Y. (1997). Perception of Japanese accent by American and French learners:
First language intervention. Spoken Japanese language education: Looking to the 21st
century (pp. 5-12). Tokyo: The National Language Research Institute.
Nishinuma, Y., Arai, M., & Ayusawa, T. (1996). Perception of tonal accent by Americans
learning Japanese. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing. Philadelphia, PA: Conference Organizing Committee. Available at http://
www.isca-speech.org/archive/icslp_1996.
Perrachione, T. K., Lee, J., Ha, L. Y. Y., & Wong, P. C. M. (2011). Learning a novel phonological
contrast depends on interactions between individual differences and training paradigm
design. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 130, 461-472.
Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Beckman, M. E. (1988). Japanese tone structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Sekiguchi, T., & Nakajima, Y. (1999). The use of lexical prosody for lexical access of the
Japanese language. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 439-454.
Shport, I. (2014). Variation in prosodic phonology: Individual differences in production of
the pitch-accent contrast. In C. Gussenhoven, Y. Chen, and D. Dediu (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Tonal Aspects of Languages (pp. 104-107).

Training to Identify Pitch-Accent Patterns

769

Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Conference Organizing Committee. Accessible at http://
www.isca-speech.org/archive/tal_2014/.
Shport, I. A. (2015). Perception of acoustic cues to Tokyo Japanese pitch-accent contrasts
in native Japanese and naive English listeners. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 138, 307-318. doi:10.1121/1.4922468.
So, C. K., & Best, C. T. (2010). Cross-language perception of non-native tonal contrasts:
Effects of native phonological and phonetic influences. Language and Speech, 53,
273-293.
Sugito, M. (1982a). Kak onch to akusento-gata no chikaku [Perception of falling intonation and accentual patterns]. Nihongo akusento no kenky [Studies on Japanese
accent] (pp. 135-146). Tokyo: Sanseido.
Sugito, M. (1982b). Tky akusento ni okeru "hana" to "hana" no ss to chikaku [The production and perception of "flower" and "nose" with Tokyo accent]. Nihongo akusento
no kenky [Studies on Japanese accent] (pp. 182-201). Tokyo: Sanseido.
Sugiyama, Y. (Ed.). (2012). The production and perception of Japanese pitch accent.
Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Vance, T. J. (1995). Final accent vs. no accent: Utterance-final neutralization in Tokyo
Japanese. Journal of Phonetics, 23, 487-499.
Venditti, J. J. (2005). The J-ToBI model of Japanese Intonation. In S.-A. Jun (Ed.), Prosodic
typology: The phonology and intonation of phrasing (pp. 172-200). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Ueyama, M. (2000). Prosodic transfer: An acoustic study of L2 English vs. L2 Japanese
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles.
Wang, Y., Spence, M. M., Jongman, A., & Sereno, J. A. (1999). Training American listeners to perceive Mandarin tones. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
106, 3649-3658.
Wayland, R. P., & Guion, S. G. (2004). Training English and Chinese listeners to perceive
Thai tones: A preliminary report. Language Learning, 54, 681-712.
Wong, P. C. M., & Perrachione, T. K. (2007). Learning pitch patterns in lexical identification
by native English-speaking adults. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 565-585.

