Applied Psycholinguistics 37 (2016), 285-301
doi:10.1017/S0142716414000563

Evaluating missing-letter effects and
comprehension in proficient and
nonproficient languages
JOANNA C. BOVEE and GARY E. RANEY
University of Illinois at Chicago
Received: November 26, 2013

Accepted for publication: July 19, 2014

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Joanna C. Bovee, Department of Psychology (MC 285), University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60607. E-mail: jbovee2@uic.edu
ABSTRACT
This study was conducted to examine whether word recognition and comprehension processes change
as a function of language proficiency. Participants were highly proficient in English but at a low
proficiency level in Spanish. The participants read texts presented in English and Spanish while reading
normally or while performing a letter-detection task and then answered comprehension questions that
tested their mental representations of the surface form, text base, and situational model. Overall letterdetection error rates were lower when texts were presented in the nonproficient Spanish language. There
was a typical missing-letter effect in English, such that more detection errors were made on function
than content words. In Spanish, the missing-letter effect was reversed, with more errors on content than
function words. Overall comprehension was substantially better when reading English passages than
Spanish passages and best at the situation model level. For the English passages, comprehension was
reduced during letter detection compared to normal reading. For the Spanish passages, comprehension
was similar for letter detection and normal reading. Question type did not systematically vary as
a function of language proficiency or task type. These findings highlight differences in cognitive
processes during reading as a function of language proficiency and enhance our understanding of the
letter-detection task itself.

The current study used the letter-detection task to examine whether word recognition and comprehension in a connected text change as a function of a reader's
language proficiency. In letter detection, participants are instructed to read for comprehension while circling all instances of a target letter, such as t. Previous studies
using letter detection have examined the cognitive processes that occur during
identification of letters, phonemes, and words (i.e., perceptual units); the syntactic
or structural roles of the words; and the semantic roles of words (Healy, 1994;
Koriat & Greenberg, 1994; Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1997). The letter-detection task
is useful for exploring processing demands during reading because letter-detection
accuracy systematically varies as a function of word frequency (more detection errors as frequency increases), word length (more detection errors as length
(c) Cambridge University Press 2015 0142-7164/15

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

286

decreases), syntactic class (more detection errors for function words than content
words), and general properties of the text, such as overall difficulty (more detection errors as difficulty decreases; Greenberg, Healy, Koriat, & Kreiner, 2004).
A robust finding is that the target letter is missed (a detection error) more often
in function words than in content words. This is called the missing-letter effect
(MLE) and has been found in a variety of conditions, including in children in
first grade (Foucambert & Baille, 2011; Saint-Aubin, Klein, & Landry, 2005) and
in several languages (Chitiri & Willows, 1997; Greenberg & Saint-Aubin, 2004;
Krech Thomas, Healy, & Greenberg, 2007).
The specific purpose of the current study is to examine whether readers of different proficiency levels approach the letter-detection task in different manners and
whether the addition of the letter-detection task reduces reading comprehension
relative to normal reading. Several researchers have explored how letter-detection
accuracy interacts with the readers' language proficiency (Chitiri & Willows,
1997; Greenberg & Saint-Aubin, 2004, 2008; Hatch, Polin, & Part, 1974; Tao,
Healy, & Bourne, 1997). These studies have produced mixed findings, ranging
from a slightly reduced MLE in the second language relative to the first language
to a reversed MLE in the second language (fewer errors for function words than
content words). If the readers' word-processing ability changes with proficiency,
comprehension might also be affected. We aim to clarify past results regarding
letter-detection accuracy and to further explore reading comprehension during the
letter-detection task as a function of language proficiency.
MODELS OF LETTER DETECTION

There are two prominent models of letter detection. Although the current study is
not designed to test these models, a brief overview of them is helpful in understanding how language proficiency might interact with the letter-detection task.
The guidance-organization model of reading accounts for the MLE in two key
ways, both of which are derived from the hierarchical nature of text processing
(Greenberg et al., 2004). High-frequency words are more likely to be processed as
a single unit (unitized), rather than letter by letter, than are low-frequency words.
Unitization occurs because as people become more proficient readers and more
familiar with a word, the size of the reading unit is increased from individual
letters to groups of letters to entire words, for short, common words. This allows
unitized words to be recognized before all their constituent letters are identified.
Once the word is identified, attention is directed to the next word in the text,
regardless of whether the letter-identification process was completed for every
letter. If attention shifts before the target letter is identified, the target letter will go
undetected. Because function words have higher average word frequencies than
content words and tend to be shorter in length, function words are more likely to be
processed as a unit; therefore, the target letter is less likely to be identified (Healy,
1994; Greenberg et al., 2004). The role a word plays in the sentence is a second
source of the MLE. Readers use function words as cues to help create a structural
organization of the text, and these cues guide attention to the more meaningful
content words. Therefore, function words will receive less attention than content
words, and the time spent fixating function words will be less than content words.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

287

The reduced attention and fixation time leads to shallower depth of processing
for function words than for content words. The reduced attention and processing
time given to function words reduces the likelihood that letters in function words
are completely identified, which increases the likelihood that target letters are
undetected. In short, when a word is processed before its constituent letters are
processed, an omission (detection error) is more likely (Greenberg et al., 2004).
The attentional disengagement model (Roy-Charland, Saint-Aubin, Klein, &
Lawrence, 2007) places emphasis on how much time is needed to recognize a
word. The shifting of attention from one word to the next is the proximal factor
responsible for the MLE in this model, and word frequency and grammatical
class are downgraded to more distal factors. These distal factors indirectly affect
the MLE by influencing when the reader disengages attention from a word. In
essence, when the reader has recognized a word, whether it has been fixated on or
not, the amount of attention devoted to the word rapidly decays. Recognition and
processing of words that require less attention, such as high-frequency words and
function words, may be finished before a target letter is detected. If a target letter
in a word was not detected before attention shifts to the next word, it is more likely
to be missed because the information accumulated about the word will quickly
decay. This explanation differs from the guidance-organization model in that in
the attentional disengagement model there is still the possibility, albeit a small
one, of the reader detecting the target letter after the word is recognized.
Both models can be used to predict what might happen when readers are second
language learners and read in their less proficient language. The more knowledge
and familiarity a person has for a language, such as knowledge of word frequency
and syntactic roles, the more top-down processing can facilitate word processing,
which should increase letter-detection errors. In the case of second language
learners, this type of knowledge is limited, and they will have to rely more on
bottom-up processing, such as letter by letter word identification. This could lead
to more attention on individual words, which leads to more complete identification
of letters and, consequently, fewer errors in the letter-detection task.
BILINGUAL LETTER-DETECTION ACCURACY

Several researchers have used the letter-detection task to study second language
proficiency. For example, Hatch et al. (1974, Experiment 2) tested the role of word
and syllable stress on letter detection as a function of language proficiency. Participants were native English speakers, intermediate English language learners, or
beginner English language learners. For overall error rates, native speakers made
the most errors and the beginner group the fewest errors. All groups demonstrated
the typical MLE, but the MLE was largest for the native speakers (35%), next
largest for the intermediate English group (22%), and smallest for the beginner
group (7%). They concluded that less proficient speakers rely more on function words for help understanding the relation between the content words. This
increased the attention given to function words and, consequently, reduced letterdetection errors. An alternative interpretation is that the less proficient group was
reading letter by letter and treating the task as more of a visual discrimination or
search task. Although Hatch et al. state that participants answered comprehension

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

288

questions for each passage, no details were provided regarding the formatting or
the content of the questions. In addition, no comprehension data were provided
that might help explain differences in reading processes across groups.
Tao et al. (1997) compared letter-detection performance of native English speakers to three groups of native Chinese speakers: a no-English language knowledge
group comprising elementary school children with exposure to the English alphabet, but not to the language; an intermediate knowledge group comprising adults
who had taken at least 6 years of English classes while they were in school; and an
advanced knowledge group comprising adults with at least 15 years of experience
with English who currently used English on a regular basis. Native speakers made
more errors overall and had a much larger MLE (55%) than the nonnative groups.
For the no-English knowledge group, there was no difference in the number of target letters detected in function words compared to all other words (i.e., no MLE).
Participants who had knowledge of English (Groups 2 and 3) exhibited the typical
MLE (10% and 38%, respectively). These results are generally consistent with
the expectation that as readers gain experience with a language, they increase the
size of their reading units and use the syntactic roles of the words to guide word
processing, which supports the development of the MLE. Unfortunately, children
do not serve as a good comparison to the other participants, so the absence of
the MLE in the elementary school children could be due to their lack of knowledge about English or less general knowledge. Because there was no measure of
comprehension, we cannot make any conclusions about the amount of attention
devoted to comprehension of the text versus letter detection.
Chitiri and Willows (1997) had native Greek high school students who were
advanced learners of English complete letter detection on a passage in English
and a passage in Greek. Participants showed the standard MLE for Greek passages (3.5%) but a reversed MLE (-2.5%) for English passages (fewer errors
on function than content words). Participants answered six multiple-choice questions about each passage, but the comprehension data were only used to exclude
participants who answered three or more questions incorrectly; therefore, how
letter-detection performance relates to comprehension again cannot be determined.
Greenberg and Saint-Aubin (2004) examined how bilinguals process interlingual homographs (e.g., words such as "or," which is a function word in English and
a content word meaning "gold" in French). In their Experiment 1, 18 participants
were English monolinguals, 24 were French-English bilinguals (French dominant), and 18 were English-French bilinguals (English dominant). Participants
performed the letter-detection task with English and French passages. Overall
letter-detection accuracy did not vary in a predictable manner as a function of
language group and text language, but the MLE did vary based on language experience. Monolingual English speakers had a very large MLE in English (63%) and
a reversed MLE in French (-41%). French-dominant bilinguals showed a large
MLE in English (45%) and a smaller MLE in French (27%). English-dominant
bilinguals showed a similar pattern as their French-dominant counterparts (MLE
in English = 56%, MLE in French = 10%) The MLE decreased systematically as
proficiency level decreased and was reversed for monolingual English readers in
French. Comprehension was not measured, so no conclusion can be made about
how well the texts were processed or understood.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

289

Greenberg and Saint-Aubin performed a follow-up study (2008, Experiment 1)
using mixed-language passages (sentences alternated between French and English
languages in a random order). Unlike in the 2004 study, participants answered three
multiple-choice questions, with three alternatives each, after reading each passage.
Questions tested knowledge of facts stated in the text. For the English sentences,
English monolinguals demonstrated the typical MLE (21%), but a reversed MLE
for the French sentences (-23%). Bilinguals, who were native French speakers,
made fewer errors on the English than on the French sentences and showed a standard MLE in both languages (English = 8%, French 10%). Bilinguals performed
better than monolinguals on the comprehension tests, although this is not surprising given that monolinguals could only understand the half of the text in English.
Thus, the comprehension questions cannot be used to make conclusions about how
the texts were processed. Taken together, these two studies support Greenberg and
Saint-Aubin's (2004) conclusion that for the monolinguals reading in the unfamiliar French language, the task changed from one that tests the readers' knowledge
of the words' role to one that was based on orthographic pattern (finding letters).
Krech Thomas et al. (2007) had English speakers who were intermediate learners of Spanish read a text normally and then reread it while searching for a target
letter. The authors suggested that the first reading freed attentional resources during the second reading that could be used to more accurately search for target
letters. The first and second readings could vary with respect to language of the
text. Participants answered two, three-alternative comprehension questions about
details contained in the passage following each passage. Averaged across the first
and second readings, comprehension was highest when the first passage was in
English. Participants also answered more questions correctly for the English passages than for the Spanish passages. Because normal reading always preceded
letter detection on a passage, how letter detection affects comprehension cannot
be determined because participants were familiar with the passage when they
performed letter detection. Of the most importance, there was a typical MLE for
English (32%) and Spanish (35%) passages. This suggests intermediate bilinguals
processed passages in both languages similarly, at least as reflected by similar
MLEs.
As can be seen from past research, error rates for content and function words
varies greatly as a function of language proficiency even within first or second language groups. This suggests the need to more tightly control language background.
In addition, some of the studies placed an emphasis on comprehension by presenting questions after the passages. Therefore, differences in letter-detection error
rates between studies could be due to how participants allocated their attentional
resources to text comprehension versus letter detection. Furthermore, even when
comprehension was measured, comprehension was not always analyzed. Of the
six studies summarized above, only four measured comprehension. Of these, only
two analyzed comprehension as a function of language background (Greenberg
& Saint-Aubin, 2008; Krech Thomas et al., 2007). Greenberg and Saint-Aubin
(2008) used mixed-language texts and found that bilinguals comprehended more
of mixed-language texts than did monolinguals. Krech Thomas et al.'s (2007)
participants never completed letter detection on a "novel" text, only on one they
had already read. Thus, neither of these studies can speak directly to how letter

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

290

detection changes comprehension of a text in a second language. In addition,
comparing patterns of letter-detection errors between studies that do not measure
or emphasize comprehension in the instructions to studies that do emphasize comprehension is problematic. In a monolingual letter-detection study, Oliver, Healy,
and Mross (2005) found that letter detection marginally reduced reading comprehension compared to normal reading when participants were explicitly told
to read for comprehension and make as few errors as possible. However, when
participants were instructed to focus exclusively on letter detection and not read
for comprehension, the reduction in reading comprehension performance was significant during letter detection compared to normal reading only. This indicates
the importance of task demands. We aimed to minimize limitations of previous research by precisely controlling language background, measuring comprehension
in a detailed manner, and including a normal reading task for comparison.
COMPREHENSION

In the current study, we aim to more finely measure changes in reading comprehension as a function of task type (letter detection and normal reading) and language
proficiency. Our comprehension questions were designed based on Kintsch and
van Dijk's (1978) levels of representation; therefore, we will briefly summarize
their model. According to Kintsch and van Dijk, there are three levels of comprehension: surface form, text base, and situation model. The surface form contains
the wording used in the text and reflects lexical and syntactic analysis of a text
(Fletcher & Chrysler, 1990; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). The text base represents
the meaning of the words and phrases in a text (i.e., concepts) as an organized
network of propositions, but it is independent of the actual words (Kintsch, 1974;
Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978). For example, the sentences "Jane sat on the couch" and
"Jane sat on the sofa" have different surface forms but similar text bases because
these sentences express essentially the same concepts. This is relevant to bilingual
reading because words from each language can be thought of as synonyms that
express the same concept, such as dog (English) and perro (Spanish). The situation model is an integration of the text base with a reader's prior knowledge and
reflects how the reader interprets a text. The situation model includes information
that is not part of the original text, such as general knowledge of the topic, inferences, and other by-products of text comprehension (Fletcher, 1994; Kintsch,
1988; Kintsch, Welsch, Schmalhofer, & Zimny, 1990). Because letter detection
focuses attention on the letters and words in the text, one could envision letter
detection emphasizing surface form comprehension over text base and situation
model comprehension. One could also predict that letter detection will affect each
level of comprehension equally through a general reduction in attention to text
features. The present study is the first to address this issue. In our study, participants read four texts in English (their proficient language) and four texts in
Spanish (their less proficient language) while reading normally or completing a
letter-detection task. Participants also answered six comprehension questions after
reading each passage (two surface form, two text base, and two situation model
level). Experience with Spanish was tightly controlled (described below). With
this design, we can compare how letter-detection accuracy changes as a function of

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

291

Table 1. Means (standard deviations) of vocabulary quiz scores, cloze-like grammar
test scores, and key variables from the LEAP-Q
Individual Difference Measures

English

Spanish

Vocabulary (proportion correct)
Grammar (proportion correct)
Self-reported measures from LEAP-Q
Current exposure (% of time)
Age of acquisition (years)
Age began reading (years)
Self-rated proficiency (1 = low, 10 = high)
Speaking
Understanding
Reading proficiency

0.55 (0.16)
0.90 (0.05)

0.38 (0.08)
0.31 (0.09)

87.1 (13.8)
1.3 (1.2)
4.8 (1.1)

5.9 (5.1)
12.8 (2.9)
13.7 (1.7)

9.6 (0.6)
9.8 (0.5)
9.5 (0.9)

4.5 (1.4)
5.1 (1.5)
5.4 (0.05)

proficiency as well as how a person's comprehension is affected by the addition of
the letter-detection task. This will allow us to test whether the letter-detection task
changes in nature as comprehension/proficiency degrades. In addition, it allows
us to investigate what has been repeatedly found, but not thoroughly evaluated: a
reversed MLE. To obtain reliable estimates of the MLE, we had participants read
multiple passages in each language.
We expected overall letter-detection error rates to be larger in Spanish (our
participants' less proficient language) than in English. Moreover, we expected to
replicate the finding of a larger MLE (more errors on function words than content
words) for the proficient language (English) than for the nonproficient language
(Spanish). Because our participants have only a basic proficiency level in Spanish,
the MLE should be absent (function = content) or even reversed (function <
content) for Spanish passages. For comprehension, we expected comprehension
to be better for English passages than for Spanish passages and comprehension to
be better during normal reading than during letter detection.
METHOD
Participants

Fifty-one undergraduates (25 women, 26 men) enrolled in an introductory psychology course participated for course credit. Eleven participants were excluded
because they were not native English speakers. This left 40 (19 women, 21 men)
participants who were native English speakers and who were not highly proficient
in Spanish. To ensure basic knowledge of Spanish, participants were required
to have taken at least 2 years of high school Spanish or two semesters of college Spanish. Half of the participants reported having knowledge of an additional
language besides English and Spanish. These languages included Arabic, Cantonese, Farsi, Hindi, Korean, Malayalam, Polish, Portuguese, Tagalog, and Urdu.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for participants for the various measures of
proficiency described below.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

292

Materials and design

Proficiency for each language was measured using a combination of vocabulary tests and cloze tests. The English vocabulary quiz (developed by Raney) has been used in several prior studies (Minkoff & Raney, 2000;
Therriault & Raney, 2007) and is moderately correlated with comprehension ability (r = .40 to .52). The Spanish vocabulary quiz and the English and Spanish
cloze tests were adapted by Montrul (2005) from the Diplomas de Espanol como
Lengua Extranjera exam (http://www.dele.org/) to assess proficiency. To assess
word knowledge, participants completed 30-item multiple-choice vocabulary tests
in English and Spanish. For the English test, participants were required to choose
the best definition for a given word from five alternatives. For the Spanish test,
participants had to choose a word from the four options that would best fit in a
blank in the sentence. To assess grammatical knowledge, participants completed
cloze-like tests. Participants read a passage in each language that had several words
missing. After reading the entire passage, participants returned to each blank and
chose the best fitting word from three possible answers. We followed Montrul's
(2005) guidelines for defining low proficiency. Participants were defined as low
Spanish proficiency if they had a composite vocabulary and cloze test score above
chance accuracy (25%) but below 50% correct.

Proficiency measures.

All participants completed the Language History Questionnaire (Marion, Blumenfeld, & Kaushanskaya, 2007). This questionnaire consists of questions relating to language acquisition, proficiency, exposure,
environment, and so on.

Language History Questionnaire.

Eight English passages with accompanying multiple-choice comprehension questions (six per passage) were
taken from a set of normed stimuli by Daniel and Raney (2014). The topics of
the approximately 400 word expository texts involve descriptions of procedures
or common events such as making coffee or having a baby. For each set of six
questions, two fill in the blank questions were designed to test readers' memory
for the surface form (i.e., memory for wording). Participants were required to
select the exact word that had been in the text. Two questions were designed to
test readers' understanding of the text base (i.e., memory for meaning). Participants were required to select the answer based on information explicitly stated
in the passage. Two questions were designed to test readers' development of a
situation model (i.e., ability to apply knowledge to a new topic). Participants were
required to infer what could happen in a novel situation based on what they had
learned from the passage. Each question had four alternatives and was presented
in the same language as the text that had just been read. The questions had previously been normed so that average comprehension was equivalent across levels
of comprehension during normal reading (Daniel & Raney, 2007). The passages
and questions were translated into Spanish independently by two native Spanish
speakers who were proficient in English. The two translators then compared versions and created one agreed-upon translation. The language of the questions was
matched to the language of the passages to maintain the language mode. Matching

Text passages and comprehension questions.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

293

language was also important because the surface form questions required memory
for specific words in a passage. The text base and situation model questions could
also benefit from including words and phrases that exactly matched the passages.
Participants read four texts in English and four in Spanish. Passage language and task type were blocked and counterbalanced across participants.
One group of participants completed the English normal reading task on two passages and then the English letter detection on two different passages. They then
completed the normal reading task in Spanish on two new passages and finally
completed letter detection on two additional new passages in Spanish. Another
group completed English letter detection, then English normal reading, followed
by Spanish letter detection and Spanish normal reading. A third group started with
Spanish letter detection, then completed Spanish normal reading, then English
letter detection, and finally English normal reading. A fourth group completed
Spanish normal reading, then Spanish letter detection, then English normal reading, and finally English letter detection. This resulted in eight different versions of
the experiment with each passage used twice for each language and each task type.
For the normal reading task, participants were instructed to read normally
for comprehension. For the letter-detection task, participants were instructed to
read for comprehension while circling every instance of the target letter (t in
English and l in Spanish) as quickly and accurately as possible. Different target letters were used for each language to ensure similarity of letter frequency
across languages (the letters t and l are one of the three most common letters in
the English and Spanish languages, respectively; see http://subtlexus.lexique.org;
Brysbaert & New, 2009; and http://www.lexiteria.com/word_frequency/spanish_
word_frequency_list.html). Participants were instructed not to correct any mistakes they made (i.e., circling a target letter they previously missed) and that a
six-question multiple-choice comprehension test would follow each passage.

Reading tasks.

Procedure

Participants were tested in small groups (one to three participants). To begin,
all participants completed the Language History Questionnaire in English. The
proficiency measures were then presented via computer (using SuperLab 4.5,
Cedrus Corp.). Participants began each language block by completing a short
practice letter-detection passage to help instantiate the language to be used. All
passages were presented on paper to ensure the presentation format for normal
reading and letter detection was identical. Passages were presented double-spaced
in Courier 12-point font across two pages. Before reading a passage, participants
were presented with task instructions (read normally or detect the target letter) on
an otherwise blank page in the packet. They then turned the page in the packet to
the passage and pressed the space bar on a keyboard to signal they were starting
a passage. They pressed the spacebar again when they finished the passage and
turned the page in the packet. Comprehension questions were then presented on
the computer. Participants were not allowed to refer back to the passage while
answering the comprehension questions and responded by pressing the key on the
keyboard that corresponded to the multiple-choice alternative they chose.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

294

Table 2. Mean (standard errors) error rate (proportion incorrect) for
letter detection as a function of passage language and word type
Word Type

English

Spanish

Average

Average
Function (F)
Content (C)
MLE (C - F)

0.18 (0.02)
0.25 (0.04)
0.10 (0.02)
0.15 (0.02)

0.09 (0.01)
0.05 (0.01)
0.13 (0.02)
-0.07 (0.01)

0.13 (0.01)
0.15 (0.02)
0.11 (0.02)

RESULTS

Letter-detection error rate (proportion of target letters not detected) and comprehension question accuracy (proportion of questions correct) were collected.
Participants were excluded from the data set if they did not meet proficiency
requirements, did not follow instructions (e.g., skimmed as opposed to reading
normally as indicated by a reading time three or more standard deviations below
the mean or circled incorrect target letters throughout the task), or detected fewer
than 50% of either function or content target letters within a language. Eleven
participants were removed based on these criteria, leaving 29 participants in the
data set.
Letter-detection error rate

Letter-detection error rate (proportion incorrect) was analyzed using a 2 (word
type: function or content) x 2 (language: English or Spanish) repeated measures
analysis of variance (see Table 2 for means). There was a main effect of language,
F (1, 28) = 43.60, MSE = 0.005, p < .01, such that participants made 8% more
errors on the English passages than the Spanish passages. As expected, there was
a main effect of word type, F (1, 28) = 8.80, MSE = 0.01, p < .01. Participants
made 4% more errors on content words than on function words.
The main effect of word type was qualified by a significant Word Type x Language interaction, F (1, 39) = 70.00, MSE = 0.01, p < .01. Pairwise comparisons
showed that for English passages, participants made approximately 15% more
errors in function words than in content words, F (1, 28) = 64.38, MSE = 0.005, p
< .01. This is the typical MLE. The reverse occurred for Spanish passages, such
that participants made 7% fewer errors in function words than in content words,
F (1, 28) = 14.62, MSE = 0.01, p = .01. This is a reversed MLE.
Comprehension

Comprehension data were analyzed with a 3 (question type: surface form, text
base, or situation model) x 2 (language: English or Spanish) x 2 (task type:
letter detection or normal reading) repeated measures analysis of variance with
the proportion of comprehension questions answered correctly as the dependent
measure (see Table 3 for means).

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

295

Table 3. Mean (standard errors) comprehension scores (proportion correct) as a
function of question type, passage language, and task type
Task Type

Surface Form

Text Base

Situation Model

Average

0.77 (0.04)
0.73 (0.05)
0.75 (0.04)

0.77 (0.03)
0.66 (0.043)
0.71 (0.03)

0.39 (0.05)
0.45 (0.05)
0.42 (0.03)

0.35 (0.03)
0.35 (0.03)
0.35 (0.02)

English
Normal reading
Letter detection
Average

0.76 (0.04)
0.58 (0.05)
0.67 (0.04)

0.78 (0.04)
0.67 (0.05)
0.72 (0.04)
Spanish

Normal reading
Letter detection
Average

0.31 (0.04)
0.37 (0.04)
0.34 (0.02)

0.35 (0.04)
0.24 (0.04)
0.29 (0.02)

There was a main effect of question type, F (2, 56) = 4.76, MSE = 0.05, p < .01.
Pairwise comparisons revealed that comprehension was better for the situation
model level questions (M = 0.58, SE = 0.03) than for either the surface form
(M = 0.50, SE = 0.03) or the text base questions (M = 0.51, SE = 0.03; ps < .01).
There was no difference in comprehension between surface form and text base
level questions (p = .86).
As expected, there was a main effect of language, F (1, 56) = 234.61, MSE =
0.05 p < .01, such that readers comprehended the English passages (M = 0.71,
SE = 0.03) much better than the Spanish passages (M = 0.35, SE = 0.02). For
both languages, comprehension was above chance accuracy (chance = 0.25;
z = 2.02, p < .05), which indicates participants were able to read for comprehension while performing the letter-detection task, even in their less proficient
language.
There was a main effect of task type, F (1, 56) = 4.49, MSE = 0.05, p < .05,
with comprehension being better during normal reading (M = 0.56, SE = 0.02)
than during letter detection (M = 0.51, SE = 0.03). More interesting, there also
was a Task Type x Language interaction, F (1, 56) = 5.57, MSE = 0.05, p < .05.
Pairwise comparisons showed that participants comprehended English passages
better when reading normally (M = 0.77, SE = 0.03) than when detecting letters
(M = 0.66, SE = 0.04), F (1, 56) = 3.32, p < .05. In contrast, comprehension of
Spanish passages was equivalent across tasks (normal reading: M = 0.35, SE =
.02; letter detection: M = 0.35, SE = 0.3), F (1, 56) < 1, ns.
The Question Type x Language, Question Type x Task, and Question Type
x Language x Task interactions were not significant (all Fs < 2.2, ns).1 This
demonstrates that the pattern of comprehension (situation model > text base =
surface form) did not systematically vary as a function of language proficiency or
task type (letter detection versus normal reading).
In summary, the addition of the letter-detection task significantly reduced comprehension for English, but not for Spanish. Overall, comprehension was better at

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

296

the situation model level, but all levels of comprehensions were reduced for letter
detection relative to normal reading.
DISCUSSION

Language proficiency clearly influenced letter-detection error rate, the MLE, and
comprehension. Several key findings emerged. First, overall letter-detection error
rate was smaller in the less proficient (Spanish) language. This indicates that
readers were less likely to process words as a single unit and more likely to attend to
the individual letters when performing letter detection in Spanish than in English.
Second, the size of the Spanish MLE was not simply smaller than the English MLE,
but was reversed in direction. The reversal indicates participants were processing
some features of the text in a different manner in their nonproficient language
than in their proficient language. When performing letter detection in Spanish,
participants might have focused more attention on lower level text properties,
such as letters, and less attention on other features, such as grammatical class.
Third, comprehension was much better in the proficient (English) language than
in the nonproficient (Spanish) language. What is interesting is that performing the
letter-detection task caused a significant reduction in comprehension of English
passages but not Spanish passages. Furthermore, comprehension based on all
three question types was degraded equally by adding the letter-detection task to
normal reading. These results demonstrate that how function and content words
are processed changes as a function of proficiency, that adding the letter-detection
task to normal reading has a larger impact on comprehension of the proficient
language than the nonproficient language, and that comprehension at each level
was similarly reduced during letter detection relative to normal reading (i.e., a
general reduction in comprehension).
Our results complement previous findings by Greenberg and Saint-Aubin (2004,
2008) and Chitiri and Willows (1997). They found a normal MLE in the native/proficient language and a reverse MLE for the less proficient language. Their
nonproficient language data, along with ours, seems to be at one end of the spectrum of word processing, a point in which the task emphasizes visual search for
specific orthographic features for the low-proficiency language. At the other of
the end of the spectrum is the high-proficiency language. Both monolinguals and
bilinguals demonstrate a reliable MLE when reading in their first/proficient language. Although the pattern of MLEs is consistent, the size of the MLE in our
study (-7% to 15%) and Chitiri and Willows's study (-2.5% to 3.5%) is much
smaller than the MLE in Greenberg and Saint-Aubin's studies (-40% to 63%). It's
worth noting that in our study and Chitiri and Willows's study participants were
given six-question comprehension tests after reading a passage whereas Greenberg and Saint-Aubin did not report giving comprehension tests. Emphasizing
comprehension might slow reading rates, which would lead to more time focused
on each word and fewer letter-detection errors overall.
Of course, comprehension is affected by language proficiency, but our results
demonstrate that the letter-detection task differentially affects comprehension as a
function of proficiency. For the English passages, comprehension decreased for all
three question types with the addition of the letter-detection task. In contrast, for

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

297

the Spanish passages, there was no overall difference in comprehension between
normal reading and letter detection. Average comprehension accuracy was above
chance for the Spanish passages, which indicates the task readers did not give up
on trying to comprehend the passages and focus all their attention on the lettersearch task. Although there was no statistical difference between question types
for Spanish, comprehension of the text base (24%) matches chance level. Perhaps
there is a balance between attention devoted to comprehension and letter detection
that varies as a function of proficiency. Specifically, as proficiency increases,
knowledge of word roles increases, less attention is required to process words,
higher level integrative process become easier, and more attention is available to
devote to all levels of comprehension. When proficiency is low and comprehension
is limited, fewer resources are devoted to comprehension and more resources are
devoted to the letter-search component. It should be noted that statistical chance
here (25%) might not be the same as performance when the passage is not read. The
comprehension questions were originally designed to ensure that they could not be
answered correctly at a rate above chance if the passages had not been read (Daniel
& Raney, 2014). It is possible that the translation of the questions into Spanish
did not preserve the original selection rate of the multiple-choice alternatives.
For example, there could be cues in the questions that help readers eliminate an
option for some questions, which would increase the odds of guessing the correct
answer. Performance in Spanish ranged from 24% for text base questions (clearly
at statistical chance) to 45% for situation model questions during letter detection.
It seems reasonable to assume that readers could not answer 45% of the situation
model questions, which require application and inferences, if they did not obtain at
least minimal knowledge of the meaning of a passage. Nonetheless, it is possible
that participants are at floor for comprehension in Spanish. Future research could
address this issue by including an intermediate level of proficiency.
To evaluate the hypothesis that readers emphasized the search process for Spanish passages, we compared the correlations between letter-detection error rate
and word length for each language. If search processes are emphasized, more
errors should occur on longer words than on shorter words due to increased visual
distraction from additional letters in the word. We found this exact pattern. For
Spanish, there was a significant positive correlation between word length and error
rate (r = .28, df = 857, p < .01), which indicates more errors were made on longer
words. The opposite occurred for English texts: there was a significant negative
correlation between word length and error rate (r = -.34, df = 1395, p < .01),
which indicates fewer errors were made on longer words. For English, this pattern
might reflect something like a word-superiority effect, with the additional letters
in longer words providing a context that was helpful for processing the individual
letters (Reicher, 1969; Wheeler, 1970).
When we examined the word-length correlations as a function of word type,
we found that the relationship between word length and accuracy was stronger for
function words than for content words for both Spanish (r = .17, df = 487, p < .001;
r = .01, df = 368, p = .81, respectively) and English (r = -.16, df = 463, p < .001;
r = -.07, df = 931, p < .05, respectively). This supports the conclusion that
how function words are processed changes more than how content words are
processed as language proficiency increases. This is consistent with the idea that

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

298

readers learn to use function words to guide their attention to content words (RoyCharland et al., 2007). Although the word-length correlations are not definitive
evidence for an emphasis on the letter-search component of the letter-detection
task, the reversal in correlations for Spanish and English provides strong support
for the conclusion that the processes used for letter detection change dramatically
as a function of language proficiency. To better understand how letter detection
changes as a function of proficiency, future research could track participants in a
longitudinal design. This would allow one to track whether changes in the MLE
are linear or nonlinear as proficiency increases while controlling for potentially
confounding individual differences such as age of second language acquisition.
As proficiency increases, we would predict that the MLE would change from
being reversed to approaching zero (no MLE), and eventually become positive (a
standard MLE). This would be consistent with previous studies based on betweensubject comparisons (e.g., Hatch et al., 1974; Tao et al., 1997).
In summary, we propose that when readers struggle with word processing and
comprehension, they focus more attention on recognizing individual letters to
decipher the words and focus less on general comprehension processes. That
is, less proficient readers emphasize the visual search component of the letterdetection task. This is consistent with Greenberg and Saint-Aubin's (2004, 2008)
conclusion that reading in an unfamiliar language changes the task to emphasize
the analysis of orthographic patterns. In addition to focusing more attention on
letter-level processes, less-proficient readers likely read words more slowly, which
would support more complete letter identification and lead to an overall decrease
in letter-detection errors. Our findings highlight differences in cognitive processes
during reading related to language proficiency, demonstrate a change in the focus
of attention or manner of word recognition during reading as a function of language
proficiency, and enhance our understanding of the letter-detection task itself by
demonstrating a reduction in comprehension at multiple levels relative to normal
reading.

APPENDIX A
SAMPLE PASSAGE AND COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS
Going on a first date in high school
While a first date commences with the ringing of a doorbell, hours of preparation will
occur prior to the date. For most high school students, plans are conducted via telephone.
Indeed, for the event to be successful, certain elements must be in place before it begins.
An appropriate time, for example, must be mutually agreed upon between the parties
involved. In addition, information such as name, address, and occupation are exchanged.
In most cases, these preliminary details are determined days prior to the event, and final
preparations do not begin until the day of the affair. Actually, the very hour before the
doorbell rings is generally the most frenzied for both parties. Daily primping routines are
followed with special care and attention in this hour, and tasks that have been neglected are
undertaken. Washing, scrubbing, and brushing, for example, are conscientiously completed.
Both parties for the most part use the same products to complete these tasks. Creams, razor

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

299

blades, and clippers are employed. If preparations run on schedule, the date will begin as
planned, with the ringing of the doorbell. According to students, this particular moment
is the most anxiety-ridden of the entire occasion. Often, individuals' careful preparations
become undone. Sweat glands overproduce, hearts begin to race, and dexterity is fatally
reduced. Ironically, if both students are pleasantly surprised at the start of the date, such
nervous bodily responses will not dissipate for the rest of the evening. Disappointment,
however, is often a guaranteed remedy for these physiological reactions. The anxiety
associated with this event may seem extreme to inexperienced daters. It is important to
recognize, however, that a successful date is entirely dependent on chance. Whether the
event turns out to be promising or a total disaster is quite often independent of any one
party's influence. Still, students like to speculate on what elements contribute most to a
successful date. Some believe strongly that appearance is paramount, while others believe
character is essential. Regardless, if the date is a dreadful disaster, no further communication
will take place between the students. If the event is enjoyed by both students, however, an
additional date will likely follow. In this case, the entire process begins again. Preliminary
details are laid down via telephone. Daily routines are undertaken prior to the event. Heart
rate, blood pressure, and sweat production all elevate. As compared with the first date,
however, the students' anxiety levels are generally significantly lower.

Surface form
1. Which word was in the original sentence?
An appropriate time, for example, must be _____agreed upon between the parties
involved.
a. jointly
b. individually
c. mutually
d. equally

Text base
3. Which of the following is involved in the preparation for the affair?
a. Parties extreme anxiety associated with the event.
b. Parties paying special attention to daily routines.
c. The speculation involved on what contributes to the success.
d. The possibility that additional events will occur.

Situation model
5. What could happen if one encounters a party from unsuccessful events?
a. The encounter will be socially unacceptable.
b. The encounter will cause confusion among elders.
c. The encounter could be socially awkward.
d. The encounter will cause joy among elders.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

300

NOTE
1.

Observed power values for key tests were as follows: main effect of task type (0.42),
main effect of question type (0.89), main effect of Language (1.0), Question Type x
Language interaction (0.57), Question x Task interaction (0.42), Question Type x
Language x Task interaction (0.43), and Task Type x Language interaction (0.60).
Observed power for the effects that did not reach significance ranged from 0.42 to
0.57.

REFERENCES
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). SubtlexUS: American word frequencies [Database]. Retrieved from
http://subtlexus.lexique.org
Chitiri, H. F., & Willows, D. M. (1997). Bilingual word recognition in English and Greek. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 18, 139-156.
Daniel, F., & Raney, G. E. (2007). Capturing the effect of a title on multiple levels of comprehension.
Behavior Research Methods, 39, 892-900.
Daniel, F., & Raney, G. E. (2014). The effects of repetition and resource allocation on comprehension
during reading. Manuscript in preparation.
Fletcher, C. R. (1994). Levels of representation in memory for discourse. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.),
Handbook of psycholinguistics (pp. 589-607). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Fletcher, C. R., & Chrysler, S. T. (1990). Surface forms, textbases, and situation models: Recognition
memory for three types of textual information. Discourse Processes, 13, 175-190.
Foucambert, D., & Baille, J. (2011). Evolution of the missing-letter effect among young readers
between ages 5 and 8. Applied Psycholinguistics, 32, 1-17.
Greenberg, S. N., Healy, A. F., Koriat, A., & Kreiner, H. (2004). The GO model: A reconsideration
of the role of structural units in guiding and organizing text on line. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 428-433.
Greenberg, S. N., & Saint-Aubin, J. (2004). Letter detection for homographs with different meanings
in different language texts. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7, 241-253.
Greenberg, S. N., & Saint-Aubin, J. (2008). Inter-lingual homograph letter detection in mixed language text: Persistent missing-letter effects and the effect of language switching. Bilingualism
Language and Cognition, 11, 111-119.
Hatch, E., Polin, P., & Part, S. (1974). Acoustic scanning and syntactic processing in three reading
experiments: First and second language learners. Journal of Reading Behavior, 6, 275-285.
Healy, A. F. (1994). Letter detection: A window to unitization and other cognitive processes in reading
text. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 333-344.
Kintsch, W. (1974). The representation of meaning in memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kintsch, W. (1988). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kintsch, W., & Van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of text comprehension and production.
Psychological Review, 85, 363.
Kintsch, W., Welsch, D., Schmalhofer, F., & Zimny, S. (1990). Sentence memory: A theoretical
analysis. Journal of Memory and language, 29, 133-159.
Koriat, A., & Greenberg, S. N. (1994). The extraction of phrase structure during reading: Evidence
from letter detection errors. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 345-356.
Krech Thomas, H., Healy, A. F., & Greenberg, S. N. (2007). Familiarization effects for bilingual letter
detection involving translation or exact text repetition. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61, 304-315.
Marion, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007). The Language Experience and Proficiency
Questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 940-967.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:2
Bovee & Raney: Proficiency and the missing-letter effect

301

Minkoff, S. R. B., & Raney, G. E. (2000). Letter-detection errors in the word the: Word frequency
versus syntactic structure. Scientific Studies of Reading, 4, 55-76.
Montrul, S. (2005). Second language acquisition and first language loss in adult early bilinguals:
Exploring some differences and similarities. Second Language Research, 21, 199-249.
Oliver, W. L., Healy, A. F., & Mross, E. F. (2005). Trade-offs in detecting letters and comprehending
text. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 159-167.
Reicher, G. M. (1969). Perceptual recognition as a function of meaningfulness of stimulus material.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81, 275-280.
Roy-Charland, A., Saint-Aubin, J., Klein, R. M., & Lawrence, M. (2007). Eye movements as direct
tests of the GO model for the missing-letter effect. Perception & Psychophysics, 69, 324-337.
Saint-Aubin, J., Klein, R. M., & Landry, T. (2005). Age changes in the missing-letter effect revisited.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 91, 158-182.
Saint-Aubin, J., & Poirier, M. (1997). The influence of word function in the missing-letter effect:
Further evidence from French. Memory & Cognition, 25, 666-676.
Tao, L., Healy, A. F., & Bourne, L. E. (1997). Unitization in second-language learning: Evidence from
letter detection. American Journal of Psychology, 110, 385-395.
Therriault, D. J., & Raney, G. E. (2007). Processing and representing temporal information in narrative
text. Discourse Processes, 43, 173-200.
Van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: Academic
Press.
Wheeler, D. D. (1970). Processes in word recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 1, 59-85.

