Applied Psycholinguistics 37 (2016), 49-67
doi:10.1017/S0142716415000417

Narrative competence of
Italian-English bilingual children
between 5 and 7 years
MAJA ROCH, ELENA FLORIT, and CHIARA LEVORATO
University of Padova

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Maja Roch, Department of Developmental Psychology and Socialization, University of Padova,
Via Venezia 8, Padova 35131, Italy. E-mail: maja.roch@unipd.it

ABSTRACT
The study explored narrative production and comprehension in typically developing Italian-English
sequential bilinguals. Thirty 5- to 6-year-olds and 32 6- to 7-year-olds were presented with story
telling and retelling tasks, each followed by comprehension questions in Italian (their first language)
and English (their second language). The macrostructure of narratives produced was analyzed, considering total amount of relevant information, story complexity, and mental state terms. Comprehension
questions focused on implicit story information (i.e., characters' mental states and goals). The results
indicated that (a) older children outperformed younger ones on all measures; (b) an advantage of
first language (Italian) over second language (English) emerged for younger children; and (c) comprehension and production were both more accurate in story retelling than in telling. Theoretical and
methodological implications of these results are discussed.

Narrative competence, defined as the ability to comprehend and produce narratives, is a complex ability that involves the encoding and interpretation of information and organization of this information in a coherent mental representation
(Kintsch, 1988; Levelt, 1989). To date, research on narrative competence and development has mainly focused on monolingual children (e.g., Lever & Senechal,
2011; Oakhill & Cain, 2012; Silva, Strasser, & Cain, 2014) and mainly on Spanish/English bilingual children living in the United States (e.g., Fiestas & Pena,
2004; Squires et al., 2014; but see also Iluz-Cohen & Walters, 2012). The present
paper contributes to the previous literature by focusing on the narrative competence
of Italian-English sequential bilinguals aged between 5 and 7 years.
Research on narrative competence and its development is important for several
reasons. First, narratives are pervasive in children's lives from an early age, and
narrative competence is crucial to communicate social messages to others and to
derive meaning from experience (Bruner, 1986; Nelson, 2007). Second, narrative
competence has been shown to be related to later children's literacy development
and school success (e.g., Oakhill & Cain, 2012; O'Neill, Pearce, & Pick, 2004;
(c) Cambridge University Press 2015 0142-7164/15

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

50

Pearson, 2002). Third, and particularly relevant for the present work, narratives are
an efficient way to obtain rich information not only about story structure but also
about a child's language. These qualities of narrative have prompted educators
and speech-language pathologists to use narratives in the assessment process with
both monolingual and bilingual children (Iluz-Cohen & Walters, 2012; Pearson,
2002; Squires et al., 2014). To date, however, data regarding the narratives of
bilingual children are lacking.
The present paper makes two main contributions. First, the development of
narrative competence (i.e., narrative production and comprehension) and differences/relations between first language (L1) and second language (L2) are analyzed
in a population that has not been studied yet: bilingual children who have Italian
as their L1 and are acquiring English as an L2, but not as a majority language. This
contrasts with most of the studies on narrative competence in bilingual Spanish
children who have English as their L2, in contexts where English is the majority language (e.g., Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Second, narrative
competence was assessed using a new methodological paradigm: the Multilingual
Assessment Instrument for Narratives (MAIN1 ; Gagarina et al., 2012; see Gagarina, Klop, Tsimpli, & Walters, 2016 [this issue]). The MAIN allows assessment
of narrative comprehension and production in the context of two tasks: fictional
story telling based on a sequence of pictures and story retelling, based on a second,
structurally similar sequence of pictures associated with a story narrated by the
experimenter. The paradigm is used in the present study to examine the effects of
age, language, and task on bilingual children's narrative production and comprehension, specifically the macrostructure of the stories and the understanding of
implicit story information (i.e., mental states and goals).
Literature related to the variables just outlined is reviewed in the next sections.
The literature on monolingual children is presented, with a focus on developmental changes and relations between narrative production and comprehension and
differences between story telling and retelling tasks. This is followed by a review
of the literature on bilingual children, which focuses on the relations between
narrative production and comprehension in L1 and L2.
RESEARCH ON NARRATIVE COMPETENCE AND DEVELOPMENT
IN MONOLINGUAL CHILDREN

One important linguistic development that occurs between 4 and 10 years is
children's growing ability to produce and comprehend increasingly more complex texts, in particular narratives (e.g., Florit, Roch, & Levorato, 2014; Lever &
Senechal, 2011; Oakhill & Cain, 2012; Pearson, 2002). For the purposes of the
present paper, research on narrative production of fictional narratives and the ability to organize story elements at the macrostructure level was considered. A classic
story, according to story grammar models, is structured according to temporal relations, includes causal links between the actions and the characters' motivations,
and provides sufficient background information (Peterson, 1994). According to
Stein and Glenn (1979), the macrostructure of a narrative includes the following
elements or categories: the introduction, which provides the setting and describes
the characters of the story; the initiating event, which provides an action or event

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

51

that sets up a problem or dilemma for the story and determines the character goal/s;
attempts, which are used by the character to achieve the goal/s; and the outcome
of the attempts or resolution. Consequences and characters' reactions to the final
outcome are usually included in more sophisticated stories.
Research on monolingual children has shown that at 5 years of age, typically
developing children have acquired a basic knowledge or schema of stories (Trabasso, Stein, & Johnston, 1981) and are able to produce narratives that include
more than two sequentially connected elements; however, these stories often end
abruptly, without proper conclusions (Peterson & McCabe, 1983). Five-year-olds
also tend to focus mainly on concrete events, while their ability to include characters' mental states and motives is emerging. At about 6 years of age, children are
able to create a narrative with a sequence of events that is purpose oriented: stories include an initiating event, goal-directed actions, and consequences (Berman,
1988). Children's ability to organize narratives continues to develop during primary and secondary school; older children include more events, mental states,
and temporal and causal relations between events than do younger ones (Stein &
Glenn, 1979).
Different types of tasks have been used to analyze narrative production of
monolingual children (Lever & Senechal, 2011), with two types dominating: story
retelling and story telling. In a story retelling task, participants are told a story and
then asked to retell it. In story telling tasks, participants are asked to produce a
fictional narrative based on an initial prompt. Lever and Senechal (2011) investigated the influence of task on narrative production. They compared story telling
and story retelling with parallel materials, as one of the aims of a broader study
on 5- and 6-year-olds. Results showed that all children produced narratives that
were significantly longer, better structured, and had more mental state references
in the story retelling task than in the story telling task. The authors provided
explanations for these findings. They proposed that the two tasks varied in their
processing demands, with the story retelling task having lower demands than the
story telling task. According to this explanation, children might include more
structural elements when they are asked to retell a story because they can rely on
the story previously narrated by the experimenter, stored in the episodic memory.
In contrast, a story telling task (based on pictures) imposes higher processing
demands, because narrators must identify relevant information, decide upon relations between information, and establish the order in which information should be
presented. Lever and Senechal suggest that the two narrative tasks might involve
different cognitive skills; story telling involves a constructive process, whereas
story retelling, which relies on the comprehension of a previous story, is based on
reconstructive processes through which characters, thoughts, and motives may be
reproduced.
Several studies have shown that narrative production and comprehension are related. For instance, some studies have shown that primary school children who have
difficulty understanding narrative texts also have difficulty in producing coherent
fictional narratives (Cain, 2003; Cain & Oakhill, 1996). Narrative production in
kindergarten is longitudinally related to the ability to understand narrative texts
in primary school (Roth, Speece, & Cooper, 2002). These results suggest that
narrative production and comprehension share the ability to construct a coherent

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

52

representation of the meaning of a story. To our knowledge, there are no studies
that have compared the relation between comprehension and production using
both story telling and story retelling tasks.
RESEARCH ON NARRATIVE COMPETENCE AND DEVELOPMENT
IN BILINGUAL CHILDREN

Studies on bilingual children have shown that the ability to produce narratives in
both L1 and L2 develops from preschool to school age (Gutierrez-Clellen, 2002;
Pearson, 2002; Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Longitudinal studies
carried out by Squires et al. (2014) and Uccelli and Paez (2007) suggested that
bilingual children, attending kindergarten and first grade, follow the same developmental pattern as monolingual children as far as macrostructure is concerned.
Squires et al. (2014) analyzed the macrostructure of stories retold by children with
typical development and with language impairment in Spanish (L1) and English
(L2). Results showed that first graders with typical development included more
references to characters, initiating events, and internal responses in both L1 and L2
compared to kindergarteners. Uccelli and Paez (2007) asked low socioeconomic
status (SES) children to tell a story in Spanish (L1) and English (L2) and collected
multiple measures of narrative productivity and quality. In both languages, children's macrostructure scores, which contributed to a global measure of narrative
quality, improved from kindergarten to Grade 1. Narrative productivity (i.e., the
length of the narratives), however, did not increase in the same age range.
Research on bilinguals has also considered associations between narrative skills
in the L1 and L2. Previous research showed that, overall, children displayed better
narrative production and comprehension in L2 than in L1 (Fiestas & Pena, 2004;
Gutierrez-Clellen, 2002; Pearson, 2002; Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez,
2007). Regarding narrative production, the longitudinal studies of Squires et al.
(2014) and Uccelli and Paez (2007) showed that bilingual children obtained higher
performance in English (L2) than in Spanish (L1) on both retelling and telling
tasks. Better narrative production in L2 was attributed to the loss of L1 during the
acquisition of the societal language (Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez, 2007).
Similarly, Pearson (2002) found that second and fifth graders performed better on
macrostructure measures when telling stories in English, their L2, than in Spanish.
Gutierrez-Clellen (2002) likewise found that second graders performed better in
English (L2) than in Spanish (L1) on a story retelling task and on a narrative
comprehension task, but better performance in English was not obtained for the
story telling task. It should be noted, however, that parallel materials were used
only in the telling and comprehension tasks.
Previous research has also shown moderate cross-linguistic associations for
narrative production; measures of macrostructure in L1 and L2, obtained using
retelling and telling tasks, were related in first grade but not in kindergarten
(Fiestas & Pena, 2004; Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Explanations
for the results pointed out that there could be a shared conceptual knowledge
on macrostructure of stories across L1 and L2, and this might facilitate crosslinguistic transfer while more experience (e.g., through schooling) is acquired in
both languages.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

53

THE PRESENT STUDY

The present study makes two main contributions. First and foremost, narrative production and comprehension of Italian-English sequential bilinguals were analyzed
in order to identify the following:
1. developmental differences between preschool (5-6 years) and first grade (6-7
years),
2. differences and associations between L1 (Italian) and L2 (English), and
3. differences and associations between performance on story telling and retelling
tasks.

Second, these differences and relations were assessed using a new methodological
paradigm with parallel materials, namely, sequences of pictures having the same
number of structural elements and the same structural complexity.
The expectations for each of the three points listed for the first contribution
follow. First, narrative production was expected to develop from preschool to first
grade as shown by studies on monolinguals and bilinguals (e.g., Berman, 1988;
Squires et al., 2014; Stein & Glenn, 1979; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Moreover, we
expected narrative comprehension to develop in our bilingual participants, in line
with studies of monolinguals (e.g., Florit et al., 2014).
Concerning performance in the L1 and L2, better performance for both narrative
production and comprehension was expected in Italian, the children's L1 and the
majority societal language (e.g., Gutierrez-Clellen, 2002; Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Second, narrative production in L1 was expected to correlate
with L2 production in first grade, but not in kindergarten (e.g., Squires et al., 2014;
Uccelli & Paez, 2007). Specific predictions could not be formulated for narrative
comprehension given that studies on bilinguals reviewed in the Introduction did
not analyze cross-linguistic associations of this skill.
With respect to task, better performance for narrative production was expected in
retelling than in telling, as shown by research on monolinguals that used tasks with
parallel material (e.g., Lever & Senechal, 2011). Specific predictions concerning
differences between tasks could not be formulated for comprehension. Narrative
production and comprehension were also expected to be associated as shown by
research on monolinguals (e.g., Cain, 2003). In particular, given that retelling task
relies on the comprehension of a previous narrated story, stronger associations
were expected for the retelling task.
METHOD
Participants

Study participants were 62 Italian-English bilingual children attending English
international schools in northeastern Italy. Thirty "younger" children attended the
last year of kindergarten (mean age = 5 years, 5 months [5;5], SD = 3 months,
range = 5-6 years) and 32 "older" children attended the first year of primary
school (mean age = 6;6, SD = 4 months, range = 6-7;2 years). Children were
sequential bilinguals: the mean age of first exposure to English was 3 years, 3
months (SD = 1 month) for the younger group and 3 years, 6 months for the

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

54

older group (SD = 2 months). At the time of the study, they were exposed to
English daily at school for approximately 8 hr. They belonged to middle- to highSES families. Children's parents completed a short questionnaire investigating the
amount of linguistic input in L1, L2, and other languages at home. At home, 71%
of participants had been exposed exclusively to Italian. The remaining 29% were
exposed to a mixture of languages: Italian and English in 98% of cases, and a third
language in 2% of cases.
All participants were administered the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)
in Italian (Stella, Pizzoli, & Tressoldi, 2000) and in English (Dunn & Dunn, 1981).
The raw scores were transformed to standardized scores provided by the test
manual (M = 100, SD = 15). The participants' average score was 92.8 (SD = 13)
for the Italian test and 90.4 (SD = 11) for the English test, which indicates that,
on average, participants had age-appropriate vocabulary scores in both languages.
Children were also presented with the nonverbal picture arrangement subtest
of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (Italian adaptation by Orsini &
Picone, 2006). Standardized scores (M = 10, SD = 3) were considered. All the
participants showed age-appropriate nonverbal ability: the mean score was 10.1
(SD = 2.3).
Materials and procedures

Wordless picture stories from the MAIN (Gagarina et al., 2012) were
adopted in order to examine narrative competence of children through story telling
and story retelling tasks, which were followed by open-ended comprehension
questions on the story content. Children were tested in both Italian and English.
Each participant was presented with four wordless elicitation picture sets that had
the same story structure: two in Italian (one for the story telling task and the other
for retelling) and two in English (again, for story telling and retelling).
The presentation of the two stories for story telling ("Baby Birds" and "Baby
Goats") and the two stories for retelling ("Dog" and "Cat") was balanced across
the two languages. Children were first tested in English (all the tasks) and then
in Italian (all the tasks). The telling and retelling tasks were always presented in
separate sessions, but the order of task presentation was randomized (e.g., telling
first vs. retelling first). Each production task (telling and retelling) was followed
by a set of open-ended comprehension questions on the story content.
In the story telling task, the child was shown six pictures, and than two per
time, and was asked to produce a story. After the child had told the story, s/he
was asked nine comprehension questions on story content. In the retelling task,
the child was presented with the story on headphones, while six pictures, two by
two, were presented on the computer screen. Then the child was asked to retell the
story to the experimenter who did not know it, while pictures were shown on the
computer; finally, the child was asked the nine story comprehension questions.
The two sets of pictures (i.e, Baby Goats and Baby Birds for the telling and Dog
and Cat for the retelling) have the same story structure. Each story is composed of
three episodes each and contains the same macrostructural elements within each
episode (initial mental state, character's goal, characters attempt at achieving goal,
outcome of attempt, and mental state as a reaction). The difference between the

Testing.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

55

telling and the retelling task is the elicitation procedure: a spontaneous production
from pictures in the telling and the production of a previously heard story in the
retelling. Finally, each story elicitation set is followed by nine comprehension
questions concerning character's goals and mental states. The similar story structure of the two tasks allows a direct comparison of different aspects of narrative
competence in two languages, namely, story telling and comprehension on one
hand, and story retelling and comprehension on the other.
During task administration the story productions were
recorded using a digital audio recorder (EDIROL R-09HR) and subsequently
transcribed and coded by two trained postgraduate students. All complete and
intelligible utterances were included in the analyses. Single words that were codeswitched to the nontarget language were included in the macrostructure analyses
while entire sentences or discourse in nontarget languages were excluded.
The MAIN scoring rubric (Gagarina, et al., 2012) was adopted for the coding
of macrostructure and comprehension. For each task (telling and retelling), four
scores were calculated: three for macrostructure of narrative production and one
for narrative comprehension. The scores are briefly described below.

Coding and scoring.

Each story elicitation set was
formed by two setting elements (time and place) and three episodes, each of
which included five macrostructural elements: the character's initial mental state,
his goal, the attempt and the outcome, and the consequence consisting of the
mental state of the character. Each macrostructure element produced by the child
was scored 1 point, and this gives a maximum macrostructure elements score of
17 for each of the four stories. Given the design of the MAIN, and of this study,
four macrostructure elements scores were obtained: two for the story telling task
(one for Italian and one for English) and two for the retelling task (again, one for
Italian and one for English).

NUMBER OF MACROSTRUCTURE ELEMENTS.

According to the MAIN (Gagarina et al.,
2012), mental state terms are coded within the total macrostructure elements score,
but are also counted separately given that the presence of mental state terms in
narratives are a good indicator of the linguistic complexity of story production
(e.g., Lever & Senechal, 2011; Squires et al., 2014). According to the scoring
rubric of the MAIN, two mental states are possible for each of the three episodes,
and each is scored 1 point, resulting in a maximum score of 6 points for each
story set. Four mental state scores were obtained: two from the telling task and
two from the retelling task, each in Italian and English.

NUMBER OF MENTAL STATE TERMS.

Alongside the count of
macrostructure elements, which represents a general and single quantitative measure of story production, the MAIN allows one to score the complexity of story
production (for both telling and retelling tasks). The complexity score ranges
from low to high, based on the relations among the macrostructure elements of
goal, attempt, and outcome. Low complexity implies the presence of two elements,
namely, one attempt and one outcome within at least one of the three episodes
LEVEL OF MACROSTRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

56

of a story; medium complexity implies the presence of two elements, namely, one
goal and one attempt or one goal and one outcome, within at least one of the three
episodes of a story, and is considered more complex because characters' goals are
mentioned by the children; and high complexity implies the presence of a complete sequence of three relevant elements, namely, one goal, one attempt, and one
outcome, mentioned within at least one episode of a story. For each participant,
the highest level of complexity reached for each task and in each language was
identified. Low, medium, and high complexity levels were scored as 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. When the story production did not include at least one attempt and
one outcome, its complexity was classified as 0. Four macrostructural complexity
scores were calculated, one for each task (telling and retelling) for each of the two
languages (Italian and English).
The comprehension score is a sum of correct answers to a set of nine open-ended comprehension questions administered after
each task (telling and retelling). The comprehension questions elicit implicit information such as mental states and goals of story characters. For every correct
answer 1 point was given, yielding a maximum comprehension score in each elicitation set of 9 points. Four comprehension scores resulted, given that the story
was told and retold in Italian and in English.

COMPREHENSION SCORE.

Two Italian postgraduate student assistants,
fluent in Italian and English, were trained in the transcription and coding procedures by the first author. Each assistant collected, coded, and scored approximately
50% of story productions and comprehension sheets independently, and together
resolved uncertainties in coding. Nearly 30% of narratives (story tellings and
retellings), half in Italian and half in English, were randomly selected to be transcribed, segmented, and coded independently by the first author.
Transcription accuracy was established by calculating the total number of
agreed-upon words divided by the total number of words for both coders. Interrater agreement for transcriptions was expressed through the percentage of
agreement, which was as follows: story telling Italian 93.8%, and English 92.3%;
story retelling Italian 94.3%, and English 95.7%. These values indicate an excellent level of transcription reliability.
The children's productions and answers to comprehension questions were transcribed and scored using the MAIN rubric (Gagarina, et al., 2012). Nearly 30%
of the narratives and comprehension sheets (half Italian and half English, half
tellings and half retellings) were randomly selected and scored by the first author.
A Cohen  value was calculated for each of the four scores to evaluate intercoder
reliability. For the number of macrostructure elements in story telling,  = 0.90
for Italian and 0.95 for English, while in retelling  = 0.90 for Italian and 0.93 for
English, indicating excellent interrater reliability. For the number of mental state
terms in story telling, the value was 0.93 for both Italian and English, and 0.80 for
Italian and 0.93 for English story retellings; again, the values indicated excellent
interrater reliability. For the comprehension score in story telling, the values were
also high at 0.83 for Italian and 0.91 for English, while for retellings the values
were 0.96 for Italian and 0.87 for English. Finally, for the level of macrostructural

Transcription and coding reliability.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

57

complexity, values were 0.55 and 0.78 for Italian and English story telling and
0.78 and 0.55 for Italian and English story retelling, indicating moderate to good
interrater reliability.
Analytic plan

Before conducting the analyses aimed to answer our research questions, receptive
vocabulary scores, measured through PPVT, were compared in LI and L2 in order
to examine potential differences in proficiency, and correlations of the vocabulary
scores with the dependent variables were examined in order to assess whether the
vocabulary scores should serve as a control variable in subsequent analyses.
In order to answer our research questions, performance of children of the two age
groups for the four measures of narrative competence were compared in function
of the two different tasks in both languages. That is, three separate three-way
mixed analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were carried out on the dependent variables
(number of macrostructure elements, number of mental state terms, comprehension
score) with Age (two levels: younger 5-6 and older 6-7) x Language (2 levels:
Italian and English) x Task (two levels: telling and retelling) as independent
variables. Age was a between-subject factor while task and language were withinsubject factors. Chi-square tests on the frequency of the four story macrostructural
complexity levels were carried out for each of the two tasks (telling and retelling)
with age (younger 5-6 and older 6-7) and languages (Italian and English) serving
as independent variables.
Finally, a Pearson correlation matrix was computed on measures of narrative
production (number of macrostructure elements and comprehension score)2 in
order to explore correlations within and between the two languages (Italian and
English); and within and between the two tasks (story telling and story retelling).
RESULTS
Preliminary analyses

Mean raw score on the Italian and English PPVT was compared in the younger and
older group. The results of ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of language,
F (1, 60) = 145.8, p < .001, 2 = 0.708, with higher receptive vocabularies for
Italian than for English. There was also an effect of age, F (1, 60) = 11.4, p <
.001, 2 = 0.160, with older children having higher receptive vocabularies than
younger ones. The interaction between language and age was not significant, F (1,
60) = 0.829, p = .366, indicating that differences in vocabulary sizes in the two
languages were stable across the two age levels. Subsequently, differences between
the two vocabulary sizes were calculated, and showed a mean difference between
the Italian and English vocabulary size of 24 words (22 words for younger and
26 for older). This score, named L1-L2 vocabulary size difference, was correlated
with the four scores of narrative competence (three for narrative production at a
macrostructure level and one for comprehension). The only significant correlation
found was between L1-L2 vocabulary size difference and the number of mental
state terms in Italian retellings (r = .369, p < .05); as the advantage of L1 over L2

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

58

Table 1. Means (standard deviations) for number of macrostructure
elements (maximum score = 17)
Telling

Younger
Older

Retelling

Italian

English

Italian

English

7.1 (2.3)
6.5 (2.2)

4.3 (2.4)
5.9 (2.1)

6.9 (1.8)
7.3 (2.1)

4.9 (2.8)
6.6 (2.1)

vocabulary increased, so did the number of retold mental state terms. Based on
the general lack of significant correlations, receptive vocabulary was not included
in subsequent analyses. This decision was further supported by the generally ageappropriate standard scores on both the English and Italian PPVT; based on these,
we felt quite confident that participants' receptive vocabulary was sufficient to
produce and comprehend narratives in both languages.
The analyses aimed to answer the research questions follow. Results for narrative
production are presented, with results for each dependent variable in a separate
paragraph. These are followed by the results concerning comprehension.
Number of macrostructure elements

Table 1 presents the mean number of macrostructure elements by the three factors
of group (younger and older), task (story telling and retelling), and language
(Italian and English). ANOVA revealed that all three factors had a significant
effect on the number of macrostructure elements produced: age, F (1, 58) = 3.99,
p < .05, 2 = 0.064; language, F (1, 58) = 22.91, p < .001, 2 = 0.283; and
task, F (1, 58) = 6.99, p < .01, 2 = 0.108. The significant effect of age showed
that older children outperformed the younger ones. The language effect revealed
that, in general, more macrostructure elements were provided in Italian than in
English. The significant Language x Age interaction, F (1, 58) = 8.22, p < .01,
2 = 0.124, indicated that on average younger children produced significantly
more macrostructure elements in Italian than in English, while the difference for
the older children was not large enough to be significant. The significant effect of
the factor task showed that more macrostructure elements were produced in story
retelling than in story telling. The other two-way interactions and the three-way
interaction did not yield significance (F < 1 and p > .35 in all cases).
Number of mental state terms

Table 2 presents the mean number of mental state terms by the three factors of
group (younger and older), task (story telling and retelling), and language (Italian
and English). The ANOVA run on the number of mental state terms showed that
all three main factors were significant: age, F (1, 58) = 8.66, p < .01, 2 =
0.130; language, F (1, 58) = 12.09, p < .01, 2 = 0.173; task, F (1, 58) = 18.52,

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

59

Table 2. Means (standard deviations) for number of mental state
terms (maximum score = 6)
Telling

Younger
Older

Retelling

Italian

English

Italian

English

2.8 (2.3)
3.4 (2.6)

1.7 (2.5)
2.7 (2.3)

3.3 (1.3)
4.7 (2.2)

2.3 (2.6)
4.1 (2.1)

p < .001, 2 = 0.242. The significant effect of age showed that older children
produced more mental state terms than younger ones. The significant main effect
of the factor language indicated that more mental state terms were produced in
Italian than in English. Finally, the significant effect of the factor task suggested
that the story retelling task elicited more mental state terms with respect to the
story telling task. The two- and three-way interactions were not significant (F <
2 and p > .35 in all cases).
Level of macrostructural complexity

In order to examine whether the level of macrostructural complexity of story
tellings and retellings varied as a function of age and language, chi-square tests
were performed on the proportions of children producing narratives corresponding
to the macrostructural complexity levels: 0, 1, 2, and 3. Chi-square tests comparing
the story telling and story retelling tasks were significant for the younger group,
2 (3) = 14.1, p < .01 and 2 (3) = 11.6, p < .01, whereas no differences were
detected for older children (p = .55 and p = .25). In particular, in the younger
children's telling task, a significant difference between L1 and L2 emerged for the
highest macrostructural complexity level (i.e., 3) and for the lowest macrostructural complexity level (i.e., 0). More specifically, the highest level of complexity
(3) was more frequent in L1 than in L2 (46.7% vs. 20.7%), while the lowest
level of complexity (0) was more frequent in L2 than in L1 (41.4% vs. 3.3%).
In addition, on the retelling task, significant differences emerged for the younger
children for the macrostructural complexity levels 2 and 0: level 2 was more frequent in L1 than in L2 (53.3% vs. 20.7%), whereas level 0 was more frequent
in L2 than in L1 (41.4% vs. 10.0%). Overall, and congruent with the results obtained from the analysis of the number of macrostructure elements, these results
suggest that the younger children produced narratives with higher macrostructural
complexity levels in L1 than in L2 in both telling and retelling tasks. The degree
of macrostructural complexity of narratives produced by older children was not
different in the two languages. However, an unexpected result concerns the performance of the two groups in Italian story telling. As can be seen in Table 3, a greater
number of younger children produce complex stories (Level 3) than older ones,
who produce more Level 1 stories than younger children. The reasons for this are
unclear. However, some speculative considerations can be put forward: it might be

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

60

Table 3. Percentage of children reaching each level of story complexity in story telling
and story retelling tasks in first and second languages
Italian
Story telling
Level of complexity
Younger children
Older children
Story retelling
Level of complexity
Younger children
Older children

English

0
3.3
3.1

1
26.7
50.0

2
23.3
12.5

3
46.7
34.4

0
41.4
12.5

1
27.6
40.6

2
10.3
12.5

3
20.7
34.4

0
10.0
9.4

1
23.3
28.1

2
53.3
40.6

3
13.3
21.9

0
41.4
25.8

1
13.8
22.6

2
20.7
41.9

3
24.1
9.7

Table 4. Means (standard deviations) for comprehension score
(maximum score = 9)
Telling

Younger
Older

Retelling

Italian

English

Italian

English

6.4 (1.5)
6.2 (1.5)

3.6 (1.7)
6.1 (1.8)

8.5 (0.8)
8.4 (0.9)

6.1 (2.4)
7.9 (1.5)

that the younger children's narratives were overestimated when coders attributed
the goal, the attempts, and the outcome categories, while older children narratives
might have been underestimated in complexity. The relatively low reliability value
obtained for the complexity measure lends some support to this interpretation. It
might be that scores reflected challenges in coding these particular categories, and
thus in attributing an appropriate complexity score.
Comprehension score

Table 4 illustrates the mean comprehension scores by age for the story telling
and story retelling tasks in Italian and in English. ANOVA on comprehension
scores showed that the effects of all three main factors were significant: age, F
(1, 58) = 17.22, p < .001, 2 = 0.229; language, F (1, 58) = 33.09, p < .001,
2 = 0.363; and task, F (1, 58) = 207.81, p < .001, 2 = 0.782. In addition, the
Age x Language interaction was significant, F (1, 58) = 19.1, p < .001, 2 =
0.25. The results showed that older children scored higher than the younger children and that comprehension of stories was better for Italian than for English. The
interaction between language and age indicated that younger children showed a
better narrative comprehension in Italian than in English, but the difference between comprehension scores of Italian and English narratives was not significant
for the older group. Finally, more accurate comprehension was observed after

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

61

Table 5. Correlations among macrostructure and comprehension scores, language, and
task for the younger and older groups
Italian
Telling
Mac Comp

English

Retelling
Mac

Comp

Telling
Mac

Comp

Retelling
Mac

Comp

Younger Group
Italian

Telling

Mac
Comp
Retelling Mac
Comp
English Telling
Mac
Comp
Retelling Mac
Comp

1

.188
1

.181
.277
1

-.196 .049
.135 -.249
-.096 .011
1
.127
1

-.102
.125
-.313*
-.334* -.285
-.151
-.335* -.040
-.330*
.074
.012
.176
.461** .822** .241
1
.426*
.636**
1
.359*
1

Older Group
Italian

Telling

Mac
Comp
Retelling Mac
Comp
English Telling
Mac
Comp
Retelling Mac
Comp

1

.227
1

.528**
.472**
1

.173
.194
.231
1

.319*
.219
.238
-.056
.483** .286
.009
.052
1
.189
1

.339*
.150
.403*
.027
.610**
.490**
1

.077
.040
.014
.012
.313*
.540**
.572**
1

Note: Mac, Macrostructure elements score; Comp, comprehension score.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

the story retelling than after the story telling task. The other two-way and the
three-way interactions were not significant (F < 1 and p > .20 in all cases).
Relationships across tasks, languages, and narrative production, and
comprehension

In order to analyze associations among the main variables, a Pearson correlation
matrix was computed on measures of narrative production (number of macrostructure elements) and narrative comprehension (comprehension score) within and
between the two languages (Italian and English); and within and between the two
tasks (story telling and story retelling). Because the pattern of significant correlations differed for the younger and the older group of children to some extent, the
results are presented separately.
For the younger group, as illustrated in Table 5, no significant correlation
emerged in Italian between measures of comprehension and production in either

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

62

the story telling or story retelling tasks. Otherwise, consistent, medium to high significant correlations emerged between measures obtained for story telling and story
retelling tasks in Italian. Particularly interesting is the correlation between narrative
comprehension in story telling and narrative production in story retelling. Furthermore, a few significant negative correlations were found in the cross-linguistic
comparison of narrative production in Italian and narrative comprehension in English. Finally, narrative comprehension in the Italian story telling task correlated
negatively with narrative comprehension in the English retelling task.
Table 5 illustrates the correlation pattern for the older group. As for the younger
group, narrative production and comprehension did not correlate significantly for
either of the two tasks in Italian, and correlated only for the story retelling task in
English. Few significant correlations emerged between the two tasks in Italian. As
for younger children, particularly interesting is the correlation between narrative
comprehension in the context of the story telling task and narrative production
on the retelling task. Similarly to the younger group, significant correlations were
consistently found between narrative comprehension and production within and
between the two tasks in English. Conversely, compared to the younger group,
the older group showed a different pattern of cross-linguistic correlations: the
significant correlations involve measures of narrative production obtained in the
two tasks and are positive.
DISCUSSION

The current study was designed in order to provide new evidence on narrative
competence in children who are developing bilingually. The study makes two
significant contributions to the existing literature. First, narrative competence and
differences/relations between L1 and L2 were investigated in Italian bilingual
children aged between 5 and 7 years who are acquiring English as L2 and exposed
to this L2 daily at kindergarten/school as the language of instruction. In contrast
with previous work on bilingual children, most of which has been conducted in
the United States with children from low- to middle-SES backgrounds (GutierrezClellen, 2002; Uccelli & Paez, 2007), participants of the current study are acquiring
English as a second but not majority language, and come from middle- to high-SES
backgrounds.
Second, narrative competence was assessed in two elicitation conditions in order
to verify whether the different tasks, namely, story telling and story retelling, are
equivalent in eliciting narrative competence. This was allowed by adopting the
tasks of the MAIN (Gagarina, et al., 2012), which are characterized by parallel
story structure but differ in the elicitation procedure. The macrostructure of story
productions was directly compared in story telling and story retelling in terms
of the elements included, the number of mental state terms, and the complexity
level reached. In addition, children's narrative understanding after story telling
and story retelling elicitation tasks was compared.
The main results of the study are discussed below in terms of their theoretical
contribution to the existing knowledge on the development of narrative competence; differences/relations between L1 and L2; and the relevance of the findings
for the assessment of narrative competence in bilinguals.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

63

Developmental changes in narrative competence between 5 and 7 years

The current study highlighted a developmental change in narrative production at a
macrostructural level and in narrative comprehension. Older children, namely, first
graders, produced more complex and macrostructurally more complete narratives.
The production of all relevant macrostructure elements and their inclusion of key
elements, namely, character's goal(s), attempts, and outcome, was more frequent
for older than for younger children. The omission of elements and of relevant
relations among them was more frequent for younger than for older children. Older
children also produced more mental state terms than younger ones, highlighting
the gain in linguistic complexity of the narratives within this age range.
The inclusion of a logical structure might be considered to be the most important
component of a narrative because it allows the global meaning of the story to be
transferred to the listener (Lever & Senechal, 2011). Developmental changes in
structure can be explained in terms of changes that occur in cognitive development
in this age range, as well as by environmental factors. From kindergarten to first
grade, children start to be exposed to formal literacy practices at school. Written language is often richer and structurally more complex than oral language,
and exposure to written stories, in particular, could be related to the development of narrative skills. As the stories children are exposed to become richer with
macrostructural elements, their productions might likewise show greater complexity of relations among macrostructure elements, and story comprehension might
also improve. Previous studies (discussed in the literature review) showing higher
scores for L2 narratives (Fiestas & Pena, 2004; Squires et al., 2014; Uccelli &
Paez, 2007) also imply that formal schooling may be influential.
Cross-linguistic comparison

The current study provided cross-linguistic data for Italian and English. The results
showed lower scores in the L2 than in the L1 on tests of receptive vocabulary.
This L2 disadvantage, evident in both age groups, was paralleled by a lower
number of mental state terms produced in the L2 narratives than in the LI. This
finding is consistent with previous research showing that early bilinguals display
lower vocabularies in L2 than in L1 (cf. Uccelli & Paez, 2007), and provides
evidence that the reported disadvantage applies to different measures of vocabulary
(viz., both receptive vocabulary size and production of mental state terms). The
mental state terms did not vary by task; even in the story retelling task, in which
mental state terms are provided in the story, children tended to produce fewer
mental state terms in the L2. Nonetheless, in the current study, we did not find
evidence of a relationship between differences in L1-L2 receptive vocabulary and
measures of narrative competence. Far from arguing that vocabulary is irrelevant to
narrative competence, we claim that the existing gap between L1 and L2 receptive
vocabulary was not wide enough to affect the macrostructure or comprehension
scores.
Younger participants who produced more macrostructure elements also showed
higher levels of narrative complexity and better narrative comprehension in L1
than in L2; for these measures, the L1 over L2 advantage did not persist for

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

64

older children, who showed similar narrative competence in both languages. This
finding suggests a different pattern for narrative competence than for vocabulary,
indicating development in the two languages may vary as a function of linguistic
level (i.e., word vs. discourse level).
In addition, the pattern of relations across the two languages was different for
the two age groups. In the younger group, a few measures of narrative competence
in Italian and in English correlated negatively, while for the older group, narrative
production correlated positively across the two languages. To explain the negative
correlations, it might be argued that in the first phases of bilingual development,
the use of two languages is cognitively demanding and, as stated by Bialystok
and Craik (2010), cognitive mechanisms might not be sufficiently efficient to
distribute resources in the two languages adequately. With increasing experience
with both languages, children might become more able to use efficiently the
cognitive resources in the two languages. Positive correlations could, in contrast,
be explained by common conceptual knowledge underlying narrative competence.
According to Cummins (1979), deep, conceptual knowledge is shared by the two
languages. In line with this idea, and based on longitudinal data, Squires et al.
(2014) claimed that narrative production skills transferred from L1 to L2 in first
graders; what was known in the L1 was made available for use in L2. Findings
of the present study do not allow transfer and parallel development in the two
languages to be distinguished, but new insights on relevant changes in crosslinguistic relationships during transition from preschool to school are suggested.

Different methodological paradigms for the assessment of narrative
competence

The paradigm adopted in the current study was developed for a cross-linguistic
comparison. The story telling and story retelling tasks have parallel materials in
terms of structure and complexity that allowed narrative competence across tasks
to be directly compared. The results showed that task affected performance in
narrative production and comprehension. For all measures of narrative production
and comprehension, better performance in story retelling than in story telling was
observed in both age groups and languages. There are several possible explanations
for this finding. Story telling and retelling tasks might be characterised by a
different processing load, and for this reason the story retelling task could be
easier than the story telling task. In the story telling task, children are asked to
spontaneously produce a story from pictures, which could be more cognitively
demanding and limit their ability to construct and produce narratives with a great
number of elements. In contrast, in the story retelling task, children can select the
most important elements from the presented story and then can build the story
representation in order to recall it back. Another explanation might be related to
differences in the skills involved in story telling and retelling. The construction of
a story based on a previously heard narrative might rely more on comprehension
skills. This interpretation is consistent with the one provided by Lever and Senechal
(2011), according to which story telling relies more on constructive processes,
whereas story retelling relies on reconstructive processes.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

65

Conclusions

For the first time, the narrative competence of Italian bilinguals acquiring English
as an L2, but not as a majority language, were directly compared, using a developmental perspective within a critical age range. The study provides strong evidence
that different elicitation methods influence narrative production and comprehension by showing the facilitating effect of a story retelling task for both age groups
and languages. This facilitating effect, irrespective of the child's age and whether
narrative competence is measured in the L1 or the L2, provides useful practical
implications for a more targeted evaluation of narrative competence, in function
of the aim of the assessment.
A further contribution of the current work concerns the evidence for relevant
developmental changes in the relations between the two languages. The developmental changes were not equivalent across linguistic levels. While for vocabulary
measures, an L1 advantage over L2 was stable between 5 and 7 years of age,
for narrative competence, the L1 advantage disappeared between 6 and 7 years.
Furthermore, as shown by the correlations, the relationship between the L1 and
the L2 changed from negative in the younger group to positive in the older group,
suggesting that the relationship of the two languages changed from being in competition with one another to following a common developmental pathway. This
result is particularly informative for educational purposes of bilingual children
who are first graders and have started their formal instruction in L2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the children, their families, and the English International schools of
Padova, Rosa-Vicenza, and Grimani (Noventa Padovana) for taking part in the study; Carla
Basci and Daniela Trentin for data collection, story transcription, and data coding; the
reviewers of the paper for useful suggestions; and Diane Pesco for the excellent work as
editor and for valuable suggestions for improvements of this article.

NOTES
1.

2.

The MAIN was developed during the COST-ACTION IS0804--Language Impairment in a Multilingual Society: Linguistic Patterns and the Road to Assessment. The
complete set of materials and the manual may be downloaded from http://www.zas.
gwz-berlin.de/fileadmin/material/ZASPiL_Volltexte/zp56/MAIN_final.pdf
The number of mental state terms and the level of macrostructural complexity were
not included in this analysis because both are already incorporated in the total number
of macrostructure elements.

REFERENCES
Berman, R. (1988). On the ability to relate events in narrative. Discourse Processes, 11, 469-497.
Bialystok, E., & Craik, F. I. M. (2010). Cognitive and linguistic processing in the bilingual mind.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19, 19-23.
Bruner, J. S. (1986). Actual minds, possible words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

66

Cain, K. (2003). Text comprehension and its relation to coherence and cohesion in children's fictional
narratives. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 21, 335-351.
Cain, K., & Oakhill, J. V. (1996). The nature of the relationship between comprehension skills and the
ability to tell a story. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 187-201.
Cummins, J. (1979). Linguistic interdependence and the educational development of bilingual
children. Review of Educational Research, 49, 222-251.
Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test--Revised. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Fiestas, C. E., & Pena, E. D. (2004). Narrative discourse in bilingual children: Language and task
effects. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 35, 155-168.
Florit, E., Roch, M., & Levorato, M. C. (2014). Listening text comprehension in preschoolers: A
longitudinal study on the role of semantic components. Reading and Writing, 27, 793-817.
Gagarina, N., Klop, D., Kunnari, S., Tantele, K., Valimaa, T., Balciuniene, I., et al. (2012). MAIN:
Multilingual Assessment Instrument for Narratives. ZAS papers in linguistics 56. Berlin: ZAS.
Gagarina, N., Klop, D., Tsimpli, I. M., & Walters, J. (2016). Narrative abilities in bilingual children.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 37, 11-17.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V. F. (2002). Narratives in two languages: Assessing performance of bilingual
children. Linguistics and Education, 13, 175-197.
Iluz-Cohen, P., & Walters, J. (2012). Telling stories in two languages: Narratives of preschool children
with typical and impaired language. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15, 58-74.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension: A construction-integration
model. Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lever, R., & Senechal, M. (2011). Discussing stories: On how a dialogic reading intervention improves
kindergartners' oral narrative construction. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108,
1-24.
Nelson, K. (2007). Young minds in social worlds: Experience, meaning, and memory. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Oakhill, J. V., & Cain, K. (2012). The precursors of reading comprehension and word reading in young
readers: Evidence from a four-year longitudinal study. Scientific Studies of Reading, 6, 91-121.
O'Neill, D. K., Pearce, M. J., & Pick, J. L. (2004). Preschool children's narratives and performance on
the Peabody Individualized Achievement Test Revised: Evidence of a relation between early
narrative and later mathematical ability. First Language, 24, 149-183.
Orsini, A., & Picone, L. (2006). WISC-III. Italian Adaptation. Firenze: Organizzazioni speciali.
Pearson, B. Z. (2002). Narrative competence among monolingual and bilingual school children in
Miami. In D. K. Oller and R. E. Eilers (Eds.), Language and literacy in bilingual children (pp.
135-174). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Peterson, C. (1994). Narrative skills and social class. Canadian Journal of Education, 19, 251-269.
Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental psycholinguistics: Three ways of looking at a
child's narratives. New York: Plenum Press.
Roth, F. P., Speece, D. L., & Cooper, D. H. (2002). A longitudinal analysis of the connection between
oral language and early reading. Journal of Educational Research, 95, 259-272.
Silva, M., Strasser, K., & Cain, K. (2014). Early narrative skills in Chilean preschool: Questions
scaffold the production of coherent narratives. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 29, 205-
213.
Squires, K. E., Lugo-Neris, M. J., Pena, E. D., Bedore, L. M., Bohman, T. M., & Gilliam, R. B. (2014).
Story retelling by bilingual children with language impairments and typically developing
controls. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 49, 60-74.
Stein, N. L., & Glenn, C. G. (1979). An analysis of story comprehension in elementary school children.
In R. O. Freedle (Ed.), New directions in discourse processing (Vol. 2, pp. 53-120). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Applied Psycholinguistics 37:1
Roch et al.: Narrative competence of bilingual children

67

Stella, G., Pizzoli, C., & Tressoldi, P. E. (2000). Peabody--Test di vocabolario recettivo--PPVT-R.
Turin: Omega.
Trabasso, T., Stein, N. L., & Johnson, N. S. (1981). Children's knowledge of events: A causal structure.
In G. Bower (Ed.), Learning and motivation (Vol. 15, pp. 237-282). New York: Academic
Press.
Uccelli, P., & Paez, M. M. (2007). Narrative and vocabulary development of bilingual children from
kindergarten to first grade: Developmental changes and associations among English and Spanish
skills. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 38, 225-236.

