Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Source monitoring and associative structure
Francis S. Bellezza , Jennifer K. Elek, Ru Zhang
Department of Psychology, Ohio University, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 September 2014
revision received 18 September 2015

Keywords:
Source monitoring
Episodic memory
Context information
Event memory
Mediated learning

a b s t r a c t
Paired associates were used to study source memory. In three studies each word of the
pairs was presented in one of the four locations of a two by two array. An event code explanation of memory representation, based on the hierarchical propositional network of
Anderson and Bower (1974), was used to explain two seemingly paradoxical results: (a)
Location identification of the cue word depended on successful target recall, and (b) source
memory for the cue and target words was the same. Furthermore, the creation of an event
code in memory can explain why the source locations of unrecalled target words were
identified above chance level. This explanation seems preferable to a word code explanation in which source information for each item is attached to itself and also to the other
item in the pair. It is suggested that the event code explanation may also play a role in
accounting for source identification without recognition.
O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
It is as important to remember details of an event, such
as its time or place, as it is to remember the event itself
(Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993; Johnson & Raye,
1981, 1998). How source information is remembered has
been the focus of intensive research. Moreover, the assessment of source-monitoring performance has typically
occurred in conjunction with the testing of recognition
memory. This is true in the studies of the neuroscience of
source monitoring (Mitchell & Johnson, 2009) and in the
development of mathematical models of source monitoring (Banks, 2000; Batchelder & Riefer, 1990; Glanzer,
Hilford, & Kim, 2004; Rotello, Macmillan, & Reeder,
2004), as well as in multiple-item paradigms such as the
associative recognition task (Achim & Lepage, 2003;
Hockley, 2008), where pairs of items are presented followed by a recognition test of the complete pairs.
Researchers have generally assumed source information
 Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Ohio University,
Athens, OH 45701, United States.
E-mail address: bellezza@ohio.edu (F.S. Bellezza).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2015.09.004
0749-596X/O 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

to be stored in memory at the item level. If an item is
not recognized, then its contextual information cannot be
remembered. Thus, source-identification tests have been
accompanied by recognition tests with source identification assumed to be contingent on successful recognition.
But source information in memory about real events is
not typically accessed by another presentation of that
event. By the predominant use of the recognition paradigm
we may have unintentionally limited our knowledge of the
learning and retention of source information. Because real
events are typically assembled from contiguous but often
unrelated features of an experience, source information
must often be remembered when only some aspect of
the event is referred to in a test query. For example, the
sparse question ``How was your vacation?" can result in a
variety of information being remembered, including source
and context information. Consequently, for the successful
identification of source information the components of
each event must have first been bound together in memory
(Chalfonte & Johnson, 1996). Our results presented below
suggest this to be the case.
Paired associates learning is rarely used in source monitoring experiments. (For exceptions see Broder, 2009;

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

Cook, Marsh, & Hicks, 2006.) In our preliminary studies
using a paired-associates learning task, the two words of
each presented pair occupied two locations in a 2  2
matrix, as shown in Fig. 1. The words used represented
concrete objects, and participants were told to try to create
a visual image combining the words. Later, when one of the
items was presented as the cue word, the participants had
to recall the other word, the target word. They also had to
identify the original location of each word in the pair.
Word pairs, of course, are not complex events; but the
recall of an ensemble of information before making a
source judgment is more difficult than simply recognizing
a single word. Because of the prevailing belief that an individual word is the locus and effective cue for its source
information in memory, we expected to find more source
information remembered for cue words than for target
words. We assumed that a cue word could elicit its source
information during each recall test, but that a target word
had to be recalled before its location could be identified. To
our surprise, we found in preliminary studies that successful source identification of a cue word was greatly dependent on recall of its corresponding target word. Secondly,
it appeared that levels of source monitoring performance
for the cue word and the target word were identical. These
two results have implications about how source information is stored in episodic memory.
The phenomena of interest we describe here represent
the less than expected source identification of the cue words
of studied pairs compared to the source identification of
the target words, which are much less available. In our
studies every cue word was available at test, but only
about half of the target words were, namely, only those
that could be recalled. Thus, with regard to source identification there were approximately twice as many presented
cue words present as test items as there were target words.
When source information is identified better than expected
There is another result reported in the research literature that may be related to those focused upon here. This
phenomenon involves the greater than expected source
identification of studied items that have not been recognized or recalled (e. g., Starns & Hicks, 2008; Starns,
Hicks, Brown, & Martin, 2008). For example, using a
paired-associates paradigm, Cook et al. (2006) found that

145

under certain conditions the sex of the voice presenting
an item could later be identified, even when the test item
itself was not recalled. Ball, DeWitt, Knight, and Hicks
(2014), using extra-list cues semantically related to unrecognized test items, found that the rating task previously
used to evaluate an item could be identified at a level
greater than expected by guessing. Other authors have also
demonstrated this phenomenon of source identification
without recognition (e. g., Kurilla & Westerman, 2010).
A common explanation of the nature of source memory
is that the representation of the word in memory becomes
associated with information indicating that the word was
presented during the experiment. Various types of source
information, such as time of occurrence, location, type font,
or sex of speaker's voice may become associated as information tags (Quillian, 1968) to the representation of the
word. We refer to this as the word-code explanation.
According to this view, a participant may be able to
retrieve temporal information for an item from memory,
but not be able to retrieve location information. That is,
recognition of the word may occur but not the retrieval
of other source information. Similarly, location information
may be retrieved but not temporal information. In this latter situation the item may not be recognized but other
source information may be retrieved.
Some types of source information may be remembered
and not others because in the word-code explanation of
source memory each word is made up of features which
may be selectively activated and used in associations
(Anisfeld & Knapp, 1968). Hence, semantic components
of the word provide context to be associated to cooccurring information. A similar mechanism generating
associations rather than features has been labeled by
Underwood (1965) as implicit associative responses. These
types of generated context can act as a mediator for the
source information. That is, different types of source information may become associated to different aspects of the
generated context. Context information may be inadequate
to support the recognition of an item but may be able to
retrieve enough information from memory to identify
source information associated with the item. For a further
discussion of this explanation of source information without recognition or recall see Cook et al. (2006) and Ball
et al. (Figs. 1-5 and 2014).
Word code explanation

Fig. 1. Example of words in a pair and their source locations.

The word code explanation can be applied to the paired
associates paradigm used here. One possible version of the
word code explanation is diagrammed in Fig. 2. The Link
a in memory associates the two words in the pair. Because
participants do not know which word will be the test cue,
during presentation participants may bind the source
information of each word to both items of the pair. Link
x1 binds source information about the location of the cue
to the cue word, and Link y1 binds source information
about the target word to the cue word. Similarly Links x2
and y2 bind source information about the two words to
what will be the target word. Thus, regardless of which
item is the cue, recall of the other item plus source information for both items can be retrieved. In this word code

146

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

Fig. 2. Diagram of a possible word code explanation for associating
location information to words in pair. The associations originating at the
cue and target words may originate from different features or meanings
of the words. Parameter a is the probability of retrieving the target using
the cue of the pair; parameter x1 is the probability of the cue retrieving
the proposition connecting the cue with its location; parameter y1 is the
probability of the cue retrieving the proposition connecting the target
with its location; parameter x2 is the probability of the target retrieving
the proposition connecting the cue with its location; parameter y2 is the
probability of the target retrieving the proposition connecting the target
with its location.

explanation all the source information is associated to
memory representations of both items presented in the
event.
Event-code explanation
We propose an explanation somewhat different from
the word-code explanation given above. We label it the
event code explanation to emphasize our assumption that
source information becomes associated to a mental construct we call an event rather than to the representations
of individual items making up that event. The event must
be created in memory before source information can be
attached to it. Anderson and Bower (1974) suggested that
the associations relating list information with various
types of context information form a hierarchical network.
The nodes in this network represent interrelated propositions utilizing labeled associations. This formulation allows
flexibility in the variety of events represented. To deal with
our results, we use a simplified version of Anderson and
Bower's proposal (see also Anderson, 1976, 1983a,
1983b; Anderson, Bothell, Lebiere, & Matessa, 1998;
Anderson & Bower, 1972, 1973).

As shown in Fig. 3, we assume that if a visual image can
be constructed for the pair, then an event code is formed in
memory that includes that image. The image is the event
node in an associative hierarchy to which the cue and target words become associated, as represented by Links a
and b, respectively. This image can be thought of a mediator (Montague, 1972; Paivio, 1969, 1971; Richardson,
1998) for a set of organized context in which the pair is
embedded. Once the event code is created, the source
information for each item in the pair can become associated to it by Links x and y.
These associations depicted in Fig. 3 used for successful
retrieval in different combinations can generate various
kinds of performance. The first result in our preliminary
data showed that successful source identification of the
cue word was highly dependent on recall of the target
word. With an event code explanation recall of the target
indicates that the event code has been retrieved. There is
then the possibility that the Links x to the source information of the cue can also be accessed. Our second result can
also be explained: Because the participant does not know
which item will be used as a cue, the availability of Links
x and y should be comparable. Hence, the probability of
identifying the source of each word will be approximately
the same. Because of the event code's associative structure,
there is the possibility that the target word can be recalled
but not its source information. There is also the possibility
that source information can be identified without recalling
the target word. That is, target source information and target recall information may co-vary but one is not necessary
for the other.
We suggest that the event code explanation is preferable to the word code explanation. There are a number of
reasons for this. First, it seems that a representation of
the event should be formed in memory before source information is associated to the event. That is, source information is associated to an event not to each of the multiple
components making up the event. Second, if the source
information is associated directly to the representations
of the items making up the event, as depicted in Fig. 2, then
the number of associations needed increases in a combinatorial manner as the number of component items
increases. Third, one of our preliminary results was that
source information for cue words is remembered no better
than source information for the target words. This means
that the cue word is as strongly associated to targetword source information as it is associated to its own
cue-word source information. This does not correspond
to the notion that information should be most strongly
associated with stimuli in closest proximity to it. The differences between the two explanations are discussed in
more detail below.

The three studies
Fig. 3. Diagram of the event code model. Parameter a is the probability of
retrieving the event code from the cue in the pair; parameter b is the
probability of retrieving the target word in the pair from the event code;
parameter x is the probability of retrieving the proposition giving the
location of the cue word; parameter y is the probabilities of retrieving the
proposition given the location of the target word.

The three studies described address various issues considered above. In all three studies we expected the two
basic outcomes of (a) location identification of the cue
word highly dependent on recall of the target word and
(b) location identification of the cue and target word

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

almost identical. In addition, we also looked for identification of source location of the target words in the absence of
recall of those target words.
Study 1 was a straight-forward demonstration of these
expected results. In Study 2, pairs consisted of both related
and unrelated words were presented in the study list. The
pairs with related words should be easier to learn because
related words are more similar, and therefore associated,
than unrelated words. Source identification, however,
should be poorer for the related words. According to the
event code explanation, there should be more associative
interference when identifying the locations of similar cues.
That is, in the event code explanation shown in Fig. 3 the
instantiations Cue2 and Target2 will be more difficult to
discriminate for related words than unrelated words
(Osgood, 1949), even though the representations of Cue2
and Target2 result from being embedded in the composite
image. A variety of predictions can be made from the word
code hypothesis depending on precisely how Fig. 2 is interpreted. However, Ball et al. (2014) suggest that when recall
does not occur source information should be better identified for the related items because the word used as a cue
more easily accesses both sets of source information compared to when the items were unrelated.
In Study 3, half the pairs were made up of unrelated
words and the other half of single letter cues with word
targets. It is more difficult to associate information to single letters than to concrete nouns, so recall should be
poorer for letter cues than for word cues (Day & Bellezza,
1981). According to the event code hypothesis, information
is associated to instantiations Cue2 of the cue and Target2
of the target word. Therefore, letter cues should exhibit
poorer source discrimination than word cues. These expectations also follow from the word code explanation
because the source information for both items will be more
difficult to associate to letter than to word representations
in memory.
Method
Materials for Study 1
Eight hundred and forty-five words were sampled from
Toglia and Battig (1978) such that all words had mean ratings above 4.50 on seven-point scales of concreteness, imagery, familiarity, and meaningfulness. Ninety-six words
were then randomly selected to construct 48 word pairs
with the two words in each pair not obviously related.
Examples are father - beach, bird - nurse, and heart - window. The words from each pair were randomly placed in
different cells of a two-by-two grid as shown in Fig. 1. Each
of the six possible spatial configurations of two words was
utilized 8 times.
Participants and procedure for Study 1
Forty-one undergraduate students participated for
extra course credit and were tested with each participant
seated before a computer station. Past research with our
paired-associates procedure using 48 items indicated that

147

the mean proportion of correct recalls was about .50. This
suggests that about twice as many cues words would be
available as target words for source identification. Consequently, twice as many locations should be correctly identified for cues than for targets. Assuming that this is a
medium effect size involving correlated means and setting
power at .90, a sample size of 36 was appropriate (Faul,
Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007).
Participants were informed that each pair would be
later tested for recall and word location. The participants
were instructed to try to form a mental image containing
representations of both words when each pair was presented. The use of mental imagery in paired-associates
learning has been shown to enhance performance (Paivio,
1971; Richardson, 1998). However, no instructions were
provided regarding how the source locations should be
remembered.
Each word pair was presented for 3 s followed by 3 s of
blank screen, with the entire list presented twice in identical order. Following presentation, participants solved anagrams for 3 min to eliminate any possible effects of shortterm memory. They then received a test booklet of 48
blank two-by-two grids with the cue word from each of
the 48 pairs printed to the left of each grid. Each cue word
was selected randomly from the two words in the presented pair. Participants recalled the appropriate target
word by printing the cue word and the target word in their
studied locations. Every test item had to be completed
fully, even if the target word and the word locations were
guessed.
Materials for Study 2
Forty-eight related cue and target word pairs were sampled from Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber's (1998) norms
such that the words in each word pair scored a 5.85 or
greater on the concreteness dimension. An additional 48
concrete words were sampled to serve as alternate cue
words, with each cue word not obviously related to its target word. Hence, 48 word triads were made up of a target
word, a related cue, and an unrelated cue.
Two presentation lists of materials containing 48 word
pairs each were created. In one list, half of these word pairs
consisted of the related cue and target words, such as
cheese - goat, tower - castle, and shoe - box, with the
remaining half of the pairs containing the unrelated cue
and target words. The second list contained the same target words but the relatedness of the cues from the 48
three-word sets were opposite of those in the first list.
Examples of unrelated pairs were towel - goat, ticket - castle, and lamp - box. The spatial configuration corresponding
to a target word to be recalled was identical for both lists.
Participants and procedure in Study 2
Seventy-one undergraduate students completed Study
2 for course credit. A larger sample size was used compared to Study 1 to because two different types of pairs
were tested using a within-subjects design. The procedure
was that of Study 1 with participants randomly assigned to
one of two forms of the experimental list. The words were

148

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

projected on a large screen in the testing room. After testing of the pairs, participants rated the relatedness of the
two words in each presented pair on a 7-point rating scale,
with 1 indicating that the words were completely unrelated and 7 indicating completely related.
Materials for Study 3
Using of words from Study 1, forty-eight noun pairs
were created with one word randomly chosen as the cue
word. The target item of each pair was always a word,
but half the cue items were replaced by a single letter of
the alphabet. This was counterbalanced so that one list
replaced the cue word with a letter in 24 of the 48 word
pairs, and a second list replaced the cue word with a letter
in the other 24 word pairs. In both lists half the pairs were
word pairs and half the pairs were made up of a letter and
a word. Examples of unrelated word pairs are pocket - bottle, perch - test, and tank - ocean. Examples of presented
letter-word pairs are pocket - M, W - test, and tank - A.
Participants and procedure in Study 3
Eighty-nine undergraduate students completed Study 3
for course credit. Approximately half were administered
each list. After presentation of the pairs but before testing
the participants were informed that all the targets to be
recalled were words and that letters would appear only
as cues. No relatedness ratings were collected, but the
instructions and procedure were the same as in Study 2.
Results
In Study 1 all 41 participants recalled at least one target,
a necessary condition for analyzing source identification
conditional on recall, so all participants were retained. In
Study 2 eight participants were eliminated because they
did not recall at least one target word for both related
and unrelated pairs. Similarly, eight participants were
eliminated in Study 3 because they did not recall at least
one target word for both word cues and letter cues. The
final number of participants in Study 2 was 63 and in Study
3 was 81.

Table 1
Proportion of target words recalled and the proportion of spatial locations
identified in the three studies.
Condition

Target recall

Source identification
Source of cue

Source of target

Study 1
Unrelated

.44

.54

.51

Study 2
Unrelated
Related

.25
.50

.48
.53

.45
.53

Study 3
Letter cue
Word cue

.39
.66

.54
.54

.53
.55

interest in the three studies, however, was sourcemonitoring performance.
Source-monitoring performance
Identifying locations of cues and targets
As can be seen in Table 1, in all three studies there was
almost no difference in the identification of the location of
cue and target items. The largest difference was .03. An
ANOVA was performed on the source identification performance of Studies 2 and of Study 3 with the two withinsubjects factors of pair condition and cue versus target.
In Study 2 there was an effect of pair-relatedness, F
(1, 62) = 19.60, p < .001, partial eta-squared = .24, with
related pairs resulting in better source identification but
with no effect of cue versus target. In Study 3 there was
no effect of word cue versus letter cue on source identification nor of cue item versus target item.
Source identification conditional on recall
Figs. 4-6 show mean performance across participants in
identifying the source of the items in each pair conditional
on recall of the target word in each of the three studies. In
Fig. 4 the CIs indicate that the only factor in Study 1 that
was related to source identification was whether the target

0.8

Cue

Target

0.7

A recalled word was scored as correct even if it was the
plural of the target word or a misspelling. As shown in
Table 1, participants correctly recalled .44 of the target
words in Study 1. In Study 2 target words for the pairs with
semantically related words were better recalled (.50) than
pairs with unrelated words (.25), where the 95% CI for the
difference was [.21, .28]. A manipulation check of the materials showed that for the related pairs a mean relatedness
rating of 5.85 was obtained compared to a mean relatedness rating of 2.06 for the unrelated pairs, with a 95% CI
for the difference of [3.56, 4.02]. In Study 3, target words
for word cues were better recalled (.66) than for letter cues
(.39), with a 95% CI for the difference of [.23, .30], replicating the results of Day and Bellezza (1981). Of primary

Proportion Identified

Recall performance
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

No Recall

Recall

Recall Condition
Fig. 4. Proportion of cues and targets in the recalled and unrecalled pairs
whose source location was identified in Study 1.

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

Cue

following no recall and that source identification was superior for letter cues than for word cues but only following
recall. A 3-way within-subjects ANOVA confirmed these
two results. In all three studies source identification was
equal for cues and targets and was positively correlated
with target recall.

Target

1.0
0.9

Proporon Idenfied

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

No Recall
Unrelated

Recall

No Recall

Recall

Relatedness Condion Related

Fig. 5. Proportion of cues and targets in the recalled and unrecalled pairs
whose source location was identified for pairs consisted of unrelated
words and for pairs consisted of related words in Study 2.

1.00
0.90
Cue

0.80

Proportion Identified

149

Target

0.70
0.60
0.50

Source identification performance for unrecalled targets
For those pairs for which correct recall did not occur,
participants had only the cue word to use for identifying
both locations. Already noted was the result that source
identification was the same for both cues and targets. But
another interesting finding was that with no recall of the
target word source identification for both items from the
pair was significantly above the chance level of .25, as indicated by the CIs in Figs. 4-6. The conclusion that chance
performance is equal .25 is based on the argument that
there are four alternatives for guessing the location of the
first word placed and three alternatives for the second
word. Hence, there are twelve different combinations
available for randomly placing the two words. For only
one combination of the twelve possible are both locations
correct. For two combinations of the twelve only the cue
word is correctly placed, and for two combinations only
the target word is correctly placed. For the other seven
combinations both words are incorrectly placed. To correctly place the cue word by guessing, either the combination with both words correctly placed must be chosen or
one of the two combinations where only the cue word is
correctly placed. Thus, getting the cue location correct by
chance is 3/12 = .25. The same argument can be made for
correctly guessing the target location.

0.40

Correlation of cue and target source identification
performance

0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
No Recall

Recall

word cues

No Recall

Recall

letter cues

Cue Type Condition
Fig. 6. Proportion of cues and targets in the recalled and unrecalled pairs
whose source location was identified for pairs with words as cues and
pairs with letters as cues in Study 3.

word was recalled. The factor of cue versus target word
had no effect. An ANOVA with two within-subjects factors
confirmed these results. As shown in Fig. 5, source identification in Study 2 was superior following recall, and the
pairs of CI's on the graph suggest that neither type of pair
nor type of item in the pair had any effect on source identification once performance was made conditional on target recall. However, a 3-way within-subjects ANOVA
indicated that when combining over word type and recall,
source identification for unrelated items was .58 and superior to the .51 for related items, F(1, 62) = 16.25, p < .001,
partial eta squared = .21.
Based on inspection of the CIs in Fig. 6, source identification following recall in Study 3 was superior to that

Source location performance for the cue and target
items was correlated for each participant using a phi correlation. This was done separately for the recalled and unrecalled items, as shown in Figs. 4-6. For those pairs for
which recall occurred the mean phi correlations were .76
in Study 1, .85 and .85 for the related and unrelated conditions, respectively, of Study 2, and .77 and .76 for the word
cue and letter cue conditions, respectively, of Study 3. The
corresponding five phi correlations for the pairs in which
no recall occurred were .24, .30, .44, .37 and .37. Because
the largest 95% CI for these 10 mean correlations involved
adding and subtracting a value of .12 from the value, there
was no overlap between the phi values of the recalled and
not recalled items.
In our learning paradigm both words of the pair could
not appear in the same location, so placement of one word
in a location constrains the choice for the second word.
Therefore, if participants simply guess the locations of
the two words, a phi correlation of .11 is expected. Nevertheless, all five values of phi for the no-recall response category were significantly above the chance value of .11
using the largest 95% CI of .24. Thus, there is some common
factor or factors that elevate the level of source identification of both the cue word and the target word of a pair

150

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

about chance level, even when recall of the target does not
occur.
An alternative way to investigate the independence of
source identification for cue and targets is to compute conditional probabilities. If the target word was recalled, then
each word is the pair was available as a prompt for identifying its location. The large values of phi reported above
suggest that when the location of the cue word was identified, there was a high probability that the location of
the target was identified. That is, the value of P(T|C) was
large, where C represents the event of cue location identification and T represents the event of target location identification. If the target word was not recalled, however,
only the cue word was available so it is important to determine to what degree target location was identified without
target recall. The values of P(T|C) and P(C|T) when recall
did not occur are shown in Table 2. If cue location was
identified, then the value of P(T|C) based guessing is .33.
Similarly, if target location was identified, the value P(C|
T) by guessing is also .33. As can be seen in Table 2, the values of both P(C|T) and P(T|C) are similar in value and
greater than .33 in all conditions of the studies.
Conditional probabilities are related to the phi correlation coefficient in a specific manner. The quantity P(T|
C) P(T|C) represents the DP measure (e. g., Broder,
2009). However, when P(T) = P(C), then this difference also
represents phi; that is, P(T|C) P(T|C) = DP = phi. See
Falk and Well (1997) for a general discussion of correlation
as a probability. In each of the ten conditions analyzed, the
probability of correctly identifying the source of the cue,
denoted P(C), was observed to be almost identical to the
probability of correctly identifying the source of the target,
denoted P(T). From this result a number of relationships
can be deduced, as shown in Appendix A. The phi correlation was equal to both the differences P(C|T) P(C|T) and
P(T|C) P(T|C) in each of the ten conditions of the three
studies. By computing these conditional probabilities we
found that source memory in the five recall and five norecall conditions were nearly identical for the cues and targets, which shows that assuming P(T|C) = P(C|T) and
assuming P(C|T) = P(T|C) is justified.
If the cue location and target location were influencing
each other differently, then we would expect that P(T|C) -
P(C|T). Furthermore, such an inequality also implies P(T) -

Table 2
Proportion of target locations identified given cue location identified, P(T|
C), and proportion of cue locations identified given target location
identified, P(C|T), when recall of the target word did not occur.
Condition

P(T|C)

P(C|T)

Study 1
Unrelated

.48 (.04)

.52 (.04)

Study 2
Unrelated
Related

.53 (.03)
.48 (.04)

.58 (.03)
.53 (.04)

Study 3
Letter cue
Word cue

.61 (.03)
.59 (.04)

.65 (.03)
.61 (.04)

Note. Values in parentheses represent standard errors. All proportions are
above the chance values of .33.

P(C), which is contrary to our results. Instead, we get conditional probabilities in these two cases that are the same.
This result suggests that the locations are not cuing each
other, but are both being affected by some other factor or
factors (Starns & Hicks, 2005, 2008).
Source identification reversals
In Appendix B are shown the frequencies of locations
chosen for the two items in each pair with regard to
whether the item occupied its own correct location,
denoted C or T, the location of the other word in the
pair, denoted (C) or (T), or one of the two unused locations,
denoted C and T. If participants are guessing both locations, there are 7 possible ways to guess the locations of
the cue and target given that both are incorrect. One of
these is the reversal error, denoted (C)(T), with an expected
relative frequency of 1/7 or .14. However, in the five
conditions of Studies 1-3 shown in Appendix B in which
the target word was recalled, these relative frequencies
of the (C)(T) responses were .50, .50, .54, .51, and .48,
respectively. For the five conditions for which the target
word was not recalled, the relative frequencies were .19,
.18, .20, .17, and .22. All of these values are above the
chance value of .14.
In Study 2 location reversal errors were slightly smaller
for unrelated words, .50, than for related words, .54, when
target recall occurred, and were .18 and .20, respectively,
with no target recall. Related words can be considered
more similar, and thus more confusable, than unrelated
words. These proportions are based on aggregated data
with each participant usually having a small number of
location errors from unrelated and related pairs in which
both cue and target words are placed in incorrect locations.
Using the frequency data displayed for Study 2 in
Appendix B, the proportion of targets recalled for unrelated
words was .25 and the proportion of targets recalled for
related words was .50. Related and unrelated words, however, also differed in level of recall. Because of the poor target recall for unrelated pairs, only 35 out of 71 participants
had at least one unrelated item where two location errors
were made when recall of the target occurred. When an
analysis was performed based on the mean proportions
of these individual participants, the relative frequencies
of location reversals given that the target was recalled
was .49 for unrelated pairs and .51 for unrelated pairs.
The difference was not statistically significant. When the
analysis was performed on the data where the target was
not recalled, the relative frequencies of location reversals
were .17 for unrelated pairs and .25 for related pairs, compared to the respective values of .18 and .20 found in the
aggregated data. This difference was statistically significant, t(69) = 1.99, p < .025, indicating that the reversal
errors occurred more frequently for related than unrelated
pairs when recall did not occur.
Discussion
The three studies described here reliably demonstrated
the two related phenomena found in our preliminary

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

investigations: (a) the probability of identifying the source
location of the cue word from a pair depended on the recall
of the target word, and (b) source monitoring performance
for the cue and target word was virtually identical. These
results were surprising because cue words were always
available at test, whereas target words were recalled for
fewer than half the pairs. Two other effects from previous
research literature were replicated. Source identification of
unrecalled target words was above chance level, as
reported in previous research literature (Ball et al., 2014;
Cook et al., 2006). Also, source identification performance
for cues and targets was positively correlated as indicated
by the values of the phi correlations. This was true even
when the target word was unrecalled.
Effects of type of pair on source identification
The experimental manipulations used in Studies 2 and 3
produced some unexpected results. The analysis conditional on recall supported our expectations in Study 2
but not in Study 3. In Study 2 related and unrelated pairs
were used. Not surprisingly, more target items were
recalled for related pairs than for unrelated pairs. Without
being made conditional on recall performance, source
identification was better for related words (.53) than unrelated words (.48), as shown in Table 1. However, when
made conditional on recall, source identification was better for unrelated words (.58) than for related words (.51).
This result is opposite of the result shown in Table 1.
The reason for this discrepancy is that source identification
was larger for recalled targets than for unrecalled targets.
But, more targets were recalled for the related pairs. So,
unless made conditional on recall, performance for related
pairs appears to be better, as shown in Table 1, where
related pairs resulted in better recall which in turn produced better source identification.
The superiority of unrelated pairs compared to related
pairs on the source identification measure was a main
effect and thus was true for recalled and unrecalled items
and for both cue and target items. The result that source
identification of unrecalled targets was no different for
related versus unrelated pairs is contrary to Ball et al.
(2014, p. 1282) who suggested that in the related pairs
the cue and target would share features and the cue word
would thus be better able to access context generated by
the target word which, in turn, would be associated with
location information regarding the target word. This can
be seen in Fig. 2 by considering that the features shared
by the related words enabled access to location information that may have be associated to those features from
either word. The event code explanation, as diagrammed
in Fig. 3, makes a greater distinction between item encodings that are the basis of recall versus encodings that are
created for source identification.
The results of Study 3, in which word cues were compared to letter cues, are difficult to explain. For recall of
the target words the word cues were more effective than
letter cues, replicating Day and Bellezza (1981). As shown
in Table 1, however, there was no overall difference in
source identification for pairs with letter cues versus pairs
with word cues. Because, in general, single letters are less

151

easily associated to new information than words, we
expected that source information would be better for word
cues. Contrary to expectations, when the target word was
recalled, identification of the location of both cue and target was better when a letter was the cue than when a word
was the cue. When target recall did not occur, there was no
difference in identifying the locations of the two types of
cues. When source identification performance was made
conditional on recall, a significant interaction was found
in Study 3. Contrary to expectations, not word-cue, but
letter-cue superiority occurred but only for recalled pairs.
One possible explanation of the result is that the pairs in
Study 3 consisted of a total of 24 letters but 72 words.
Not only because of their smaller total number but also
because of their smaller number among the recalled pairs,
the letters may have been more distinctive than the words
(Nairne, 2002; Schmidt, 1991), thereby resulting in better
source discrimination for the letter-word pairs. Distinctiveness as an organizational factor may have been operating to enhance source identification for the letter cues
(Bower, 1970). Furthermore, global matching models suggest that items forming small categories based on their
number of shared features are more easily retrieved
(Clark & Gronlund, 1996; Hicks & Starns, 2006).
The correlation of source memory for targets with source
memory for cues
When the target word could not be recalled, the level of
source identification performance for both cues and targets
was about .36 across the five conditions compared to about
.75 when the target word could be recalled. The values of
phi correlations indicated that identification of one component of the pair was highly predictive of identification of
the other component, but only if the target was recalled.
If the target was not recalled, predictability was less but
still above chance level. This result of dependence of
source memory on recall is similar to results of previous
researchers (Ball et al., 2014; Broder, 2009; Cook et al.,
2006; Starns et al., 2008). Similarly, identification of source
without recognition has been found in previous studies
(Kurilla & Westerman, 2010; Starns & Hicks, 2008; Starns
et al., 2008; Vogt & Broder, 2007), but we performed no
recognition tests, so the degree to which the unrecalled
targets in our three studies would be recognized is
unknown.
In a word code explanation, as shown in Fig. 2, each
word in the pair is associated with the source information
of both words. Even if the link connecting the cue to the
target, Link a, is not available the link of the cue to the location information of the target, Link y1, may be. If the target
is recalled, then location information can be accessed from
both cue and the target words, using Links y1 and y2,
respectively. An event code explanation is somewhat different. Even without target recall the event code can sometimes be available. As shown in Fig. 3, Link b may fail, but
Links x and y may function. Dependency between target
recall and source identification is created by the presence
or absence of Link a, which cannot be observed but sometimes can be inferred. For both explanations, the correlation between source identification for the cue and the

152

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

target does not imply that location information for one
word is acting as a cue for the location information of the
other (Starns & Hicks, 2005, 2008; Vogt & Broder, 2007).
Because the 48 pairs consist of 96 items, each location is
associated with 24 items in the list. The degree of associative interference, or fanning (Anderson, 1983b), makes difficult the retrieval of one location of a pair item from the
location of the other pair item.
Evidence was found that participants were sometimes
reversing the locations of the cues and targets after identifying the locations of the two items. This was especially
true when the target word was recalled. This outcome
can be described using either a word code explanation, as
shown in Fig. 2, or an event code explanation, as shown
in Fig. 3. In either model information identifying two of
the four locations can be identified without the participant
knowing whether each contained the target word or cue
word. If both locations are identified without the participant knowing the item either location contained, then
the reversals of the kind shown in Appendix B can result.
Whether the data values can be accounted for precisely
will depend on a formal model being developed and
applied to these data.
There was also evidence that location reversals were
more frequent for pairs made up of related words compared to pairs containing unrelated words, as would be
expected. The effects reached conventional levels of statistical significance only for pairs for which recall of the target word did not occur.
Multidimensional source attributes
Positive correlations in source monitoring have been
previously reported in the literature using pairs of words
with source information for each item. Broder (2009) presented two words from the same taxonomic category
either adjacent in a list or separated by seven other words.
Also, each word was presented either at the top or bottom
of a screen. In a test of free recall of the words the screen
location of each word recalled had to be identified. When
two category words were presented adjacently, the correct
identification of the location of one word in the pair was
highly predictive of the location identification of the other
word. This was not true for words from pairs not presented
adjacently. Because each word in the pair belonged to a
common category, the participants, perhaps, became
aware of the common category for adjacent words and
used it as the basis of for relating the two words, but this
awareness decreased as the two words appeared further
apart in the list.
In addition, there have been a number of studies in
which a recognition procedure has been used where each
individual item had values on two different source dimensions. For example, Meiser and Broder (2002) varied the
font size of visually presented words as well as their location on a computer screen. They found a positive relation
between identifying the font of the presented word and
identifying its location. But this occurred only with remember recognition responses but not with know responses for
which source identification measures for font and location
were independent. Vogt and Broder (2007) and Meiser

(2014) also found a positive covariance when identifying
different types of source information attached to the same
presented items. From these results and those of our Studies 1-3 the conclusion can be drawn that performance on
multiple source monitoring dimensions will covary in a
positive way. This is true whether one item is used, as in
recognition, or two items in a pair, as in paired-associates
learning.
When single words are presented along with two
dimensions of source information for later recognition, a
word code rather than an event code, may possibly act as
a mediator for both sources of location information. Identification of the source values on both dimensions may be
contingent on successful recognition, with each attribute
associated with the representation of the word in memory,
but not directly associated with one another (Starns &
Hicks, 2008). However, we discuss below the possibility
and, perhaps, the benefit of event codes acting as mediators for source information in the recognition paradigm.

General discussion
We proposed an event code explanation, as opposed to
a word code explanation, to account for the following
source-memory results using a paired-associates learning
task: that location identification of the cue word was
strongly dependent on recall of the target word, that identification of the location of the cue word and target word
was nearly identical, that source identification of the cue
and target words occurred above chance level, even when
recall of the target word did not occur, and that performance identifying the location of the cue and of target
word was positively correlated across items regardless of
whether recall of the target word occurred. As described
above, a word code explanation can also explain these
results, but we believe that the event code explanation is
preferable for the following reasons: First, a representation
of an event should be formed in memory before source
information is associated to that event. Events are integral
representations in memory and are remembered in a unitized manner. That is, source information is associated to
events not to the components making up the event. This
occurs in the event code explanation but not in the word
explanation. This last assumption implies that participants
who are unable to assemble an event in memory out of its
diverse components will be less able retain source information about that event. In confirmation of this, source
information was less available when a target item could
not be recalled.
Second, if an event is made up of more than two components, then source information should not be duplicated
among the various components making up the event. However, if word codes were used, this would have to happen.
Third, if the source information is associated directly to the
representations of the items making up the event, as
depicted in Fig. 2, then the number of associations needed
increases in a combinatorial manner as the number of
these items increases. Fourth, according to a word cue
explanation, it seems reasonable that a single item in a pair
should be the focus of attention when source information

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

regarding that item is processed. That is, one word is being
cognitively processed to a greater degree than the other
word because an individual word rather than the entire
event is being attended to. Consequently, source information should be strongly associated to that item but more
weakly associated to its paired item. Source information
for the cue word should later be identified better in the
presence of the cue word than source information for the
target word. This is a consequence of the principle of
encoding specificity (Thomson & Tulving, 1970; Tulving &
Thomson, 1973).
The role of encoding specificity in source-monitoring
paradigms
The event code is a central hub in a hierarchy of four
associations represented by a link to each of the words in
the pair and to two propositions encoding the location of
each word. The order in which the hierarchy is formed is
important. First, the event code is formed associating the
two words, and then the location information is attached
to it. Thus, the cognitive processes and context occurring
during the two learning stages are different.
The location information is not associated to representations of single words. Thus, if a participant was unable
to assemble an event in memory out of two seemingly
unrelated words, then he or she cannot store source information about them, unless a different learning strategy is
used and the items are studied individually. Therefore,
when explaining word recall and source memory in the
paired associates paradigm, there are two instantiations,
that is, encodings, of each word in the pair. When a pair
of words is first presented, the participant reads them separately but because of instructions quickly tries to relate
them to one another to form a composite image. The first
encoding process involves considering the meaning of each
word thereby creating memory representations Cue1 and
Target1, as indicated in Fig. 3.
A key assumption of the event code explanation is that
only after a representation of the event is created, by interassociating the two words of the pair, is source information
associated with the representation of the event. The event
code is then completed by producing representations Cue2
and Target2 and making them part of the image. The representations Cue2 and Target2 are then associated to their
respective location information.
The encodings Cue1 and Cue2 are not the same. The
encoding specificity principle suggests that representations Cue1 and Cue2 are not identical in meaning. The
encodings are not trans-situational and, also, there is no
automatic access from encodings to the more general representation of the word in semantic memory (Tulving &
Thomson, 1973, p. 365). It is also true that Target1 and Target2 are not identical in meaning. When the pair is first
presented, encoding processes create Cue1, the mediating
event code, and Target1. The context of the encoding processes includes the experimental setting before and during
the formation of the image. After the image has been
formed it becomes a prominent part of the context of the
processes linking the location information to Cue2 and
Target2. Because of the principle of encoding specificity,

153

the encoding processes engaged in at encoding must be
reproduced at test for the item to be accessed in memory.
Cue1 is used to retrieve the event code mediator which
retrieves Target1. The event code mediator also contains
Cue2 and Target2 which are then used to retrieve the location information. Thus, the encoding processes are reproduced to enable retrieval (Thomson & Tulving, 1970;
Tulving & Thomson, 1973; cf. Anderson et al., 1998).
The factors which influence the formation and retrieval
of the event code may not be the same factors that influence the encoding and retrieval of the source information.
This was shown in Study 2 where similarity of the words in
the pair facilitated the target word recall, representing the
first stage of learning, but interfered with source identification, representing the second stage.
The event code explanation for source memory in recognition
We have cited studies in which source information is
identified though a word has not been recognized
(Kurilla & Westerman, 2010; Starns & Hicks, 2008) or a
studied word not recalled (Cook et al., 2006). However,
these two situations involving failure of recognition and
failure of recall are not necessarily equivalent. Tulving
and Thomson (1973) give the example of presenting the
pair glue - CHAIR and later finding participants would
sometimes fail to recognize CHAIR if presented alone but
recall CHAIR when provided with the cue glue. The principle of encoding specificity (Thomson & Tulving, 1970;
Tulving & Thomson, 1973) operates in either paradigm.
We have suggested that the imagery of an event code supports recall from a cue, whereas in recognition a word code
mechanism may suffice, and learning context may reside
in word-generated associations when using the word code.
However, the question may be asked whether an event
code is also necessary when learning source information in
a recognition paradigm. In recognition tasks the nature of
any event code formed is not apparent. Participants are
not typically instructed in a learning strategy. Yet, the phenomenon of source identification in the absence of recognition may be dependent on event codes being
previously formed, even if participants were not explicitly
instructed to do so. This possibility is supported by the fact
that source identification of unrecognized items depends
on strong encoding procedures involving semantic processing (Ball et al., 2014; Cook et al., 2006; Meiser, 2014;
Starns et al., 2008), and seems to occur only if learning context is recollected (Kurilla & Westerman, 2010).
What kind of instructions could be provided in recognition learning to create those event codes necessary for the
phenomenon of source identification to occur without
recognition taking place? We suggest that an event code
for a single presented item can result from an elaboration
based on semantic information (Fisher & Craik, 1980;
Montague, 1972), such as using the presented word in a sentence. To explain the formation of an event code in recognition, Fig. 3 could be modified to include the one presented
word with a Link a to the event code produced by elaboration but with no Link b. Furthermore, rather than two links
to location information, there would be one link to location
information and one link to temporal information

154

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

(Anderson & Bower, 1974), where access to the latter would
provide the basis for a recognition decision.
As in the paired-associate paradigm, in recognition
there would not be perfect concordance between retrieval
of the temporal information and retrieval of the location
information. If the event code was not formed or was not
accessible at test, then neither the location nor the temporal information would be available. If the event code was
accessible, then one, both, or neither of the two pieces of
source information, temporal and location, could be
retrieved. Each type of information must be separately
cued by the event code. Starns and Hicks (2008) have
shown that when different contextual dimensions (color
and location) were bound to item information, they were
not directly linked to each other. This conclusion is consistent with both the word code and event code explanations
as diagrammed in Figs. 2 and 3.
Goals, strategies, and awareness
Whether an event code or a word code mediates learning depends, in part, on learning strategies, in turn, influenced by learning instructions. Participants in our studies
were given a learning goal and a mediation strategy for
achieving that goal; namely to create an event, a visual
image, from the two words with location information
being of less importance. We assume that they were aware
of their success in this reaching goal and could verbalize
some of the contents of their visual image, although they
were not asked to do so. Performance would change if
instructions emphasized only remembering the location
of each word with no emphasis on associating the two
words. Without specific instructions each participant could
use one of many different learning strategies, or, perhaps,
no strategy at all, other than passive attention.
How an individual creates an event in memory depends
upon his or her expectations and goals. People typically try
to find meaningful relations among the multiple components of an experienced event; that is, people try to comprehend events. We assume that mediated learning
reflects what typically occurs when creating events in
memory outside the laboratory. Events are usually created
using pre-existing information in memory about naturally
occurring objects and people. In general, expectations and
goals can activate structures in memory, sometimes
referred to as chunks, schemas, scripts, frameworks, and
so on, whose purpose is to organize information to resemble familiar past events (Anderson, 1983a, 1983b). These
mental structures formed from previously experienced
events provide a framework for the event code. Even
events formed from streams of behavior can be organized
by a process Newtson (1973) has labeled unitization.
In our three studies two consequential experimental
manipulations were used. First, participants were instructed
in a visual-mediation learning strategy. Second, when the
pairs were presented for study, participants did not know
which of the two words would be later used as the cue.
The mediation instructions were used so that participants would form an event code. Without mediation
instructions, which increase the likelihood of associating
the two words, participants would be more likely to form

to separate word codes for each pair; that is, be less able
to interrelate the two words in the pair. Under these conditions source identification should be greater for the cue
word than for the target word because no event
code would exist to enable location identification of the
target word if it was not recalled.
If participants know which word in each pair will be the
cue word but nevertheless received mediated learning
instructions, then performance may not be very different
from that reported here. This is because when using concrete words visual imagery produces bidirectional associations (Paivio, 1971, pp. 276-285). If high-imagery materials
are not used, however, creating an event code may become
difficult. In this case location of the target item in the pair
may only be identified if the target item is recalled.
Without instructions for mediated learning knowing
which item will be the cue may also have an effect on
which learning strategy a participant chooses. For example, some participants may decide to focus on learning
the location of the target item, based on the assumption
that when presented the cue at test they will automatically
remember its location. Or, some participants may focus on
learning the location of the cue because they know it is certain to be tested.
In addition, strategies may also be used at the time of
memory retrieval. If a participant remembers a location
associated with the pair but is unsure of whether it is for
the cue or target word, the strategy used could be always
to assign the location to the cue word. The cue word is salient because it is always present at test, but the target word
is present only if it is recalled. This strategy would introduce a bias in location assignment. At this point we do
not know what strategies, if any, participants use in source
learning and retrieval.
Limitations of the recognition paradigm
Our use of a paired-associates paradigm for studying
memory for source information resulted from dissatisfaction with the predominant use of the recognition paradigm
for this purpose. There are three problems when using the
recognition paradigm for studying source memory of an
event. One is that only a single item typically comprises
the experimental event, which does not reflect the more
natural situation where a number of diverse, but contiguous, perceptual components must be organized in memory
to represent an event. It is not often that a real event occurs
that is already comprised of a completely integrated unit in
memory. But this is what typically occurs in the recognition paradigm. Second, the memory test in the recognition
paradigm requires a complete re-presentation of the event.
These are not the circumstances under which we usually
access source information in memory. Third, the required
response is typically an old versus new judgment, resulting
in the possibility of guessing and response bias. Many correct judgments could be the result of guessing. As mentioned above, researchers have built neuroscience
accounts and mathematical models of source memory
from data based almost exclusively on recognition data.
We have suggested two possible explanations for the
recall and source monitoring results we have obtained

155

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

here. Each of these explanations can be realized with a
variety of formal models. Quantitative analysis may be
necessary to make predictions with enough precision to
determine if a particular model fits the data and to determine if parameter values exhibit values consistent with
the memory processes proposed.
Using a paired-associates paradigm with components
that cannot be easily guessed seems like only a small step
away from using the recognition paradigm, but, as we try
to demonstrate here, the use of the paradigm raises new
and interesting questions about the storage and retrieval
of source information. These include, but are not limited
to, Why is source memory for the event cue relatively poor?
and Why is source memory for the unrecalled target relatively
good?

Appendix A
Proof that phi equals DP when the marginal distributions are identical in a 2  2 contingency table.
Let the event C be the identification success of the location of the cue of the pair and let event C be the identification failure of the cue. Similarly, event T is the location
identification of the target and T is its identification failure. The 2  2 frequency table is denoted as below:
Event T

Event T

Marginal total

Event C
Event C

n11
n21

n12
n22

n1
n2

Marginal total

n1

n2

n

If P(C) = P(T), then n1/n = n1/n and n1 = n1.
Also, n2 = n2. In addition, 1/P(C) = 1/P(T),
so P(C&T)/P(C) = P(C&T)/P(T).
P(T|C)P(C)/P(C) = P(C|T)P(T)/P(T), so P(T|C) = P(C|T).
Similarly, 1 P(C) = 1 P(T), so P(C) = P(T).
Also, P(C&T)/P(C) = P(C&T)/P(T).
Therefore, P(C|T) = P(T|C).
phi = (n11 n22 n12 n21)/sqrt(n1 n2 n1 n2) = (n11 n22 n12 n21)/n1 n2.
phi = (n11 n22)/n1 n2. (n12 n21)/n1 n2 = P(C|T)P(C|T) P(C|T)P(C|T).
phi = P(C|T)[1 P(C|T)] P(C|T)[1 P(C|T)] = P(C|T) P(C|T)P(C|T) P(C|T) + P(C|T)P(C|T).
phi = P(C|T) P(C|T) = DP,
where also phi = P(T|C) -[1 P(C|T)] = P(T|C) [1 P[T|C)] = P(T|C) P(T|C).
Because the assumption P(T) = P(C) holds for pairs when targets are recalled and for pairs when targets are not recalled,
then phi = P(C|T) P(C|T) = P(T|C) P(T|C) is true for both types of pairs.

Appendix B
Condition

Frequencies of item response locations for related and unrelated pairs in Studies 1-3.
Response category
CT

CT

CT

(C)T

C(T)

Study 1, unrelated words in pairs
Correct recall
603
Incorrect recall
195

38
221

44
165

21
166

20
121

Study 2, unrelated words in pairs
Correct recall
288
Incorrect recall
236

23
173

11
147

6
152

Study 2, related words in pairs
Correct recall
543
Incorrect recall
119

19
124

27
114

Study 3, letter cue, word target
Correct recall
597
Incorrect recall
245

36
173

Study 3, word cue, word target
Correct recall
771
Incorrect recall
133

63
100

CT

(C)(T)

Total

45
145

86
98

-
1968

9
140

14
181

29
103

-
1512

26
110

17
94

31
119

86
83

-
1512

32
147

13
180

13
172

24
156

51
105

-
1944

80
90

57
99

68
89

62
84

172
76

-
1944

Note: C = cue in correct location, T = target in correct location, (C) = cue in target location, (T) = target in cue location, C = cue in location other than cue or
target location, T = target in location other than cue or target location.

156

F.S. Bellezza et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 87 (2016) 144-156

References
Achim, A. M., & Lepage, M. (2003). Is associative-recognition more
impaired than item recognition memory in Schizophrenia? A metaanalysis. Brain and Cognition, 53, 121-124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0278-2626(03)00092-7.
Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, memory, and thought. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. (1983a). A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 261-295. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0022-5371(83)90201-3.
Anderson, J. R. (1983b). Retrieval of information from long-term memory.
Science, 220, 25-30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.6828877.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M. (1998). An integrated
theory of list memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 341-380.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1972). Recognition and retrieval processes
in free recall. Psychological Review, 79, 97-123. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/h0033773.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1973). Human associative memory.
Washington, DC: Winston.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1974). A propositional theory of
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 2, 406-412. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3758/BF03196896.
Anisfeld, M., & Knapp, M. (1968). Association, synonymity, and
directionality in false recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
77, 171-179. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0025782.
Ball, B. H., DeWitt, M. R., Knight, J. B., & Hicks, J. L. (2014). Encoding and
retrieval processes involved in the access of source information in the
absence of item memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 40, 1271-1286. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0037204.
Banks, W. P. (2000). Recognition and source memory as multivariate
decision processes. Psychological Science, 11, 267-273. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1467-9280.00254.
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1990). Multinomial processing models
of source monitoring. Psychological Review, 97, 548-564. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/0033-295X.97.4.548.
Bower, G. H. (1970). Organizational factors in memory. Cognitive Psychology,
1, 18-46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(70)90003-4.
Broder, A. (2009). Semantically clustered words are stored with
integrated context: Validating a measurement model for source
memory, storage, and retrieval in free recall. Zeitschrift fur Psychologie,
217, 136-148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/0044-3409.217.3.136.
Chalfonte, B. L., & Johnson, M. K. (1996). Feature memory and binding in
young and older adults. Memory & Cognition, 24, 403-416. http://dx.
doi.org/10.3758/BF03200930.
Clark, S. E., & Gronlund, S. D. (1996). Global matching models of
recognition memory: How the models match the data. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 3, 37-60. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03210740.
Cook, G. I., Marsh, R. L., & Hicks, J. L. (2006). Source memory in the absence
of successful cued recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 828-835. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/
BF03195921.
Day, J. C., & Bellezza, F. S. (1981). The alphabet mnemonic and visualimagery mediation. Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic
Society, Philadelphia, PA, November.
Falk, R., & Well, A. D. (1997). Many faces of the correlation coefficient.
Journal of Statistics Education, 5.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). GPower 3: A
flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral,
and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 175-191.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03193146.
Fisher, R. P., & Craik, F. I. M. (1980). The effects of elaboration on
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 8, 400-404. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3758/BF03211136.
Glanzer, M., Hilford, A., & Kim, K. (2004). Six regularities of
source recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 1176-1195. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0278-7393.30.6.1176.
Hicks, J. L., & Starns, J. J. (2006). Remembering source evidence from
associatively related items: Explanations from a global matching
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 32, 1164-1173. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.32.5.
1164.
Hockley, W. E. (2008). The picture superiority effect in associative
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 36, 1351-1359. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3758/MC.36.7.1351.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring.
Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3-28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0028139.

Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981). Reality monitoring. Psychological
Review, 88, 67-85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.88.1.67.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1998). False memories and confabulation.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 137-145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S1364-6613(98)01152-8.
Kurilla, B. P., & Westerman, D. L. (2010). Source memory for unidentified
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 36, 398-410. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018279.
Meiser, T. (2014). Analyzing stochastic dependence of cognitive processes
in multidimensional source recognition. Experimental Psychology, 61,
402-415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/1618-3169/a000261.
Meiser, T., & Broder, A. (2002). Memory for multidimensional source
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 116-137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.28.1.116.
Mitchell, K. J., & Johnson, M. K. (2009). Source monitoring 15 years later:
What have we learned from fMRI about the neural mechanisms of
source memory? Psychological Bulletin, 135, 638-677. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/a0015849.
Montague, W. E. (1972). Elaborative strategies in verbal learning and
memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.). The psychology of learning and
motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 6). New York:
Academic Press.
Nairne, J. S. (2002). The myth of the encoding-retrieval match. Memory,
10, 389-395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658210244000216.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998). The University of
South Florida word association, rhyme, and word fragment norms.
<http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/>.
Newtson, D. (1973). Attribution and the unit of perception of ongoing
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 28-38.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0035584.
Osgood, C. E. (1949). The similarity paradox in human learning: A
resolution. Psychological Review, 56, 132-143. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/h0057488.
Paivio, A. (1969). Mental imagery in associative learning and memory.
Psychological Review, 76, 241-263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
h0027272.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart,
and Winston.
Quillian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic
information processing (pp. 227-270). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Richardson, J. T. E. (1998). The availability and effectiveness of reported
mediators in associative learning: A historical review and an
experimental investigation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5,
597-614. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03208837.
Rotello, C. M., Macmillan, N. A., & Reeder, J. A. (2004). Sum-difference
theory of remembering and knowing: A two-dimensional signaldetection model. Psychological Review, 111, 588-616. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/0033-295X.111.3.588.
Schmidt, S. R. (1991). Can we have a distinctive theory of memory?
Memory & Cognition, 19, 523-542. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/
BF03197149.
Starns, J. J., & Hicks, J. L. (2005). Source dimensions are retrieved
independently in multidimensional monitoring tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31,
1213-1220. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.31.6.1213.
Starns, J. J., & Hicks, J. L. (2008). Context attributes in memory are bound
to item information, but not to one another. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 309-314. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/PBR.15.2.309.
Starns, J. J., Hicks, J. L., Brown, N. L., & Martin, B. A. (2008). Source memory
for unrecognized items: Predictions from multivariate signal
detection theory. Memory & Cognition, 16, 1-8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3758/MC.36.1.1.
Thomson, D. M., & Tulving, E. (1970). Associative encoding and retrieval:
Weak and strong cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 86,
255-262. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0029997.
Toglia, M. P., & Battig, W. F. (1978). Handbook of semantic word norms.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1037/0033-295X.111.3.588.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval
processes in episodic memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0020071.
Underwood, B. J. (1965). False recognition produced by implicit verbal
responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 122-129. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1037/h0022014.
Vogt, V., & Broder, A. (2007). Independent retrieval of source dimensions:
An extension of results by Starns and Hicks (2005) and a comment on
the ACSIM measure. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33, 443-450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/02787393.33.2.443.

