C Cambridge University Press 2014 doi:10.1017/S1366728914000844
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 19 (1), 2016, 1-18 

Prediction and integration in
native and second-language
processing of elliptical
structures

EDITH KAAN
Department of Linguistics, University of Florida

JOSEPH KIRKHAM
Department of Linguistics, University of Florida

FRANK WIJNEN
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics OTS, Utrecht University

(Received: January 7, 2014; final revision received: November 11, 2014; accepted: November 17, 2014; first published online 29 December 2014)

According to recent views of L2-sentence processing, L2-speakers do not predict upcoming information to the same extent as
do native speakers. To investigate L2-speakers' predictive use and integration of syntactic information across clauses, we
recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) from advanced L2-learners and native speakers while they read sentences in which
the syntactic context did or did not allow noun-ellipsis (Lau, E., Stroud, C., Plesch, S., & Phillips, C. (2006). The role of
structural prediction in rapid syntactic analysis. Brain and Language, 98, 74-88.) Both native and L2-speakers were sensitive
to the context when integrating words after the potential ellipsis-site. However, native, but not L2-speakers, anticipated the
ellipsis, as suggested by an ERP difference between elliptical and non-elliptical contexts preceding the potential ellipsis-site.
In addition, L2-learners displayed a late frontal negativity for ungrammaticalities, suggesting differences in repair strategies
or resources compared with native speakers.
Keywords: second-language processing, ellipsis, predictive processing, LAN, late negativity

Introduction
Comprehending written or spoken sentences in a language
learned at a later age is often different from sentence
processing in one's native language. Several accounts
have been proposed concerning the underlying difference
between native and non-native sentence processing.
According to the S HALLOW S TRUCTURE H YPOTHESIS
(Clahsen & Felser, 2006), late second-language (L2)
learners cannot use detailed syntactic information, but use
semantic information, and general heuristics to infer the
meaning of the sentence. Under this account, differences
between native and non-native speakers will be primarily
attested in long-distance syntactic dependencies, in which
the dependent elements are not adjacent and syntactic
information is crucial to construct the correct meaning.
Other proposals hypothesize that L2-learners can use
syntactic information, but will experience difficulty when
different kinds of information need to be combined
(Sorace, 2011). An example of the latter is the licensing of



The authors would like to thank Natalia Davidson, Chelsea Guerra,
Kyriaki Neophytou and Marpessa Rietbergen for their help making
materials and running participants, Ellen Lau for letting us use her
stimuli, and Iris Mulders and Sjef Pieters for technical assistance at the
Utrecht site. This research was funded in part by the National Science
Foundation (NSF 0957178), and a visiting scholars grant from the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO 040.11.367)
awarded to the first author.

a particular word order given a specific discourse context
and information structure (Hopp, 2009).
A more recent proposal is that L2-speakers do not
anticipate upcoming information to the same extent or
manner as do native speakers (Gruter, Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2012; Kaan, 2014; Kaan, Dallas & Wijnen, 2010;
Martin, Thierry, Kuipers, Boutonnet, Foucart & Costa,
2013). A growing number of psycholinguistic studies
suggests that native speakers make detailed predictions
concerning upcoming information during listening and
reading. These predictions include the gender (Van
Berkum, Brown, Zwitserlood, Kooijman & Hagoort,
2005; Wicha, Moreno & Kutas, 2003, 2004), phonological
form (DeLong, Urbach & Kutas, 2005; Martin et al.,
2013), or visual form of the upcoming word (Dikker,
Rabagliati, Farmer & Pylkkanen, 2010; Dikker, Rabagliati
& Pylkkanen, 2009). For instance, in a study using Event
Related brain Potentials (ERPs), DeLong et al. (2005)
had participants read semantically highly constraining
sentences such as The day was breezy so the boy went
outside to fly . . . . The next word could be a determiner
that either matched the expected noun (a kite, in this
case), or did not (an airplane). The unexpected form of
the determiner (an, in this case) elicited a larger N400
component compared with its expected counterpart (a).
The N400 component is typically seen for words that are
semantically unexpected (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). The
DeLong et al. (2005) results suggest that native speakers

Address for correspondence:
Edith Kaan Department of Linguistics University of Florida Box 115454 Gainesville, FL 32611
kaan@ufl.edu
Supplementary material can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1366728914000844

2

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

predict upcoming words while they are reading, and
even pre-activate the phonological form of these words,
which, in turn generates expectations for the form of the
determiner. This leads to a deflection in the ERP when the
expectations are violated, even BEFORE the expected noun
appears in the input.
Most studies on predictive processing in L2-learners,
on the other hand, report that L2-learners do not anticipate
upcoming words, at least, not to the same extent as do
native speakers. This is in spite of the fact that the L2learners in these experiments know the specific rules and
words used when probed off-line (Dussias, Valdes Kroff,
Guzzardo Tamargo & Gerfen, 2013; Gruter et al., 2012;
Gruter & Rohde, 2013; Hopp, 2013; Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2010; Martin et al., 2013). For instance, using
an a/an paradigm similar to Delong et al. (2005), Martin
et al. (2013) did not find anticipatory effects in the ERPs at
the determiner (a, an) in Spanish L2-learners of English,
even though the participants in this study were highly
proficient in English, and had been English-immersed
for at least two years. The L2-learners in this study did
show incongruency effects in the ERPs at the noun when
the preceding determiner did not match the noun (e.g. a
airplane vs. an airplane). This suggests that even though
the L2-speakers knew the morpho-phonological rules of
determiners in English, they lacked the ability to anticipate
this phonological information on the basis of the semantic
context during reading.
One account of L2-speakers' reduced ability to predict
is that this is the result of a processing deficit: Lexical
access, and integration of the words into the context are
slow and effortful in L2, with the result that fewer processing resources can be devoted to forming and maintaining
predictions during listening or reading (Foucart, Martin,
Moreno & Costa, 2014; Gruter & Rohde, 2013). Other
factors that may affect predictive processing in L2 are the
learner's L2 proficiency, native language, and the type of
information to be predicted, among others (Dussias et al.,
2013; Foucart et al., 2014; Hopp, 2013; Kaan, 2014).
Most studies on predictive processing in L2-learners
have investigated the anticipation of specific discourse
referents based on gender information encoded in the
determiner preceding the noun, e.g. lafem /elmasc in Spanish
(Dussias et al., 2013; Gruter et al., 2012; Hopp, 2013;
Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2010). To our knowledge, the
few other studies that use on-line techniques have focused
on the predictive use of contextual-lexical semantics
(Chambers & Cooke, 2009; Foucart et al., 2014; Martin
et al., 2013). It is therefore unclear to what extent the
current findings on predictive processing in L2-speakers
generalize to other phenomena, in particular the predictive
use of syntactic information other than gender. This is
especially important given the special role assigned to
(non-adjacent) syntactic information in prevailing models
of L2 processing (Clahsen & Felser, 2006).

The aim of the present study is to investigate to
what extent advanced L2-learners differ from native
speakers in the anticipation and/or integration of syntactic
information. To this purpose we adapted an ERP paradigm
used by Lau, Stroud, Plesch and Philips (2006). Lau et al.
(2006) manipulated the expectation of a particular word
class by contrasting syntactic contexts that did and did
not allow noun-ellipsis. Elliptical structures are structures
in which a particular word or phrase is missing from the
input, but can be inferred from the preceding linguistic or
discourse context (for an overview of linguistic accounts
of ellipsis, see Phillips & Parker, 2014). Two of the
conditions used by Lau et al. (2006) are illustrated in
(a) and (b) of Table 1. In (a), the fragment Although Peter
met John's surgeon, he did not meet Max's allows nounellipsis: Here the noun surgeon is missing from the second
clause, yet it can be inferred from the preceding context.
The second clause in (a) can therefore be syntactically
complete at Max's. There is no strong expectation for a
particular type of continuation. In the example in (b),
on the other hand, noun-ellipsis is not possible. The
fragment Although the surgeon met John, he did not meet
Max's . . . is incomplete. This creates a strong expectation
for an overt noun phrase to follow the possessive Max's,
since this is the only way to complete the sentence in a
grammatical way. The conditions (a) and (b) therefore
differ in the degree to which an overt noun can be
anticipated: in (b) there is a strong expectation for an overt
noun; in (a) this expectation is much weaker because of
the possibility of noun-ellipsis. In both (a) and (b), the
possessive is followed by of. This is an ungrammatical
continuation in (a) and (b) for two reasons. First, of
may introduce an expression that modifies a preceding
noun (e.g., report of the operation), and would require
an overt noun in contexts such as (a) and (b). However,
no such noun is available in (a) and (b). Alternatively, of
can introduce an argument of the verb (e.g., to remind
somebody of something), but such a verb is missing in
(a) and (b). In both (a) and (b), therefore, of constitutes
an ungrammatical continuation. Crucially, the difference
between (a) and (b) is that of violates a strong expectation
for an overt noun in (b) but not in (a). Testing native
English speakers, Lau et al. (2006) reported a larger Left
Anterior Negativity (LAN) effect at the word of in (b)
versus (a). The LAN is a component elicited by syntacticmorphological violations (e.g., Coulson, King & Kutas,
1998; Kaan & Swaab, 2003), but has not been consistently
observed. Although the LAN component and its meaning
are rather controversial (Steinhauer & Drury, 2012), one
interpretation proposed by Lau et al. (2006) is that the
LAN is modulated by the strength of syntactic predictions.
Thus, the violation of a strong prediction, in particular,
the prediction of an overt noun in (b), will lead to a
larger LAN effect than violations of weaker predictions, as
in (a).

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

3

Table 1. Experimental conditions in the current study
Condition label

Example

a. Ellipsis context-of
(ungrammatical)
b. Non-ellipsis context -of
(ungrammatical)
c. Ellipsis context -temporal
(grammatical)
d. Non-ellipsis context- temporal
(ungrammatical)

Although Peter met John's surgeon, he did not meet Max's  of the operation.
Although the surgeon met John, he did not meet Max's  of the operation.
Although Peter met John's surgeon, he did not meet Max's before the operation.
Although the surgeon met John, he did not meet Max's  before the operation.

Note:  indicates the onset of the ungrammaticality; the critical preposition is underscored and in italics for demonstration purposes only.

In the present study we used conditions (a) and (b)
from Lau et al. (2006) to test to what extent L2 and native
speakers differed in their ability to predict an elided noun
on the basis of the preceding syntactic context. If, in
contrast to native speakers, L2-speakers cannot use the
preceding syntactic context to generate predictions as to
the possibility of noun-ellipsis, we expected the native,
but not the L2-speakers to show an effect of the preceding
context, that is, a difference between contexts in which
ellipsis is possible (a) versus contexts in which ellipsis
is not possible (b). In particular, we expected that in
the native speakers, the context affects the LAN effect
or other early components at the critical preposition of,
or at the preceding possessive, but that the L2-speakers
would not show such a modulation. Although Lau et al.
did not find any significant differences at the possessive
(Max's) preceding the preposition, we do not exclude
effects of context on that position, as the possessive is
the first position at which noun-ellipsis can be inferred in
(a) versus (b). Also, other ERP studies on ellipsis report
effects at the position directly preceding the ellipsis site
(Dimitrova, 2012). In our data analysis, we will therefore
also analyze ERPs to the possessive preceding the critical
preposition.
Second, we were interested in the extent to which
native and non-native speakers differed in the integration
of syntactic information across clauses and in the repair
of syntactic errors. In order to interpret the elliptical
constructions and to determine their grammaticality,
information from the first clause needs to be combined
with that in the second clause. If L2-learners have
difficulties integrating structural information across
clauses (Clahsen & Felser, 2006), they will have difficulty
distinguishing grammatical from ungrammatical ellipsis,
and difficulty retrieving the antecedent of the elided
element. To test this, the current study included two
additional conditions, (c) and (d) in Table 1. These
conditions were not part of the Lau et al. (2006) study,
but allowed us to tease apart the effects of processing
ellipsis and the effects of processing a preposition (of)

that is ungrammatical for reasons independent of ellipsis.
Conditions (c) and (d) are the same as (a) and (b) except
for the use of the preposition. In contrast to of in (a)
and (b), the prepositions used in conditions (c) and (d)
introduce expressions of time, and do not need a directly
preceding noun or subcategorizing verb in order to be
grammatical. As in (a) and (b), a noun is omitted after
the possessive in (c) and (d). In (c) this kind of ellipsis is
allowed because of parallelism with the preceding context,
rendering (c) grammatical; in (d) omission of the noun is
not allowed, which results in an ungrammaticality at the
preposition.
Native speakers were expected to show a larger
P600 effect at the preposition for the ungrammatical
(d) versus grammatical condition (c). In addition, the
P600 was expected to be larger in (b) than in (a), as
the preposition in (b) may be perceived as a stronger
violation than in (a) since noun-ellipsis is licensed in (a)
but not in (b). The P600 effect is commonly observed
for ungrammatical or syntactically difficult continuations
and may reflect integration, repair and/or monitoring
processes (Friederici, Hahne & Saddy, 2002; Kaan,
Harris, Gibson & Holcomb, 2000; Van de Meerendonk,
Indefrey, Chwilla & Kolk, 2011). If L2-speakers have
difficulty combining syntactic information across clauses,
they may not experience the ungrammaticality in the way
native speakers do, and/or may integrate or repair the
ungrammatical continuation in a different way than native
speakers. This would be reflected in differences in the
latency, scalp distribution, or amplitude of the P600 effect
at the preposition for (b) versus (a), and (d) versus (c).
In addition, differences between native speakers and
L2-learners may be observed in a late anterior negativity
following the P600. This effect has been observed in L2learners (Gillon Dowens, Vergara, Barber & Carreiras,
2010; Hahne & Friederici, 2001; Isel, 2007; MorganShort, Steinhauer, Sanz & Ullman, 2012; Sabourin &
Stowe, 2008), as well as native speakers (Aleman Banon,
Fiorentino & Gabriele, 2012; Gillon Dowens et al.,
2010; Sabourin & Stowe, 2004) and may reflect working

4

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

memory load (Morgan-Short et al., 2012; Sabourin &
Stowe, 2004; Sabourin & Stowe, 2008) or difficulty with
semantic-conceptual integration (Hahne & Friederici,
2001; Isel, 2007).
In sum, the aim of the present study was to investigate
to what extent advanced L2-learners of English differ
from native English speakers in the use of syntactic
information in the preceding clause: (a) to anticipate
upcoming syntactic information (noun-ellipsis versus an
overt noun in particular), leading to a modulation of the
LAN effect at the ungrammatical preposition, or other
early effects for the native speakers, but not for the L2learners; (b) to integrate information and repair violations,
possibly leading to differences between the native and
L2-groups in P600 and late negativities following the
ungrammatical preposition.
Methods
Participants
Two groups of participants were recruited. The Native
English group consisted of 19 monolingually-raised,
native speakers of American English, recruited and run
at the University of Florida. An additional 7 participants
were run in this group, but were omitted from analysis
because of early bilingualism (5 participants); technical
problems (1 participant); or close to chance performance
on judging the grammaticality of the sentences in the
ERP experiment (less than 55% correct, 1 participant).
The L2-group consisted of 19 native speakers of Dutch
who were advanced second language learners of English.
This group was recruited and run at Utrecht University,
The Netherlands. Participants in the L2-group were raised
in a monolingual household, and started learning English
in a school context around the age of 10, although many
indicated they had been exposed to English through TV
and other media at an earlier age (mean 8.1, range 3-
10 years). Participants in the L2-group indicated that
they had been actively using English for 13.3 years on
average (range 9-23 years), which included at least 8
years of formal instruction. Eight of the 19 L2-speakers
had spent 1-6 months in an English-speaking country; one
had spent three years in an English-speaking country. The
L2 participants indicated to have some knowledge of 1 to
5 other languages besides Dutch and English (mean 3.7),
with French and German being the most frequently listed.
The main criterion for inclusion in the L2-group was a
score of at least 80 on the LexTALE English proficiency
task (Lemhofer & Broersma, 2012), which corresponds
to an `advanced' user. The LexTALE is a standardized
lexical decision task. Scores on this task correlate strongly
with more general English proficiency scores (Lemhofer
& Broersma, 2012). In this task, words and pseudo words
are presented one at a time on a computer screen, and

participants are asked to indicate with a button press
whether or not the letter string is an actual word of English.
An additional 13 Dutch speakers of English were run but
not included in the analysis presented in this paper because
of a LexTALE score lower than 80 (8 participants), early
bilingualism (1 participant), or technical problems (4
participants). None of the participants reported any history
of neurological or reading disorders; all had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, and were right-handed
as determined by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
(Oldfield, 1971). Participants gave informed consent as
per local Institutional Review Board procedures, and
received course credit or small monetary compensation
for participation.
Both native and L2 participants completed an augmented version of the LEAP-Q language questionnaire
(Marian, Blumenfield & Kaushanskaya, 2007) and an
English cloze test in which they were asked to complete
truncated words in short passages (passages number 1,
2, 4 and 5 from Keijzer, 2007). To be able to control for
potential differences in working memory and cognitive
control between the groups, which may affect predictive
language processing (e.g., Slevc & Novick, 2013), we
had participants complete a forward and backward digit
memory span task (Wechsler, 1987) and a Stroop task in
their native language (Stroop, 1935).
Language and other demographic data for the Native
English and L2-groups are provided in Table 2. The L2group was slightly older than the Native English group,
rated themselves as less proficient in English, and used
English less often on a daily basis compared with the
Native English group. The groups did not differ on the
English cloze-test, the Stroop task, or on the digit span
tasks.
Materials
One hundred and sixty quadruplets were constructed of
the type illustrated in Table 1. Most of the experimental
stimuli were taken from Lau et al. (2006). Some items
were slightly modified, to make the scenarios more
plausible and less culture-specific, and a few items were
added. Conditions (a), "ellipsis of", and (b), "non-ellipsis
of", were the same as in Lau et al. (2006). In both
conditions, the possessive in the second clause was
followed by the preposition of, yielding an ungrammatical
sentence. The ellipsis of a noun after the possessive
was possible in (a), but not in (b). This means that the
possessive can be a potential end of the clause in (a);
in (b) an overt noun is required downstream in order
for the sentence to be grammatical. In both (a) and
(b), the preposition of either needs an overt noun, or a
verb that takes an of-complement. The ungrammaticality
in both constructions can therefore also be due to of
missing an element it can modify, or due to the lack of

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

5

Table 2. Participant demographics
Variable

Native English

L2-group

Gender
Age (range)+
English listening proficiency (self-rating)
English reading proficiency (self-rating)
English writing proficiency (self-rating)
English speaking proficiency (self-rating)
Percentage of daily English use
LexTALE score
English cloze-test score (out of 80)
Stroop effect (in seconds)
Forward digit span
Backward digit span

4 M; 15 F
20.4 (18-26)
9.8 (0.4)
9.8 (0.6)
9.8 (0.5)
9.7 (0.7)
93.1 (8.8)
N/A
69.4 (7.6)
23.4 (8.7)
8.5 (2.2)
8.1 (2.7)

4 M; 15 F
22.4 (19-33)
7.4 (0.7)
8.3 (0.7)
8.6 (0.9)
7.5 (1.0)
23.9 (18.6)
90.1 (7.7)
70.9 (5.0)
23.6 (10.7)
9.5 (1.6)
8.4 (2.1)

Note: + significant difference between the groups, p < .05;  L2-group scored significantly lower
than the Native English group, p < .0001. Numbers in parentheses indicate the range for Age, and
standard deviation for other measures.

an appropriate verb. In order to compare grammatical
versus ungrammatical noun ellipsis, and to investigate
effects of integration and repair, we added conditions (c),
"ellipsis temporal", and (d), "non-ellipsis temporal". Up
to and including the possessive, these conditions were the
same as in (a) and (b): noun-ellipsis is possible in (c),
but not in (d). In contrast to (a) and (b), the preposition
following the possessive introduced a temporal modifier
(before, during, after), and did not require a preceding
noun. Condition (c) was therefore grammatical; Condition
(d) was ungrammatical at the preposition, since ellipsis is
not allowed, and an overt noun is expected rather than a
preposition. Note that ellipsis after a possessive proper
name is not possible in Dutch, the native language of the
L2-learners in the study. In Dutch, a pronoun or other overt
element must be used (Corver & van Koppen, 2010). For
instance, Ik zie Jans auto, maar niet  Piets "I see Jan's car,
but not Piet's," is ungrammatical; a correct construction
is Ik zie Jans auto, maar niet die van Piet, "I see Jan's car,
but not that of Piet."
A questionnaire study with 43 native English speakers
(not participating in the ERP study) on 48 experimental
items confirmed that the ellipsis temporal condition (c)
was more acceptable than the other three conditions. On
a scale from 1 (implausible) to 7 (plausible), the mean
ratings were: (a) ellipsis of: 2.62 (SD 0.93); (b) nonellipsis of : 2.04 (SD 0.86); (c) ellipsis temporal: 5.19
(SD 0.95); (d) non-ellipsis temporal: 2.37 (SD 1.03).
The ellipsis temporal condition was rated as significantly
more acceptable than the other three, with T-tests yielding
ps < .001; in addition, the non-ellipsis of condition (b) was
rated significantly worse than the other two ungrammatical
conditions (ellipsis of (a) and non-ellipsis temporal (d),
ps < .001).

In addition, 32 filler items for each of the following
four filler conditions were constructed: (1) ellipsis context
(possessive in first clause), with an overt noun in the
second clause, e.g., Although Leigh emailed Kate's
assistant, she did not email Amy's secretary before the
class; (2) non-ellipsis context (i.e., no possessive in first
clause), with a possessive and overt noun in the second
clause, e.g., While Kimberly denied the criminal charges,
she admitted that her lover's allegations were true; (3)
non-ellipsis context in which of is used in a grammatical
way, e.g., Although the nurse weighed Tristen, she forgot
to take the temperature of the patient; (4) non-ellipsis
context, other, e.g., Because Chloe had no other food in
her house, she ate some chips for dinner. Fillers of type (1)
and (2) were included to prevent participants from always
expecting an elided noun in the second clause. Fillers
of type (3) were included to bias participants away from
noticing that all uses of the preposition of in the critical
trials were ungrammatical. Fillers of type (4) introduced
more variability into the sentence structures presented to
participants. One fourth of all filler types contained an
ungrammaticality (word order or agreement violation).
The complete set of stimuli is given in the Supplementary
Materials Online (Supplementary Material).
Experimental items were Latin-Squared and distributed across four lists. Fillers were the same across
the lists. The order of fillers and experimental items was
pseudo-randomized, such that conditions were equally
distributed across the entire list and experimental trials
of the same condition never occurred in immediate
succession. Each participant saw only one list of 288
sentences: 160 experimental items (4 conditions of 40
trials each) and 128 fillers (4 types of 32 each). The 288
trials were broken into 8 blocks of 36 trials each, with

6

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

5 occurrences of each experimental condition, and 3-5
items of each filler type in each block.1 The order of
blocks was randomized per participant.
Procedure
During the ERP experiment, participants were seated at
a distance of 100 cm from a computer monitor. The text
was presented in 36-point Arial font, white against a black
background. A trial started with a fixation cross presented
for 700 ms in the center of the screen, followed by the
words of the sentence. Each word was presented in the
center of the screen for 300 ms followed by a 200 ms
blank screen. The last word of each sentence was followed
by a 700 ms blank screen, after which a prompt ("?")
appeared. Participants were instructed to silently read each
sentence and to indicate at the prompt whether they judged
the preceding sentence to be a grammatical sentence of
English via a button press (left for `grammatical'; right for
`ungrammatical'). They were asked to respond as quickly
and accurately as possible, without sacrificing speed for
accuracy. After responding, the words "Press for next"
appeared on the screen; participants proceeded to the next
trial at their own pace. Participants were familiarized with
the procedure with a practice block of 8 items which were
unrelated to the experimental manipulations. Each of the
8 blocks was followed by a short break.
Before the ERP experiment, the native English
participants completed the cloze-test, the forward and
backward digit span tasks, and the Stroop task. The L2
participants first completed the digit span and Stroop
tasks in their native language, and then continued in
their L2 (English) with the cloze-test and the LexTALE
English proficiency task. During EEG setup and during
the breaks in the ERP experiment, participants completed
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory and the LEAP-Q
language questionnaires. These forms were all in English.
ERP Recording
EEG was recorded using Ag/AgCl electrodes mounted in
a Waveguard 64 cap for the native English participants,
and in a 64 channel Biosemi cap for the L2 participants.
The following electrode locations were shared between
the two systems: on the midline: Fpz, Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz,
Pz, POz, and Oz, and at lateral sites: Fp1/2, AF3/4/7/8,
F1/2/3/4/5/6/7/8, FC1/2/3/4/5/6, FT7/8, C1/2/3/4/5/6/,
T7/8, CP1/2/3/4/5/6, TP7/8, P1/2/3/4/5/6/7/8, PO3/4/7/8,
and O1/2. An additional 6 electrodes were placed at the
following locations: both mastoids, the left and right
outer canthi, above the left eye, and below the left eye.
Impedance levels were generally kept below 5 k, though
1

Each block contained 16 filler items, but due a minor oversight, some
blocks contained 3 or 5 items of a particular filler type rather than 4.

in rare cases some electrodes could only be reduced to
10 k. In the native English participants, signals were
recorded using a sampling a rate of 256 Hz and referenced
to the left mastoid. In the L2 participants, signals were
acquired using a common reference and sampled at a rate
of 2048 Hz, down-sampled to 256 Hz after recording.
EEG Analysis
In both participant groups, the signal was re-referenced
off-line to the mean of both mastoids, and filtered
between 0.01 and 30 Hz. Epochs were defined as -100 to
1500 ms from the onset of the possessive, that is, the
word preceding the critical preposition. Averages were
time-locked to the onset of the possessive, using the
100 ms window preceding the possessive as a baseline.
We chose to time-lock to the onset of the possessive
rather than to the critical preposition, to capture potential
differences in ERPs due to the possessive signaling a
potential ellipsis site in conditions (a) and (c), but not (b)
and (d). Using the 100 ms time window before the onset
of the possessive as a baseline, rather than the 100 ms
preceding the preposition, allowed us to see to what extent
early differences in the ERPs observed at the preposition
were due to effects induced by the preceding possessive,
and prevented confounding ERPs at the preposition with
pre-existing differences between the conditions. Epochs
containing blinks or other artifacts were rejected before
averaging. For the Native English group, average artifact
rejection rates were 11% for the ellipsis of condition;
16% for non-ellipsis of; 12% for ellipsis temporal; and
16% for non-ellipsis temporal; for the L2-group, the
percentage of rejected trials were 10%, 9%, 9% and
13%, respectively. Mean amplitudes were analyzed in the
following time windows, based on visual inspection and
previous studies: 300-500 ms and 500-700 ms after onset
of the possessive (early context effects); 900-1100 ms
(that is, 400-600 ms after onset of the preposition, LAN
effect); and 1200-1500 ms (that is, 700-1000 ms after
onset of the preposition, P600 and late negative effects).
To avoid confounds due to the critical prepositions
differing in length and frequency between conditions (a)
and (b) on the one hand, and (c) and (d) on the other,
we conducted two separate analyses: one comparing the
two conditions containing of, (b) versus (a), and one
comparing the two temporal preposition conditions, (d)
versus (c). For each pair of conditions a 2 x 2 x 5 repeated
measures Generalized Linear Model (GLM, Language
Group x Ellipsis x Anteriority) was run on the midline
electrodes, and a 2 x 2 x 2 x 5 repeated measures GLM
(Language Group x Ellipsis x Hemisphere x Anteriority)
was run on lateral electrodes, with Language Group
(Native English, L2) as a between-subjects factor, and
Ellipsis (ellipsis, non-ellipsis context), and scalp location
factors as within-subject factors. Analyses on midline

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

7

Table 3. Mean (standard deviation) proportion of accurate
grammaticality judgments.
Native English

L2-group

Preposition

Ellipsis Context

Non-Ellipsis

Ellipsis Context

Non-Ellipsis

Of
Temporal

.89 (.12)
.90 (.11)

.98 (.04)
.83 (.18)

.81 (.25)
.93 (.09)

.96 (.05)
.87 (.13)

electrodes included Anteriority as within-subject factor
(five levels: Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz and Pz). For the analyses of
lateral sites, ten regions were defined: left (right) frontal:
F1(2), F3(4), F5(6) and F7(8); frontal-central: FC1(2),
FC3(4), FC5(6), FT7(8); central: C1(2), C3(4), C5(6),
T7(8); central-parietal: CP1(2), CP3(4), CP5(6), TP7(8);
and parietal: P1(2), P3(4), P5(6), P7(8). Analyses included
the factor Hemisphere (two levels) and Anteriority (five
levels). For effects involving factors with more than two
levels, the p-value was corrected using the Greenhouse-
Geisser correction for sphericity violations (Greenhouse
& Geisser, 1959). Since we were only interested in
the difference in ERPs between the ellipsis and nonellipsis conditions and between the language groups,
we will only report effects involving the factor Ellipsis
or Language group, that is, main effects of Anteriority,
main effects of Hemisphere, and two-way interactions
between Anteriority and Hemisphere are not reported
because these do not convey any information as to the
differences between the conditions or groups. Significant
interactions of interest were followed up with separate
GLMs. However, since the main focus of the study was
on potential differences between L2 and native speakers
in the processing of ellipsis vs. non-ellipsis conditions,
separate analyses within the Language groups were
conducted when differences were apparent in the means,
even when the interaction between Language group and
Ellipsis did not reach significance.

Results
Grammaticality judgments
The proportions of accurate judgments in the four
experimental conditions are given in Table 3. Accurate
responses were the response "grammatical" for the ellipsis
temporal condition (c), and "ungrammatical" for the other
three conditions. In conditions with the preposition of,
participants gave more accurate responses in the nonellipsis (b) than in the ellipsis (a) contexts. With a temporal
preposition, in contrast, participants gave fewer accurate
responses in the non-ellipsis (d) than in the ellipsis
context (c) (Ellipsis x Preposition, F(1, 36) = 17.59,
p < .001; ellipsis versus non-ellipsis: of, F(1, 36) =

19.83, p < .001, temporal, F(1, 36) = 4.37, p < .05). The
Native English group gave more accurate responses than
the L2-group in the of conditions, and the L2-group gave
more accurate responses than the Native English group in
the conditions with the temporal preposition (Language
group x Preposition, F(1, 36) = 4.80, p <.05). However,
the effect of Language group was not significant when
analyses were conducted separately for each preposition
(of, F(1, 36) = 2.03, p = .16; temporal, F(1, 36) = 1.37,
p = .25). No other differences between the Language
groups were found (main effect of Language group, F <
1, N.S.; Language group x Ellipsis, F(1, 36) = 1.02, p
= .32; Language group x Preposition x Ellipsis, F < 1,
N.S.).2
ERPs: Comparing the `of' conditions, (a) versus (b)
We first compared the processing of an ungrammatical
preposition (of) in contexts that did allow ellipsis (a)
versus contexts that did not (b). If L2-speakers differ
from native speakers in terms of anticipating upcoming
word categories on the basis of the preceding syntactic
content, we expected the two groups to differ in the ERPs
at the possessive (that is, the first position at which an
elided noun can be predicted), and/or in early effects at the
preposition, such as the LAN effect observed by Lau et al.
(2006). In particular, the native speakers were expected
to show differences between the ellipsis and non-ellipsis
contexts, whereas the L2-learners were expected not to do
so.
The ERPs for conditions (a) and (b), starting from the
onset of the possessive, are displayed in Figure 1 for the
Native English group and in Figure 2 for the L2-group.
2

Two L2 participants performed below chance judging the
grammaticality of the ellipsis of condition (a). After omitting these two
participants from the analysis of the behavioral data, the interaction
of Language group by Preposition was no longer significant (F(1,
36) = 2.48, p = .13). Analyses of the ERP data omitting these two
participants yielded no difference in significant effects compared with
the analysis reported in the main text, except for the analysis of the
900-1100 ms interval in the comparison of the of conditions (a) vs.
(b). In contrast to the analysis reported in the main text, the threeway interaction between Ellipsis, Hemisphere and Language group
reached significance after omission of the two low-performing L2
participants (F(1, 34) = 5.01, p < .05).

8

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

Figure 1. ERPs for the Native English group, ellipsis of condition (solid line) and non-ellipsis of condition (dotted line).
ERPs are plotted from the onset of the possessive onwards. The preposition of starts at 500 ms. 1: absence of a LAN effect; 2:
early positivity for non-ellipsis versus ellipsis condition; 3: positivity for non-ellipsis/negativity for ellipsis, 400-600 ms after
onset of the preposition; 4: late positivity for the non-ellipsis condition at posterior sites.

Right after the onset of the preposition (that is, 500
ms after the onset of the possessive), we observed a
posterior positivity for the non-ellipsis (b) versus ellipsis
(a) conditions for the Native English group only (arrow 2
in Figure 1). In contrast to Lau et al. (2006), however, we
did not see a LAN effect at the preposition for the nonellipsis versus ellipsis condition for either group (arrow 1
in Figures 1 and 2).
Our second set of predictions concerned effects of
integration. We expected L2-speakers to differ from native
speakers in the effect of context on the P600 at the
preposition, and later effects reflecting integration and
repair. As can be seen in Figures 1 and 2, both groups
showed a difference for the non-ellipsis versus ellipsis
condition at right central-posterior sites at 400-600 ms
after the onset of the preposition (arrow 3 in Figures 1
and 2). This effect can either be seen as a positive shift for
the non-ellipsis condition or an increased negativity for the
ellipsis condition. At the end of the epoch, 700-1000 ms
after the onset of the preposition, the L2-speakers' ERPs
for the non-ellipsis condition were more negative than for
the ellipsis condition at anterior sites (arrows 4 and 5 in
Figures 1 and 2). This difference was absent in the native

speakers. Statistical evaluations of these observations are
reported in the next paragraphs.

Context effects at the possessive
Early effects of context were assessed at the 300-
500 ms and 500-700 ms time-windows after the onset
of the possessive. No differences between the conditions
or language groups were observed in the 300-500 ms
interval after the onset of the possessive. Starting 500-
700 ms after onset of the possessive (i.e., 0-200 ms
after presentation of the critical preposition, arrow 2
in Figure 1), the non-ellipsis of (b) was more positive
relative to the ellipsis of (a) condition. This positivity
had a central-posterior maximum (Ellipsis x Anteriority,
midline, F(4, 144) = 2.46, p = .08; lateral, F(4, 144)
= 3.91, p < .05). Judging from Figures 1 and 2, the
500-700 ms positivity for the non-ellipsis condition was
present only in the Native English group. Although the
factor Language group did not significantly interact with
Ellipsis effects (ps > .18), our research question justified
a comparison within each group. Analyses for the groups
separately yielded a main effect of Ellipsis for the Native

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

9

Figure 2. ERPs for the L2-group, ellipsis of condition (solid line) and non-ellipsis of condition (dotted line). ERPs are
plotted from the onset of the possessive onwards. The preposition of starts at 500 ms. 1: absence of a LAN effect; 3:
positivity for non-ellipsis/negativity for ellipsis, 400-600 ms after onset of the preposition; 4: late positivity for the
non-ellipsis condition at posterior sites; 5: late negativity for non-ellipsis condition at frontal sites.

English group only (midline, F(1, 18) = 4.79, p <.05;
lateral, F(1, 18) = 3.78, p = .07; L2-group: Fs < 1, N.S.).
Context effects at the preposition
Context effects at the preposition were assessed 900-1100
ms after onset of the possessive, that is, 400-600 ms
after onset of the preposition. In this time window, ERPs
to the non-ellipsis condition were more positive going
compared with the ellipsis condition (midline, F(1, 36) =
5.90, p <.05; lateral, F(1, 36) = 4.13, p < .05). This
difference was largest over right central-posterior sites
(Ellipsis x Anteriority: midline, F(4, 144) = 4.69,
p < .01; lateral, F(4, 144) = 2.34, p = .13; Ellipsis
x Hemisphere, F(1, 36) = 5.57, p < .05, Ellipsis x
Hemisphere x Anteriority, F(4, 144) = 3.59, p < .05).
The hemispheric asymmetry of the ellipsis effect was
more pronounced in the Native English than the L2-group
(Ellipsis x Hemisphere x Language Group, F(1, 36) =
3.99, p = .053; Ellipsis x Hemisphere: Native English,
F(1,18) = 8.51, p <.01; L2, F(1,18) < 1, N.S.)
Later effects at the preposition
In the 1200-1500 ms interval after the onset of the
possessive (700-1000 ms after onset of the preposition),

the non-ellipsis condition (b) continued to elicit more
positive ERPs at posterior sites than the ellipsis condition
(a), especially over the right hemisphere (Ellipsis x
Anteriority, midline, F(4, 144) = 5.95, p < .01; lateral,
F(4, 144) = 4.69, p < .05; Ellipsis x Hemisphere: F(1, 36)
= 7.98, p < .01, Ellipsis x Hemisphere x Anteriority: F(4,
144) = 3.32, p < .05). In addition, in the L2 participants,
the ERPs for the non-ellipsis condition were more negative
than for the ellipsis condition over frontal sites, leading
to an interaction of Ellipsis x Anteriority x Language
group (midline, F(4, 144) = 6.36, p < .001; lateral, F(4,
144) = 2.79, p = .09). Analyses for the language groups
separately revealed an Ellipsis x Anteriority interaction
for the L2-group only (L2, midline, F(4, 72) = 12.01,
p < .001; lateral, F(4, 72) = 6.94, p < .01; Native English,
midline and lateral: F(4, 72) < 1, N.S.).
Summary: (a) vs. (b)
To summarize these results, both language groups showed
sensitivity to the contextual manipulation. Starting at
400 ms after onset of the preposition of, ERPs in both
groups were more positive for the non-ellipsis than for
the ellipsis condition. This effect tended to be more

10

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

Figure 3. ERPs for the Native English group, ellipsis temporal condition (solid line) and non-ellipsis temporal condition
(dotted line). ERPs are plotted from the onset of the possessive onwards. The preposition starts at 500 ms. 1: absence of a
LAN effect; 2: early positivity for non-ellipsis versus ellipsis condition. 3: absence of a 400-600 ms effect.

right-lateralized in the Native English group. This effect
can be interpreted either as a P600 for the non-ellipsis
conditions, and/or an N400 for the ellipsis condition. We
will return to this in the Discussion section. The Native
English group, but not the L2-group, showed an earlier
positivity for the non-ellipsis versus ellipsis conditions,
starting 500 ms after onset of the possessive, although the
interaction with language group was not significant for
this effect. Given its early onset, this effect suggests that
the Native and L2-groups differed in the anticipation and
early processing of the critical preposition.
Finally, the L2 and Native groups differed in the
presence of a late frontal negativity, occurring 1200-1500
ms after the onset of the possessive, for the non-ellipsis
versus ellipsis conditions in the L2-group, but not in the
Native English. This suggests that the groups differed in
the processing resources available, or in the processes
involved in dealing with the ungrammaticality in ellipsis
of contexts.
ERPs: Comparing the temporal conditions, (c) versus
(d)
We also compared ERPs for ellipsis and non-ellipsis
contexts containing a temporal preposition which did not

require an overt noun or specific verb (conditions (c) and
(d) in Table 1). This comparison allowed us to test the
effect of a grammatical versus ungrammatical omission
of a noun, independently of the ungrammaticality of the
preposition. Also here, we had expected the L2 and Native
groups to differ in early effects of context (ellipsis (c) vs.
non-ellipsis (d)) at the possessive or preposition, and in
the P600 and later effects for the ungrammatical (d) versus
grammatical (c) condition.
The ERPs for the ellipsis temporal (c) and non-ellipsis
temporal (d) conditions are displayed in Figures 3 and 4
for the Native English and L2-groups, respectively.
As in the (a) versus (b) contrast, the Native English
group (Figure 3) showed a positivity for the non-ellipsis
versus ellipsis conditions 500-700 ms after onset of the
possessive (arrow 2 in Figure 3). Also, no LAN was
observed (arrow 1 in Figure 3). In contrast to the (a) vs. (b)
comparison, however, no differences were seen between
400-600 ms after onset of the preposition (arrow 3 in
Figure 3).
The L2-group (Figure 4) showed a long-lasting
posterior positivity for the non-ellipsis temporal condition
(d), which started shortly after the onset of the possessive
(arrow 1 in Figure 4). Towards the end of the epoch,
700-1000 ms after the onset of the preposition, this

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

11

Figure 4. ERPs for the L2-group, ellipsis temporal condition (solid line) and non-ellipsis temporal condition (dotted line).
ERPs are plotted from the onset of the possessive onwards. The preposition starts at 500 ms. Note the early spurious
positivity (arrow 1), and the late frontal negativity for the non-ellipsis condition (arrow 2).

positivity turned into a negativity at frontal sites (arrow
2). Recall that the L2-group did not show an earlyonset slow positivity in the comparison between the two
of conditions, (b) and (a). Since the sentences in (c)
and (d) were exactly the same as those in (a) and (b)
before the preposition across the experiment, and no early
differences were seen in the (a) vs. (b) contrast in the
L2-group, we consider the slow positivity observed for
the (d) vs. (c) condition a spurious effect caused by an
unknown, task-irrelevant source. This spurious positivity
makes it hard to interpret any differences between the
Native and L2-group, especially those related to the early
effects of context. We therefore assessed the early effects
in the Native English group only. To assess the later effects
of integration and repair, we used the 100 ms interval
preceding the onset of the preposition as a baseline.
This means that the differences between the conditions
observed before the onset of the preposition are subtracted
out from the ERPs observed at the preposition, allowing us
to see whether the difference between the two conditions
changed relative to that observed in the baseline period.
Potential differences between the groups should still be
interpreted with caution, however, due to differences
during this baseline interval. Figures in which the ERPs
are time-locked to the onset of the preposition are provided
in the Supplementary Material Online (Supplementary
Material).

Context effects at the possessive (Native English only)
Early context effects were assessed at the 300-500 ms
and 500-700 ms time-windows after the onset of the
possessive for the Native English only. No effects were
significant for the 300-500 ms interval. Analysis on the
500-700 ms interval from the onset of the possessive
showed a significant positive difference for the nonellipsis (d) versus ellipsis condition (c) which was largest
over posterior sites (midline, Ellipsis, F(1, 18) = 3.30, p =
.09; Ellipsis x Anteriority F(4,72) = 7.44, p < .001;
lateral, Ellipsis, F(1, 18) = 3.51, p = .08; Ellipsis x
Anteriority F(4, 72) = 10.90, p < .001).
Late effects (pre-preposition baseline, both groups)
Using a pre-preposition baseline, the 400-600 ms time
window (corresponding to 900-1100 ms from the onset
of the possessive) yielded no significant effects. In the
700-1000 ms interval (1200-1500 ms from the onset of
the possessive), the L2-group showed a frontal negativity
for the ungrammatical versus the grammatical condition,
as in the of conditions, leading to an interaction of Ellipsis
x Anteriority (midline, F(4, 144) = 4.05, p < .05; lateral,
F(4, 144) = 3.21, p = .07). Although the interaction with
Language group was not significant (ps >.18), the Ellipsis
x Anteriority interaction at the midline sites was only
observed for the L2-group (F(4, 72) = 3.55, p < .05;
Native English: F(4, 72) < 1, N.S).

12

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

Summary: (c) vs. (d)
Although the results for the (d) versus (c) comparison need
to be interpreted with caution, the posterior positivity for
the non-ellipsis versus ellipsis conditions, starting 500 ms
after offset of the possessive, was again present for the
Native English group. Due to the slow-positive artifact in
the L2-group, it is hard to judge whether the L2-group
showed a similar effect.
The main difference in results between the present
comparisons and the of-conditions was the absence of
the 400-600 ms effect for the ellipsis versus non-ellipsis
conditions. This suggests that this effect was primarily
driven by the use of the ungrammatical preposition of
in an ellipsis context. As in the conditions containing
the preposition of, we failed to find a LAN effect at the
preposition, even though the critical preposition was a
grammatical continuation in one condition, but not in the
other. Similar to the of conditions, we saw a late frontal
negativity at the preposition for the non-ellipsis versus
ellipsis conditions which was more prominent in the L2learners.
Direct comparison with Lau et al. (2006)
In both comparisons (b) vs. (a), and (d) vs. (c), we failed
to replicate the LAN effect reported by Lau et al. (2006).
One difference between our study and Lau et al.'s is that
Lau et al. referenced their EEG to the average of all
electrodes, and observed a LAN only using this reference.
In addition, Lau et al. time-locked the ERPs to the onset
of the preposition, using the 100 ms interval preceding
the preposition as a baseline. To more closely compare
our findings to those reported by Lau et al. (2006), we rereferenced the EEG to the average of all scalp electrodes
and used the same baseline as Lau et al. to investigate the
ERPs at the preposition. The resulting figures are provided
in the Supplementary Material Online (Supplementary
Material). Using an average reference, and time-locking
to the onset of the preposition, we did observe a negative
deflection in the ERPs at left anterior sites for the nonellipsis (b) versus ellipsis (a) conditions for the Native
English speakers, but not for the L2-group. However, the
negative deflection for the non-ellipsis condition started
right at the onset of the preposition, which is too early to be
a LAN effect elicited by the ungrammatical preposition.
An analysis of the mean amplitude at left-frontal sites,
restricted to the Native English speakers yielded no
significant difference between the non-ellipsis and ellipsis
conditions in the 400-600 ms interval for which Lau et al.
reported a significant effect of Ellipsis (F(1, 18) = 1.11,
p = .31). The effect was almost significant in the 0-
200 ms window (F(1, 18) = 4.04, p = .06), however.
Given the timing of the effect, we interpret this effect as
the equivalent of the early positivity for the non-ellipsis
condition that we reported above for the Native English
group when referencing to the averaged mastoids.

Discussion
Summary of aim and results
The aim of this paper was to investigate to what
extent advanced L2-learners differed from native speakers
in the anticipation, integration and repair of syntactic
information during reading. To this aim we used twoclause contexts in which the structure of the first
clause either allowed or did not allow noun-ellipsis
after a possessive in the second clause. We investigated
whether native and L2-speakers differed in the processing
of the possessive and the following grammatical or
ungrammatical preposition (the preposition of, or a
temporal preposition). Previous studies have reported a
reduced ability for L2-speakers to actively anticipate
information (Dussias et al., 2013; Gruter et al., 2012;
Gruter & Rohde, 2013; Hopp, 2013; Lew-Williams &
Fernald, 2010; Martin et al., 2013). Our expectation
was that if L2-speakers do not use syntactic information
to anticipate the upcoming syntactic categories, that is,
an overt noun or elided noun in this case, they would
not show any differences between the ellipsis and nonellipsis conditions at the possessive or shortly after the
onset of the ungrammatical preposition, such as the LAN
effect observed by Lau et al. (2006). If the L2-speakers'
difficulty lies in the integration of syntactic information
across clauses, as is implied by, e.g., the S HALLOW
S TRUCTURE H YPOTHESIS (Clahsen & Felser, 2006), L2learners would differ from native speakers in the P600
at the critical preposition and in later effects indexing
integration and repair.
Across the board, the results for the L2 and native
groups were remarkably similar. L2-learners did not differ
from native speakers in judging the grammaticality of
the sentences. Figure 5 summarizes the results for the
ERPs. Both groups showed a larger posterior positivity/
smaller negativity for the ungrammatical non-ellipsis
relative to ellipsis conditions, starting at 400 ms after
onset of the preposition of, suggesting that both groups
employed overlapping integrative or repair processes at
this point (arrow 2 in Figure 5). The two groups differed
in two respects. First, the Native English group showed
an early difference between the non-ellipsis and ellipsis
conditions: the non-ellipsis condition elicited a centralparietal positivity in this group right at the onset of the
preposition in both (b) versus (a), and (d) versus (c), (arrow
1 in Figure 5). Second, only the L2-group showed a late
frontal negativity for the non-ellipsis condition in the of
conditions (b) vs. (a) (arrow 3 in Figure 5). The effects
for (d) vs. (c) were hard to evaluate for the L2-speakers
because of the spurious slow positivity for this group
(arrow 4 in Figure 5). A final finding is that, in contrast to
the Lau et al. (2006) study, no LAN effect was observed
for the non-ellipsis vs. ellipsis of conditions. Below we

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing

13

Figure 5. ERPs at the central midline electrode (Cz) for ellipsis (solid line) and non-ellipsis conditions (dotted line). Upper
row: of conditions; bottom row: conditions with a temporal preposition; Left column: Native English group; right column
L2-group. ERPs are plotted from the onset of the possessive onwards. The preposition starts at 500 ms. 1: early positivity for
non-ellipsis versus ellipsis condition in the Native English group; 2: increased positivity/decreased negativity for the
non-ellipsis of conditions in both groups, 400-600ms after onset of the preposition; 3: late fronto-central negativity for the
non-ellipsis condition in the L2 group (700-1000 ms after onset of the preposition); 4: spurious slow positive wave for the
L2-group in the conditions with a temporal preposition.

will further discuss the effect starting at 400 ms that was
shared between the groups, followed by a discussion of
the effects that were different: the early ellipsis effect and
the later effects. We will also address the absence of a
LAN effect.
Shared effects of integration
If L2-learners have difficulty integrating information
across clauses, the L2-group was expected to differ
from native speakers in the later components reflecting
integration and repair of the ellipsis, such as the P600 and
later negativity.
Both the Native English and the L2-group showed a
larger positivity/smaller negativity for the non-ellipsis
versus ellipsis conditions starting at 400 ms after the
onset of the preposition of (arrow 2 in Figure 5).
This effect was not found for the non-ellipsis versus

ellipsis conditions with temporal prepositions. There
are two interpretations of this effect. The first is that
the effect is a P600 effect, reflecting integration and
revision processes, but with an earlier onset in the nonellipsis of condition (b), and a later onset and smaller
amplitude in the other ungrammatical conditions (ellipsis,
of; non-ellipsis temporal). This would be in line with
the pattern seen in the behavioral data. Participants
were less likely to detect the ungrammaticality in the
ellipsis of and non-ellipsis temporal condition than in
the non-ellipsis of condition. In addition, when corrected
for the pre-preposition differences, the native speakers
did not show any significant differences in the ERPs
between the grammatical and ungrammatical temporal
conditions (d vs. c). This difference in the processing
of the ungrammaticality between the conditions can be
attributed to the number of cues available that indicate
that the sentence is ungrammatical. In the non-ellipsis

14

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

of condition, there are two cues: first, the absence of a
required overt noun after the possessive, and, second, the
absence of a noun or verb that of can modify. In contrast
to the temporal prepositions, the preposition of needs
either an overt noun it can modify, or a particular verb
that takes an of- phrase as an argument (e.g., to remind
somebody of something). In the non-ellipsis temporal
condition the absence of an overt noun is the only cue
that the sentence is ungrammatical; in the ellipsis of
condition, the absence of noun or verb for of is the only
cue. The difference in the timing and amplitude of the
positivity may therefore reflect the ease with which the
ungrammaticality is detected.
A second interpretation is that the effect observed
in the of conditions is a combination of a P600 and an
N400 effect. Under this interpretation, N400 reflects the
difficulty with the semantic integration of the preposition
of into the preceding context. The word of is hard to semantically integrate, since it does not have a verb or noun
it modifies. N400 effects have been reported in similar
situations, in which the clause contained an additional
noun phrase which was not licensed by the verb (Friederici
& Frisch, 2000). The difference between the non-ellipsis
and ellipsis of conditions can then be accounted for as
follows. As suggested by the grammaticality judgment
data, it may have been easier to spot the ungrammaticality
of of in the non-ellipsis (b) than in the ellipsis context (a):
the only possible continuation in the non-ellipsis context
was an overt noun or an adjective; hence, the presence
of of resulted in a phrase structure violation. This early
detection of an ungrammaticality may have prevented
readers from trying to integrate the preposition of in a
semantic way, leading to the absence of an N400 effect or
an early P600 in the non-ellipsis condition. This is similar
to situations in which no N400 effects were reported for
a semantically anomalous critical word when this word
also formed a phrase structure violation (Frisch, Hahne &
Friederici, 2004; Hahne & Friederici, 2002).
Regardless of the interpretation of the 400-600 ms
effect, the fact that the L2 as well as the Native
English speakers showed the effect only for the ellipsis
of condition suggests that both groups are similarly
sensitive to the restrictions on the use of of, and
that both groups used the structure of the preceding
clause in detecting the ungrammaticality in the second
clause. The only difference observed was a stronger
right lateralization of the effect for the Native English
group. One interpretation of this difference in scalp
distribution is that the two groups made a slightly
different trade-off between semantic integration, as
indexed by an increased central N400-negativity, and
syntactic integration/revision, as reflected by an increased
parietal positivity. For differences among individuals in
this respect see, e.g., Tanner, Inoue and Osterhout (2014),
and Tanner and Van Hell (2014).

Differences between L2 and Native speakers: Early
context effect
The Native English, but not the L2-group, showed
a posterior positivity for non-ellipsis versus ellipsis
conditions (arrow 1 in Figure 5). We are cautious here,
since we did not obtain a significant interaction with
Language group. This ellipsis effect was present in the
Native English group for conditions with of as well as
a temporal preposition, and started 500 ms after onset of
the possessive, that is, right at the onset of the preposition.
This early onset makes it rather unlikely that this effect
is a response to the preposition. Instead, the effect may
reflect differences in the expectation of what is to follow
the possessive. In contrast to the conditions allowing
ellipsis, the non-ellipsis conditions required an overt noun
to follow the possessive in order for the sentence to be
complete; the ellipsis conditions could be interpreted as
being complete at the possessive. A similar, though nonsignificant posterior positivity was reported by Osterhout,
Holcomb and Swinney (1994) for noun phrases following
verbs that could take a sentential complement (e.g.,
The doctor hoped/believed/charged the patient) compared
with noun phrases following intransitive verbs (e.g.,
The doctor forced the patient). In the latter case, the
noun phrase can be the end of the clause, and no
particular predictions can be made concerning the nature
of the upcoming material; in the sentential complement
conditions, in contrast, the noun phrase can be followed
by a finite verb. The positivity may therefore reflect this
difference in expectation. Native English speakers and
advanced L2-learners in our study may thus have differed
in the anticipation of syntactic information.
Alternatively, the effect starting at 500 ms after the
onset of the possessive can be interpreted as a larger
NEGATIVITY for the ellipsis compared to the non-ellipsis
conditions. This negativity may then reflect the anticipation and processing of the elided element. Previous
studies on ellipsis often reported negativities associated
with ellipsis starting at the word AFTER the elided element
(Kaan, Overfelt, Tromp & Wijnen, 2013; Streb, Henninghausen & Rosler, 2004), which were more anterior
in distribution, however. The exception is Dimitrova
(2012), who reported a 400-700 ms, broadly distributed,
negativity for prosodically stressed words directly
preceding elided materials. In the Dimitrova (2012) study,
the prosody signaled the upcoming ellipsis. Similarly, in
our experiment, the parallelism between the possessive in
the first and second clause may have signaled an upcoming
elided noun. Under this interpretation of the effect, L2learners differed from the Native English group in the lack
of anticipation of the ellipsis at the possessive. Further
research is needed to tease these two interpretations apart.
A third, but somewhat problematic interpretation is
that the effect is an early P600 and that the Native

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing
English participants may have been more sensitive to
experimentally-induced manipulations. All non-ellipsis
conditions in our experimental items were ungrammatical.
Although we tried to counter the ungrammaticality bias
by including 32 grammatical fillers with a possessive
in the second clause, this may not have been enough
to counterbalance the 80 ungrammatical non-ellipsis
experimental items. The positivity observed for the nonellipsis versus ellipsis conditions starting 500 ms after the
onset of the possessive could then be interpreted as a P600
triggered by the possessive in the non-ellipsis condition,
in anticipation of the upcoming ungrammaticality. The
language groups, then, may have differed in the
expectation of the ungrammaticality, induced by the
experiment. We conducted a post-hoc analysis to test this
interpretation. If the 500-700 ms positivity were indeed
related to the experimentally-induced anticipation of the
ungrammaticality, the positivity would have been stronger
towards the end of the experiment. However, the effect in
the Native English group was stronger in the first half of
the experiment, instead (midline sites, F(1, 18) = 6.00,
p < .05, mean 1.18 V; second half, F(1, 18) = 1.00,
p = .33, mean 0.40 V). This is problematic for an
interpretation of the early effect in terms of experimentinduced strategies.
Differences between L2 and Native speakers: Late
effect (1200-1500 ms)
We found that the L2-group showed a frontal negativity
(arrow 3 in Figure 5) and a late posterior positivity for the
non-ellipsis versus ellipsis conditions, whereas the native
speakers only showed the posterior effect. This suggests
that, although the groups were similarly sensitive to the
context in the initial stages of integration (as reflected in
the 400-600 ms effect), the two groups differed in the
later stages of integration and repair.
Late frontal negativities following the P600 in response
to ungrammaticalities have been observed in native
speakers (Aleman Banon et al., 2012; Gillon Dowens
et al., 2010; Sabourin & Stowe, 2004) as well as L2learners (Gillon Dowens et al., 2010; Hahne & Friederici,
2001; Isel, 2007; Morgan-Short et al., 2012; Sabourin
& Stowe, 2008), with some studies reporting larger or
earlier effects in L2-learners (Hahne & Friederici, 2001;
Isel, 2007; Sabourin & Stowe, 2008). Two interpretations
of this effect have been proposed. The first is that the
slow anterior negativity reflects working memory load
(Morgan-Short et al., 2012; Ruchkin, Grafman, Cameron
& Berndt, 2003), either due to the maintenance of the
response that is due at the sentence end (Sabourin &
Stowe, 2004), or due to keeping language material in
working memory after attempts at repair fail (Sabourin
& Stowe, 2008). Since second-language processing is
often more effortful, repairing an ungrammaticality,

15

maintaining uninterpreted material, or maintaining a
response will put more burden on working memory in
L2-speakers than in native speakers, leading to a larger
negativity in the L2-group.
A second interpretation is that the frontal negativity
reflects a semantic-conceptual way of repairing the
ungrammaticality. This interpretation has been proposed
by Hahne and Friederici (2001), who report a right anterior
negativity in L2-speakers for semantic violation and
violations that combined syntactic and semantic errors.
Under this interpretation, our L2-speakers differ from
the Native English speakers in the processes recruited
in repairing the ungrammaticality caused by the lack of
an overt noun in the non-ellipsis constructions: whereas
the Native English speakers may not have attempted to
semantically repair the missing noun in these conditions,
the L2-speakers might have done so.
In an attempt to find support for one interpretation
of the negativity over the other, we correlated the size
of the late negativity over right-frontal sites (average of
the F2/4/6/8 electrodes) for the non-ellipsis vs. ellipsis
of condition in the L2-group, on the one hand, with the
L2-learners' performance on the backwards digit span
task in their native language, on the other. A working
memory interpretation of the late negativity predicts
that L2-speakers with a smaller working memory span
will show a larger frontal negativity. We did not find
any relation between backward digit span and frontal
negativity, however (Pearson's r = -.22; p = .36).
We therefore do not have evidence directly favoring
the working memory interpretation over the conceptual
processing interpretation of the frontal negativity.
Absence of a LAN effect
Lau et al. (2006) reported a larger LAN effect for the nonellipsis versus ellipsis of conditions for native speakers,
which they interpreted as the LAN being an index of
prediction strength. The underlying reasoning is that the
possessive in the non-ellipsis contexts needs a noun in
order for the sentence to be grammatical; in the ellipsis
contexts, the ellipsis could be a potential end of the
clause; predictions regarding upcoming information are
weaker in the latter than in the former case, leading to
a weaker effect of the phrase structure violation (hence,
smaller LAN effect) induced by the preposition of in the
ellipsis versus non-ellipsis context. In contrast to Lau
et al. (2006), we did not observe a LAN effect in either
language group. The failure to replicate the LAN effect
is not very surprising given the inconsistency of the LAN
effect across studies; see Steinhauer and Drury (2012)
for a critical review. Note that even in the Lau et al.
(2006) study, the LAN effect was not very robust, as it
was no longer visible when the EEG was referenced to
the averaged mastoids -which is a very commonly used

16

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

reference in ERP research on sentence processing. In fact,
after referencing to average mastoids, the Lau et al. results
looked remarkably similar to the N400/P600 effects we
observed (Lau et al., Figure 4). As discussed above and
in the Supplementary Material Online (Supplementary
Material), even after re-referencing our data using an
average reference and using the same baseline as in Lau
et al., we did not observe a significant LAN effect at
the preposition of. We did observe an earlier left-frontal
negativity, but given its early onset, we interpret this as
the average-reference equivalent of the early positivity
discussed above.
We should note that there were some other differences
between the Lau et al. (2006) study and ours. For instance,
Lau et al. used three times as many grammatical as
ungrammatical stimuli, whereas in our experiment, the
number of grammatical and ungrammatical trials was
about equal. In addition, our filler stimuli were different
from those used by Lau et al. These and other differences
in design could have affected the strategies used by
participants in the two studies, and, hence, may have
affected the presence of a LAN effect. The aim of our
study, however, was not to directly replicate the Lau et al.
study, but to use their ellipsis-paradigm as a means to
test differences in anticipatory processing and integration
between native and L2-speakers, regardless of whether
these differences would emerge in the LAN effect, or in
other components.

2014; Kaan et al., 2010; Martin et al., 2013), although
this depends on proficiency (Dussias et al., 2013; Hopp,
2013) and the typological relation between the first and
second language (Dussias et al., 2013).
Although the current data can be accounted for by the
S HALLOW S TRUCTURE H YPOTHESIS (Clahsen & Felser,
2006), for instance, by assuming that ellipsis involves the
matching of stored phrase-structural templates, rather than
the active computation of detailed syntactic structures,
the present data are more directly compatible with a
view according to which L2-speakers can attain the same
syntactic knowledge as native speakers and use this
information on-line, but differ from native speakers in
the predictive use of information, and in either processing
resources (Sorace, 2011) or strategies related to repair.
Future research should explore the mechanisms that affect
the anticipatory use of information and differences in
repair strategy (e.g., speed and consistency of lexical
access, Hopp, 2013; Kaan, 2014), and to what extent the
differences observed between the L2-speakers and native
speakers are a function of L2 proficiency.

Conclusion

References

The present study aimed to identify differences between
native and non-native speakers in the processing
of ellipsis, especially concerning the combination of
information across clauses, and the anticipation of
syntactic categories during processing. Our advanced
L2-speakers were very similar to native speakers:
Grammaticality judgments were comparable between the
groups, and both groups showed similar N400/P600
effects. This suggests that our advanced L2-learners
had native-like knowledge of restrictions on ellipsis
and the use of the preposition of, and were equally
sensitive to whether the context allowed ellipsis or not.
The groups differed in when and how this knowledge
was used. First, the L2-speakers showed a late frontal
negativity in the non-ellipsis conditions, suggesting either
an increased working memory load or the use of different
repair strategies compared with native speakers. Second,
the native English speakers showed an early effect
distinguishing ellipsis from non-ellipsis constructions,
suggesting they anticipated upcoming information (either
the ellipsis, or an upcoming noun phrase), whereas the
L2-learners did not. The latter is in line with other studies
suggesting that L2-speakers do not predict in the same
way as native speakers do (Gruter et al., 2012; Kaan,

Aleman Banon, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2012). The
processing of number and gender agreement in Spanish:
An event-related potential investigation of the effects of
structural distance. Brain Research, 1456, 49-63.
Chambers, C. G., & Cooke, H. (2009). Lexical competition
during second-language listening: Sentence context, but not
proficiency, constrains interference from the native lexicon.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 35, 1029-1040.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in
language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Corver, N., & van Koppen, M. (2010). Ellipsis in Dutch
possessive noun phrases: a micro-comparative approach.
Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics, 13, 99-140.
Coulson, S., King, J. W., & Kutas, M. (1998). Expect the unexpected: Event-related brain response to morphosyntactic
violations. Language & Cognitive Processes, 13, 21-58.
DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005). Probabilistic
word pre-activation during language comprehension
inferred from electrical brain activity. Nature Neuroscience,
8, 1117-1121.
Dikker, S., Rabagliati, H., Farmer, T. A., & Pylkkanen, L. (2010).
Early occipital sensitivity to syntactic category is based on
form typicality. Psychological Science, 21, 629-634.
Dikker, S., Rabagliati, H., & Pylkkanen, L. (2009). Sensitivity
to syntax in visual cortex. Cognition, 110, 293-321.

Supplementary material
For supplementary material accompanying this paper,
visit http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1366728914000844

Prediction and integration in L1 and L2 processing
Dimitrova, D. V. (2012). Neural correlates of prosody and
information structure. Unpublished PhD, Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen, Groningen.
Dussias, P. E., Valdes Kroff, J. R., Guzzardo Tamargo, R. E.,
& Gerfen, C. (2013). When gender and looking go hand
in hand. Grammatical gender processing in L2 Spanish.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35, 353-387.
Foucart, A., Martin, C. D., Moreno, E. M., & Costa, A. (2014).
Can bilinguals see it coming? Word anticipation in L2
sentence reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40, 1461-1469.
Friederici, A. D., & Frisch, S. (2000). Verb argument structure
processing: The role of verb-specific and argument-specific
information. Journal of Memory and Language, 43, 476-
507.
Friederici, A. D., Hahne, A., & Saddy, D. (2002). Distinct
neurophysiological patterns reflecting aspects of syntactic
complexity and syntactic repair. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31, 45-63.
Frisch, S., Hahne, A., & Friederici, A. D. (2004). Word category
and verb-argument structure information in the dynamics
of parsing. Cognition, 91, 191-219.
Gillon Dowens, M., Vergara, M., Barber, H. A., & Carreiras,
M. (2010). Morphosyntactic processing in late secondlanguage learners. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22,
1870-1887.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95-112.
Gruter, T., Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2012). Grammatical
gender in L2: A production or a real-time processing
problem? Second Language Research, 28, 191-215.
Gruter, T., & Rohde, H. (2013). L2 processing is affected by
RAGE: Evidence from reference resolution. Paper presented
at the the 12th conference on Generative Approaches to
Second Language Acquisition (GASLA)
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A. D. (2001). Processing a second
language: late learners' comprehension mechanisms as
revealed by event-related brain potentials. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 4, 123-141.
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A. D. (2002). Differential task effects
on semantic and syntactic processes as revealed by ERPs.
Cognitive Brain Research, 13, 339-356.
Hopp, H. (2009). The syntax-discourse interface in nearnative L2 acquisition: Off-line and on-line performance.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12, 463-483.
Hopp, H. (2013). Grammatical gender in adult L2 acquisition:
Relations between lexical and syntactic variability. Second
Language Research, 29, 33-56.
Isel, F. (2007). Syntactic and referential processes in secondlanguage learners: Event-related brain potential evidence.
Neuroreport, 18, 1885-1889.
Kaan, E. (2014). Predictive sentence processing in L2 and L1:
What is different? Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism,
4, 257-282.
Kaan, E., Dallas, A. C., & Wijnen, F. (2010). Syntactic
predictions in second-language sentence processing. In
J.-W. Zwart & M. de Vries (eds.), Structure preserved.
Festschrift in the honor of Jan Koster (pp. 207-213).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

17

Kaan, E., Harris, A., Gibson, E., & Holcomb, P. (2000). The P600
as an index of syntactic integration difficulty. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 15, 159-201.
Kaan, E., Overfelt, C., Tromp, D., & Wijnen, F. (2013).
Processing gapped verbs. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 42, 307-338.
Kaan, E., & Swaab, T. Y. (2003). Electrophysiological evidence
for serial sentence processing: a comparison between
non-preferred and ungrammatical continuations. Brain
Research. Cognitive Brain Research, 17, 621-635.
Keijzer, M. (2007). Last in, first out? An investigation
of the regression hypothesis in Dutch emigrants in
anglophone Canada. Unpublished Ph.D., Free University
of Amsterdam.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity.
Science, 207, 203-206.
Lau, E., Stroud, C., Plesch, S., & Phillips, C. (2006). The role of
structural prediction in rapid syntactic analysis. Brain and
Language, 98, 74-88.
Lemhofer, K., & Broersma, M. (2012). Introducing LexTALE:
A quick and valid lexical test for advanced learners of
English. Behavioral Research, 44, 325-343.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2010). Real-time processing
of gender-marked articles by native and non-native Spanish
speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 63, 447-464.
Marian, V., Blumenfield, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007). The
language experience and proficiency questionnaire (LEAPQ): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 50, 940-
967.
Martin, C., Thierry, G., Kuipers, J.-R., Boutonnet, B., Foucart,
A., & Costa, A. (2013). Bilinguals reading in their second
language do not predict upcoming words as native readers
do. Journal of Memory and Language, 69, 574-588.
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M. T.
(2012). Explicit and implicit second language training
differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain
activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24,
933-947.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113.
Osterhout, L., Holcomb, P. J., & Swinney, D. A. (1994). Brain
potentials elicited by garden-path sentences: Evidence
of the application of verb information during parsing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 20, 786-803.
Phillips, C., & Parker, D. (2014). The psycholinguistics of
ellipsis. Lingua, 151, 78-95.
Ruchkin, D. S., Grafman, J., Cameron, K., & Berndt, R. S.
(2003). Working memory retention systems: A state
of activated long-term memory. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 26, 709-777.
Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L. (2004). Memory effects in syntactic
ERP tasks. Brain and Cognition, 55, 392-395.
Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L. A. (2008). Second language
processing: when are first and second languages processed
similarly? Second Language Research, 24, 397-430.

18

Edith Kaan, Joseph Kirkham and Frank Wijnen

Slevc, L. R., & Novick, J. M. (2013). Memory and cognitive
control in an integrated theory of language processing.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 373-374.
Sorace, A. (2011). Pinning down the concept of "interface" in
bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1, 1-
33.
Steinhauer, K., & Drury, J. E. (2012). On the early left-anterior
negativity (ELAN) in syntax studies. Brain and Language,
120, 135-162.
Streb, J., Henninghausen, E., & Rosler, F. (2004). Different
anaphoric expressions are investigated by event-related
brain potentials. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 33,
175-201.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643-
662.
Tanner, D., Inoue, K., & Osterhout, L. (2014). Brainbased individual differences in online L2 grammatical
comprehension. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
17, 277-293.
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J. G. (2014). ERPs reveal
individual differences in morphosyntactic processing.
Neuropsychologia, 56, 289-301.

Van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., Zwitserlood, P., Kooijman,
V., & Hagoort, P. (2005). Anticipating upcoming words
in discourse: Evidence from ERPs and reading times.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 31, 443-467.
Van de Meerendonk, N., Indefrey, P., Chwilla, D. J.,
& Kolk, H. H. J. (2011). Monitoring in language
perception: Electrophysiological and hemodynamic responses to spelling violations. NeuroImage, 54, 2350-
2363.
Wechsler, D. (1987). Wechsler memory scale-revised (WMS-R)
San Antonio: Psychological Corporation.
Wicha, N. Y. Y., Moreno, E. M., & Kutas, M. (2003). Expecting
gender: An event related brain potential study on the role
of grammatical gender in comprehending a line drawing
within a written sentence in Spanish. Cortex, 39, 483-
508.
Wicha, N. Y. Y., Moreno, E. M., & Kutas, M. (2004).
Anticipating words and their gender: An event-related
brain potential study of semantic integration, gender
expectancy, and gender agreement in spanish sentence
reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1272-
1288.

