Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 2017, 39, 319-346.
doi:10.1017/S0272263117000031

THE ROLE OF TASK REPETITION IN
LEARNING WORD-STRESS
PATTERNS THROUGH AUDITORY
PRIMING TASKS

YeonJoo Jung
Georgia State University

YouJin Kim
Georgia State University

John Murphy
Georgia State University

This study focused on an instructional component often neglected
when teaching the pronunciation of English as either a second, foreign,
or international language--namely, the suprasegmental feature of
lexical stress. Extending previous research on collaborative priming
tasks and task repetition, the study investigated the impact of task
and procedural repetition on eliciting target-stress patterns during
collaborative priming tasks. It employed a pretest-posttest design
with 57 Korean high school students who were randomly assigned
to one of three groups: a control, priming with task repetition, and
priming with procedural repetition. Learners participated in a pretest,
two priming sessions, and two posttests over a 4-week period.
Learners' ability to produce target-stress patterns was measured
through sentence read-aloud tasks. The task repetition group repeated
We would like to thank the editors and three anonymous reviewers who provided helpful
comments on earlier versions of this article. Special thanks go to the editors of the special
issue, Laura Gurzynski-Weiss, Avizia Y. Long, and Megan Solon for their insightful and valuable suggestions. Any remaining errors are our own.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to YeonJoo Jung, Department of Applied Linguistics & ESL, Georgia State University, 15th floor, 25 Park Place,
Atlanta, GA 30303. E-mail: yjung9@gsu.edu
(c) Cambridge University Press 2017

319

320

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy
the same primes and prompts twice, whereas the procedural repetition group performed priming tasks with different primes and prompts
during two sessions. Results indicate that the amount of primed production was significantly more than unprimed production. Additionally,
both experimental conditions promoted learners' accurate production
of target-stress patterns, though, in relation to long-term impacts,
repeating the same task (i.e., same procedure and same content)
twice was more effective than repeating the procedure for a second
time with different content. The results are discussed in light of pronunciation teaching using auditory priming tasks.

Over recent decades the field of second language acquisition (SLA) has
witnessed a continuous proliferation of studies on second language
(L2) morphosyntax development. However, less attention has focused
on L2 pronunciation development despite ample theoretical proposals
designed to account for various aspects of the pronunciation development
process (e.g., structural conformity hypothesis [Eckman, 1991]; optimality theoretic of phonological categorization [Escudero & Boersma,
2004]). Although such proposals presented scientifically sound and
intriguing approaches to L2 pronunciation, they often had little to contribute to the development of L2 pedagogical applications of the theories.
Recent L2 pronunciation research has begun to bridge the gap between
relevant theories and teaching practices by addressing the growing needs
for research on potential variables that should be considered in L2 pronunciation instruction (e.g., Munro & Derwing, 2015).
One theoretical view receiving mounting attention regarding L2
instruction is the interactive alignment model (IAM) first articulated by
Pickering and Garrod (2004). In a series of recent studies, Trofimovich
and his colleagues have applied the framework of interactive alignment
to L2 instructional contexts, suggesting alignment occurring between
peers during collaborative tasks may lead to the development of L2 pronunciation as well as grammar (e.g., Trofimovich, McDonough, & Foote,
2014; Trofimovich, McDonough, & Neumann, 2013). The IAM posits a
parity of representation between language production and comprehension systems (i.e., activation of the representation of a word in comprehension maintains its activation during production). According to the
IAM, interlocutors tend to align the language forms they use during conversational interaction by reusing each other's expressions, grammatical
structures, and patterns of pronunciation. Principal mechanisms for
promoting such instances of interactive alignment are auditory, lexical,
and structural priming. Priming refers to the phenomenon in which prior
exposure to specific language forms or meanings influences a speaker's
subsequent language comprehension or production (McDonough &

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

321

Trofimovich, 2009). Researchers have shown how speakers achieve the
goal of mutual understanding during conversation by converging on
their language at different levels (e.g., phrase structures: Branigan,
Pickering, Pearson, & McLean, 2010; lexical expressions: Brennan &
Clark, 1996; phonetic realizations of words: Pardo, 2006). In L2 research,
the concept of alignment within the cognitive processing perspective
is still new, and researchers have only recently begun to examine it
in light of priming mechanisms, primarily within the IAM framework
(e.g., Trofimovich et al., 2014; Trofimovich et al., 2013).
Within SLA research literature, three types of priming have been defined:
structural priming, auditory priming, and lexical priming. Of these different
priming types, auditory priming has recently been suggested to have the
potential to help promote the learning of patterns of word stress in English
(see Trofimovich et al., 2014) and is of a particular interest to this study.
Auditory priming refers to the tendency for people to process a spoken
word or word combination more quickly and more accurately when they
have had previous exposure to that word or word combination in recent
speech (e.g., Trofimovich & Gatbonton, 2006). The focus of the current
study is to determine the possible relevance of auditory priming to the
learning and teaching of lexical stress (i.e., word-level stress) during collaborative communicative tasks.
In terms of task implementation factors, previous research has introduced various characteristics of task repetition: exact task repetition
(the exact tasks are repeated; henceforth task repetition), procedural
repetition (procedure of tasks is repeated with different content), and
content repetition (the content of tasks is repeated with different procedures; Kim & Tracy-Ventura, 2013; Patanasorn, 2010). Previous studies
found that different types of task repetition are associated with different
aspects of L2 development. Thus, the current study's purpose is to examine the role of different characteristics of task repetition on learning
English word-stress patterns through auditory priming tasks.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Acquisition of L2 Lexical Stress Patterns
Lexical stress is one of the prosodic elements that have been found
to have a greater impact on intelligibility compared to other factors
such as segmental features (phonemes) or accentedness (AndersonHsieh, Johnson, & Koehler, 1992). Lexical stress information plays a
key role in recognizing and distinguishing words as it is part of a word's
underlying identity (e.g., PREsent vs. preSENT) (Ashby & Clifton, 2005).
Past research has demonstrated that accurate production of lexical
stress enhances the intelligibility of nonnative speech (Field, 2005).

322

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

For example, Trofimovich and Isaacs (2012) found that inaccurate wordstress assignment has a more negative impact on intelligibility than
grammatical errors. However, the perception and production of lexical
stress patterns have been shown to be difficult for L2 learners (e.g., Field,
2005; Munro & Derwing, 1995).
Of a variety of sources of such difficulties, researchers have suggested
that the transfer of first language (L1) features may be a primary source
of difficulty in acquiring L2 lexical stress (e.g., Erdmann, 1973; Lord, 2001).
For example, in their investigation of the influence of the L1 on the production of L2 Dutch lexical stress, Caspers and Kpiska (2011) found
that learners with varying L1 backgrounds (French, Mandarin Chinese,
Polish, and Hungarian) not only assign stress to L2 words based on their
L1 but also tend to overgeneralize L1 rules of lexical stress to the L2
system. Their findings support Erdmann's (1973) claim that learners do
not produce L2 stress patterns on a random basis but create a new
system. Although the rules of the new system seem to reflect applications
of the L1 system and not approximations of the L2 rules to be acquired,
they do tend to be systematic and patterned. Altmann (2006) also presented interesting findings about learners' production of L2 English stress
and the influence of the L1. The results from her study showed that native
speakers of Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, whose L1s lack anything like
the English word-stress system, performed much less accurately in the
production of English word stress when compared to participants who
were native speakers of Spanish, Turkish, and Arabic.
In sum, these studies have indicated that L1 acoustic characteristics
may interfere with one's ability to produce an L2 at the suprasegmental
level and accordingly, pose difficulty for acquiring L2 suprasegmental
features such as lexical stress patterns. However, little attention has been
given to different ways of assisting learners whose L1 has a typologically
distinct prosodic system from the target language to develop L2 stress
patterns in instructional contexts. Therefore, the current study targeted
Korean English language learners because lexical stress patterns are not
a feature of Korean phonology.

Auditory Priming and Pronunciation Development
To date, most priming studies have focused on the development of
morphosyntax using structural priming tasks (e.g., dative construction,
McDonough, 2006; wh-question formation, McDonough & Kim, 2009; and
active/passive constructions, Kim & McDonough, 2008). These studies
document benefits of using priming techniques in teaching grammatical
forms within instructional contexts. Compared to structural priming techniques, auditory priming has received little attention in L2 research,

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

323

and only a handful of studies have investigated the role of auditory
priming in teaching pronunciation, particularly in connection with a focus
on English patterns of lexical stress.
As increased emphasis is given to speech intelligibility enhancement
for L2 pronunciation learning (e.g., Grant, 2014), a few researchers
have begun to examine the utility of collaborative priming activities
for L2 pronunciation instruction (Trofimovich et al., 2014; Trofimovich
et al., 2013). For instance, Trofimovich and colleagues (2013) examined
the effectiveness of priming activities designed to provide learners with
targetlike L2 models at two linguistic levels: grammar and pronunciation. They found that communicative tasks successfully promoted both
auditory and structural priming during peer interaction. Moreover,
learners were more likely to produce targetlike linguistic features when
they were exposed to L2 models with multiple priming targets such as
pronunciation and grammar (i.e., integrated priming). In Trofimovich
and colleagues (2014), the researchers were particularly interested in
the role of interactive alignment in the teaching of L2 pronunciation in
university-level English as a second language (ESL) classroom settings.
They discovered that learners tended to produce target-stress patterns
more accurately after hearing an interlocutor's accurate primes but not
if the interlocutor had produced an inaccurate pattern. In addition to
the beneficial role of interactive alignment, Trofimovich and colleagues
(2014) demonstrated that collaborative tasks flooded with target pronunciation patterns may provide learners with more optimal practice
opportunities.
Both Trofimovich and colleagues (2013) and Trofimovich and colleagues
(2014) provide evidence to support application of interactive alignment
activities in language teaching, including the teaching of pronunciation.
They operationalized the occurrence of auditory priming as an instance,
in which a learner produced a prompt word with an accurate stress
pattern after hearing the interlocutor's accurate production of the same
stress pattern (i.e., prime). The studies suggest that communicative
priming activities may hold great promise for teaching word stress of
multisyllabic words in ESL and English as a foreign language (EFL) classrooms. They further illustrate that teachers can design and use pedagogic
priming tasks to provide learners with opportunities to proceduralize
(e.g., automatize) information about the L2 phonological system recently
featured during classroom instruction (DeKeyser, 2007). However, as
Trofimovich and colleagues (2014) indicated, their study did not provide a firm link between auditory priming effects and L2 pronunciation
development. A complication was that they had not applied a pretestposttest and control-experimental group design to track the impact of
priming on learning target-stress patterns. To date, a large body of SLA
research has attested to the sustained link between interaction and
the development of lexis and grammar; however, far less research has

324

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

explored whether interaction promotes development of L2 phonology
(Mackey, Abbuhl, & Gass, 2012). Moreover, although past L2 structural
priming research demonstrates that priming materials designed to prompt
learners to produce particular structures with a wider variety of lexical
verbs (i.e., high type frequency) are likely to facilitate learners' subsequent production of target grammatical structures (e.g., wh-question
with inversion; McDonough & Kim, 2009), we do not know if something
comparable would hold true for auditory priming effects. Thus, we
examined the extent to which repeating the same primes and prompts
impacts auditory priming effects by manipulating the task repetition
conditions.

The Role of Task Repetition in Task-Based Instruction
The benefits of tasks in language learning have been supported by
numerous SLA studies (e.g., Samuda & Bygate, 2008), and researchers
have investigated various factors that positively impact task-based
language learning. Among such task design and implementation factors,
we found task repetition to be of particular interest because of its relevance to the frequency of lexical items in primes and prompts during
priming tasks (i.e., different types of words that learners are exposed
to during priming tasks). Previous research has demonstrated that the
lexical items provided in the primes and prompts targeted in priming
tasks may affect learners' immediate and subsequent production of the
target structures differently. More specifically, researchers have shown
that producing the target structure with diverse lexical items during
priming tasks had a positive effect on L2 learners' subsequent production (McDonough & Kim, 2009). Furthermore, based on the findings of
previous research on task repetition, it is expected that learners' task
performance might be affected by repeating different aspects of tasks
(e.g., content, procedure).
Bygate (1996, 2001) explains potential psycholinguistic benefits of
task repetition using Levelt's (1989) speech production model. Bygate
(2001) claims that when carrying out oral tasks, learners are primarily
concerned with content generation; however, once learners are familiar
with the message content (i.e., after they have already completed the
task), they can shift the focus of their attention away from the content
being featured to the selection and monitoring of appropriate language
forms. As a result, he hypothesized that task repetition could facilitate
the quality of oral production. In addition to repetition of the same task,
Bygate discusses the potential benefits of repeating only the procedure
of tasks (i.e., same task types). He argues that this kind of task familiarity
can also impact the amount of attentional resources available during

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

325

formulation and articulation because familiarity with a specific task type
or discourse type is thought to be stored in long-term memory.
To date, several studies have tested these claims by investigating
the effect of different aspects of task repetition (i.e., procedure and
content) on three main dimensions of L2 oral performance: complexity,
accuracy, and fluency as well as specific task-induced linguistic forms
(e.g., simple past) (Kim & Tracy-Ventura, 2013; Patanasorn, 2010). Three
possible task repetition combinations exist in the literature: repeating the
same content and procedure, repeating the same content with different
procedures, and repeating the same procedure with different content.
Studies that have implemented the same tasks illustrate that fluency,
accuracy, and complexity improve when learners repeat the same exact
task (e.g., Ahmadian & Tavakoli, 2011; Bygate, 1996). Another line of task
repetition research has focused on repetition of the same task procedure
but with different content. Lynch and Maclean (2000) found that immediate
repetition of task procedures has positive effects on both accuracy and
fluency of oral production. Bygate (2001) included two treatment groups
and a control (N = 48) in his study of L2 English. The treatment groups completed different task types (either narratives or interviews), and each group
repeated both the same exact task and the same task procedure with
different content. A total of 12 tasks were completed by both treatment
groups, some of which were repeated twice and others only once. The last
four tasks were treated as posttests: Learners repeated the same two tasks
that they previously completed on the first day, and 10 weeks later carried
out two new tasks of the same task type. The findings indicated that repetition of the same exact task has positive effects on fluency and complexity
but not on accuracy. Additionally, results of this study suggest that practicing the same task type did not impact participants' later performance
on new versions of the same task type.
As research began to demonstrate the role of different characteristics
of task repetition in improving learners' task performance, Patanasorn
(2010) examined the effects of procedural, content, and task repetition
using collaborative treatment tasks among 92 Thai EFL learners. Procedural repetition was operationalized as carrying out tasks with identical
procedures but different content, whereas content repetition was operationalized as carrying out tasks with identical content but different procedures. Finally, task repetition was operationalized as carrying out the
exact same tasks each time. Findings indicated that different characteristics of task repetition result in different learning outcomes, showing
that only the procedural repetition group developed accurate use of the
targeted grammatical feature, whereas the content repetition group
improved regarding global fluency.
In a recent study, Kim (2013) investigated Korean EFL learners' attention to form during task performance as they repeated three collaborative tasks in two conditions: task repetition and procedural repetition.

326

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

The results showed that the procedural repetition group produced significantly more language related episodes (LREs) than the task repetition
group, possibly because the task repetition group was already familiar
with the content and the procedure and did not need to negotiate meaning
as often as when the content changed. In a follow-up study, Kim and
Tracy-Ventura (2013) found that both task repetition and procedural repetition were beneficial for accurate production of a task-induced linguistic
feature, whereas only procedural repetition enhanced syntactic complexity
development. By contrast, neither type of task repetition significantly
promoted faster rate of speech.
In sum, as described thus far, empirical evidence from the L2 task
repetition literature demonstrates that different characteristics of task
repetition are associated with different aspects of L2 development.
However, the role of repeating different aspects of tasks on the learning
of target-stress patterns through collaborative priming tasks has yet to
be examined. Moreover, although past L2 structural priming research
demonstrates that priming materials designed to prompt learners to
produce particular structures with a wider variety of lexical verbs
(i.e., high type frequency) are likely to facilitate learners' subsequent
production of target grammatical structures (e.g., wh-question with
inversion; McDonough & Kim, 2009), we do not know if something
comparable would hold true for auditory priming effects.
As an extension of Trofimovich and colleagues' (2014) study, the current research aims to address the previously mentioned research gaps by
employing a pretest, immediate posttest, and delayed posttest research
design to examine whether priming of word-stress patterns during collaborative tasks facilitates L2 phonological development. Our study also
investigates how differences in the operationalization of task repetition
affect learners' development in the production of particular word-stress
patterns before and after two different task repetition treatments: (a) task
repetition (same content, same procedure) and (b) procedural repetition
(different content, same procedure). These contrastive implementations
of task repetition enabled us to examine how repeating the same content
and vocabulary words would impact learners' subsequent production of
target-stress patterns. The study was guided by the following research
questions:
1.Are there any significant differences between primed and unprimed production
of target-stress patterns? If so, how do different characteristics of task repetition
(task repetition vs. procedural repetition) affect the amount of primed production of the target-stress patterns during collaborative priming tasks?
2.Do auditory priming tasks facilitate learners' development of English wordstress patterns? If so, how do different characteristics of task repetition (task
repetition vs. procedural repetition) impact learners' development of English
word-stress patterns through collaborative priming tasks?

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

327

METHOD
Participants
Participants were 57 Korean high school students (15 males and 42 females)
who were enrolled in the same private co-ed school in South Korea.
Their ages ranged from 16 to 18 years, with a mean age of 16.56 years
(SD = 0.60). All participants had taken at least four years of required
English classes, and the average amount of previous English instruction
was 7.49 years (SD = 0.63). Each participant was randomly assigned to
one of three groups: control (N = 18), auditory priming with task repetition
(N = 22), and auditory priming with procedural repetition only (N = 17).
The students participated in the current study on a voluntary basis
during their summer vacation in 2014.

Target Word-Stress Patterns
Word stress was targeted in the communicative tasks because missing or
misplaced stress contributes to listeners' perceptions of accentedness
(i.e., the degree to which the quality of a nonnative English speaker's
pronunciation is different from the quality of pronunciation anticipated
by a proficient English language listener; Derwing, 2010) and comprehensibility (i.e., perception of the degree of difficulty a listener encounters
when trying to understand an utterance; Field, 2005) and is challenging
for L2 speakers to acquire (Murphy, 2004). In particular, as addressed in
the preceding section, Korean speakers have often been identified as
those who struggle with acquiring English word-stress patterns due to a
lack of a comparable prosodic feature in Korean. In Korean, lexical stress
is not a significant pronunciation feature because stress does not change
meaning. A speaker may use stress for emphasizing or attracting listeners'
attention, but, without such intention, a speaker puts stress evenly across
all syllables in a word or on all words in a phrase (Sohn, 1999). Korean
is also known as a syllable-based language, in which the syllables have
approximately the same loudness (intensity), length, and pitch, as opposed
to a stress-based language like English with dynamic patterns of full vowel
and reduced vowel productions. Furthermore, tone patterns constitute the
basic building block of Korean prosody, whereas stress accent is a defining
characteristic of English prosody. And, whereas tone patterns are associated with an intonational unit (accentual phrase) in Korean, stress accents
are associated with lexical words in English.
The target word-stress patterns featured in this study were three- and
four-syllable words with the primary stress on the second syllable (i.e.,
3-2 [existing] and 4-2 [environment] words, respectively; see Murphy, 2004,

328

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

for further discussion of the numeric system used for stress pattern
identification). In total, 72 target words corresponding to the 3-2 and
4-2 stress patterns were selected from Korea's National English Curriculum
(Ministry of Education, Science & Technology, 2009), which provides a
list of words required to be taught by the end of ninth grade. Also, these
stress patterns are two of the three most frequent patterns in the academic
word list (Coxhead, 2000), accounting together for nearly 28% of all
polysyllabic words in the academic word list (Murphy & Kandil, 2004).

Materials
Priming Tasks. To elicit production of the target words, two communicative information-exchange priming tasks were designed based on
those developed by Trofimovich and colleagues (2014). The words with
the target-stress patterns were embedded into the tasks. The communicative priming tasks required both participants to exchange information with each other to facilitate communicative interaction. Both tasks
featured a reading component as participants were required to exchange
information based on reading materials. Because Korean high school
students generally have few opportunities to use their linguistic knowledge for a genuine communicative purpose, these information-exchange
tasks were designed to encourage the participants to practice their
integrated (i.e., reading and speaking) language skills while participating
in speaking activities with the researcher.
Each task consisted of 18 short reading passages around eight themes
(e.g., Picasso's Guernica, the development of aspirin). These themes
were selected from Mackey and Savage's (2011) Read This! Level 2 and
Savage's (2010) Read This! Level 3. To participate in the task, the researcher
had 18 belief statements and the learners were provided with 36 note
cards with reading passages. Two note cards were prepared for each
activity unit to set up a prime and no-prime conditions, which would
enable us to determine whether priming (manifested as alignment)
occurs after a learner hears the researcher's correct production of the
target-stress pattern. One of the note cards contained a prompt word that
the learners were asked to produce after hearing the researcher's speech
including a prime (i.e., a prime condition), whereas they were asked to
produce the other prompt word provided on the second note card without any model presented in the preceding utterance of the researcher
(i.e., a no-prime condition). Table 1 shows an example of one belief statement with two note cards from the collaborative priming task (i.e., one
activity unit). The first card had four to five sentences of supplementary
information along with a sentence fragment that embedded a prompt
word with the target-stress pattern (either 3-2 or 4-2; see #2 in Table 1).

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

329

Table 1. Sample activity material
Printed Script
#1: L-P sees (and reads): In ancient
times, people found that some
animals could talk with humans.
* A British scientist has recently
argued an interesting fact about
dolphins.
* According to him, the dolphin is
very smart because of its brain.
* The dolphin's brain is split into
four lobes.
* And he established that the
fourth lobe of the brain actually
hosts all of the senses.
#5: L-P sees (and reads):
He argues that the dolphin is
very intelligent because of its
brain_________________.
#8: L-P sees (and reads):
Q: (he/establish)

Researcher (R) and
Learner-Participant (L-P) say:
#2: R presents the prime by saying:
"Recently, people found animals
that can communicate with humans."
#3: L-P is expected to respond by
saying "False" based on what was
read (in #1) and heard in the spoken
prompt (#2). #4: Researcher then
asks: "What does a British scientist
argue about dolphins?"
#6: L-P is expected to respond based
upon the information provided while
using the targeted word intelligent
(e.g., "He argues that the dolphin is
very intelligent because of its brain
that is split into four lobes.")
--(A no-prime condition begins here)--
#7: R gives feedback to L-P's response
(e.g., "Great. Yes, the scientist argues
dolphins are smart because of their
brain structure.") and encourages L-P
to ask a question (e.g., "Okay, then,
it's your turn to ask me a question.")
#9: L-P is expected to ask using the given
words he and establish (e.g., "What did
he establish about the dolphin's brain
structure?")
#10: R answers L-P's question
(e.g., "He found that the fourth lobe
of the brain hosts all of the senses.")

Note. Words with target-stress patterns are italicized. The numbers correspond to the order of utterance
during collaborative auditory priming task.

For each reading passage, when the researcher read a belief statement--
which contains a word with the target-stress pattern (e.g., communicate;
#2)--to the learner, the participant answered whether the statement is
true or false referring to the information in the reading passages (#3).
Then, the researcher would ask a follow-up question (#4). The learner
could answer this follow-up question by completing the given sentence
fragment, which contains a prompt word (e.g., intelligent; #5 and #6).
In the second phase of the activity, the learner's answer was followed by
the researcher's comment, which did not contain a prime (#7; no-prime
condition begins) and the researcher encouraged the learner to ask a

330

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

question pertaining to the topic. Finally, the learner asked a question
using a subject and a verb (a prompt word; e.g., establish in #8) provided
on the second note card and the researcher answered the question (#10).
A total of 18 activity units were included in each session of the task. Each
unit contained one prime and its corresponding prompt with either of
the two target-stress patterns (i.e., 3-2 or 4-2) in the prime condition and
only a prompt without a prime presented by the researcher in the no-prime
condition. The learners did not receive any explicit information about
word-stress patterns or what the task would be testing.
To examine the impact of vocabulary type frequency on auditory
priming effects, the number of target words was manipulated for the two
experimental groups. Previous studies have shown that priming materials
with lexical diversity promoted subsequent production of target linguistic features (McDonough & Kim, 2009). In our study, the task repetition
group repeated the same task twice, whereas the procedural repetition
group performed a task with the same procedure but with different content on the second day. Accordingly, the procedural repetition group
encountered twice as many prime words containing the target-stress
patterns as those in the task repetition group.
Testing Materials. To measure learners' development of accurate production of target-stress patterns, three versions of a sentence-read-aloud
task (SRAT) were designed. To prevent learners from receiving any additional input, the SRAT was conducted individually. Each version of the
test included 25 sentences, each of which contained one to as many as
five target words (both prime and prompt words) as shown in the following
examples:
Sample Item 1: They considered (3-2) stability (4-2) to be especially (4-2)
important (3-2).
Sample Item 2: Try pronouncing (3-2) the word precisely (3-2).

A total of 72 words (39 with the 3-2 pattern and 33 with the 4-2 pattern)
were placed in the 25 sentences. Learners were asked to read each sentence clearly without looking up any sources. Each version of the tests
served as either the pretest, posttest, or delayed posttest. The order of
the three versions of the test was counterbalanced across participants to
minimize potential test effects.
PROCEDURES
The priming and measurement tasks were administered over a 4-week
period. The researcher met with each student five times; each meeting
took approximately 30 to 40 minutes. As shown in Figure 1, the pretest

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

331

Figure 1. Procedure of the study.
was carried out during the first week, and the two priming tasks and immediate posttest were completed during the second week. The two priming
sessions were offered to each student on two consecutive days, and the
immediate posttest was administered one day after the second priming
task. Each learner performed the delayed posttest 2 weeks after the posttest. During the priming task, the researcher met each participant individually in a laboratory setting. Whereas the task repetition group repeated
the first task two times, the procedural repetition group repeated the same
task procedure (exchanging information with the researcher) but with
different content that included a different set of target words each time.
The control group completed the pretest and the two posttests only.
The interactions between the researcher and each student-participant
as well as the participants' performances on the SRAT were recorded
using a digital audio recorder.

Analysis of Stress Patterns
To create the coding scheme for the current data, all three co-authors
met and listened to 10% of the entire data. Through multiple discussions, we decided to follow the criteria established in previous research
(Trofimovich et al., 2014; Trofimovich et al., 2013), which auditorily
determines stress placement based on three physical attributes or correlates of stress in English: vowel length (duration), vowel intensity
(loudness), and pitch height. The most prominent syllable was determined by one or more of these attributes. For accurate identification
and verification of word stress produced by learners, we used Praat
(Boersma & Weenink, 2015), a free software package for speech analysis
that visually displays components of word stress. We also employed the
coding scheme used in Trofimovich and colleagues (2014) as well as in

332

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

previous corpus-based priming research (Collentine & Collentine, 2013)
to determine the occurrence of priming in the prime and no-prime conditions. Two counts--learner's accurate production of the target-stress pattern and learner's inaccurate production of the target-stress pattern--were
generated under each of (a) the prime condition where the researcher
accurately produces the target-stress pattern and (b) the no-prime condition where no prime word is presented to a learner.
Although past studies have analyzed prompt words produced by students in terms of correct and incorrect word stress, we found that inaccurate stress was multidimensional and could be further analyzed into
many different categories based on several sources of incorrectness.
Thus, we identified three patterns of inaccurate stress (i.e., misplaced
stress, multiple prominent stresses, and absence of prominent stress) in
addition to correct stress as described in Table 2.
One point was assigned to a word produced with an accurate stress
pattern, whereas production of a word with any of the three inaccurate
stress patterns was given zero point. The best possible score was 72 for
each version of the production test (SRAT). After devising the coding
scheme, the first researcher coded all the transcripts, and the second
and the third researchers coded a randomly selected sample of 15% of
the entire data independently to ensure interrater reliability. Cohen's
kappa was .87, and alpha was set at .05.

Statistical Analyses
To answer the first research question, a two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was carried out to see (a) whether learners produced targetlike
L2 stress patterns more frequently after hearing a model (i.e., in the prime
condition) as compared to in the no-prime condition and (b) whether there
was any significant difference between the task repetition and procedural
repetition groups in the amount of primed production of the targetstress patterns. Group (task repetition vs. procedural repetition) was
included as a between-subject variable and the prime condition (prime vs.
no-prime) as a within-subject variable. To avoid Type I error due to multiple
Table 2. Examples of learner production of lexical stress
Categories
Accurate
Misplaced stress
Multiple prominent stresses
No prominent stress

Learner Production

Stress Pattern

conSIstent [knsistnt]
PREdicting [pridkt]
exCLUSIve [ksklusiv]
equipment [kwpmnt]

3-2
3-1
Both 3-2 and 3-3
3-O

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

333

comparisons on a single dataset, we adjusted the significance level to
0.0125, and considered values of p  0.01 to be significant. For the second
research question, a two-way mixed ANOVA was conducted to explore the
developmental trend of the target-stress patterns across the three production tests. Learner performance in the SRAT served as the dependent variable, whereas time (pretest, immediate posttest, and delayed posttest) was
a within-subject variable and the task repetition condition (task repetition,
procedural repetition, and control) was a between-subject variable.
RESULTS
Before answering the two research questions, the three participant
groups' knowledge of the target word pronunciation was compared to
ensure that the three groups did not differ from one another. In terms of
the learners' performance in the pretest (i.e., SRAT), the scores of all
three groups were similar: a mean score of 40.95 for the task repetition
group, 39.76 for the procedural repetition group, and 40.44 for the control group (see Table 4). A one-way ANOVA did not show any significant
between-group differences, indicating that all three groups began the
experiment on an equal footing: F(2, 54) = 0.040, p = .450.
Following Trofimovich and colleagues (2014), successful priming effects
refer to a learner's accurate production of the target-stress pattern
following the researcher's production of the same stress pattern (i.e.,
prime). For the first research question, the magnitude of the priming
effect was operationalized by comparing the occurrence of primed
production of targetlike stress patterns and unprimed production of targetlike stress patterns. Table 3 displays descriptive statistics for the
occurrence of priming during the two treatment sessions in both conditions. Because the control group did not perform any priming tasks,
priming data is not available for the control group.
Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the occurrence of priming
Task Repetition
(N = 22)
Condition
Primed Production
Unprimed Production

Procedural
Repetition
(N = 17)

Session

M (%)

SD (%)

M (%)

SD (%)

Session 1
Session 2
Total
Session 1
Session 2
Total

55.28
76.28
65.78
27.27
20.45
22.72

15.83
9.44
11.44
25.48
31.47
23.31

63.39
74.44
70.92
32.35
29.51
28.43

18.33
17.78
16.94
24.63
28.60
19.33

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

334

A two-way ANOVA was conducted after checking the assumptions for
using parametric tests. First, the results demonstrate that the main effect
for the prime condition was statistically significant, F(1, 37) = 957.161,
p < .001, p2 = .963, with a significantly higher amount of primed production
of the target-stress patterns in the prime condition than in the no-prime
condition. This finding indicates that the learners could produce the
prompt words more accurately after hearing a prime presented in the preceding utterance compared to when they did not receive any model.
Regarding the impact of different characteristics of task repetition on the
auditory priming effects, there was no statistically significant difference
between the task repetition and procedural repetition groups in the amount
of primed production of the target-stress patterns: F(1, 37) = 1.370, p = .249.
Accordingly, the interaction between the two factors was not significant:
F(1, 37) = 1.019, p = .319. These results seem to suggest that different characteristics of task repetition did not affect the amount of primed production of the target-stress patterns in both prime and no-prime conditions.
The second research question examined whether collaborative auditory
priming tasks are beneficial for promoting development of L2 learners' pronunciation, particularly word-stress patterns. Table 4 shows descriptive
statistics for the development of accurate production of the target-stress
patterns. The results demonstrate that accuracy scores of both the task
repetition and the procedural repetition groups increased between the pretest and immediate posttest and between the pretest and delayed posttest,
whereas no noticeable change was observed for the control group.
To test whether these results were statistically significant, a two-way
mixed ANOVA was conducted with time (pretest, immediate posttest,
and delayed posttest) as a within-subject variable, task repetition condition (task repetition, procedural repetition, and control) as a betweensubject variable, and learner performance in the SRAT as the dependent
variable. The mixed ANOVA revealed a statistically significant main effect
for time, F(2, 54) = 53.707, p < .001, p2 = .499; for group, F(2, 54) = 3.309,
p = .011, p2 = .109; and for the interaction between time and group,
F(2, 54) = 16.537, p < .001, p2 = .380.
Table 4. Descriptive statistics for accuracy development
Task Repetition
(N = 22)
Test
Pretest
Immediate Posttest
Delayed Posttest

Procedural
Repetition
(N = 17)

Control
(N = 18)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

40.95
54.18
52.27

13.45
11.48
11.97

39.76
53.82
49.59

11.65
11.14
11.61

40.44
40.11
38.44

13.70
14.88
16.00

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

335

The group differences indicate that both task repetition and procedural repetition groups produced significantly more accurate stress
patterns than the control group, F(1, 38) = 5.245, p = .001, p2 = .121, and
F(1, 33) = 3.739, p = .005, p2 = .102, respectively. Furthermore, post hoc
Bonferroni tests found no significant difference between the task repetition group and the procedural repetition group (p > .0125), but statistically significant differences were observed between the control group
and the experimental groups (p < .0125 for both comparisons). The significant Time x Group interaction effects seem to be attributed to the fact
that, whereas there was no difference in the pretest, F(2, 54) = 0.040,
p = .450, a significant difference was found among the three groups in
the immediate posttest, F(2, 54) = 7.561, p = .007, p2 = .781, and delayed
posttest, F(2, 54) = 6.085, p < .001, p2 = .225.
To delve into the developmental patterns of the experimental groups,
post hoc pairwise comparisons were also conducted for each group
using a Bonferroni correction, with the level of statistical significance
taken as p < .0125. Results revealed that the task repetition group significantly improved between the pretest and immediate posttest (p < .001,
d = 1.058), and the development was retained in the delayed posttest
(p = .109). In terms of short- and long-term learning effects, whereas
procedural repetition resulted in significant improvement between the
pretest and the immediate posttest (p < .001, d = 1.233), this group's score
decreased significantly between the immediate posttest and the delayed
posttest (p = .001, d = .372). Despite such score change, the procedural
repetition group still produced the target-stress patterns significantly
more accurately in the delayed posttest than in the pretest.
To understand the test results more clearly, we conducted three sets of
follow-up analyses. First, we examined whether treatment of the words
(i.e., prime vs. prompt) impacted learners' performance in the immediate
and delayed production tests. Specifically, we used paired t tests to investigate whether there was any significant difference in learners' production of the words that they heard as primes and those that they produced
during the priming activities. This is an important issue because priming
involves both listening to primes and producing targets. Yet, to date,
there has been little, if any, exploration of the extent to which each mechanism contributes to L2 learning through collaborative priming tasks. For
this analysis, proportion scores were calculated and reported because
the number of target words provided to each experimental group differed
due to different repetition conditions. Results revealed that for both task
repetition and procedural repetition groups, learners performed significantly better on the words provided in the primes than those given as
prompts in the immediate and delayed posttests (see Table 5).
Our second follow-up analysis focused on whether learners' performance differed depending on the number of syllables of a target word.
We report proportion scores in parentheses in addition to raw numbers

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

336

Table 5. Production of prime and prompt words
Task Repetition

Procedural Repetition

Test

M (%)

Immediate Posttest Prime
Prompt
Delayed Posttest Prime
Prompt

81.57 3.916 .001 0.636 78.10 2.869 .011 0.469
70.96
71.90
80.30 5.387 < .001 0.894 71.57 4.325 .001 0.743
66.41
64.22

t

p

d

M (%)

t

p

d

for this analysis due to the imbalanced number of 3-2 and 4-2 words in
the production tests. As shown in Table 6, learners of both experimental
groups tended to produce 3-2 stress patterns more accurately than 4-2
patterns in a consistent manner over time.
Finally, we further analyzed error types with English stress patterns
on production tests to understand whether their error types changed
as a result of priming tasks in addition to the production of accurate
English stress patterns. As illustrated in Table 7, erroneous stress patterns produced by the Korean learners fell into three categories: misplaced stress, multiple stresses, and no primary stress (see "Analysis of
Stress Patterns" section). Of the three error types, the most frequent across
all three groups was misplaced stress assignment. Multiple stresses and no
primary stress were found to occur to a similar extent. Regarding the
effects of priming tasks, both task repetition and procedural repetition
groups exhibited a marked decrease in the frequency of overall erroneous
production between the pretest and the immediate posttest and a slight
increase between the immediate posttest and the delayed posttest,
whereas the control group showed little change over time.
An interesting learning trend was found in the learners' performance
throughout the study's procedure overall. For example, as shown in
Example (1), a learner appeared to go through a certain learning path until
she attained correct stress assignment of a target word intelligent (4-2) after
being exposed to the target-stress pattern in the researcher's primes
Table 6. Accurate production of the target-stress patterns
Pretest
Condition
Task Repetition

Immediate Posttest Delayed Posttest

3-2
4-2
3-2
(k = 19) (k = 17) (k = 19)

4-2
3-2
4-2
(k = 17) (k = 19) (k = 17)

11.97
9.75
15.50
11.84
14.92
11.41
(63.00%) (52.38%) (81.60%) (69.63%) (78.50%) (67.13%)
Procedural Repetition 10.63
6.70
15.25
10.81
14.10
10.78
(55.70%) (41.16%) (80.24%) (63.56%) (74.22%) (63.44%)

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

337

Table 7. Types and percentages of erroneous production of target
stress by group
Pretest
Group
TR
PR
C

Immediate Posttest

Delayed Posttest

MP

MT

NO

MP

MT

NO

MP

MT

NO

14.50
15.76
14.56

8.45
6.88
8.61

8.54
9.58
8.39

10.14
10.65
14.50

5.00
3.82
8.89

4.27
3.71
8.50

10.86
11.76
14.72

5.81
4.71
9.56

5.04
5.94
9.28

Note. TR = Task repetition; PR = Procedural repetition; C = Control; MP = Misplaced stress; MT = Multiple
stresses; NO = No primary stress.

(i.e., the prime condition) during the two priming sessions, whereas learning
did not occur for the word, establish (3-2), in the no-prime condition:
Example (1)
1.Pretest (no primary stress): He is intelligent [ntlnt] and responsible
for his job.
2.Priming task 1 (multiple stresses and misplaced stress in the prime
and no-prime condition, respectively)
R: Recently, people found animals that can communicate [kmjunket]
with humans.
S: (referring to the reading materials) False.
R: What does a British scientist argue about dolphins?
S: (referring to the reading materials) He argues that dolphins are
very intelligent [nt lint] because of their brains that are split into
four areas.
R: Great. Yes, the scientist argues dolphins are smart because of
their brain structure.
R: Okay, then it's your turn to ask me a question.
S: (using a subject [he] and verb establish) What did he establish
[stbli] about the dolphin's brain structure?
R: He found that the fourth lobe of their brain hosts all the senses.
3.Priming task 2 (accurate stress in the prime condition only)
R: Recently, people found animals that can communicate [kmjunket]
with humans.
S: (referring to the reading materials) False.
R: What does a British scientist argue about dolphins?
S: (referring to the reading materials) He argues that dolphins are
very intelligent [nt lnt] because of their brains that are split into
four areas.
R: Right, he argues dolphins are very smart because of their brain
structure.
R: Okay, then it's your turn to ask me a question.
S: (using a subject [he] and verb establish) What did he establish
[stbli] about the dolphin's brain structure?
R: He found that the fourth lobe of their brain hosts all the senses.

338

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

4.Immediate posttest (accurate stress): Being intelligent [nt lnt]
and creative, he will contribute to his team's adventure.
5.
Delayed posttest (accurate stress): He is enormously intelligent
[nt lnt] but cannot communicate it.

This example seems to demonstrate that a learner ultimately
acquired a certain stress pattern of the target language by attempting to align her language with the interlocutor's as a function of auditory priming, particularly in the prime condition. Initially she did not
assign stress to the target word perhaps due to L1 interference (to
be discussed in detail in the "Discussion" section). However, through
interactive alignment, she became aware of the need to place stress
on the word in the first session of the priming task and eventually
learned the correct stress pattern in the second session. It may be
premature to suggest that such awareness occurred during interaction and led to learning but that seems plausible from our qualitative
analysis of the data. Future research is warranted to further investigate
this issue.
To summarize, for the first research question, the learners produced an accurate stress pattern more frequently after they heard the
same stress pattern in the researcher's speech as compared to when
they were asked to produce a prompt word without the presentation of
a prime in the preceding utterance. Moreover, different characteristics
of task repetition did not appear to impact the quantity of primed
production of the target-stress patterns, showing similar effects for
enhancing auditory priming effects. For the second research question, which concerned the benefits of collaborative priming tasks for
promoting L2 pronunciation development (i.e., word-stress patterns),
both characteristics of task repetition were revealed to facilitate L2
learners' development of pronunciation; however, repeating the exact same task was more effective in sustaining learning of word-stress
patterns over time (in contrast to repeating the same procedure with
the incorporation of different content).
DISCUSSION
The purpose of the study was to determine the extent to which auditory
priming tasks would be successful in providing learning opportunities,
which in turn may lead to learners' development of target-stress patterns.
The study also examined whether differences in the operationalization
of task repetition impact learners' development of particular wordstress patterns before and after two different task repetition treatments:
(a) task repetition (same content, same procedure) and (b) procedural repetition (different content, same procedure).

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

339

Regarding interactive alignment, the study's findings are in line with
Trofimovich and colleagues (2014) who found that collaborative priming
tasks including words with target-stress patterns not only elicited successful alignment of word stress between L2 speakers but also provided
ample opportunities for practice. The results showed that participants
in the two experimental groups produced a high proportion of accurate
stress patterns in the prime condition throughout the two priming
sessions (i.e., 65.78% for the task repetition group and 70.92% for the
procedural repetition group). On the contrary, the learners produced
accurate stress patterns to a much lesser degree in the no-prime condition (i.e., 22.72% for the task repetition group and 28.43% for the
procedural repetition group). These findings may demonstrate that
the learners were more likely to align with the researcher's L2 pronunciation patterns after hearing a prime as a function of auditory priming
than when the target-stress pattern was not presented in the researcher's
preceding utterance. However, the study did not find any significant
effect of different characteristics of task repetition (task repetition vs.
procedural repetition) on the amount of primed production of the targetstress patterns in both prime and no-prime conditions.
As a follow-up study of Trofimovich and colleagues (2014), the findings
of the current study provide evidence for the learning value of interactionbased alignment in pronunciation. By adopting the pretest-posttest, control group design, this study revealed the positive impact of alignment
on L2 pronunciation development. Although it may be premature to
suggest that the findings of this lab-based study could be extended to
L2 classrooms or naturalistic settings of even more authentic L2 use,
we speculate that collaborative, communicative tasks targeting linguistic alignment (e.g., collaborative priming tasks) may hold considerable
promise as an important component of pronunciation instruction as
also suggested by Trofimovich and colleagues (2014).
The current findings are also consistent with Kim (2013) in terms of
the equal benefits of the two different task repetition types for learning
task-induced target features. That is, repeating the same procedure with
or without the same content, in combination with interaction, may provide L2 learners with valuable opportunities to enhance the intelligibility of their speech on the dimension of lexical stress. Furthermore,
the current study extends the grammar-focused findings of Kim to a
phonological feature (i.e., lexical stress). In terms of delayed learning
effects, a similar picture was found when we probed the sustainability
of learning in the two repetition conditions. A noticeable improvement
between the pretest and the posttests was observed in both groups, and
both groups maintained their performance until the delayed posttest.
However, although no difference was found between the immediate posttest and delayed posttest for the task repetition group, there was a significant decrease between the two posttests for the procedural repetition

340

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

group, which seems to indicate that the task repetition condition might be
more beneficial for delayed learning effects. This suggests that hearing
and producing the same words containing the target-stress patterns
repeatedly while participating in collaborative meaning-focused tasks
was helpful in developing better control of L2 lexical stress in English.
This also suggests that although grammar learning through collaborative priming tasks was enhanced with more variety of verbs in prompts
(McDonough & Kim, 2009), knowledge of word stress might be more fully
proceduralized and automatized through repeated practice with the same
words (DeKeyser, 2007).
Both researchers (e.g., Field, 2005) and pronunciation instruction specialists (e.g., Celce-Murcia, Brinton, Goodwin, & Griner, 2010; Murphy, 2004)
characterize correct word-stress assignment as an essential contributing
factor for the enhancement of both intelligibility and comprehensibility of
L2 speech (Munro & Derwing, 2015). Despite its significant role in L2 pronunciation, word stress has sometimes been characterized as an unteachable linguistic feature (Jenkins, 2002), and teaching L2 word-stress patterns
has been neglected in L2 classrooms (Lord, 2001). However, the current
findings suggest that collaborative tasks, which include words with targetstress patterns, may have the potential to facilitate L2 learners' more accurate control over target language patterns of word stress.
The findings also suggest that on both posttests, learners produced
accurate stress patterns significantly more with the words provided in
the primes than in the prompt words. This may indicate that, whereas
opportunities for exposure to the target-stress patterns (i.e., primes)
are associated with higher production accuracy on the immediate and
delayed posttests as compared to opportunities to produce target-stress
patterns embedded in prompt words. It is tempting to suggest that
whereas exposure to the target prosodic features may be vital to learning
L2 pronunciation, production opportunities (i.e., prompts) did not
necessarily result in the development of the target-stress patterns in
the present study. However, further investigation is necessary to determine whether the provision of exposure (input) or production (output)
opportunities is a significant determiner of learning.
Moreover, in-depth analyses of the data revealed interesting trends
regarding pronunciation errors. First, previous research has shown that
the number of syllables in the words appeared to be very important for
correct stress assignment (e.g., Fokes & Bond, 1989). In the present
study, L2 learners were found to have fewer problems with correct stress
assignment when words consisted of three syllables, whereas their
accuracy score was lower for four-syllable words. In Fokes and Bond,
four-syllable words were more problematic to L1 Korean speakers with
respect to the acoustic-phonetic correlates of stress (fundamental
frequency, duration, amplitude) than three-syllable words, which were
produced corresponding well to expected native speaker values.

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

341

However, the remarkable improvement in both 3-2 and 4-2 target-stress
patterns exhibited by the present study's two groups of learners between
the pretest and posttest appear to indicate that both stress patterns
were susceptible to positive priming effects. Further, both types of
repeating collaborative priming tasks were beneficial for development
of lexical stress patterns in general, irrespective of the number of syllables contained in the target words.
As to possible sources of the observed stress-related error patterns,
Anderson (1993) and Pennington (1994) speculate that the influence of
learners' L1 in combination with incomplete mastery of the English prosodic system contribute to L2 pronunciation difficulties. According to
Pennington, the phonological distance between the rhythmic patterns
(e.g., word stress) of learners' L1 and the target language impacts processing of rhythmic information. In addition, Erdmann (1973) claimed
that learners develop the intermediate stress system on the basis of
regular patterns, not random guesses, and that the rules of the new
system are elaborations of learners' L1 and not in concordance with
the L2 rules to be mastered. Given that the learners' L1 is Korean,
which has a prosodic system that is typologically distinct from English
(Swan & Smith, 2001), it could be surmised that at least some of the
sources of identified erroneous stress patterns--multiple stresses and
no primary stress in particular--could be attributed to the typological
distinctiveness of the two languages. The learners in the current study
were found to struggle with changing pitch height and/or intensity in
their pronunciation of certain words or to use pitch movement and
intensity on every single syllable or more than two syllables when producing certain words. However, the number of errors associated with
(1) the absence of primary stress, (2) multiple stresses as well as
(3) misplaced stress decreased noticeably after participating in the
study's auditory priming tasks.
IMPLICATIONS
The study's results have several implications for L2 pronunciation
instruction. First, the current research confirmed that collaborative tasks
designed to elicit alignment at a phonological level during interaction
positively impacted EFL adolescent learners' development of the target
word-stress system. The study also illuminates benefits of repeating
collaborative priming tasks in pronunciation development, particularly
when both content and procedure were repeated twice. Given that teachers
often recycle materials and activity types in classroom contexts to provide more language learning opportunities (Kim, 2013), the current findings may be used to support repeated use of the same task and of the
same task type in pronunciation instruction. However, it should be noted

342

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

that such benefits are more likely only when the tasks are implemented
in ways that provide students with ample opportunities to practice targeted linguistic features (e.g., lexical stress) during collaborative oral
activities with a primary focus on meaning (McDonough, Neumann, &
Trofimovich, 2015). It should also be noted that the results of the current
study cannot necessarily be generalized to repeating the exact same tasks
more than twice.
Previous research has suggested that learners would benefit from collaborative tasks designed to elicit alignment with target pronunciation
patterns (Trofimovich et al., 2014) as opposed to convergence on typical pronunciation errors (see Walker, 2010). While carrying out tasks,
learners should be provided with ample tokens of lexical items pronounced with reliable (i.e., targetlike) patterns of word stress, which
in turn will aid their development of perception and production skills
(Trofimovich et al., 2014). Building upon research procedures featured
in the study, teachers may sometimes serve as an activity participant
during collaborative classroom tasks. When structuring learner-learner
interactions, collaborative tasks may be set up so that one member of
each dyad is provided unambiguous visual supports through which patterns of word stress are clearly indicated to support accurate production of target words (e.g., enlarged font size, bolding, and/or underlining
of primary stressed syllables; a diacritic positioned directly above
stressed syllables).
The study's findings showed that in the posttests of the production
test, learners performed better at producing prime words that were
spoken by the researcher as a model than the prompt words that they
actually produced during the interaction. This seems to lend support to
Derwing and Munro's (2014) proposal on the crucial role of perception
in learning targetlike forms. Proponents of this proposal maintain that it
is important to expose learners to a variety of target forms, which may
help learners produce targetlike or more intelligible forms as well as
enhance their listening comprehension (Goodwin, 2014).
Finally, the current findings on the effectiveness of repeating collaborative priming tasks seem to hold particular promise for EFL contexts
where English is not used daily and has no immediate function within
the society beyond the classroom. As illustrated with an example in
the previous section, learners seemed to go through a developmental
sequence for acquiring word-stress patterns through repetitive exposure to an L2 model. For example, they initially pronounce a word without stress. As they are repeatedly exposed to accurate production of
the target-stress patterns, they recognize the need to assign primary
stress and produce an erroneous stress pattern (wrong placement or
multiple stresses). Provided with sizeable targetlike input, they finally
can place primary stress accurately. Pronunciation is sometimes perceived as a feature of language acquired merely as a result of exposure

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

343

to native speaker input (e.g., direct method, the natural approach).
However, EFL learners generally have limited access to real-life communication with proficient speakers of English, and, accordingly, pronunciation teaching is sometimes deemed of only peripheral concern
(Sato, 2007) and as representing unrealistic goals for EFL contexts
(Pica, 1994). Past SLA research, however, has suggested that considerable exposure to L2 input and practice with the L2 are crucial factors
in shaping cognitive representations on which learners base their pronunciation of the target language (Derwing & Munro, 2014; Sifakis, 2014)
and that intelligible nonnative speech samples along with native speech
samples should be included as integral parts of pronunciation teaching
(Murphy, 2014). In this regard, collaborative priming tasks seem to hold
great promise for teaching pronunciation, in particular lexical stress,
in EFL contexts.
Limitations of the study should also be acknowledged as many of
them imply a need for further research. First, we did not manipulate the
frequency of repetitions; all the learners repeated the priming tasks
twice on two consecutive days. As indicated in Kim (2013), it would be
intriguing to investigate how much repetition of certain task aspects is
essential for pronunciation development. Future research may consider
addressing this issue by manipulating the frequency of repeating different
task characteristics. Second, the current study was conducted with EFL
adolescent learners who were homogenous in terms of age of acquisition,
English learning experiences, and proficiency level. Therefore, we are cautious about extending the results of this study to different L2 learner groups
studying English in different contexts (e.g., adult ESL learners, learners
studying in nontraditional settings). Future studies would benefit from
replicating the current study with different learner populations in a variety
of settings. In addition, it could be said that the study lacks ecological
validity because the collaborative tasks were carried out in a laboratory
setting between the researcher and individual students. Future research
may be interested in examining more diverse interactional contexts,
especially within language classrooms. Finally, further studies are called
for to determine to what extent the two types of repetition of collaborative tasks would be beneficial for the development of aspects of English
pronunciation other than patterns of lexical stress (e.g., thought grouping,
sentence-stress, intonation, vowel quality, tones) and in the acquisition
of phonological characteristics of other target languages.
CONCLUSION
The results of the current study echo findings of previous research on
the effectiveness of collaborative tasks in eliciting auditory priming
and the benefits of different types of task repetition in interaction-

344

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

driven language learning. Participating learners in the current study attempted to align their linguistic representation at a suprasegmental
level (i.e., word-stress assignment) during interaction as a function
of auditory priming. Furthermore, regarding the impact of different implementations of task repetition, both task repetition and procedural
repetition were found to enhance learning of word-stress patterns. However, repeating the same content and procedure with the same vocabulary items (i.e., task repetition) seemed to be more conducive to
learning over time. These findings have implications for pronunciation
instruction, casting light on what we believe is the considerable potential of collaborative priming tasks as an effective pedagogical tool
that can assist L2 learners in enhancing the intelligibility of their
speech during well-structured meaning-focused interactions.
Received 24 February 2016
Accepted 12 January 2017
Final Version Received 18 January 2017
REFERENCES
Ahmadian, M. J., & Tavakoli, M. (2011). The effects of simultaneous use of careful online
planning and task repetition on accuracy, complexity, and fluency in EFL learners'
oral production. Language Teaching Research, 15, 35-59.
Altmann, H. (2006). The perception and production of second language stress: A cross-linguistic
experimental study (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Newark: Delaware University.
Anderson, P. (1993). The interstress interval as an indicator of perceived intelligibility among
nonnative speakers of English (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Wichita, KS: Wichita
State University.
Anderson-Hsieh, J., Johnson, R., & Koehler, K. (1992). The relationship between native
speaker judgements of nonnative pronunciation and deviance in segmentals, prosody
and syllable structure. Language Learning, 42, 529-555.
Ashby, J., & Clifton, C. Jr. (2005). The prosodic property of lexical stress affects eye movements during silent reading. Cognition, 96, B89-100.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2015). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (Version 5.4.06)
[Computer program]. Retrieved from http://www.praat.org/
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., Pearson, J., & McLean, J. F. (2010). Linguistic alignment
between people and computers. Journal of Pragmatics, 42, 2355-2368.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Bygate, M. (1996). Effects of task repetition: Apprising the developing language of learners.
In D. Willis & J. Willis (Eds.), Challenge and change in language teaching (pp. 136-146).
London, UK: Heinemann.
Bygate, M. (2001). Effects of task repetition on the structure and control of language.
In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second
language learning, teaching, and assessment (pp. 23-48). London, UK: Longman.
Caspers, J., & Kpiska, O. (2011). The influence of word-level prosodic structure of
the mother tongue on production of word stress in Dutch as a second language.
In W. -S. Lee & E. Zee (Eds.), Proceedings of the 17th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences, The City University of Hong Kong, 17-21 August (pp. 420-423). Hong Kong:
The City University of Hong Kong.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., Goodwin, J. M., & Griner, B. (2010). Teaching pronunciation hardback with audio CDs (2): A course book and reference guide (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Auditory Priming and L2 Pronunciation Development

345

Collentine, J., & Collentine, K. (2013). A corpus approach to studying structural convergence in task-based Spanish L2 interactions. In K. McDonough & A. Mackey (Eds.),
Second language interaction in diverse educational contexts (pp. 167-187). Amsterdam/
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 213-238.
DeKeyser, R. (2007). Skill acquisition theory. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories
in second language acquisition: An introduction (pp. 97-114). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Derwing, T. M. (2010). Utopian goals for pronunciation teaching. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and Teaching
Conference, Iowa State University, Ames, 17-19 September (pp. 24-37). Ames: Iowa State
University.
Derwing, T., & Munro, M. J. (2014). Once you have been speaking a second language 34 for
years, it's too late to change your pronunciation. In L. Grant (Ed.), Pronunciation
myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching (pp. 34-55). Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Eckman, F. R. (1991). The structural conformity hypothesis and the acquisition of consonant
clusters in the interlanguage of ESL learners. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13,
23-41.
Erdmann, P. H. (1973). Patterns of stress-transfer in English and German. International
Review of Applied Linguistics, 11, 229-241.
Escudero, P., & Boersma, P. (2004). Bridging the gap between L2 speech perception research
and phonological theory. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26, 551-585.
Field, J. (2005). Intelligibility and the listener: The role of lexical stress. TESOL Quarterly,
39, 399-423.
Fokes, J., & Bond, Z. S. (1989). The vowels of stressed and unstressed syllables in nonnative
English. Language Learning, 39, 341-373.
Goodwin, J. (2014). Teaching pronunciation. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton, & M. A. Snow
(Eds.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (4th ed.) (pp. 136-152). Boston,
MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Grant, L. (2014). Pronunciation myths: Applying second language research to classroom
teaching. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Jenkins, J. (2002). A sociolinguistically based, empirically researched pronunciation syllabus
for English as an international language. Applied Linguistics, 23, 83-103.
Kim, Y. (2013). Effects of pretask modelling on attention to form and question development.
TESOL Quarterly, 47, 8-35.
Kim, Y., & McDonough, K. (2008). Learners' production of passives during syntactic
priming activities. Applied Linguistics, 29, 149-154.
Kim, Y., & Tracy-Ventura, N. (2013). The role of task repetition in L2 performance development: What needs to be repeated during task-based interaction? System, 41, 829-840.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lord, G. (2001). The second language acquisition of Spanish stress: Derivational, analogical
or lexical? (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University Park: Pennsylvania State
University.
Lynch, T., & Maclean, J. (2000). Exploring the benefits of task repetition and recycling for
classroom language learning. Language Teaching Research, 4, 221-250.
Mackey, A., Abbuhl, R., & Gass, S. (2012). Interactional approach. In S. Gass & A. Mackey
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 7-23). New York, NY:
Routledge.
Mackey, D., & Savage, A. (2011). Read this! Level 2. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
McDonough, K. (2006). Interaction and syntactic priming: English L2 speakers' production
of dative constructions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 28, 179-207.
McDonough, K., & Kim, Y. (2009). Syntactic priming, type frequency, and EFL learners'
production of wh-questions. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 386-398.
McDonough, K., & Trofimovich, P. (2009). Using priming methods in second language research.
New York, NY: Routledge.
McDonough, K., Neumann, H., & Trofimovich, P. (2015). Eliciting Production of L2 Target
Structures through Priming Activities. Canadian Modern Language Review, 71, 75-95.
Ministry of Education, Science & Technology (2009). The national English curriculum.
Seoul, Korea: MEST.

346

YeonJoo Jung, YouJin Kim, and John Murphy

Munro, M., & Derwing, T. (1995). Foreign accent, comprehensibility, and intelligibility in the
speech of second language learners. Language Learning, 45, 73-97.
Munro, M. J., & Derwing, T. M. (2015). A prospectus for pronunciation research in the 21st
century: A point of view. Journal of Second Language Pronunciation, 1, 11-42.
Murphy, J. M. (2004). Attending to word-stress while learning new vocabulary. English for
Specific Purposes, 23, 67-83.
Murphy, J. M. (2014). Intelligible, comprehensible, non-native models in ESL/EFL pronunciation teaching. System, 42, 258-269.
Murphy, J. M., & Kandil, M. (2004). Word-level stress patterns in the academic word list.
System: An International Journal of Educational Technology and Applied Linguistics,
32, 61-74.
Pardo, J. S. (2006). On phonetic convergence during conversational interaction. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 119, 2382-2393.
Patanasorn, C. (2010). Effect of procedural content and task repetition on accuracy and
fluency in an EFL context (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Flagstaff: Northern
Arizona University.
Pennington, M. (1994). Recent research in L2 phonology: Implications for practice.
In J. Morley (Ed.), Pronunciation pedagogy and theory: New views, new directions
(pp. 92-108). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Pica, T. (1994). Questions from the language classroom: Research perspectives. TESOL
Quarterly, 28, 49-79.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 27, 169-225.
Samuda, V., & Bygate, M. (2008). Tasks in second language learning. New York, NY: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Sato, E. (2007). A guide to linguistic modification: Strategies for increasing English language
learner access to academic content (Paper developed for the U.S. Department of
Education LEP Partnership).
Savage, A. (2010). Read this! Level 3. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Sifakis, N. C. (2014). Teaching pronunciation in the post-EFL era: Lessons from ELF and
implications for teacher education. English as a Foreign Language Teacher Education:
Current Perspectives and Challenges, 27, 127-146.
Sohn, H.-M. (1999). The Korean language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Swan, M., & Smith, B. (2001). Learner English: A teacher's guide to interference and other
problems (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Trofimovich, P., & Gatbonton, E. (2006). Repetition and focus on form in processing L2
Spanish words: Implications for pronunciation instruction. Modern Language Journal,
90, 519-535.
Trofimovich, P., & Isaacs, T. (2012). Disentangling accent from comprehensibility. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 15, 905-916.
Trofimovich, P., McDonough, K., & Foote, J. A. (2014). Interactive alignment of multisyllabic
stress patterns in a second language classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 48, 815-832.
Trofimovich, P., McDonough, K., & Neumann, H. (2013). Using collaborative tasks to elicit
auditory and structural priming. TESOL Quarterly, 47, 177-186.
Walker, R. (2010). Teaching the pronunciation of English as a lingua franca. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

