C Cambridge University Press 2016 doi:10.1017/S1366728916000778
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 20 (5), 2017, 999-1009 

Effect of socio-economic status
on cognitive control in
non-literate bilingual
speakers

V I S H N U K K NA I R
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders and
Discipline of Speech Pathology and Audiology, Flinders
University

B R I T TA B I E D E R M A N N
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders and
School of Psychology and Speech Pathology, Curtin University

LY N D S E Y N I C K E L S
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders and
Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University

(Received: November 24, 2015; final revision received: June 6, 2016; accepted: June 22, 2016; first published online 8 September 2016)

Previous research has suggested that the advantages for cognitive control abilities in bilinguals are attenuated when
socio-economic status (SES) is controlled (e.g., Morton & Harper, 2007). This study examined the effect of SES on cognitive
control in illiterate monolingual and bilingual individuals who lived in adverse social conditions. We tested monolinguals
and bilinguals using Simon and Attentional Network task while controlling for two potential confounding factors: SES and
literacy. Bilinguals were faster for both trials with and without conflict demonstrating overall faster response times (global
advantage) compared to monolinguals on both tasks. However, no bilingual advantage was found for conflict resolution on
the Simon task and attentional networks on the Attentional Network task. The overall bilingual effects provide evidence for a
bilingual advantage even among individuals without literacy skills and of very low SES. This indicates a strong link between
bilingualism and cognitive control over and above effects of SES.
Keywords: bilingual cognitive control, socio-economic status, literacy, bilingual advantage

Introduction
Research that has been conducted in the past decade
on the relationship between bilingualism and cognitive
ability has focused on whether bilinguals possess superior
non-linguistic cognitive control abilities compared to
monolinguals (e.g., Abutalebi & Green, 2007; Bialystok,
Craik, Klein & Viswanathan, 2004; Costa, Hernandez &
Sebastian-Galles, 2008). This stems from the idea that
the bilingual advantage originates from the bilingual's
need to inhibit the non-target language which arises
due to the parallel activation of all known languages in
the lexicon (e.g., Green, 1998; Bialystok et al., 2004).
Studies have suggested a bilingual advantage in a range


During the preparation of this paper, Vishnu KK Nair was supported
by an International Macquarie University Research Excellence
Scholarship (iMQRES - 2011105), ARC Centre of Excellence in
Cognition and its Disorders, Department of Cognitive Science,
Macquarie University. Lyndsey Nickels was supported by an
Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (FT 120100102), and
Britta Biedermann by an Australian Research Council Postdoctoral
Fellowship and Discovery Project (DP 11010079). We would like
to thank Albert Costa and Mireia Hernandez for their help with
experiments, Jeff Mathew and staff members of Marthoma College
of Special Education, Kasargod, Kerala for their assistance in data
collection, and two anonymous reviewers for constructive comments
on an earlier draft.

of tasks. For example, bilinguals have been demonstrated
to show superior performance in task switching (Prior
& MacWhinney, 2010), working memory (Bialystok,
Poarch, Luo & Craik, 2014), conflict monitoring (Costa,
Hernandez, Costa-Faidella & Sebastian-Galles, 2009),
conflict resolution and alerting (Costa et al., 2008), and
on non-verbal auditory executive function tasks (Foy &
Mann, 2014).
While there is a widespread interest in examining the
specific mechanisms underlying the bilingual advantage,
the extent to which bilingualism has been linked to
superior cognitive ability has led to considerable criticism
(e.g., Hilchey & Klein, 2011). Indeed, recent research has
produced conflicting reports with some studies indicating
no differences between bilinguals and monolinguals for
tasks measuring non-linguistic cognitive control (e.g.,
Paap & Greenberg, 2013). In one of the most exhaustive
reviews on the effects of bilingualism on cognition, Valian
(2015) emphasised two possibilities for those reports
which do not find a bilingual advantage: a) bilingualism
does not exert any cognitive control benefits and/or b)
bilingualism exerts certain cognitive control benefits, but
these effects are similar to those resulting from other
forms of expertise, such as being a professional musician,
a juggler, or a long-term meditator. It is therefore often
difficult to disentangle those skills experimentally, when

Address for correspondence:
Vishnu KK Nair, Discipline of Speech Pathology and Audiology, Level 7, Flinders Medical Centre, Flinders University, SA 5001, Australia.
vishnu.nair@flinders.edu.au

1000

Vishnu KK Nair, Britta Biedermann and Lyndsey Nickels

Monolingual controls may have life experiences (e.g.,
musical training) which also positively affect cognitive
abilities.
Although the debate on how different life experiences
may influence cognitive abilities is largely unresolved,
it has been also suggested that the apparent benefits of
bilingualism may stem from other confounding factors,
such as socio-economic status (SES). For example,
Morton and Harper (2007) criticised past studies (e.g.,
Martin & Bialystok, 2003) for inadequately controlling
SES and suggested that the better performance of
bilinguals may be due to their higher SES (relative
to monolinguals) rather than their bilingualism. Engel
de Abreu, Cruz-Santos, Tourinho, Martin and Bialystok
(2012) suggest that the confounding effect of SES has two
major implications. First, it would mean that the bilingual
advantage emerged as a result of higher SES. Second,
it would also indicate that only bilinguals from higher
SES would be expected to outperform monolinguals.
The research reported here sought to investigate this
issue by examining whether a bilingual advantage in
cognitive control was evident in individuals from lower
SES backgrounds. Hence the present study examined
cognitive control abilities in bilingual individuals of lower
SES and compared their performance with monolingual
individuals from a similarly low SES background.
Effects of SES on bilingual cognitive control
SES exerts a profound impact on specific cognitive
control tasks such as those measuring alerting and
executive attention (Mezzacappa, 2004). The likelihood
of a potential confound of SES in bilingual cognitive
control measures was first reported by Morton and Harper
(2007). Bialystok et al. (2004) administered a Simon
task with bilingual and monolingual adults and found
an advantage for bilingual adults in conflict resolution.
Martin and Bialystok (2003) had earlier reported a
similar effect in children. In the Simon task participants
are required to press appropriate computer keys to
correspond to red or blue coloured boxes. The boxes
are either presented on the same side of the computer
screen as the appropriate colour response key (spatially
congruent) or on the opposite side (spatially incongruent).
Participants typically respond faster to congruent than
to incongruent trials. The difference in response time
between incongruent and congruent is considered to be an
index of conflict resolution abilities (see below for more
detail on this task). When Morton and Harper (2007) used
the Simon task with children who were matched for SES,
in contrast to Martin and Bialystok (2003), they found
identical performance for bilingual and monolingual
children. Moreover, they found an association between
higher SES and better performance on the Simon task
(SES was negatively correlated with a reduced Simon

effect), regardless of language status. However, Bialystok
(2009) suggested that the failure to obtain any significant
differences between the two language groups may have
been rooted in developmental differences as participants
in Morton and Harper (2007) were 1.5 years older than
the participants in Martin and Bialystok (2003). She
hypothesised that by the age of 7 years monolingual
children may have acquired similar executive function
abilities to bilingual children. Although developmental
differences offer a reasonable explanation, past studies
have also suggested bilingual advantages for children at 8
years. Therefore, it is unclear why a bilingual advantage
would not be present at 7 years and re-emerge for children
at the age of 8 years (Hilchey & Klein, 2011).
In their review, Mindt, Arentoft, Germano, D'Aquila,
Scheiner, Pizzirusso and Gollan (2008) suggested that
bilingual advantages may be difficult to replicate with
bilingual individuals from countries where bilingualism is
not typically associated with higher SES. They also noted
that in previous studies, that have reported a bilingual
advantage with children from low SES, the advantage
emerged only after effects of SES were controlled
for. For example, Carlson and Meltzoff (2008) showed
that bilingual children from comparatively lower SES
backgrounds demonstrated advantages over monolingual
children from privileged social background (higher SES)
on a range of executive function tasks (e.g., advanced
dimensional change card sort, simon says, visually cued
recall) only after parental education was controlled (as
a proxy for SES). Although it is true that the effects
of bilingualism emerged only when SES was controlled,
the composite raw scores of all executive function tasks
indicated no significant group difference between children
from lower and higher SES. Therefore, the fact that lower
SES bilingual children showed similar performance on
raw scores to higher SES monolingual children indicates
that perhaps some of the cognitive disadvantages of lower
SES may be compensated for by superior cognitive control
mechanisms resulting from their bilingual experience
(Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008). This finding would therefore
contradict the earlier claim that bilingual advantages may
be absent in individuals from lower SES.
In a similar study, Engel de Abreu et al. (2012)
specifically studied the ability to resolve cognitive
conflict in lower SES monolingual and bilingual children
from Luxembourg and Portugal. An assessment of
poverty indicator found that the bilingual children were
more disadvantaged than monolingual children. The
authors predicted that bilingual experience specifically
influences the ability to resolve conflict (a domain specific
advantage) rather than providing facilitation of overall
cognitive mechanisms (a domain general advantage).
As predicted, the bilingual children showed a specific
advantage on cognitive control tasks (selective attention -
Sky Day Search task; interference suppression - Flanker

Bilingual Cognitive control
task) and not on abstract reasoning (Ravens Coloured
Progressive Matrices) and working memory measures
(Odd-One-Out; Dot Matrix). This finding therefore also
supports the position that bilingual advantages for conflict
resolution in children cannot be accounted for solely by
differences in SES.
In order to further dissociate the role of SES in
bilingual cognitive control, Calvo and Bialystok (2014)
studied 6 to 7 year old bilingual and monolingual children
using parental education as proxy for SES. A range
of language (e.g., Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test)
and cognitive tests (e.g., Nonverbal Visual Attention
and Flanker task) were administered to assess language
and executive functioning. Their results suggested that
both SES and bilingualism had an overall effect on
language and cognition; however this effect was not in
the same direction. SES was associated with decreases
in both language and executive functioning performance,
whereas bilingualism was associated with a decrease in
language but increase in executive functioning abilities.
This evidence suggests that the effect of SES on cognitive
ability may not override the effect of bilingualism.
While the role of SES on bilingual cognitive control
in children has received some attention, its role has been
under-researched in adults. The bilingual advantage on
tasks measuring executive function has been replicated
by some studies with middle aged and older adults
(e.g., Bialystok, Craik & Luk, 2008; Salvatierra &
Rosselli, 2010). However, in these studies not only
are bilingual adults often high SES, but SES is rarely
explicitly controlled. Therefore not only is it unclear
whether the bilingual advantage manifests only in higher
SES populations, but also the extent to which it may
be a confound of SES in adults (Hilchey & Klein,
2011). However, it is often hard for factors such as
cultural practices, differences in life experiences between
language groups, immigrant status, SES and literacy to be
controlled. Moreover, most bilingual studies tend to focus
on bilinguals from an urban middle class background. In
many parts of the world, bilingualism is not associated
with immigrant status or classroom experience but is
a part of the everyday living experience. For example,
in rural southern India, where the current study was
conducted, a significant number of people living in
(interstate) border areas are bilinguals who belong to
a lower SES population. In these areas, both bilinguals
and monolinguals share similar social and cultural values
and often both monolingualism and bilingualism co-occur
with poverty and illiteracy. This linguistic and socioeconomic background provides an ideal situation for
studying the role of bilingualism in cognitive control with
matched low SES groups. It also can provide evidence
from cultures and individuals that have been less studied in
the bilingual cognitive control literature (rural bilinguals
and monolinguals).

1001

Hence, the study reported here examined performance
on cognitive control tasks in bilingual and monolingual
individuals who were living in very difficult social
conditions (from lower SES on the verge of poverty) and
were from a non-literate background with no acquisition
of literacy through formal academic education.
We administered two of the most commonly used tasks
to assess executive function. Experiment 1 used the Simon
task (Simon & Berbaum, 1990; Simon & Small, 1969;
Simon & Wolf, 1963) and Experiment 2 the Attentional
Network task (Fan, McCandliss, Sommer, Raz & Posner,
2002; for use in bilingual research see Costa et al.,
2008). Both tasks are argued to measure conflict resolution
abilities (e.g., Bialystok et al., 2004; Costa et al., 2008).
As noted above, in the Simon task (Simon &
Berbaum, 1990; Simon & Small, 1969; Simon & Wolf,
1963), spatially congruent and incongruent stimuli (e.g.,
coloured boxes - red and blue) are presented to the
participants with two response keys associated for each
stimulus (e.g., right sided key for the red box and left
sided key for the blue box). Responding to the incongruent
stimuli while ignoring the spatial conflict is one of the
key aspects of this task. Due to the conflicting responses
present in the incongruent stimuli, this condition leads
to a comparatively longer reaction time compared to
the congruent condition (see also Lu & Proctor, 1995;
Sturmer, Leuthold, Soetens, Schroter & Sommer, 2002
for more detail on this topic). The difference in response
times between incongruent and congruent conditions is
described as the Simon effect (e.g., Simon & Berbaum,
1990).
The Attentional Network Task (Fan et al., 2002) is
a combination of the Flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen,
1974) and the cue reaction time task (Posner, 1980). It
is argued that this is one of the best tasks for assessing
inhibitory control abilities (e.g., Costa et al., 2008).
In this task, three types of spatial stimuli (congruent,
incongruent and neutral) are presented above or below
a fixation cross. The stimuli are usually presented as a
set of five arrows either pointing right or left. Responses
are based on the direction of the centre arrow. The
centre arrow can either point in the same direction
as the other (Flanker) arrows (congruent condition)
or in a different direction (incongruent condition).
Response times for the incongruent conditions, where
there is conflicting information from Flanker tasks,
is longer than for the congruent conditions, where
there is no conflict. In addition to measuring conflict
resolution/inhibitory control (as also assessed by the
Simon task), the Attentional Network task also measures
other critical cognitive control abilities such as the
executive network, alerting and orienting mechanisms.
The executive network is measured by calculating the
difference between incongruent and congruent trials
(conflict effect). Generally, participants respond faster

1002

Vishnu KK Nair, Britta Biedermann and Lyndsey Nickels

for congruent than for incongruent trials. The alerting
mechanism is studied by presenting a cue before the
Flanker arrows are displayed, which indicates that the
arrows are about to appear. The alerting effect is the
difference in performance between trials without an
alerting cue (no cue) and those with an alerting cue (double
cue) (generally responses are faster for trials preceded
by an alerting cue). Orienting mechanisms are studied
by presenting a cue that directs the participants to the
location (e.g., above or below the fixation cross) of the
Flanker arrow. The orienting effect is the difference in
the participants' performance between trials preceded by
a centre cue (without any cue to spatial orientation) and
those with a spatial cue indicating a spatial orientation.
We predicted that if bilingualism improves cognitive
control, and specifically confers an advantage for
conflict resolution, then bilinguals may exhibit superior
performance compared to monolinguals despite their
shared lower SES. For the Simon task, this would be
manifested by a specific advantage for trials with conflict
(conflict resolution/interference suppression effect) or
as an overall bilingual advantage for both trials with
and without conflict (global effect). For the Attentional
Network task, we expected the bilingual advantage to
be manifested in a similar way to the Simon task:
either a specific advantage for trials with conflict and/or
an overall advantage. Additionally, we predicted that if
bilingualism facilitates alerting networks (the difference
in reaction time between trials preceded by no cue and
double cue) and orienting networks (the difference in
reaction time between trials preceded by centre cue and
spatial cue), then, we expected larger differences for
lower SES bilinguals for both networks compared to
monolinguals.
Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we administered the Simon task to
bilingual and monolingual speaker groups to examine
whether bilinguals from lower SES performed better than
monolinguals from a similar social background.
Method
Participants and demographic details
Thirty six individuals participated, 18 of them bilingual
speakers and 18 of them monolingual speakers (see
Table 1). Participants were bilingual and monolingual low
SES, illiterate, middle-aged adults recruited from rural
villages of the southern Indian state of Kerala. According
to the "United Nations Department of Economic and
Social affairs Statistics Division" (UNESCO, retrieved
from http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/sconcerns/
education/ed3.htm, see concepts and definitions under

standards and method section) an illiterate person is one
who cannot, with understanding, both read and write
a short, simple statement on his or her everyday life
(see also Ashaie & Obler, 2014). All the participants
in the current study met this criterion (see below) not
having had the opportunity to acquire literacy through
schooling.
The bilingual and monolingual participants were native
speakers of Malayalam (L1). The bilingual participants
spoke Tulu (L2) as their second language acquired before
the age of 6. In this social and linguistic context, the
Malayalam and Tulu speaking communities live closely
together with a rich history of language harmony. Tulu
(L2) is widely used especially for communicating with
neighbours, friends and even family members (e.g., crosslinguistic marriages). It is therefore not difficult for a
child growing up in this linguistic environment to acquire
Malayalam (L1) in a family context and successively start
learning Tulu (L2) at a very early age from a social context
(e.g., neighbours, friends, family). Although the bilinguals
and monolinguals were from the same province both these
groups lived in different villages at a considerable distance
from each other. It is common to have the linguistic
landscape change within short distance in India (e.g.,
multilingualism tends to be higher around the inter-state
borders) without much or little difference in people's
cultural practises (however the reverse is also true). In
this context, our participants shared similar cultural values
and mother tongue (Malayalam) but varied in their second
language acquisition. The monolingual participants
were mostly farmers and did not acquire a second
language passively (e.g., comprehension) or actively (e.g.,
speaking). Since both Malayalam and Tulu are cognate
languages it is possible that the monolingual participants
may identify certain vocabulary in Tulu, however, this
is rather different to them having acquired Tulu as a
second language. The monolingual participants in our
study reported no basic understanding (comprehension)
of Tulu even necessary to carry out a simple
conversation.
The bilingual participants' second language proficiencies (speaking and understanding) were assessed
by administering oral questions based on a language
proficiency rating scale (Chengappa, Shivashankar, Nair,
Nayak & Arvind, 2011). Socio-economic status (SES) of
the participants was assessed using four critical indicators
(1. pooled monthly income, 2. highest level of education,
3. occupation, and 4. family property) by using the socioeconomic status scale (Venkatesan, 2011). Demographic
and background data of participants are given in Table 1.
Task & Procedure
In order to make the participants more comfortable and
the testing environment less intimidating, all participants

Bilingual Cognitive control

1003

Table 1. Demographic and background data of participants as means and standard
deviations (in parentheses).
Demographic data

Monolinguals

Bilinguals

p

Age (years)

50.83 (4.25)

51.22 (3.93)

.777

4.16 (0.38)
1.35 (.49)
1.11 (.33)
1.88 (.60)
1.17 (.39)
__

4.11 (0.32)
1.47 (.51)
1.17 (.39)
1.70 (.68)
1.29 (.46)
5.05 (0.41)

.641
.508
.640
.430
.434
__

__
__

3.83 (0.38)
3.88 (0.32)

__
__

SOCIO ECONOMIC STATUS
Overall SESa
Pooled monthly incomeb
Literacyc
Occupationd
Family propertiese
L2 acquisition age (speaking)
Proficiency ratingsf
Speaking
Listening

Notes
N = 18 for each group, p = significance of t-test (2 tailed).
a
Scale from 0 (lowest SES) to 20 (highest SES).
b
Scale from 1 (Rs. 5000 or below) to 5 (Rs. 20001 or above).
c
Scale from 1 (illiterate) to 5 (Post Graduation or above).
d
Scale from 1 (unskilled/daily wager) to 5 (Specialised/Class 1 services).
e
Scale from 1 (below Rs.50,000) to 5 (above Rs 500,000)
f
Rating from 0 = not proficient to 4 = highly proficient

were familiarised with the computer by playing music
videos in their native language (Malayalam) for five
minutes.
A Simon task was administered to all participants using
the DMDX display system (Forster & Forster, 2003) on a
laptop computer. The test included 20 practice trials and
112 experimental trials. These trials were presented in four
blocks which consisted of 28 trials each, of which half
of the trials were congruent (50%) and half incongruent
(50%). The order of the presentation was randomised for
each participant. Each trial consisted of a presentation
of a fixation cross (+) in the centre of the computer
monitor maintained on the screen for 250 milliseconds
(ms), followed by a coloured (red or blue) square presented
on the left or the right side of the screen for a duration
of 2000 ms or until a response from the participant. Two
keys were labelled with a red (m, on the right) or blue (z,
on the left) sticker serving as response keys. In congruent
conditions, the coloured square appeared on the same side
as the response key (e.g., a red square appearing on the
right side of the screen requiring a response from the red
key on the right). In incongruent conditions the coloured
square appeared on the opposite side to the response
key (e.g., a red square appearing on the left side of the
screen but still requiring a response from the red key
on the right). Participants were asked to pay attention
to the coloured squares regardless of their position and
press the appropriate coloured button depending on

the colour of the square. The entire task took about
20-25 minutes.
Analysis
First, reaction times above and below 3.0 standard
deviations from the mean of each subject for each
condition were removed. We also eliminated reaction
times longer than 1500 ms and shorter than 300 ms. In
total less than 3% of responses were removed. The data
from three bilingual participants and two monolingual
participants were eliminated due to high error rates (>
40%). RT analysis was carried out only for trials with
correct responses. The results are reported in Table 2.
Response latencies were analysed with a 2 (trial type
- congruent vs. incongruent; within subjects) by 2
(language group - bilinguals vs. monolinguals) Mixed
Analysis of Variance.
Results
The error analysis found no significant effect of group
(bilinguals and monolinguals) (F (1, 34) = 7.06, p = .229)
or trial type (congruent and incongruent) (F (1, 34) =
5.45, p = .258). As expected, there was a significant main
effect of trial type (F (1, 34) = 4.54, p = .040, 2 p =.109)
with congruent trials significantly faster than incongruent
trials. There was also a significant main effect of group

1004

Vishnu KK Nair, Britta Biedermann and Lyndsey Nickels
Table 2. Mean response times (RT), error rates and standard
deviations (in parentheses) for bilinguals and monolinguals.
Trial type

Congruent
Incongruent

Bilinguals
RT (SD)
722.73 (20.36)
743.33 (129.77)

Monolinguals

Errors (%)
.05 (.05)
.08 (.05)

(F (1, 34) = 13.25, p = .001, 2 p = .264): bilinguals
exhibited a global advantage for response times compared
to monolinguals. Although bilinguals appeared to show
a reduced interference effect (the difference between
congruent and incongruent trials; bilinguals (20.60 ms)
compared to monolinguals (36.01 ms)), the interaction
between group and trial type was not significant (F (1, 34)
= .337, p = .565).
In order to confirm the absence of a reduced Simon
effect in bilinguals, RT and errors were further combined
(mean RT for each participant divided by the percentage
of correct responses) to obtain an inverse efficiency score
(IES). The IES can be used as a measure to confirm
results obtained from traditional RT analysis (Bruyer &
Brysbaert, 2011). However, this can only be used in the
absence of a speed-accuracy trade off and when error rates
are low (< 10 %; Townsend & Ashby, 1978). In order
to identify whether there was a speed-accuracy tradeoff,
the RT data for all participants was correlated with
accuracy. This correlation was not significant indicating
that a speed-accuracy tradeoff was unlikely (r = .10,
p =.405). Our data fulfilled both these criteria. The
results confirmed the previous findings from RT analysis
revealing a main effect of trial type (congruent trials faster
for both language groups) (F (1, 34) = 4.52, p = .041, 2 p
=.117) and a main effect of group (F (1, 34) = 8.25, p =
.007, 2 p =.195), and once again the interaction between
group and trial type was not significant (F (1, 34) = .141,
p = .710).
Discussion Experiment 1
There were two key findings from Experiment 1.
First, bilinguals exhibited a significant advantage over
monolinguals for both trials with conflict (incongruent)
and those without conflict (congruent): a global bilingual
advantage. Second, although there was an overall bilingual
advantage, the group versus trial type interaction was
not significant. In other words, bilinguals did not show
reduced interference for incongruent trials relative to
congruent trials - they were not superior in conflict
resolution. A significant global response time advantage
for bilinguals with no advantage for conflict resolution is
not uncommon and has been an issue of controversy in

RT (SD)
861.79 (144.12)
897.80 (135.33)

Errors (%)
.09 (.07)
.10 (.08)

the past (e.g., Hilchey & Klein, 2011), we will return to
this in the General Discussion.
Experiment 2
Method
The same participants, who completed a Simon task, were
tested again with the Attentional Network task. The testing
was carried out in a second session one hour gap between
the first and second tasks on the same day.
Task and procedure
We administered the Attentional Network task using the
DMDX display system (Foster & Foster, 2003) on a laptop
computer. We replicated the task used by Costa et al.
(2008) which was developed by Fan et al. (2002). The
experimental conditions involving cue type consisted of
trials with no cue, centre cue, double cue, or spatial cue.
The entire task consisted of 288 trials with 12 different
experimental conditions presented in three different
blocks. Each experimental condition was represented by
8 trials in one block leading to a total 96 trials per block.
Before the testing began, the participants saw 24 practice
trials. Following the presentation of practice trials the
participants were presented with Flanker stimuli (arrows
pointing either right or left) appearing on the computer
screen for 1700 ms preceded by a fixation cross. The
target stimulus always appeared as a set of five congruent,
incongruent or neutral stimuli (33% of each trial type),
including a central arrow pointing either towards the right
or left. The participants were instructed to locate the
direction of the centre arrow as quickly and as accurately
as possible. Two keys (`m' on the right and `z' on the
left hand side of the keyboard) were assigned as response
buttons. The response buttons were masked with a sticker
depicting an arrow pointing to the right (m) or left (z).
Participants were asked to press the right button if the
centre arrow pointed right and left button if the centre
arrow pointed left. The entire task lasted for about 20-25
minutes. The order of the stimuli was randomised for each
participant.
In each condition there was one central arrow pointing
left or right. In the neutral condition this arrow was flanked

Bilingual Cognitive control

1005

Table 3. Mean response times (RT), and standard deviations (in parentheses) for flanker type and cue type
in bilinguals and monolinguals.
Bilinguals

Monolinguals
a

Cue type

Congruent

Incongruent

Neutral

CE

Congruent

Incongruent

Neutral

CEa

No cue
Double cue
Centre cue
Spatial cue
Alerting effect
Orienting effect

992 (139)
974 (166)
982 (166)
951 (136)
18
31

1023 (183)
1006 (155)
1024 (144)
997 (164)
17
27

1007 (174)
986 (176)
975 (155)
920 (152)

31
32
42
46

1023 (120)
1016 (150)
1050 (161)
1013 (134)
7
37

1105 (126)
1097 (99)
1103 (120)
1085 (110)
8
18

1106 (141)
1042 (123)
1094 (143)
1115 (148)

82
81
53
72

Notes
NC-No cue, DC-Double cue, CC- Centre cue, SC-Spatial cue
a
Conflict effect(CE) was calculated by measuring the reaction time difference between incongruent vs. congruent trials
Alerting effect was calculated by measuring the reaction time difference between no cue trials from double cue trials
Orienting effect was calculated by measuring the reaction time difference between centre cue trials from spatial cue trials

by lines without arrowheads. In the congruent condition
the Flankers were arrows pointing in the same direction
as the target and in the incongruent condition the Flankers
were arrows pointing in the opposite direction.
There were four different cue conditions - (i) no cue,
(ii) centre cue, (iii) spatial cue and (iv) double cue. In the
no cue condition only the fixation cross was presented.
In the centre cue condition, the cue (an asterisk) was
presented centrally above the fixation cross (and hence
did not cue location) before presentation of the Flanker
stimulus. In the spatial cue condition the cue was presented
to the left or right of the screen to cue the direction of the
subsequent arrow. In the double (alerting) cue condition
cues (asterisks) appeared above and below the fixation
cross simultaneously in order to alert the participant to
the presentation of the next Flanker arrows. All three cue
types remained on the computer screen for a duration
of 100 ms. The target Flanker arrows appeared on the
screen after a duration of 400 ms. The Flanker arrows
remained in the spatial location for 1700 ms or until
the participant made a response (see also Costa et al.,
2008).
Analysis
The RT data was trimmed using a similar procedure to that
of Experiment 1 resulting in the removal of less than 5% of
the data. Three bilingual and two monolingual participants
exhibited high error rates (> 40 %) and therefore their data
were excluded from the analysis. The data were analysed
using 2 (language groups: bilinguals vs. monolinguals)
3 (trial type: congruent, incongruent, neutral) 4 (cue
type: no cue, centre cue, double cue, spatial cue) repeated
measures of analysis of variance (ANOVA) with language
groups as between subject factors and trial type and cue
type as within subject factors.

Results
The results are reported in Table 3. The error analysis
found no significant effect of group (bilinguals and
monolinguals) (F (1, 34) = .156, p = .729), or cue
type (F (3, 426) = .792, p = .499). The effect of trial
type (congruent, incongruent and neutral) was close to
significant (F (2, 284) = 2.32, p =.099, 2 p = .016).
None of the two or three way interactions were significant
(group and trial type (F (2, 284) = 2.30, p =.102); group
and cue type (F (3, 426) = .164, p = .920); group, trial
and cue type (F (6, 426) =.103, p =.749).
In the analysis of reaction time, there was a significant
main effect of trial type (F (2, 68) = 5.37, p =
.006, 2 p =.026), and of group: bilingual speakers were
significantly faster (988 ms) than monolingual speakers
(1085 ms) (F (1, 34) = 7.34, p = .010, 2 p =.080).
However, the interaction between group and trial type
was not significant (F (2, 68) = 1.38, p = .25). There
was also no significant main effect of cue type (F (3,
102) = 1.31, p = .27) nor two way interactions between
group and cue type (F (3, 102) = 1.31, p = .27), trial
and cue type (F (6, 204) = 0.37, p = .89) or group, trial
and cue type (F (6, 204) = .43, p = .85). Analysis for
speed-accuracy trade-off once again indicated that this
was unlikely (r = .08, p=.384). IES results replicated a
main effect of trial type (congruent trials faster for both
language groups) (F (2, 34) = 6.72, p = .001, 2 p =.154)
and a main effect of group (F (1, 34) = 9.74, p = .001,
2 p =.175). The interaction between group and trial type
was not significant (F (2, 88) = .083, p = .314) and group
and cue type were not significant (F (3, 102) = .041, p =
.517).
Figure 1 shows the three different attentional
mechanisms tapped into in this experiment. Although
the conflict effect (congruent vs incongruent trials)

Vishnu KK Nair, Britta Biedermann and Lyndsey Nickels

Difference RT (MS)

1006

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Attentional Mechanisms
NS

NS
Bilinguals
Monolinguals

NS

Conflict

Alerting
Type of Effect

Orienting

Figure 1. Mean differences in reaction times across conditions for three attentional network effects for both bilinguals and
monolinguals. Error bars indicate standard error (SE). NS: Non-significant.

appeared reduced for bilinguals (see Figure 1), the
lack of significant interaction between group and trial
type indicated that this difference was not reliable.
There were also no differences between groups for
the alerting (no cue vs double cue) and orienting
(centre vs spatial cue) effects indicated by the lack
of a significant interaction between cue type and
group.

Discussion Experiment 2
Experiment 2 assessed cognitive control mechanisms
in bilinguals and monolinguals using the Attentional
Network task. Critically, the results once again, confirmed
a global bilingual advantage, as we found in the Simon
Task. This is consistent with the findings of Costa et al.
(2008) and supports the idea of a bilingual advantage
even for trials without conflict (congruent trials). Costa
et al. (2008) indicated that a bilingual advantage for
congruent trials demonstrates the bilinguals' ability to
monitor conflict, in addition to interference suppression
being important for incongruent trials, and therefore
indicating an advantage for both conflict resolution and
monitoring in bilinguals. However, the final analysis
with the three attentional networks (executive, alerting
and orienting) showed no significant difference between
the language groups. Although there was a reduced
conflict effect for bilinguals compared to monolinguals,
the lack of statistical significance suggested that the
advantage of bilingualism is not specifically constrained
to inhibiting trials with conflict. Similarly, the nonsignificant difference between the alerting and orienting
effect indicated that the benefit of a cue to orient/alert
to the onset of the stimulus is not affected by
bilingualism.

General discussion
This study assessed the effect of bilingualism on the
performance of illiterate bilinguals and monolinguals
from lower SES on the Simon and the Attentional Network
(Flanker) task. The results were clear: For both the Simon
task and the Attentional Network task, the low SES
bilinguals responded more quickly than monolinguals for
both congruent and incongruent trials, indicating a global
bilingual advantage.
This global bilingual advantage is sometimes referred
to as the bilingual executive processing advantage
(BEPA) and may have emerged due to enhanced conflict
monitoring mechanism in bilinguals. For example, Costa
et al. (2009) suggested that because tasks that measure
cognitive control involve both trials with and without
conflict, participants need to constantly monitor conflict
regardless of the trial type. Therefore an overall advantage
could reflect the bilinguals' efficient monitoring
mechanisms. It is also possible that such a monitoring
mechanism may be activated when a bilingual's language
context involves two cognate languages. Speaking in
languages with close phonological familiarity may
involve continuous activation of monitoring mechanisms
to prevent interference. Indeed, our bilinguals spoke
cognate languages (Malayalam and Tulu). However, this
hypothesis needs to be further tested considering the
language context of these bilinguals.
For the Attentional Network Task, Costa et al. (2009)
suggested that there is a more robust conflict effect
when a lower percentage (33%) of congruent trials are
used compared to the relatively high percentage (50%)
of congruent trials in the Simon task. Although the
Attentional Network Task in our study consisted of only
33% of congruent trials, which is much lower than the
50% congruent trials in the Simon task, this difference

Bilingual Cognitive control
was not enough to elicit a significant conflict effect
between bilinguals and monolinguals. Furthermore, our
results also found no evidence for a relationship between
bilingualism and other attentional networks such as the
alerting and orienting networks. These results are in
contrast with the findings of Costa et al. (2008), which
suggested a bilingual advantage specifically for conflict
and alerting effects. It is unclear why we obtained this
contradictory pattern of results - however, one possible
explanation for the lack of effects could be the difference
in the number of participants between the current study
(n=36) and Costa et al. (2008; n = 200). The reduced
number of participants in the current study was due to the
rare occurrence of the bilingual and monolingual illiterate
participant groups. However, if this was the reason behind
the null result for the attentional mechanisms task, it
is not clear why this should not also have reduced the
effects found for overall bilingual performance (global
effects). Although the attentional mechanisms failed to
elicit any significant difference between bilinguals and
monolinguals, our findings from both the Simon and
Attentional Network Task are in line with the previous
literature indicating a more general effect of bilingualism
(global effects) rather than a specialised conflict or
alerting effect (Costa et al., 2009).
The major focus of this study was the fact that the
participants were bilinguals and monolinguals who were
both economically and socially disadvantaged and with
no opportunity to acquire any formal literacy skills. There
is evidence that suggests that living in adverse social
conditions can affect performance on tasks measuring
executive function (e.g., Noble, Norman & Farah, 2005).
Both our monolingual and bilingual participants would
be expected to have suffered equally on tasks measuring
cognitive control due to the influence of their social
environment. Nonetheless, there was an advantage for
bilinguals compared to monolinguals. This has two
implications: first, the performance of these bilinguals
from lower SES on cognitive control tasks benefitted from
bilingualism indicating that bilingualism has independent
effects on performance of such tasks. Second, it suggests
that the bilingual effects found in previous studies were
not a mere reflection of the benefits of high SES in
bilingual groups as these benefits extend to individuals
from lower SES. Importantly, the concerns regarding
SES have previously been addressed mainly in studies
conducted with children (e.g., Morton & Harper, 2007).
This study is the first to focus on middle aged adults
and our results therefore further weaken support for the
proposal that the bilingual advantage is no longer evident
when SES is controlled in adults.
The lack of literacy in these participants is also
important because literacy skills have been argued to
affect language and cognitive abilities. For instance,
neuroimaging studies have indicated that acquisition

1007

of literacy skills can result in significant cortical
reorganisation positively affecting language processing
(e.g., activation of spoken sentences doubled in right
and left superior temporal regions) and visual areas
associated with reading (e.g., ventral occipito-temporal
cortex) (Dehaene, Pegado, Braga, Ventura, Nunes Filho,
Jobert, Dehaene-Lambertz, Kolinsky, Morais & Cohen,
2010). Significant effects of literacy on visual attention,
especially language mediated visual orientation, have
been reported (e.g., Huettig & Mishra, 2014; Mishra,
Singh, Pandey & Huettig, 2012). Given such overarching
effects of literacy on a wide spectrum of language and
cognitive abilities, it is possible that there is an interaction
between bilingualism and literacy, such that non-literate
bilinguals do not show advantages on cognitive control
tasks compared to monolinguals. However, we did not
observe such a pattern: our bilingual participants showed
an advantage in the absence of literacy skills. Similar
results were found in Kave, Eyal, Shorek and CohenMansfield (2008) who in their study noted that, in
illiterate multilinguals, language status may correlate with
cognitive ability more than with literacy. However, our
design does not allow us to determine whether the effects
of literacy and bilingualism are additive, or whether the
negative effects of illiteracy are fully compensated for
by bilingualism. Similarly, although our results found an
advantage for non-literate bilinguals compared to nonliterate monolinguals, we also cannot tease apart the
specific effect of literacy on cognitive ability as lower SES
and illiteracy are confounded in our study (and indeed
often will be). The confounds can be avoided in future
by studying, for example, bilinguals who had acquired
literacy skills but remain lower SES and also higher SES
bilinguals with no formal literacy skills.
Although we measured SES using a culturally
appropriate socio economic scale, it is possible that
measuring SES in other ways may also influence the
results. For example, Abutalebi, Guidi, Borsa, Canini,
Della Rosa, Parris & Weekes (2015) assessed the
socio- economic status of their participants using a 10
point rating scale developed by the MacArthur Foundation (http://www.macses.ucsf.edu/research/socialenviron/
sociodemographic.Php) that measures the participant's
subjective perception about his/her socio-economic status,
education and family income. It is possible that measuring
these could have led to further sub grouping of
participants. If possible, future studies should aim to
compare participants based on a graded socio economic
scale in order to better understand how bilingual
participants across a range of SES perform on cognitive
control tasks.
Although it is premature to consider that bilingualism
may be a protective mechanism against the negative
cognitive effects of SES in these individuals, evidence
from developmental studies offers promise in this

1008

Vishnu KK Nair, Britta Biedermann and Lyndsey Nickels

direction, suggesting protective effects of bilingualism
against the cognitive effects of poverty (Engel de
Abreu et al., 2012). However, this needs to be further
rigorously investigated in bilingual adults. The nature of
the bilingual community and the interactional context
of bilingualism (Adaptive Control Hypothesis) (Green
& Abutalebi, 2013) are significant in understanding
the implications of the results for `cognitive reserve'.
For the participants in the present study, a bilingual
experience was not associated with a classroom or
immigrant status but was part of everyday life.
The societal practices of these bilingual communities
had encouraged bilingualism for centuries and further
promoted bilingualism through cross-cultural marriages.
This aspect of bilingualism is relevant as increasingly
researchers have treated bilingualism as a categorical
variable (Luk & Bialystok, 2013) and have ignored
multiple dimensions (societal and cultural) with most
emphasis placed on experimentally controlling daily
language use, proficiency and dominance.
Our bilingual participants grew up in a linguistically
diverse society that has a rich history of treating
bilingualism as an asset. Interestingly, considering the
bilingual participants' social background, this may be
one of their few life experiences of potential benefit to
cognition, in contrast to urban bilinguals who often live
in an environment with a host of potentially positive
life experiences for cognition (e.g., video game playing,
musical experience). Isolating the effects of bilingualism
from a number of potentially beneficial life experiences
is challenging (Abutalebi & Clahsen, 2015; Valian, 2015)
- however, our results give a preliminary indication of
the independent effects of bilingualism in the absence of
high income, educational qualifications, immigrant status,
classroom bilingual experience and/or literacy. These
results have implications when considering bilingualism
as a lifestyle factor associated with increased cognitive
reserve (Baum & Titone, 2014; Bialystok, 2014) as well
as for shaping both educational and health policy in the
context of bilingualism and poverty.
References
Abutalebi, J., & Clahsen, H. (2015). Bilingualism, cognition,
and aging. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(01),
1-2.
Abutalebi, J., Guidi, L., Borsa, V., Canini, M., Della Rosa,
P. A., Parris, B. A., & Weekes, B. S. (2015). Bilingualism
provides a neural reserve for aging populations.
Neuropsychologia, 69, 201-210.
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D. (2007). Bilingual language
production: The neurocognition of language representation
and control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 20(3), 242-275.
Ashaie, S., & Obler, L. (2014). Effect of age, education, and
bilingualism on confrontation naming in older illiterate and
low-educated populations. Behavioural Neurology, 2014.

Baum, S., & Titone, D. (2014). Moving toward a neuroplasticity
view of bilingualism, executive control, and aging. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 35(05), 857-894.
Bialystok, E. (2009). Claiming evidence from non-evidence: A
reply to Morton and Harper. Developmental Science, 12(4),
499-501.
Bialystok, E. (2014). Neuroplasticity as a model for
bilingualism: Commentary on Baum and Titone. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 35(05), 899-902.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M. (2004).
Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control: evidence from
the Simon task. Psychology and Aging, 19(2), 290.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control
and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(4), 859.
Bialystok, E., Poarch, G., Luo, L., & Craik, F. I. (2014). Effects of
bilingualism and aging on executive function and working
memory. Psychology and Aging, 29(3), 696.
Bruyer, R., & Brysbaert, M. (2011). Combining speed and
accuracy in cognitive psychology: Is the inverse efficiency
score (IES) a better dependent variable than the mean
reaction time (RT) and the percentage of errors (PE)?
Psychologica Belgica, 51(1), 5.
Calvo, A., & Bialystok, E. (2014). Independent effects of
bilingualism and socioeconomic status on language ability
and executive functioning. Cognition, 130(3), 278-288.
Carlson, S. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Bilingual
experience and executive functioning in young children.
Developmental Science, 11(2), 282-298.
Chengappa, S., Shivashankar, N., Nair, V. K., Nayak, D., &
Arvind, H. (2011). Test of Language Proficiency. Language
and Brain Organization in Normative Multilingualism.
Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST).
Costa, A., Hernandez, M., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2008).
Bilingualism aids conflict resolution: Evidence from the
ANT task. Cognition, 106(1), 59-86.
Costa, A., Hernandez, M., Costa-Faidella, J., & SebastianGalles, N. (2009). On the bilingual advantage in conflict
processing: Now you see it, now you don't. Cognition,
113(2), 135-149.
Engel de Abreu, P. M. J., Cruz-Santos, A., Tourinho, C. J.,
Martin, R., & Bialystok, E. (2012). Bilingualism
enriches the poor enhanced cognitive control in lowincome minority children. Psychological Science, 23(11),
1364-1371.
Dehaene, S., Pegado, F., Braga, L. W., Ventura, P., Nunes
Filho, G., Jobert, A., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Kolinsky, R.,
Morais, J., & Cohen, L. (2010). How learning to read
changes the cortical networks for vision and language.
Science, 330(6009), 1359-1364.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters
upon the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task.
Perception & Psychophysics, 16(1), 143-149.
Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, A., & Posner,
M. I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and independence of
attentional networks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
14(3), 340-347.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior

Bilingual Cognitive control
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1), 116-
124.
Foy, J. G., & Mann, V. A. (2014). Bilingual children show
advantages in nonverbal auditory executive function task.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 18(6), 717-729.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexicosemantic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
1(02), 67-81.
Green, D. W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in
bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515-530.
Hilchey, M. D., & Klein, R. M. (2011). Are there
bilingual advantages on nonlinguistic interference tasks?
Implications for the plasticity of executive control
processes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(4), 625-
658.
Huettig, F., & Mishra, R. K. (2014). How literacy acquisition
affects the illiterate mind-a critical examination of theories
and evidence. Language and Linguistics Compass, 8(10),
401-427.
Kave, G., Eyal, N., Shorek, A., & Cohen-Mansfield, J. (2008).
Multilingualism and cognitive state in the oldest old.
Psychology and Aging, 23(1), 70.
Lu, C. H., & Proctor, R. W. (1995). The influence of irrelevant
location information on performance: A review of the
simon and spatial Stroop effects. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 2(2), 174-207.
Luk, G., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Bilingualism is not a categorical
variable: Interaction between language proficiency and
usage. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 605-621.
Martin, M.M., & Bialystok, E. (2003). The development of two
kinds of inhibition in monolingual and bilingual children:
Simon vs. Stroop. Poster presented at the meeting of the
Cognitive Development Society, Park City, Utah.
Mezzacappa, E. (2004). Alerting, orienting, and executive
attention: Developmental properties and sociodemographic
correlates in an epidemiological sample of young, urban
children. Child Development, 75(5), 1373-1386.
Mindt, M. R., Arentoft, A., Germano, K. K., D'Aquila,
E., Scheiner, D., Pizzirusso, M., & Gollan, T. H.
(2008). Neuropsychological, cognitive, and theoretical
considerations for evaluation of bilingual individuals.
Neuropsychology Review, 18(3), 255-268.
Mishra, R. K., Singh, N., Pandey, A., & Huettig, F. (2012).
Spoken language-mediated anticipatory eye movements are

1009

modulated by reading ability: Evidence from Indian low
and high literates. Journal of Eye Movement Research, 5(1),
1-10.
Morton, J. B., & Harper, S. N. (2007). What did Simon say?
Revisiting the bilingual advantage. Developmental Science,
10(6), 719-726.
Noble, K. G., Norman, M. F., & Farah, M. J. (2005).
Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in
kindergarten children. Developmental Science, 8(1), 74-
87.
Paap, K. R., & Greenberg, Z. I. (2013). There is no coherent
evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive processing.
Cognitive Psychology, 66(2), 232-258.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3-25.
Prior, A., & MacWhinney, B. (2010). A bilingual advantage
in task switching. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
13(02), 253-262.
Salvatierra, J. L., & Rosselli, M. (2010). The effect of
bilingualism and age on inhibitory control. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 1(15), 26-37.
Simon, J. R., & Berbaum, K. (1990). Effect of conflicting cues on
information processing: the `Stroop effect'vs. the `Simon
effect'. Acta Psychologica, 73(2), 159-170.
Simon, J. R., & Small Jr, A. M. (1969). Processing auditory
information: Interference from an irrelevant cue. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 53(5), 433.
Simon, J. R., & Wolf, J. D. (1963). Choice reaction time as a
function of angular stimulus-response correspondence and
age. Ergonomics, 6(1), 99-105.
Sturmer, B., Leuthold, H., Soetens, E., Schroter, H.,
& Sommer, W. (2002). Control over location-based
response activation in the Simon task: Behavioral and
electrophysiological evidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(6),
1345.
Townsend, J. T., & Ashby, F. G. (1978). Methods of modeling
capacity in simple processing systems. Cognitive Theory,
3, 200-239.
Valian, V. (2015). Bilingualism and cognition. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 18(01), 3-24.
Venkatesan, S. (2011). Socio Economic Status Scale: NIMH
revised version. AIISH, Mysore.
UNESCO, "Institute for Statistics," http://www.uis.unesco.
org/FactSheets/Documents/FS16-2011-Literacy-EN.pdf.

