Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Is the Levels of Processing effect language-limited?
Alan D. Baddeley , Graham J. Hitch
University of York, United Kingdom

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 16 March 2016
revision received 4 May 2016
Available online 30 May 2016
Keywords:
Levels of processing
Long-term memory
Affordance
Visual memory
Verbal memory
Encoding

a b s t r a c t
The concept of Levels of Processing (LOP), proposing that deep coding enhances retention,
has played a central role in the study of episodic memory. Evidence has however been
based almost entirely on retention of individual words. Across five experiments, we compare LOP effects between visual and verbal stimuli, using judgments of pleasantness as a
method of inducing deep encoding and a range of shallow encoding judgments selected
so as to be applicable to both verbal and visual stimuli. LOP effects were consistent but
modest across the visual stimuli (mean effect size 0.5). In contrast, LOP effects for verbal
stimuli varied widely, from modest for people's names and unfamiliar animals (mean effect
size 0.6) to large for familiar animals and household items (mean effect size 1.4), typical of
the dramatic LOP effects that characterize the existing verbal literature. We interpret our
data through the Gibsonian concept of ``affordance", proposing that visual and verbal stimuli vary in the number and richness of features they afford, and that access to such features
will in turn depend on encoding strategy. Our hypothesis links readily with Nairne's feature model of long-term memory.
O 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Craik and Lockhart (1972) proposed that memory is a
by-product of processing, the deeper the processing the
better the retention. Their paper is one of the most highly
cited in the history of cognitive psychology (Roediger &
Gallo, 2001), and ``one of the most influential systematic
conceptual frameworks within which problems of memory
can be raised and investigated" (Tulving, 2001, p. 24).
While the assumption of a series of levels leading from perceptual to semantic was subsequently abandoned (Craik &
Tulving, 1975), Levels of Processing (LOP) has continued to
serve as a broad theoretical framework, accounting for a
wide range of data within the field of human memory
and potentially providing a fruitful basis for further investigation (Conway, 2002). Furthermore, the principle under-

 Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, University of
York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.
E-mail address: ab50@york.ac.uk (A.D. Baddeley).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.05.001
0749-596X/O 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

lying the levels approach is of considerable practical
relevance, providing an important and valuable means of
improving learning, in contrast to the common tendency
for learners to rely on rote rehearsal.
On the other hand, despite many replications and the
magnitude of the effects shown (a series of studies by
Hyde and Jenkins (1969) and Walsh and Jenkins (1973)
yielded an average effect size based on Cohen's d of
2.27), the use of the framework to broaden our knowledge
of human memory has been somewhat limited. One exception to this comparative lack of development comes from
the demonstration by Tulving and Thomson (1973) of the
importance of the match between encoding and retrieval
in determining memory performance. This point was further developed with the introduction of the concept of
Transfer Appropriate Processing (TAP), as proposed by
Morris, Bransford, and Franks (1977). They showed that
shallow phonological coding led to better performance
than deeper semantic coding when rhyming words were
used as retrieval cues for the items to be recalled, again

2

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

demonstrating that memory performance depends crucially on conditions at retrieval, as well as at encoding.
The concept of TAP is an important reminder that retrieval
needs to be considered, but leaves open the question of
how to determine transfer appropriateness.
In an attempt to develop the concept of TAP, Roediger
(Roediger & Blaxton, 1987; Roediger, Weldon, & Challis,
1989) proposed to link it to the distinction between explicit episodic memory and more automatic implicit memory.
Most explicit memory tasks involve processing in terms of
meaning, hence benefiting from deeper encoding while
implicit tasks tend to be perceptually based, depending
more on the exact replication of shallower encoding cues.
However, although there were many examples in the literature that fitted this pattern, it is not always possible to
make a clear distinction between perceptual data-driven
levels of analysis and analysis at a more conceptual or
semantic level. Roediger, Srinivas, and Weldon (1989) proposed that any given situation could have components
involving both levels of analysis which might or might
not trade off against each other. While plausible, this compounds the problem of measuring transfer appropriateness. Furthermore, data began to appear suggesting that
dissociations occurred within the proposed perceptual
and conceptual paradigms (Hunt & Toth, 1990) presenting
further difficulties in using TAP as a way of developing the
original LOP approach, and leading Roediger (2002, p. 321)
to conclude ``we suggest that the field in general has not
yet been able to develop an adequate characterization of
procedures that account for memory phenomena despite
efforts in this direction".
One important question to be asked of any theoretical
framework concerns its breadth of application. As
Roediger and Gallo (2001, p. 42) observe, LOP can be
regarded as ``a special case of transfer-appropriate processing that applies to memory for words in meaning-based
tests". However, although language is clearly important,
it is only part of our capacity to experience and remember
the world, suggesting a need for LOP studies of non-verbal
memory. We describe a series of experiments that began
with the question of whether reliable LOP effects could
be demonstrated using visual material. As relatively little
is known we adopted an exploratory approach of comparing LOP effects for a range of visual and verbal materials.
Our results show that different types of visual materials
all yield modest LOP effects whereas verbal materials give
a wider range such that the dramatic advantage to deep
encoding typically found depends crucially on the nature
of the material. These findings led us to propose a modified
explanation of LOP effects that takes into account the ``affordances" of a stimulus (Gibson, 1977) and applies to both
verbal and non-verbal material.
An early critique of the LOP concept (Baddeley, 1978)
noted the lack of evidence for LOP effects using visual stimuli. Although subsequent research on LOP has also been
dominated by use of verbal stimuli, a number of studies
have been performed across a range of other modalities,
though largely using implicit memory measures for which
LOP effects were, unsurprisingly found not to apply (Graf &
Mandler, 1984; Jacoby & Dallas, 1981). There appears to be
very little investigation of the LOP effect in studies of

explicit episodic memory using nonverbal stimuli. Some
exceptions to this generalization do however occur.
In the case of music, Halpern and Bartlett (2010) comment on a paucity of LOP studies in the literature, reporting
only one positive result. Peretz, Gaudreau, and Bonnel
(1998), found that judgments of the familiarity of a tune
led to better subsequent recognition than judging the
instrument playing the tune, commenting however that
``the current authors failed to find LOP effects for unfamiliar music on numerous occasions (some published, some
languishing in bottom drawers)" (Halpern & Bartlett,
2010, p. 234).
Attempts have also been made to study LOP effects in
olfactory memory. Lyman and McDaniel (1986) varied
encoding instructions in a study involving recognition
of 30 odors after a 1 week delay. No difference in hit rate
was found, but an advantage on a d0 measure suggested
that attempting to name and define each odor or linking
it to a life episode led to better performance than forming a visual image or simply trying to memorize each
stimulus. A subsequent replication by Zucco (2003) again
found a significant effect for d0 but not hit rate, with only
the life episode condition showing a significant advantage. These results suggest a modest overall effect of
deeper processing, operating mainly through reducing
false alarm rate, far from the robust effects typical of
verbal material.
There have been rather more attempts to detect LOP
effects in visual memory, reflected largely in studies of
memory for faces. Warrington and Ackroyd (1975) report
better face recognition following pleasantness judgments
than from estimation of the person's height, a somewhat
challenging task from a portrait photograph. A much easier
``shallow" task was used by Bower and Karlin (1974), judging the sex of the person portrayed. This proved less effective in facilitating subsequent recognition than did
judgments of likeableness or honesty. This could however
simply reflect the need to scan the face more intently in
order to make these ``deeper" judgments, as proposed by
Winograd (1981) who found that an instruction to identify
the most distinctive facial feature of a given face was more
effective than the apparently deeper task of making a personality judgment. On the other hand, a study by Patterson
and Baddeley (1977) which compared categorization on
physical dimensions such as nose size and thickness of lips
found these to be slightly less effective than judgments of
pleasantness or intelligence. An attempt to increase depth
of processing by providing a semantic context for each face
by adding a description of the unfamiliar person's occupation, background and habits however, proved ineffectual
(Baddeley, 1982; Baddeley & Woodhead, 1982). An
attempt to maximize TAP by presenting the contextual
information at both encoding and recognition did increase
rate of detection, but this proved to be entirely attributable
to inducing a positive response bias (Baddeley &
Woodhead, 1982), with participants also more likely to
erroneously say yes to a novel face, if accompanied by a
previously presented description. Once again therefore,
although it would be unwise to rule out the possibility of
an LOP effect for faces, any such effects are clearly far
weaker than those routinely found for verbal materials.

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

It could be argued of course, that despite the obvious
importance of faces, they are a rather special form of visual
stimulus, with their own specific anatomical processing
area (Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997), possibly also
associated with a relatively automatic link to emotional
coding (Ohman, 2009). For that reason, it is important to
extend the study of LOP effects in visual memory to other
stimuli. Unfortunately, the small number of studies that
have attempted this previously have used different methods and given contradictory results with D'Agostino,
O'Neill, and Paivio (1977) finding a positive effect using
readily nameable line drawings while Intraub and Nicklos
(1985), found a negative effect for some of their cued recall
conditions, suggesting the need for a more systematic
approach.
The starting point for our investigation was the observation that any study of the role of LOP must deal with
three variables, the nature of the initial encoding, deep versus shallow, the nature of the retrieval test, bearing in the
mind the importance of TAP, and the characteristics of the
material to be remembered. Neither the method of encoding nor the range of materials involves a simple binary
choice, hence the range of possible experiments becomes
very large indeed. For that reason we fixed our deep encoding method, basing it on judgments of pleasantness, and
always used a four-alternative forced-choice recognition
retrieval measure. Holding constant the method of ensuring deep encoding and the testing procedure then allowed
us to manipulate the variable central to our enquiry, the
nature of the material, allowing comparison between
visual and verbal memory, and importantly, of variations
in material within each modality. This approach raises a
number of further issues which will be discussed next.
The first concerns our selection of judgments of pleasantness as our deep encoding procedure. We did this
because we needed a semantic judgment that is readily
applicable to a wide range of materials. In his attempt to
develop a measure of meaning that extended beyond verbal material Osgood developed a complex rating scale,
the semantic differential which factor analysis suggested
yielded three factors of which the strongest was consistently the hedonically evaluative good-bad dimension
(Osgood, May, & Miron, 1975). In the case of words, encoding on this dimension has been shown to produce a particularly powerful LOP effect (Hyde & Jenkins, 1969) and
indeed Packman and Battig (1978) found that judgments
of pleasantness were substantially more effective than
other ``deep" judgments such as concreteness or meaningfulness. Furthermore, the widespread use of pleasantness
judgments in clinical assessments such as the Warrington
(1984) recognition test involving words and faces, reflects
the fact that it is a task that participants find natural and
relatively easy to use for both verbal and visual stimuli.
Choosing shallow encoding tasks is less straightforward
given that they need to be applicable to both visual and
verbal material and to ensure that participants process
the stimuli at the required level. Finally, to avoid the risk
of basing our conclusions on a single atypical task, we
use a range of different ``shallow" processing instructions.
Our earlier research concerned with developing a clinical
test of visual memory opted to use door scenes as they

3

are familiar, allowing a range of degrees of similarity and
resulting difficulty. Two lists of 12 doors tested using
four-alternative forced choice proved both sensitive to
memory deficit and patient friendly (Baddeley, Emslie, &
Nimmo-Smith, 1994).
Photographing doors subsequently proved addictive to
A.B., resulting in a data base of over 2000 visual stimuli.
In order to increase their experimental usability we classified each item along a range of dimensions, thus making it
relatively easy to select sets of differing levels of inter-item
similarity (Baddeley, Hitch, Quinlan, Bowes, & Stone, in
press). In addition to our having a very large readily available set, doors have the advantage that, unlike faces they
almost certainly do not have a specific brain area devoted
to their processing and are unlikely to have atypically
strong links to emotional and social processing (Ohman,
2009).
Having established that a LOP effect can be obtained
using door scenes in pilot work, we continued to include
door stimuli as a baseline against which other types of
visual and verbal stimulus material could be compared.
This led to the question of what other type of material. In
this essentially exploratory study, rather than setting up
and testing precise hypotheses, we used pragmatic constraints to select our material. We opted for lists of 24-
30 items per condition, choosing four-choice recognition
rather than two-alternative or yes/no recognition reduced
baseline guessing to obviate the need for longer lists. We
wanted to maintain certain characteristics of our doors
test, namely that the items should come from a single
broad semantic category, and that there should be sufficient similarity between items to allow a level of recognition approximately equal across materials. It is worth
noting at this point that simply selecting visual recognition
items from a wide range of categories, with distractors
chosen at random tends to lead to levels of performance
of 90% or more, even with very long lists (Brady, Konkle,
Alvarez, & Oliva, 2008; Konkle, Brady, Alvarez, & Oliva,
2010a; Nickerson, 1965; Standing, Conezio, & Haber,
1970). The experiments that follow reflect these
constraints.
Experiment 1 therefore compares recognition memory
for door scenes or concrete words processed either
``deeply" in terms of pleasantness, or more shallowly in
terms of stimulus color. Experiment 2 attempts to replicate
this with different sets of stimuli and a different shallow
processing task, while Experiments 3a, b and c explore
the generality of our initial findings by extending them
to a broader range of visual and verbal materials, using
the method of converging operations to determine which
aspects of the material are crucial

Experiment 1
Design and procedure
A 2  2 within participants design combined two types
of material, doors and words and two types of encoding
instruction involving judgments of pleasantness and color.
All participants were tested on each of the four conditions

4

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

in counterbalanced order. A total of 20 student volunteers
were tested.1 They and all participants in the remaining
studies were University of York students who gave informed
consent and were rewarded either by course credit or a
small honorarium.
Material comprised two lists of 24 doors selected to
have a range of colors, with half the door scenes being
predominantly brown. There were also two lists of 24
words, presented in Courier New 18 pt font. Half the
words contained a majority of brown letters with the
rightmost n letters displayed in PC color ``saddle
brown". The remaining letters were chosen at random
from ``red, white, blue and green", all being the same
color with a minority of brown letters. In all conditions
the background screen was silver and other textual
materials were presented in black. In the deep conditions, participants judged whether they found each door
or word pleasant or unpleasant. In the shallow condition they judged whether the stimulus was predominantly brown.
Each presented stimulus was tested using a 4 AFC
recognition procedure in which a previously presented
item occurred together with three distractors arranged
in a square formation. In the case of the doors, these
were again selected so as to be from the same category,
for example all church doors or garage doors. The verbal
stimuli comprised one list of animals (e.g. lion, leopard,
puma, tiger), and one of household objects (e.g. plate,
cup, saucer, mug), the reason being that these stimulus
categories did not have sufficient similar distractors to
create two lists of 24 items with three broadly similar
foils.
Fig. 1 shows monochrome examples of the door scenes
used.
Each learning trial involved a central fixation point
presented for 1 s followed by a 1 s stimulus presentation
after which two response choices were displayed for 2 s,
involving computer keys 1 and 2. In the shallow conditions ``brown-1, not brown-2" was displayed, and in the
deep conditions ``pleasant-1, unpleasant-2". Once a
response was made the next trial fixation cross was presented. In this and all subsequent experiments, each list
was followed by a four alternative recognition test in
which each of the target items was presented together
with three ``new" foils. Each test array was preceded by
a fixation cross, presented for 500 ms and followed immediately by the four test stimuli, one in each of the screen's
quadrants. Target location within each test set was random. Participants were told that one of the four had been
shown previously and to report the ``old" item by pressing
one of four response keys on a computer keyboard in
which the keys corresponded to the spatial layout to the
stimuli on the screen (keys 1, 3, 7 and 9). The targets
and distractors were always matched in predominant
color.
Each of the four conditions began with a practice block
comprising four study items followed by four test items,
1
Unfortunately gender balance for Experiments 1 and 2 was not
recorded but was likely to contain a higher proportion of female
participants.

leading to the experimental block which involved 24 study
items immediately followed by 24 test trials. The order of
the four conditions was balanced across participants using
a Latin square.
Results
Fig. 2 shows the mean probabilities of correct responses
across the four conditions. A 2  2 repeated measures
ANOVA that combined stimulus type (words versus picture) and LOP (shallow versus deep) showed main effects
of stimulus type (F(1, 19) = 47.57, p < .001, g2 = .72) and
LOP (F(1, 19) = 29.38, p < .001, g2 = .61) together with a
stimulus type  LOP interaction (F(1, 19) = 12.06, p < .01,
g2 = .39). Further analysis of the interaction showed a significant effect of LOP for both types of stimuli (words: t
(19) = 5.77, p < .01, d = 1.29; doors: t(19) = 2.88, p < .01,
d = 0.64) although the size of the effect was significantly
larger for the word stimuli than for pictures (t(19) = 3.47,
p < .01).
Discussion
Experiment 1 succeeds in showing a positive effect of
LOP for our visual stimuli. It is however significantly less
than that found for words where the magnitude of the
LOP effect is almost certainly constrained by a ceiling effect
with many of the participants scoring at or near the maximum of 24 in the deep processing condition. A second
problem concerns the tendency for our door stimuli to be
harder than the verbal material even under shallow encoding conditions. This difference occurred despite our
attempt to make the three distractor words as similar as
possible to the target. Category size limitations, even using
the two large semantic categories, of animals and household objects, proved insufficient to keep performance
down to an equivalent level, probably because of the difficulty in finding enough similar distractors. This then leaves
open the possibility that the interaction between material
and encoding strategy stems not from material per se, but
from the difference between high and low performance.
Such a result would be interesting in placing constraints
on the generality of the LOP effect, but would itself require
further explanation.
Fortunately, verbal materials matched in difficulty to
the doors test were already available from the Doors
and People Test (Baddeley et al., 1994) based on people's
names, where level of difficulty can readily be manipulated by varying distinctiveness. Hence, an easy item such
as Graham Cammiss with distractors Graham Clayton, Graham Crosby and Graham Coles can be contrasted with a
more difficult item such as John Robertson with distractors
John Robinson, John Roberson, and John Robson. Names
have the advantage that although obviously verbal, they
tend not to have useful semantic associations, hence
Mrs. Black is no more likely to have dark hair than Mrs.
White, or indeed Mrs. Green. Finally, a third condition
was added, namely occupations, providing a large category of semantically rich items, where difficulty can be
introduced by making relatively fine distinctions between
the target and distractors as in the case for example of the

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

5

Fig. 1. Examples of the four alternative forced choice door scenes used in Experiment 1. The full database is accessible via Baddeley et al. (in press).

target television director against distractors television engineer, television presenter, television producer. We expected
this category to give a level of performance somewhat
higher than names but lower than our previous categories
of animals and household objects. Finally, we increased
list length from 24 to 30 in order to reduce the risk of
ceiling effects.

Experiment 2
Design
A total of 24 participants, were each tested on three
types of stimuli, doors, names and occupations, in each
case processed at two levels, shallow and deep. Each

6

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

using a four-alternative forced choice procedure. Each 30
item list was preceded by a six item practice list using
the relevant encoding procedure.
Each memory block was followed by an immediate test
in which 30 sets of four items were presented in a square
array of four locations labeled A to D. Participants
responded by writing the relevant letter on an answer
sheet. They were allowed a maximum of 8 s to respond
but were encouraged to do so at their own pace. Location
of the target was randomized across the locations. After
the first three lists, there followed a 3 min interval during
which they completed a maze distractor task, before going
on to the alternative encoding procedure.

Fig. 2. Influence of levels of processing on door scenes, words selected
from the categories of household goods and familiar animals.

encoded list was followed by an immediate four alternative forced-choice test. All participants completed all six
conditions, half beginning with the shallow condition and
half with deep. The order of stimulus presentation within
each encoding condition was counterbalanced using a
3  3 Latin square. Half began with the three deep encoding instructions and half with the shallow. Order of material type was the same for each encoding depth, hence if
the participant began with deep coding of doors, they
would also begin with the deep encoding of names and
occupations.
Materials
Two sets of 30 target doors were prepared, each followed by 30 test sets comprising the target and three distractors. Two sets of 30 names were generated using the
Doors and People Test, supplemented by the local telephone directory, but avoiding names of famous people.
Each name was presented with both a given and family
name, with the given name remaining constant across
the recognition set. Two sets of 30 occupations were constructed. In order to increase level of difficulty and avoid
ceiling effects, targets and distractors were typically
selected to be similar for example the target dressmaker
was tested against distractors tailor, seamstress, and
embroiderer.
The doors were presented in full color and the verbal
stimuli were broadly equivalently colored red, green,
brown, blue or black. In the shallow condition, participants
were asked to name the color of the door or word. When
tested, both the target and distractors were in the original
target color. In the deep condition, participants were
required to make a verbal judgment of pleasant or unpleasant for each of the items.
Procedure
Stimuli were presented at a rate 1 s per item, with a
1.5 s interval during which participants were required to
make their judgments. They were informed that they
would subsequently be required to remember the items

Results
Mean performance across the three material types and
two levels of processing is shown in Fig. 3. A 3  2 ANOVA
was performed involving material (doors, names and occupations), and LOP (deep and shallow). It showed a main
effect of material type F(2, 46) = 16.14, p < .001, g2p = .41,
together with a clear effect of processing level F(1, 23)
= 38.53, p < .001, g2p = .63, with an overall advantage to
deep processing, together with a significant interaction
between material and level F(2, 46) = 8.62, p = .001,
g2p = .27. A series of t-tests showed a significant LOP effect
for each type of material, with the greatest being for occupations t(23) = 5.13, p < .001, d = 1.05, a somewhat smaller
effect for names t(23) = 3.46, p = .002, d = 0.71 and a smaller but significant effect for doors, t(23) = 2.60, p = .016,
d = 0.53.
Further 2  2 ANOVAs were performed, using the interaction as an indicator of the magnitude of the levels effect
across types of material. Analysis of occupation and names,
the two verbal conditions, showed a significant interaction,
F(1, 23) = 8.15, p = .009, g2p = .26, indicating a more pronounced levels effect for occupations. When occupations
and doors were compared in a 2  2 ANOVA, a somewhat
more substantial interaction resulted F(1, 23) = 14.27,
p = .001, g2p = .38. However, when names and doors were
compared, the interaction failed to reach significance F
(1, 23) = 1.19, p = .287, g2p = .05.
Discussion
We can draw three clear conclusions from our results.
First, we replicate the impact of depth of processing on
visual stimuli, using a different set of doors. Second, we
were successful in finding a verbal task that was at least
as difficult as our visual condition by choosing names, finding a LOP effect comparable to that with doors. A significantly larger effect of levels of processing was found in
the case of occupations where overall level of performance
was equivalent to that of the door stimuli. We can therefore rule out a simple association between overall level
of performance and impact of LOP. This pattern of results
thus appears to rule out two simple hypotheses, namely
that LOP effects are always more substantial for verbal
than visual material, and that the magnitude of the levels
effect simply reflects the overall level of performance.

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

Fig. 3. Influence of depth of processing on door scenes, people's names
and occupations.

Importantly, they also point to differences within verbal
memory of susceptibility to the effect of LOP.
While it is tempting to propose specific explanations at
this point, it would clearly be unwise to do so on the basis
of only a limited range of materials and shallow encoding
operations. Our next step therefore was to test the generality of our findings in a three part study, each involving
three different types of material and two levels of processing. In each case we include a baseline condition involving
our original doors task, together with one visual and one
verbal condition. In each case, the visual and verbal stimuli
were determined by the practical constraints of ensuring a
sufficiently large sample of material, in which degree of
similarity allowed broadly comparable levels of overall
performance. The design in each of the three was broadly
similar to that in Experiment 2, with lists comprising 30
items tested by 4 AFC. In each case deep processing
involved judgments of pleasantness, while the shallow
processing depended on the nature of the stimulus material, but was always the same for all three types of
material.

Experiment 3a
The materials selected were as follows:
(1) The 240 doors used in Experiment 2.
(2) A total of 240 clocks. These were selected from the
internet using Google Search under five subcategories: circle clocks, square clocks, pendulum clocks,
alarm clocks, and street clocks. All words on the pictures were removed using Adobe Photoshop CS
2.256.
(3) A total of 240 verbal items came from food menus,
again selected from the internet using search terms:
Chinese food menu, English food menu, Japanese food
menu, Dessert menu and Drinks menu. All food names
consisted of either three or four words (e.g. Cheddar
and tomato soup, Pea and bacon soup, Creamy sweet
corn soup, Hot and sour soup) and were displayed in
Times New Roman in font size 40.

7

All stimuli were presented in central vision on a 14 in.
flat screen monitor. Within each set, 240 items were used
in the test and 16 during the practice session. For each
type of material, two lists of 30 target items were
selected, together with three distractors, selected using
target-distractor similarity to avoid ceiling and floor
effects and to balance lists in approximate level of
difficulty.
Items were presented at encoding for 1 s, with a further
2 s allowed for a verbal judgment. In each case, the deep
judgment was pleasant or unpleasant, while the shallow
involved judged size. In the case of doors participants
judged whether each item was larger than a typical domestic door. For clocks, the judgment was larger or smaller
than a domestic mantelshelf clock, and in the case of food
items whether the name comprised more than three
words. Stimuli were exposed for 1 s, with a further 2 s
allowed for a verbal response. Recognition was self paced,
within an 8 s maximum.
A total of 48 participants (15 males), were tested. All
were student volunteers from the University of York
reporting normal color vision and reading competence.
Again a within-subject design was used with appropriate
counterbalancing of order and materials.
Results
These are shown in Fig. 4. A 3  2 ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of LOP on performance, F(1, 47)
= 100.47, p < .001, g2p = .68, with deeper processing leading
to better performance. There was however no overall effect
of stimulus type, F(1, 72) = 1.7, p = .192, g2p = .01, indicating
that the attempt during piloting to equate overall level of
difficulty had been successful. There was however a significant interaction between LOP and type of stimulus material F(2, 94) = 23.47, p < .001, g2p = .33. The LOP effect was
significant and large for food names, t(47) = 10.59,
p < .001, d = 1.52, was significant for clocks t(47) = 6.1,
p < .001, d = 0.88, and was significant but much smaller
for doors t(47) = 1.87, p < .05, d = 0.27.
A series of 2  2 ANOVAs involving material and level of
processing were performed in order to compare the processing effect across conditions. The relevant interaction
proved significant when comparing menu names with
clocks, F(1, 47) = 31.93, p < .001, g2p = .41, and with doors F
(1, 47) = 34.77, p < .001, g2p = .43. However the interaction
failed to reach significance when doors were compared
with clocks F(1, 47) = 2.4, p = .128, g2p = .05.
Discussion
Once again deeper processing enhances memory for
doors but the effect is relatively small. Clocks give a similarly modest LOP effect; however, the most substantial
effect is for the verbal material of food names. In this case
we have succeeded in matching overall levels of performance, again ruling out a simple association between difficulty and the impact of deeper processing. Further
discussion will be postponed until after Experiments 3b
and 3c.

8

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

Fig. 4. Influence of processing depth on recognition of door scenes, clocks
and menu items.

Fig. 5. Influence of processing depth on recognition of door scenes,
mobile phones and London underground station names.

Experiment 3b

of stimulus material F(2, 70) = 26.88, p < .001, g2p = .43, and
of depth of processing F(1, 35) = 39.16, p < .001, g2p = .53.
There was also a significant interaction between material
and depth of processing F(2, 70) = 3.64, p < .05, g2p = .09 suggesting that the material differed in susceptibility to LOP.
There was however a significant depth effect for all three
types of material, for underground station names, t(35)
= 6.29, p < .001, d = 1.05, for mobile phones, t(35) = 3.47,
p < .001, d = 0.58 and for doors, t(35) = 2.53, p < .01,
d = 0.42.
Once again the magnitude of the levels effect was compared between conditions using a series of 2  2 ANOVAs
and testing for an interaction. The interaction proved significant when comparing phones and underground station
names F(1, 35) = 7.54, p = .009, g2p = .18 suggesting a greater
levels effect for station names. When station names were
compared to doors the interaction was marginally significant, F(1, 35) = 4.18, p = .049, g2p = .11. However no significant interaction occurred when the two visual stimulus
sets were compared F(1, 35) = 0.27, p = .871, g2p = .00.

The overall design is identical to 3a with the exception
that different materials were used, and different shallow
processing judgments required. In this case the shallow
judgment was to report the dominant color of each
stimulus.
Materials
Again the same 30 doors were used followed by 30 test
items each comprising one target and 3 distractors. The
second visual set comprised 240 pictures of mobile phones
together with a further 8 items used for practice. These
were downloaded from the web using four categories (flip,
straightboard, touch-monitor and slide) in colors of white,
pink, red, silver, green, blue, purple and black from Google
and Yahoo using search terms ``Japanese mobile phone
images" and ``hand phone images". Any words, brand names
or other non-pictorial cues were removed to minimize the
possibility of verbal coding.
The verbal stimuli comprised a total of 240 names of
London Underground stations (e.g. Waterloo, Watford,
Wansted, Warren Street), again sourced from Google
together with two invented names. They were printed with
first letters in uppercase in colors green, red, black, purple,
blue or pink. For each condition, sets of 4 items were
selected so as to be broadly similar to the target items,
again located at random within the test sets. Since piloting
suggested these sets of material might be somewhat more
difficult than earlier stimuli, exposure time was increased
from 1 s to 2 s, allowing 2 s for the judgment. Again, recognition was unpaced with the exception that a maximum of
8 s was allowed, with participants marking the location of
the target on a response sheet. A total of 36 undergraduate
students, 18 male, from the University of York served as
unpaid participants. All reported an absence of color
blindness.
Results
These are shown in Fig. 5 and were again analyzed
using a 3  2 ANOVA. This showed significant main effects

Discussion
We again find modest but significant effects of LOP
using visual stimuli, but once again the effects are smaller
than found with words, despite the fact that the verbal
material almost certainly contained many names that were
unfamiliar to the participants, very few of whom would be
familiar with the London area. We postpone discussion
until describing our final study, which again samples a different set of material.
Experiment 3c
This used the same overall design as 3a and 3b, using a
pleasantness judgment for deep processing, this time compared with a shallow judgment of whether the stimulus
had one dominant color or was multi-colored. Three types
of material were used, one comprising the same 30 doors, a
second stimulus set comprising scenes as used by Konkle,
Brady, Alvarez, and Oliva (2010b) at http://cvcl.mit.edu/
MM/sceneCategories.html (Appendix). We used 240 scene

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

images from 10 categories (streams, libraries, snowy mountains, deserts, dining rooms, restaurants, forests, icebergs,
bars, and canyons). Images with people or atypical distinguishing features in the background were excluded. A total
of 30 images were selected as stimuli and the remainder
used as distractors, with distractors chosen to be from
the same category, for example four desert scenes or four
mountain scenes. A further 16 scenes were used during
the practice session.
The verbal stimuli comprised animal names collected
using a Google search engine under categories marine
mammals, land mammals, reptiles, amphibians and insects.
They were arranged into sets with the distractors broadly
similar to the targets. In order to avoid the very high level
of performance that occurs when familiar animals are used
as in Experiment 1, subcategories were allowed for example, striped owl, spotted owl, snowy owl, barn owl or field
ants, carpenter ants, fire ants, leaf-cutter ants. These were
displayed using Times New Roman font size 44, presented
either in black ink or using two or more colors for different
letters. When tested, the target and distractors were reproduced using the same door or letter colors.
Again the pleasant/unpleasant judgment was used for
deep processing while the shallow condition involved
judgment of whether the stimulus had one predominant
overall color or comprised multiple colors. The encoding
phase involved 2 s stimulus presentation followed by a
2 s interval during which a verbal encoding decision was
to be made. Again the relevant variables were counterbalanced using a Latin square. A total of 48 undergraduate
students, 26 male, were tested, all reporting normal color
vision.
Results
Fig. 6 shows the mean level of performance across the
six conditions. A 3  2 ANOVA found no effect of material,
suggesting that levels had been successfully matched.
There was a significant effect of LOP F(1, 47) = 24.49,
p < .001, g2p = .34, but no significant interaction between
stimulus material and processing level F(2, 94) = 0.96,
p = .386, g2p = .02. Further analysis showed significant LOP
effects for doors, t(47) = 3.33, p < .001, d = 0.48, for scenes,
t(47) = 3.45, p < .001, d = 0.50, and for words t(47) = 3.52,
p < .001, d = 0.51.
Once again we find reliable but modest effects of levels
for visual stimuli, although in this case the trend for a more
prominent effect with verbal material was absent.
Discussion
This is the only occasion in which we find no difference
in LOP magnitude across materials, all of which show a significant effect of processing depth. The most obvious interpretation for the lack of an enhanced effect for verbal
stimuli is that participants knew insufficient about the animals named to be able to set up a precise encoding; how,
for instance does a field ant differ from a fire ant? Taken
in isolation, this result could therefore be regarded as obvious and hence uninteresting. In the broader context of our
range of LOP effects however, it can be regarded as a

9

Fig. 6. Influence of processing depth on recognition of door scenes,
outdoor scenes and unfamiliar animals.

potentially informative if relatively extreme case. Also of
interest is the clear but relatively modest LOP effect for
scenes, extending our results beyond our previous range
of pictures of objects or limited door scenes. We return
to this in the general discussion.

General discussion
We will begin by summarizing our results before going
on to suggest an interpretation. This will then be applied to
the studies of the effect of LOP on verbal and nonverbal
material more generally, as summarized in the introduction before concluding with a discussion of the potential
significance of our results for other recent studies of visual
LTM.
We set out with a broad question; is the positive effect
of deep processing limited to language-based materials?
We compared the effect of judgments of pleasantness with
shallow encoding conditions involving judgments of size
and color and emerged with the conclusion that LOP
effects can clearly be found with non-verbal materials,
hence placing earlier, sometimes equivocal evidence for
this, on a broader and more robust base. More interesting
than this simple conclusion however, is the variation in
size of the effects, and the way in which this depends on
the nature of the remembered material.
We can answer our initial question with some confidence. Modest but consistent LOP effects were shown for
all, the visual materials we studied, namely doors, clocks,
mobile phones and scenes. In contrast, the data for verbal
materials are considerably more varied than found with
visual stimuli. This is shown in Fig. 7 which lists, for each
broad type of material, the LOP effect size measured in
terms of Cohen's d. For purposes of comparison, studies
run by Walsh and Jenkins (1973) and Hyde and Jenkins
(1969) using judgments of pleasantness with familiar word
stimuli report seven LOP experiments with effect sizes
ranging from 1.78 to 2.65 with a mean of 2.27. However
it should be borne in mind that these studies typically used
free recall, rather than experimental conditions that are
matched with our own. Furthermore, many studies in the
literature have used an incidental learning paradigm, not

10

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

Fig. 7. Effect sizes of the influence of depth of processing across our three experiments.

possible in our case where participants were tested across
conditions so as to allow a more powerful within participant comparison. Learning would hence have been incidental on only the first condition. A more appropriate
comparison would be with the recognition conditions
tested by Craik and Tulving (1975) but unfortunately it is
not possible to calculate effect sizes from their data.
As the previous summary would suggest, the smallest
effect sizes in Fig. 7 tend to be found for doors, with similar
effect sizes for the other visual stimuli, while effect sizes
for verbal material are widely spread ranging from a small
effect for names, broadly comparable to that found for
visual stimuli, through to a relatively substantial effect
for familiar animals and household goods. This is still
lower than those typically reported by Jenkins and colleagues, but was almost certainly constrained by a ceiling
effect.
How might we explain this pattern of data? In an informal interchange, Craik agreed that work on LOP had principally focused on studies involving individual words,
speculating that perhaps ``pictures drive a `deep' encoding
regardless of orienting instructions, whereas words can be
processed in a variety of ways" (Craik, personal communication 7th May 2014). However, while this could give an
account of a visual-verbal difference, it does not give an
adequate account of the wide range of results found within
our verbal conditions. For this, we need an explanation
that incorporates the characteristics of the material to be
remembered and the fact that material and encoding strategy interact, with the result that the same encoding
instructions can have markedly different effects across different types of material.

One way of thinking about this is offered by the concept
of ``affordance" proposed by Gibson (1977) and subsequently used more widely to refer to the relation between
an object and an organism, whereby the object provides, or
``affords" the opportunity to perform an action (Norman,
1988). An example might be a simple chair that affords
the action of sitting, but also of using it to stand and reach
a high shelf, or indeed less probably as a weapon in a bar
room brawl.
Craik and Lockhart's (1972) LOP concept could be seen
as capitalizing on the affordances offered by printed words.
Each word affords encoding as a simple visual stimulus, as
a pronounceable word, or as providing access to a rich and
potentially complex set of associations through its meaning. Following the abandonment of the initial simple processing depth hypothesis the tendency has been to
interpret the enhanced memory for ``deeply" processed
items in terms of the richness of encoding, with more
encoded features leading to greater probability of subsequent recall or recognition (Craik, 2002). Viewed in this
way, it seems likely that a judgment of pleasantness will
call upon a wide range of potential features which have
to be sampled, implicitly at least, in order to come up with
an overall pleasantness judgment.
Suppose we consider a picture of a domestic door in the
same way. Unless it is a familiar door with rich associations, pleasantness will presumably be judged using relatively superficial visual cues such as shape, size and
physical condition, features that are likely to be encoded
rapidly and incidentally, even when making other judgments such as the color of the door. We would therefore
modify Craik's suggestion of visual stimuli affording

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

immediate ``deep" processing, proposing instead that a
potential lack of depth characterizes many such stimuli
including our door scenes. A similar case can be made for
the other visual materials used, clocks, mobile phones
and visual scenes.
It is important to note however, that differences are
more likely to occur for verbal materials that will vary in
the degree and usefulness of the elaboration any word
affords. Hence, a familiar animal name such as ``leopard",
will afford the visual representation of a spotted animal,
of speed and fierceness perhaps also linked to its habitat,
possibly also including indirect associations, for example
to the title of a novel about Sicily. This will allow a clear
discrimination between its elaborated encoding and that
for example of a lion, different color, different shape, a
mane and perhaps associated with the musical ``The Lion
King" (cf Experiment 1). Similarly menu items are likely
to have a range of affordances (Experiment 2). Such richness of detail will not however be available in comparing
relatively unfamiliar creatures such as different varieties
of ant (Experiment 3c). A similar problem will occur in
the case of peoples' names, which are essentially arbitrary,
with potential semantic links, between the name and the
person being relatively unhelpful (Experiment 2).
We suggest therefore that rather than emphasizing
modality as the critical factor, we use the more general concept of affordance. This allows us to integrate results from
verbal and visual memory. Thus, in contrast to the rich
set of semantic associations afforded by a familiar concrete
word, a picture of a domestic door affords rather little in
terms of potential semantic elaboration. A door may of
course yield a wide array of visual features, any one of
which might provide the feeling of familiarity necessary
for a positive memory response. However, such features
will have little impact on success in recognition unless
they differentiate between the target and potential distractors, a situation minimized in our own studies by selecting
distractors that are broadly similar in category and visual
appearance, for example four church doors.
We suggest a distinction between two broad classes of
affordances, perceptual and semantic. Any stimulus,
whether visual or auditory will typically provide relatively
automatic perceptual encoding that may potentially
involve a large range of features. Visually presented words
on the other hand, afford a relatively impoverished perceptual stimulus, but one that can be elaborated by making
use of a complex network of semantic associations, a process that will depend to some extent at least on the strategy adopted by the participant. It is important to stress
that we use the term ``semantic" in the broad sense of elaborated and structured knowledge rather than in a purely
linguistic sense. This is of particular relevance where differences in levels of expertise are involved as proposed
by Bransford, Franks, Morris, and Stein (1979) and is well
illustrated in the case of memory for visually presented
chess positions where performance is strongly influenced
by level of expertise (De Groot, 1965) in a task that shows
no dependence on verbal coding (Robbins et al., 1996).
Rich and elaborate encoding will not itself guarantee
recognition however, unless the encoded features can distinguish between targets and distractors, a central issue

11

addressed by Nairne (2002), in what he terms a ``simple
model". This feature-based model provides a useful bridge
between our concept of affordance and more classic
approaches to theories of verbal LTM.2 Nairne's model follows his critique of the concept of transfer appropriate processing in which he criticizes what he describes as the
``myth of the encoding-retrieval match" assumption underlying TAP. He proposes instead a correlational link between
the number of features present at both encoding and retrieval. Such a correlation is strongly influenced by what he
terms the ``diagnosticity" of the matching cues, the extent
to which they allow a distinction between the correct
response and incorrect distractors. Here he introduces the
concept of cue overload whereby a potentially useful retrieval cue becomes much less so, if it is also associated with a
range of incorrect responses (Earhard, 1967; Watkins &
Watkins, 1975). This can arise either because of similarity,
whereby many of the features are common to both target
and distractor as in the case of our church doors, or because
of a relative paucity of cues due to lack of information available at encoding, as in the case of our study using relatively
rare animals such as several varieties of ant. In short, what is
necessary for successful retrieval is not determined by the
number of cues in common between encoding and retrieval,
but by their ``diagnosticity" based on their capability of distinguishing between targets and non targets.
Nairne's ``simple model" provides a plausible overall
framework encompassing the processes involved in recognition, while leaving open the question of material and
its potential interaction with LOP. The model could be
adapted to explain our results by incorporating the concept
of affordance. This would potentially provide a simple
model that is able to give an account of standard learning
phenomena (see Nairne, 2002), LOP, TAP and their interaction with material type.
If the proposed framework is to be developed further
we need to identify and measure the relevant features.
Identifying the nature of the semantic features of a given
verbal stimulus has already been addressed as part of an
attempt to develop semantic theory (Lambon Ralph,
Lowe, & Rogers, 2007; Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007)
and to compare the various theories proposed to explain
category-specific semantic deficits reported in neuropsychological patients (Cree & McRae, 2003) The method used
is simple if somewhat laborious, namely to present each
stimulus item (e.g. the word dog) and require participants
to produce as many brief associated statements as they can
in a specified time. These can be either generic e.g. ``has
four legs, is a mammal, barks", or specific ``called Fido",
``bit me last week", etc. We would expect recognition
memory for a given item to be a joint function of the number of such responses, together with their distinctivenessbased diagnosticity. Such potentially diagnostic features
are likely to be substantially more numerous for familiar
concrete nouns such as leopard than for a less familiar creature such as a leaf-cutting ant. It should, in principle, be
2
Although we find this version of feature theory helpful, our enthusiasm
does not extend to Nairne's (1990) attempt to extend feature theory to
STM, which involves strong assumptions about the role of modality-specific
features.

12

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13

possible to apply the same method to visual stimuli presenting each item and asking for associated features to
be listed. Here, we suspect the discriminative features
within a limited category such as doors will be less rich
and consequently less likely to be diagnostic in separating
targets from distractors although within each list of items
such as doors or natural scenes, we would expect some
items to be more distinctive and hence more memorable
than others, hence offering a potential validation of the
application of the method to episodic as well as semantic
memory.
This leads on to the question of whether there are likely
to be differences between typical visual and verbal stimuli.
We suggest that this is likely to be the case simply because
verbal stimuli will frequently lend themselves more readily to more general semantic elaboration, particularly if
encouraged by ``deep" encoding instructions. This seems
much less likely for most visual stimuli, for which the relevant diagnostic cues may be less semantically rich, and
more dependent on purely perceptual features.
We began with a simple question concerning the applicability of the concept of LOP to visual LTM. We arrived at
the answer that modest but consistent effects could be
shown but in doing so discovered that the classic substantial verbal effect depends crucially on the verbal material
employed. In explaining our pattern of data we imported
the concept of affordances from the field of perception
and action combining it with the feature based approach
widely used in theories of verbal LTM. The resulting broad
theoretical framework incorporates the concepts of LOP
and TAP, together with the roles of perceptual and semantic coding and the potential effects of expertise. Further
development is likely to benefit from capitalizing on currently developing methods and concepts in the areas of
semantic memory and picture processing.
Author note
We are grateful to Philip Quinlan for his help and
advice, and to Stephanie Chung, Po Fu, Stephanie Motley,
Susan Oei, Stephen Rhodes, Natalie Whitehead and Suet
Wong for their contribution to the development of material and to testing and to Fergus Craik and James Nairne
for their constructive comments on an earlier draft.
References
Baddeley, A. D. (1978). The trouble with levels: A re-examination of Craik
and Lockhart framework for memory research. Psychological Review,
85, 139-152.
Baddeley, A. D. (1982). Domains of recollection. Psychological Review, 89,
708-729. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.89.6.708.
Baddeley, A. D., Emslie, H., & Nimmo-Smith, I. (1994). Doors and people: A
test of visual and verbal recall and recognition.Bury St Edmunds,
Suffolk: Thames Valley Test Company.
Baddeley, A. D., Hitch, G. J., Quinlan, P., Bowes, L., & Stone, R. (2016). Doors
for memory: A searchable database. Quarterly Journal of Experiment
Psychology (in press).
Baddeley, A., & Woodhead, M. (1982). Depth of processing, context, and
face recognition. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 148-164. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0080635.
Bower, G. H., & Karlin, M. B. (1974). Depth of processing pictures of faces
and recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103,
751-757. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0037190.

Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2008). Visual long-term
memory has a massive storage capacity for object details. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105,
14325-14329.
Bransford, J. D., Franks, J. J., Morris, C. D., & Stein, B. S. (1979). Some
general constraints on learning in memory research. In L. S. Cermak &
F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Levels of processing in human memory
(pp. 331-354). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Conway, M. A. (2002). Sensory-perceptual episodic memory and its
context: Autobiographical memory. In A. Baddeley, M. Conway, & J.
Aggleton (Eds.), Episodic memory (pp. 53-70). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Craik, F. I. M. (2002). Levels of processing: Past, present . . . and future?
Memory, 10, 305-318. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658210244
000135.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing. A framework
for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
11, 671-684. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(72)80001-X.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the retention
of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 104(3), 268-294. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.104.
3.268.
Cree, G. S., & McRae, K. (2003). Analyzing the factors underlying the
structure and computation of the meaning of chipmunk, cherry,
chisel, cheese, and cello (and many other such concrete nouns).
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 163-201.
D'Agostino, P. R., O'Neill, B. J., & Paivio, A. (1977). Memory for pictures and
words as a function of level of processing: Depth or dual coding?
Memory & Cognition, 5, 252-256. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/
BF03197370.
De Groot, A. D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess.New York: Basic Books.
Earhard, M. (1967). Subjective organization and list organization as
determinants of free-recall and serial-recall memorization. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 501-507. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0022-5371(67)80007-0.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford
(Eds.), Perceiving, acting and knowing (pp. 67-82). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Graf, P., & Mandler, G. (1984). Activation makes words more accessible,
but not necessarily more retrievable. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 23, 553-568.
Halpern, A. R., & Bartlett, J. C. (2010). Memory for melodies. In M. R. Jones,
R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.). Music perception. Springer handbook of
auditory research (Vol. 36, pp. 233-258). . http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4419-6114-3_8.
Hunt, R. R., & Toth, J. P. (1990). Perceptual identification, fragment
completion, and free recall: Concepts and data. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 282-290. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.16.2.282.
Hyde, T. S., & Jenkins, J. J. (1969). Differential effects of incidental tasks on
the organization of recall of a list of highly associated words. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 82, 472-481. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
h0028372.
Intraub, H., & Nicklos, S. (1985). Levels of processing and picture memory:
The physical superiority effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 284-298. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0278-7393.11.2.284.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship between
autobiographical memory and perceptual learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 110, 306-340. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0096-3445.110.3.306.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. (1997). The fusiform face area: A
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception.
Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 4302-4311.
Konkle, T., Brady, T. F., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2010a). Conceptual
distinctiveness supports detailed visual long-term memory for realworld objects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 139,
558-578. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0019165.
Konkle, T., Brady, T. F., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2010b). Scene memory is
more detailed than you think: The role of categories in visual longterm memory. Psychological Science, 21, 1551-1556. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/095679610385359.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Lowe, C., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Neural basis of
category-specific semantic deficits for living things: Evidence from
semantic dementia, HSVE and a neural network model. Brain, 130,
1127-1137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm025.
Lyman, B., & McDaniel, M. (1986). Effective encoding strategies on longterm memory for odours. Quarterly Journal of Experiment Psychology,
38A, 753-765. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14640748608401624.

A.D. Baddeley, G.J. Hitch / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 1-13
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels of processing
versus transfer appropriate processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 16, 519-533. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371
(77)80016-9.
Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory. Memory &
Cognition, 18, 251-269. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03213879.
Nairne, J. S. (2002). The myth of the encoding-retrieval match. Memory,
10, 389-395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658210244000216.
Nickerson, R. S. (1965). Short-term memory for complex meaningful
visual configurations: A demonstration of capacity. Canadian Journal
of Psychology, 19, 155-160.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.New York: Basic
Books.
Ohman, A. (2009). Of snakes and faces: An evolutionary perspective on
the psychology of fear. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 50,
543-552. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9450.2009.00784.x.
Osgood, C. E., May, W. H., & Miron, M. S. (1975). Cross cultural universals of
affective meaning.Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Packman, J. L., & Battig, W. F. (1978). Effect of different kinds of semantic
processing on memory for words. Memory & Cognition, 6, 502-508.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03198238.
Patterson, K. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1977). When face recognition fails.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 3,
406-417. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2277.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do you know what
you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human
brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 976-987.
Peretz, I., Gaudreau, D., & Bonnel, A.-M. (1998). Exposure effects on music
preference and recognition. Memory & Cognition, 26, 884-902. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03201171.
Robbins, T., Anderson, E., Barker, D., Bradley, A., Fearneyhough, C., Henson,
R., ... Baddeley, A. (1996). Working memory in chess. Memory &
Cognition, 24(1), 83-93.
Roediger, H. L., & Blaxton, T. A. (1987). Retrieval modes produce
dissociations in memory for surface information. In D. S. Gorfein &
R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Memory and learning: The Ebbinghaus centennial
conference (pp. 349-379). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roediger, H. L., & Gallo, D. A. (2001). Levels of processing: Some
unanswered questions. In M. Naveh-Benjamin, M. Moscovitch, & H.
L. Roediger, III (Eds.), Perspectives on human memory and cognitive

13

aging: Essays in honour of Fergus I. M. Craik (pp. 28-47.). Hove:
Psychology Press.
Roediger, H. L. (2002). Reconstructive memory. In N. J. Smelser & P. B.
Baltes (Eds.), International encyclopedia of the social and behavioral
sciences. Oxford: England Elsevier.
Roediger, H. L., Srinivas, K., & Weldon, M. S. (1989). Dissociations between
implicit measures of retention. In S. Lewandowsky, J. C. Dunn, & K.
Kirsner (Eds.), Implicit memory: Theoretical issues (pp. 67-84).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roediger, H. L., Weldon, M. S., & Challis, B. H. (1989). Explaining
dissociations between implicit and explicit measures of retention: A
processing account. In H. L. Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of
memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving
(pp. 3-39). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Standing, L., Conezio, J., & Haber, R. N. (1970). Perception and memory for
pictures: Single-trial learning of 2500 visual stimuli. Psychonomic
Science, 19, 73-74. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03337426.
Tulving, E. (2001). Does memory coding exist? In M. Naveh-Benjamin, M.
Moscovitch, III, & H. L. Roediger, III (Eds.), Perspectives on human
memory and cognitive aging: Essays in honor of Fergus Craik (pp. 6-27).
New York: Psychology Press.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval
processes in episodic memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Walsh, D. A., & Jenkins, J. J. (1973). Effects of orienting tasks on free recall
in incidental learning: ``Difficulty," ``effort," and ``process"
explanations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12,
481-488. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(73)80028-3.
Warrington, E. (1984). Recognition memory test.Windsor, UK: NFERNelson.
Warrington, E. K., & Ackroyd, C. (1975). The effect of orienting tasks on
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 3, 140-142. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3758/BF03212890.
Watkins, O. C., & Watkins, M. J. (1975). Buildup of proactive inhibitions as
a cue-overload effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 1, 442-452.
Winograd, E. (1981). Elaboration and distinctiveness in memory for faces.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 7,
181-190.
Zucco, G. M. (2003). Anomalies in cognition: Olfactory memory. European
Psychologist, 8, 77-86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1027//1016-9040.8.2.77.

