Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 787-833
doi:10.1017/S014271641600045X

The effect of childhood
multilingualism and bilectalism
on implicature understanding
KYRIAKOS ANTONIOU
Universite libre de Bruxelles and University of Cambridge
NAPOLEON KATSOS
University of Cambridge
Received: January 15, 2015

Accepted for publication: July 3, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Kyriakos Antoniou, Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge,
Storey's Way, Cambridge CB30DG, UK. E-mail: ka353@cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The present study compares the performance of multilingual children speaking Cypriot Greek, Standard Modern Greek, and English (and sometimes an additional language), bilectal children speakers
of Cypriot Greek and Standard Modern Greek, and Standard Modern Greek-speaking monolingual
children on a task that measures the comprehension of different types of implicature. Despite lower
scores in language ability in the target language, multilingual and bilectal children performed at rates
comparable to the monolinguals with implicature. Regression analyses indicated a positive correlation
between implicature, language proficiency, and age (but not executive control), albeit language ability
did not affect implicature within multilinguals. We suggest an interpretation according to which multilingual, bilectal, and monolingual children maintain a comparable level of implicature understanding,
but they do so by relying on different resources. Finally, a principal component analysis on different
implicature types revealed a single factor of implicature performance. This outcome has implications
for pragmatic theory.

Previous research has systematically explored the cognitive correlates of childhood bilingualism with many studies reporting positive effects on aspects of
nonverbal cognitive functioning and negative effects on measures of language
proficiency (e.g., Akhtar & Menjivar, 2012; Barac, Bialystok, Castro, & Sanchez,
2014; Bialystok, Craik, Green, & Gollan, 2009; Bialystok, Luk, Peets, & Yang,
2010; Oller & Elliers, 2002). Regarding language, research comparing bilingual
and monolingual children has shown delays for bilingual children in vocabulary
development when each of their languages is considered separately and in the acquisition of certain complex aspects of morphosyntax (e.g., Bialystok et al., 2010;
Nicoladis, Palnmer, & Marentette, 2007; Oller & Elliers, 2002; Oller, Pearson, &
Cobo-Lewis, 2007; Paradis, 2010).
At the same time, many studies have reported a beneficial effect of bilingualism
on executive control (EC; see, e.g., Adesope, Lavin, Thompson, & Ungerleider,
(c) Cambridge University Press 2017 0142-7164/17

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

788

2010; Akhtar & Menjivar, 2012; Barac et al., 2014; de Abreu, Cruz-Santos, Tourinho, Martin, & Bialystok, 2012). EC is a domain-general cognitive system, which,
according to an influential account proposed by Miyake et al. (2000), comprises
three major processes: switching (the ability to flexibly switch attention between
rules, representations, or perspectives), working memory (the ability to simultaneously maintain and manipulate task-relevant information in mind), and inhibition
(the ability to suppress dominant, automatic, prepotent responses and resolve
conflict by suppressing irrelevant information).
Note, though, that there has been a recent spread of studies that failed to replicate
the bilingual EC advantage, casting doubt on the very validity of the finding (see,
e.g., Anton et al., 2014; Dunabeitia et al., 2014; Gathercole et al., 2014; Klein,
2015; Paap, Johnson, & Sawi, 2014). It is yet not clear, though, why the effect
is (or is not) found in some studies (see, among others, Bialystok, Craik, & Luk,
2012; Bialystok, Poarch, Luo, & Craik, 2014; Blom, Kuntay, Messer, Verhagen, &
Leseman, 2014; Green & Abutalebi, 2013; Kroll & Bialystok, 2013; Paap, 2014;
Paap et al., 2015; Paap & Sawi, 2014; Valian, 2015).
Although language and executive functions have been the focus of research
on bilingualism for many years, other areas of bilingual cognitive development,
particularly pragmatic-communicative skills, have so far received little attention.
Furthermore, most of previous research has focused on bilingual children and
little is known about how bidialectalism or, rather (to use the term introduced
by Rowe and Grohmann, 2013), bilectalism affects children's cognitive skills.
Bilectal speakers, that is, speakers of two linguistic varieties that are typologically
close, show a high degree of structural and lexical similarity, and are considered
to be dialects of the same language, remain a vastly underresearched population,
even though bilectalism is prominent worldwide, and particularly so in Europe
(see, e.g., Auer, 2005).
The aim of this study is threefold. First, the goal is to establish whether multilingualism confers an advantage in a specific aspect of pragmatics, the ability
to understand pragmatically implied meanings (implicatures). Second, we investigate the effect of bilectalism on this pragmatic-communicative skill by focusing
on bilectal children speaking Cypriot Greek (CG) and Standard Modern Greek
(SMG) in the diglossic sociolinguistic landscape of Greek-speaking Cyprus (see
Appendix A for a description of the sociolinguistic situation in Greek-speaking
Cyprus). Third, we aim to examine the linguistic and nonlinguistic cognitive factors that underpin implicature understanding in children.
In the next sections, we sketch the theoretical framework on which our investigation of children's pragmatic-communicative development is based: Grice's theory
of implicature; we discuss studies that previously examined aspects of bilingual
children's pragmatic-communicative competence and other sociocognitive skills;
and we examine theoretical and empirical reasons that suggest a link between
implicature understanding and EC.
GRICE'S THEORY OF IMPLICATURE

Philosopher Paul Grice (1975, 1989) argued for a division between the contents
of an utterance that depend on the literal meaning of words and the structural

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

789

relationships between them (syntax and semantics), and the aspects of an utterance
that depend on context-sensitive inferential processes about speakers' intentions
(pragmatics).
Grice (1975) suggested that a good deal of what is communicated in everyday conversation relies on the appreciation of certain conversational expectations.
According to his account, speakers design their utterances with respect to the cooperative principle and maxims, and listeners expect their interlocutors to adhere
to these conversational principles. Grice's (1975, p. 45) maxims enjoin communicators to be no less and no more informative than is required for the purpose
of the talk exchange (maxims of quantity I and II), to tell the truth and avoid
statements for which they have not adequate evidence (maxim of quality), to be
relevant (maxim of relation), and to be brief, orderly, and avoid ambiguity and
obscurity (maxim of manner; Grice, 1975, pp. 44-45).
In many communicative situations consideration of the maxims prompts interlocutors to draw inferences through which they attribute to speakers an implicit
meaning, which goes beyond what they literally said. These inferences are what
Grice (1975, p. 45) called conversational implicatures. For example, consider the
following minidiscourse:
(1) A: Did all of his students fail the exam?
B: Some of his students failed the exam.
(2) Not all of his students failed the exam.

B's utterance in (1) will be understood as implying (2) even though this has not
been stated explicitly. This implied proposition is an inference known as a scalar
implicature (SI). According to Grice's account, this implicature is derived through
a reasoning process about the speaker's intentions, which involves taking into
account a rich array of information: (a) what the speaker explicitly said; (b) the
linguistic and nonlinguistic context; (c) the assumption that B is cooperative; (d)
sensitivity to the maxim of quantity I, that is, sensitivity to the fact that there exists
a more informative proposition with the term all that could have been used but
was not; (e) the assumption that the speaker is knowledgeable of the situation and
that she would assert the more informative proposition with all if she knew it to
be true; and (f) the assumption that all the above information is available to both
interlocutors and that both interlocutors assume this to be the case.
Grice (1975, p. 56) also introduced a distinction between particularized and
generalized conversational implicatures. For instance, given a different question,
Is he a promising teacher?, B's answer in (1) would still imply (2), but will
also imply the proposition in (3) or a related one. The implied proposition in (2)
represents a case of a generalized conversational implicature (GCI), and (3) is a
case of a particularized conversational implicature (PCI).
(3) It is not certain that he is a promising teacher.

GCIs are associated with a specific form of words and seem to be stable across
contexts. PCIs, in contrast, seem to be more context dependent and are not associated with specific linguistic items. The example above illustrates the difference
between the two types of implicature: while the GCI in (2) arises in both linguistic

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

790

contexts, the PCI in (3) emerges only in the second as a result of the specific
question asked.
For Grice (1989) and other so-called contextual theories of implicature (e.g.,
Geurts, 2010; Sperber & Wilson, 1995/1986), the generalized-particularized distinction is not necessarily of particular theoretical importance. Other theories of
implicature (Chierchia, 2006; Chierchia, Fox, & Spector, 2011; Levinson, 2000),
however, suggest that GCIs are distinguished from PCIs in that the former arise by
default mechanisms, which are distinct from the processes involved in PCIs. According to Levinson's (2000) view, GCIs are part of the lexical meaning of words
and are generated automatically without reference to the speaker's intentions or
the communicative context. Chierchia's (2006, 2009) related proposal suggests
that GCIs are derived by the grammar, through a covert focus operator O, which
has similar properties to the word only. This silent grammatical operator O takes
scope over the scalar term some, and this leads to the negation of the alternative
proposition with all and, hence, to the computation of the SI.
BILINGUALISM AND PRAGMATIC-COMMUNICATIVE SKILLS

Three studies conducted by Michael Siegal and colleagues (Siegal, Iozzi, & Surian,
2009; Siegal & Surian, 2007; Siegal et al., 2010) explored the extent to which
bilingualism confers an advantage on preschool children's competence with pragmatics. Siegal, Matsuo, Pond, and Otsu (2007) sought to determine whether 4to 6-year-old English-Japanese bilingual children would outperform their monolingual (English or Japanese) peers in their ability to understand SIs. They used
a task where a puppet described a situation and the children were asked to judge
whether the puppet could have described the event better. In critical trials, the
descriptions were underinformative utterances (e.g., Teddy put some of the hoops
on the pole, as a description of a situation where Teddy had put every hoop on the
pole), and rejection of these utterances was taken as evidence that the children had
generated a SI. The results of the Siegal et al. (2007) study showed that, despite
their lower vocabulary scores in the language of testing, bilingual children were
more advanced than their monolingual peers in rejecting the critical utterances
and hence in computing SIs.
In two subsequent studies, Siegal et al. (2009, 2010) employed a Conversational Violations Test (CVT) in order to examine whether preschool-aged bilingual children also excel in their ability to detect utterances that violate Grice's
conversational maxims (maxims of quantity I and II, and maxims of quality, relation, manner, and politeness1 ). In the CVT, children were presented with two
doll speakers who answered a question. One answer violated a conversational
maxim while the other was pragmatically appropriate. For example, in one of the
items for the maxim of quality, the question was Have you seen my dog?, the
pragmatically inappropriate answer was Yes, he's in the sky, and the pragmatically
felicitous answer was Yes, he's in the garden. Children were asked to indicate
the doll that said something silly or rude. Siegal et al. (2009, their experiment 2)
found that, although comparatively delayed in their vocabulary in the language of
testing, bilingual children performed significantly better than their monolingual
counterparts in the CVT. Similar results were obtained in their 2010 study.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

791

Siegal et al. (2009) propose two possible explanations for the observed bilingual
advantages in their experiments. According to the first explanation, bilingual
children's precocious pragmatic development is linked to their enhanced EC skills,
which allow them to "consider simultaneously the appropriateness of alternative
responses to questions" (Siegal et al., 2009, p. 121). The second explanation is
that bilingual children develop heightened pragmatic abilities as compensation for
their weaker knowledge of core language.
Other studies have examined additional aspects of bilingual children's wider
pragmatic-communicative and sociocognitive development in comparison to
monolinguals. Genesee, Tucker, and Lambert (1975) reported that very young
bilinguals were more sensitive to their listeners' communication needs when providing verbal information. Two studies by Yow and Markman (2011a, 2011b)
showed that preschool-aged bilingual children were better able to understand referential gestures (such as eye gaze) in order to infer a person's referential intent
and to use paralinguistic cues to judge the speaker's emotional state. Both of these
advantages were evident in situations where conflicting information was available. Finally, a few studies have compared bilingual and monolingual children's
performance in various theory of mind (ToM) tasks (for reviews, see Akhtar &
Menjivar, 2012; and Barac et al., 2014). All these have consistently reported a
bilingual advantage. Once more, advanced bilingual performance in ToM tasks
has been attributed to bilingual children's enhanced EC skills by some researchers
(Bialystok & Senman, 2004; Kovacs, 2008).
THE RELATION BETWEEN IMPLICATURE UNDERSTANDING AND EC

Several theoretical and empirical factors suggest that EC might be positively associated to implicature understanding. First, a processing instantiation of Grice's
account of implicature suggests that implicature understanding is a process that involves taking into account information from various linguistic and other contextual
sources. This requirement to coordinate linguistic and nonlinguistic information
while interpreting language raises the likelihood that understanding implicatures
is an EC demanding process (see Bergen & Grodner, 2012; Breheny, Ferguson,
& Katsos, 2013b; Breheny, Katsos, & Williams, 2006; Grodner & Sedivy, 2005;
Huang & Snedeker, 2009a; Tomlinson, Bailey, & Bott, 2013, for some experimental evidence that, in deriving implicatures, interlocutors consider some of the
types of information proposed by Grice).
Similarly, according to relevance theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1995/1986), the
interpretation of implicatures involves extra cognitive effort (as opposed to literal
meaning). Sperber and Wilson (1995/1986) do not explicitly characterize the specific cognitive-psychological nature of this additional cognitive effort. However,
several researchers have interpreted it either in terms of extra processing time (e.g.,
Bott & Noveck, 2004; Breheny et al., 2006) or in terms of employing additional
cognitive resources (such as working memory; e.g., de Neys & Schaeken, 2007;
see Huang & Snedeker, 2009b; Siegal & Surian, 2007, who explicitly suggest a link
between executive functions and the ability to generate implicatures in children).
Second, several experimental investigations with adults have documented that
the time course of SIs is associated with an additional processing cost relative to

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

792

conventional meaning (see, e.g., Bergen & Grodner, 2012; Bott, Bailey, & Grodner,
2011; Bott & Noveck, 2004; Breheny et al., 2006; Huang & Snedeker, 2009a;
Panizza, Chierchia, & Clifton, 2009; Tomlinson et al., 2013; but see Breheny,
Ferguson, & Katsos, 2013a; Degen & Tanenhaus, 2015; Grodner, Klein, Carbary,
& Tanenhaus, 2010). This in turn suggests that computing SIs and, perhaps,
implicatures in general is a nonautomatic controlled process, which possibly relies
on EC resources. Third, empirical data in studies with adults documents that
comprehending SIs specifically involves working memory (WM) resources. De
Neys and Schaeken (2007), Dieussaert, Verkerk, Gillard, and Schaeken (2011),
and Marty and Chemla (2013) have shown that burdening adults' WM with a
secondary task before judging underinformative utterances leads to a decrease in
their SI responses.
Note that the three experimental studies by Siegal et al. (2007, 2009, 2010)
directly tested for a link between pragmatic ability and EC in children, but failed
to find any supporting evidence for a positive relation. Some methodological
concerns, though, related to both the pragmatic and the EC tasks used by Siegal
et al. do not allow for strong conclusions to be extracted. First, the three studies
were limited in that they employed only two measures of EC (the card sort task
and the day/night task) and did not include any measures of WM. Second, the
selection of the EC tasks in their studies was not eventually felicitous in several
respects. For the card sort task, Siegal et al. (2007, 2009) reported a near ceiling
level of performance in both studies in which this test was used. The day/night
task is generally considered to measure a type of inhibition (response inhibition)
for which bilingual advantages are often not reported (Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008;
Martin-Rhee & Bialystok, 2008). The choice of these specific tasks in Siegal et al.'s
(2007, 2009, 2010) studies might have actually masked possible EC differences
between the language groups and potential relations between pragmatic ability
and EC.
Third, the CVT employed in the Siegal et al. (2009, 2010) studies is a test of
fairly simple pragmatic abilities: it only required children to detect whether an
utterance violated a conversational maxim or not. In this respect, it is likely that
it did not pose any significant burden on children's EC resources. Implicature
understanding, in contrast, might be considered a more difficult, complex, and
resource-demanding pragmatic ability, which involves, but is not exhausted by,
the skill to detect maxim violations.
THE PRESENT STUDY

In the following study a multilingual, a bilectal, and a monolingual group of
Greek-speaking children were administered a novel test on the ability to understand several types of implicature. Various other EC and vocabulary tests were
administered as part of another study (Antoniou, Grohmann, Kambanaros, &
Katsos, 2016).
For the pragmatics task, each implicature type was based on one of four of
Grice's (1975, 1989) conversational maxims (relevance, quality, manner, and quantity I). Specifically, the task included one subtest on relevance implicatures (testing
whether children could comprehend, e.g., the utterance You are ill as meaning No,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

793

you can't buy an ice cream because you are ill); one on quality implicatures
(metaphors; testing whether children could understand, e.g., the metaphorical utterance George's father was a melting snowman as meaning that George's father
was feeling sad); one on manner implicatures (examining whether children could
make the inference from, e.g., The man made the door open to The man opened
the door in an atypical way); and two subtests on quantity I (scalar) implicatures
(examining whether children could make the inference from, e.g., There are stars
on some of the cards to There are stars on not all of the cards). In sum, there
were five implicature subtests in the pragmatics task with three critical items each
(where the generation of an implicature was required for accurate responding).
The implicatures included in the test can be further categorized in terms of
the generalized-particularized distinction. Specifically, for the researchers who
subscribe to this distinction, the manner and quantity I (scalar) implicatures can
be considered cases of the generalized type, while the relevance and quality
(metaphor) implicatures are exemplars of the particularized type.
The comparison between multilingual and monolingual children will provide
evidence regarding the effect of mutilingualism on implicature understanding. We
also decided to include a bilectal group of children and contrast their performance
to that of monolinguals for various reasons. First, this comparison provides the
opportunity to understand the cognitive effects of childhood bilectalism per se.
To date, there is little research on bilectal children's linguistic and nonlinguistic
cognitive skills (at least from a comparative perspective that contrasts their performance to that of monolinguals and bilinguals; but see, e.g., Antoniou et al., 2016;
Kambanaros, Grohmann, Michaelides, & Theodorou, 2012; Theodorou, Kambanaros, & Grohmann, 2013), and to our knowledge, there is no work on bilectal
children's pragmatic-communicative abilities. Second, the linguistic profile of
bilectals as speakers of two different but minimally distant linguistic varieties
allows us to examine the issue of close language similarity (between the language
pairs spoken by bilinguals) and how it modulates the outcomes of bilingualism.
Third, it enables us to examine the interplay between language proficiency and
implicature understanding. It has been argued, for instance, that bilingual children
learning two very similar languages may show less of a (or no) delay in their vocabulary skills because their languages likely share many cognates (e.g., Bialystok
& Feng, 2011). To the extent that this prediction is met in our study, the comparison
between bilectal and monolingual children provides the opportunity to examine
implicature comprehension in a group of children who have better-developed
language skills than bilingual children. Fourth and finally, the contrast between
bilectals and monolinguals controls for various background factors that are often
confounded with bilingualism: immigration status (the bilectal and monolingual
groups came from local indigenous families in Cyprus and Greece, respectively,
but the multilingual group was more heterogeneous with many children having at
least one immigrant parent), ethnicity and culture (Greek Cypriots and Hellenic
Greeks differ minimally in these respects, but multilinguals were exposed to two
cultures and many of them had a parent of a different nationality), and language of
education (both bilectal and monolingual children were educated entirely in SMG,
but multilinguals were educated in English with only a few hours of instruction
in SMG).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

794

Bilectal children were also tested in both their dialects (CG and SMG). This
allowed us to examine how their pragmatic performance compared to that of monolinguals in both their dominant, native variety (CG) and their second, nonnative
dialect (SMG).
Furthermore, the study offers an opportunity for a more careful investigation
of the relation between implicature understanding and EC. First, as described in
Antoniou et al. (2016), a wider range of EC tasks was administered measuring all
components of EC. Second, Antoniou et al. (2016) reported that all EC measures
revealed adequate variability in children's performance. Third, they found that
multilingual and bilectal children outperformed their monolingual peers in EC
performance after accounting for their lower language abilities in Greek. Fourth,
the pragmatics test in the current study focuses on a pragmatic-communicative
ability (implicature understanding) that from both a theoretical and an experimental perspective has been associated to EC skills.
Fifth and finally, this study may also provide data with respect to the psychological validity of the distinction between GCIs and PCIs.
METHOD
Participants

Participants included 64 bilectal children (speakers of CG and SMG; 32 boys,
32 girls, aged 4 years, 5 months [4;5]-12;2, mean age = 7;8, SD = 1;6); 47
multilingual children (bilectal in CG and SMG, also speakers of English and in
some cases an additional language; 24 boys, 23 girls, ages 5;0-11;5, mean age =
7;8, SD = 1;8), and 25 monolingual children (speakers of SMG only; 15 boys,
10 girls, aged 6;2-9, mean age = 7;4, SD = 0;9). Four additional children were
excluded from the bilectal group because they were exposed to a second language
apart from the two dialects of Greek at home.
Multilingual children attended English-instruction private schools in the Republic of Cyprus. In these schools, they were taught SMG as a separate subject
for 6 hr per week. Bilectal children were recruited from three different schools
(two private, one public) where SMG was the language of instruction. None of the
children included in the analyses had any exposure to or use of a language other
than the two Greek dialects at home.
All the monolingual children were recruited from a private primary school
in Athens, Greece. They were instructed exclusively in SMG, and their parents
reported speaking only SMG to them at home.
Materials and procedure

All children were tested in two sessions taking approximately 50-60 min each.
Seventeen of the bilectal children received additional tests in a third session, which
took place at least a week after the second session.
In the first session, all children were administered the implicatures test (bilectals
and multilinguals in CG and monolinguals in SMG), the Word Finding Expressive
Vocabulary Test--Greek, the matrix reasoning test of the Wechsler Abbreviated
Scale of Intelligence (WASI; Wechsler, 1999), the Simon task, and the backward

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

795

digit span task. The second session included the color-shape task, Corsi blocks
test, soccer task, and the Peabody Picture Receptive Vocabulary Test--Greek
(PPVT-Greek; adapted from Dunn & Dunn, 1981). The PPVT-Greek was given
only to the monolingual children and a group of 17 bilectal children and was
administered in SMG to the former group and in CG to the latter group. The third
session, taken only by the same subset of 17 bilectal children who also received
the PPVT-Greek, included the implicatures test and the PPVT, both administered
in SMG. Thus, 17 bilectals took the implicatures test and the PPVT in both their
dialects.
From the EC tasks, the following measures were used (the task from which each
measure was taken is given in parentheses): Simon effect (Simon task), switch cost
(color-shape task), stop-signal reaction time (soccer task), and number of correctly
recalled trials (in the backward digit span task, the forward, and backward versions
of the Corsi blocks task; for a detailed description of the EC tests and how these
measures were calculated, see Antoniou et al., 2016).
This was a novel task testing children's comprehension of
four types of implicatures: quantity I (scalar), relevance, manner, and quality
(metaphors) implicatures. The quality, manner, and relevance implicature subtests
had a picture-selection format where children had to respond by choosing one of
two pictures. For SIs, two subtests were used: an action-based task (where children
had to make a display match a target utterance) and a binary judgment task (where
they had to judge whether an utterance was a correct or an incorrect description
of a picture). In total, there were 15 implicature items (3 items in each implicature
subtest), 48 filler items, and 1 practice item.
As already noted above, there were two language versions (CG and SMG) of
the implicatures test. The same items were used in each language version, but
recorded in a different dialect (CG or SMG) by native speakers. All multilingual
and bilectal children took the test in CG, and monolinguals in SMG. A subset of 17
bilectal children received the test in both CG and SMG. Multilingual and bilectal
children were tested in CG because this was the variety spoken in the community.
This ensured that the children had adequate exposure in and knowledge of the
language of testing (multilingual children had minimal exposure to SMG, mainly
through a few hours of instruction at school and possibly through other sources,
such as the media).
Moreover, there were two task versions of the pragmatics test. Each child was
randomly given one of the two task versions so that an approximately equal number
of children (overall and across language groups) were tested in each version. For
the subtests that had a picture-selection design, two task versions were created in
order to counterbalance various factors across the two versions: attractiveness of
pictures provided as potential responses (Picture 1 or 2), target emotion expressed
by the metaphors (sadness or anger), polarity of response in relevance implicatures
(yes or no), and markedness in manner implicatures (marked or unmarked; see
description of each subtest below for more details). This ensured that level of
performance in these tasks would reflect children's pragmatic understanding of
the target utterances and not irrelevant (to pragmatics) factors (as listed above).
For the two SI subtests, the same items were used in both task versions.

Implicatures test.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

796

As described in Antoniou et al. (2016), children's performance on the 48 filler
items of the implicatures test was considered a measure of their language comprehension skills in the language of testing (language comprehension score). A total
comprehension score was calculated for each child by transforming the child's
scores on the filler items of each implicature subtest into z scores and then averaging the three z scores.
All implicature parts, except for the binary judgment task on SIs, were designed
and administered using Microsoft PowerPoint software. The binary judgment task
on SIs was implemented using the E-Prime psychology software. All implicature
subtests are described in detail in the following sections. The complete list of
linguistic material used in each part of the implicatures test can be found in Tables
B.1 to B.3 Appendix B.
For the practice and relevance implicature items, children were instructed that they would hear stories about a young
male character named George and his mother, and that at the end of each story,
they had to point to a picture that showed how the story ended. All items were
based on a previous study with children conducted by Bernicot, Laval, and Chaminaud (2007). A practice item did not require the generation of an implicature for
accurate performance.
Each item was composed of two slides. In the first slide, children were shown a
picture that visually established the story's interaction setting, and the target story
was heard. Target stories in the three critical items were of the following format:
George asked his mother a question (e.g., Mom, can I buy an ice cream?) and
his mother replied with an utterance that implied either a negative or a positive
answer (You are ill or I've got money in my wallet, respectively). The same was
true for the practice item, but in this case the reply was either explicitly negative
or explicitly positive. In the second slide, the experimenter asked What happened
at the end of the story? and introduced two pictures as possible endings (e.g.,
by saying George bought an ice cream or George did not buy an ice cream
and pointing to the relevant pictures). One of the pictures depicted a situation
compatible with a positive response (e.g., George eating an ice cream) and the
other showed a situation compatible with a negative response (e.g., George doing
something else).
There were two task versions for each story. One version of the story ended with
an utterance that implied a negative response (or that explicitly stated a negative
response for the practice item) and the other with an utterance that implied a
positive response.

Practice and relevance implicature items.

The subtest was designed based on a previous
study by Waggoner and Palermo (1989). Children were told that they would hear
stories about George and his father, and that at the end of each story, they should
point to a picture that showed how George's father felt.
They heard three stories ending in metaphors describing either the emotion of
sadness (e.g., When George's father returned home, he was a melting snowman)
or the emotion of anger (e.g., When George's father returned home, he was a
thundering cannon). Again, each critical trial was composed of two slides. In the

Quality implicatures (metaphors).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

797

first slide, children were presented with a picture relevant to the story and the target
story was heard. In the second slide, the experimenter asked How did George's
father feel at the end of the story? and presented two pictures: a picture of a sad
man and a picture of an angry man. All metaphorical expressions were embedded
in contexts that introduced the two emotions, but did not give away which of the
two emotions was expressed by the metaphorical sentence. This was achieved by
including a text such as the following in all story contexts (where X was a reason
for feeling sad and Y was a reason for feeling angry): He [George] wondered how
his father would feel when coming back home. He didn't know whether his father
would feel sad because X or whether he would feel angry because Y.
Finally, only novel and apt metaphors were used. Fifteen metaphors generated
by the authors were rated by 28 adult native speakers of CG and 36 native speakers
of SMG on a 5-point scale. All metaphors included in the test received a mean
rating of over 2.5 out of 5 for both novelty and aptness and by both Greek Cypriots
and Hellenic Greeks.
The general design of this subtest was a sentence-to-picture
matching task. Participants were informed that they would hear George describing
a picture from a book and that they had to point to a picture that matched George's
description. There were six items in total, of which three were critical items and
three were filler items.
Critical items were causatives for which a lexicalized and an opposed periphrastic alternative are available (e.g., Opened the door as opposed to Made the
door open). Lexicalized causatives are associated with a direct, normal, more frequent, stereotypical causation, while their periphrastic alternatives are associated
with an indirect, nonnormal, less frequent, nonstereotypical causation (Levinson,
2000). Manner implicatures associated with causatives arise as a result of Grice's
submaxim of manner Be brief, avoid unnecessary prolixity (Levinson, 2000). For
instance, the utterance The man made the door open implies that The man opened
the door in an atypical way. The additional meaning in an atypical way comes
about because the speaker used a more prolix and complex sentence instead of the
simpler statement The man opened the door. Filler items were literal expressions
for which the correct picture could be identified on the basis of their explicit
content.
Again, each item was composed of two slides. In the first slide, George was
displayed holding a book and the target sentence was heard. The second slide
featured two pictures as possible matches to the description. In the critical items,
the two pictures contrasted an unmarked, stereotypical way of causation (e.g., a
picture depicting a man opening a door using the handle) with a marked, nonstereotypical way of causation (e.g., a picture displaying a man opening a door
by kicking it). There were two task versions for each item. In one version, the
unmarked, lexicalized expression was used, and in the other, its corresponding
marked, periphrastic expression was employed.

Manner implicatures.

This subtest was a PowerPoint version of the
action-based task used by Pouscoulous, Noveck, Politzer, and Baside (2007).
Participants were presented with slides depicting five boxes and a selection of

Scalar implicatures act-out task.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

798

animals (five elephants, five turtles, five dolphins, and five hippopotamuses).
There were three scenarios: in the 5/5 scenario, all boxes contained the same kind
of animal, in the 2/5 scenario, two of the five boxes contained the same kind of
animal, and in the 0/5 scenario, none of the boxes had any animals. For each
scenario, children heard statements constructed with the quantifiers all, some, and
none and three types of animals (elephants, turtles, and dolphins). This resulted in
a total of 27 test items. There were also 3 practice items using numerals.
Children were told that they would hear George describing the display and that
they had to make the display match the description, by putting animals inside the
boxes, by taking animals out of the boxes, or by leaving the display as it was
without making any modifications (using the mouse as appropriate). There were 3
critical items. Critical items were statements with the quantifier some (e.g., There
are turtles in some of the boxes) in the 5/5 scenario (e.g., in which all five boxes
contained a turtle).
In each trial of this test, the participant
saw a depiction of five cards face down. An auditory stimulus was then played,
There are <X> on <Q> of the cards, where X was the item type (rings, hearts, or
stars) and Q the quantifier (all, some, or none). When the auditory stimulus ended,
the cards were immediately "turned over" to reveal the items. Participants were
instructed to press a green-labeled key if the utterance were true and a red-labeled
key if it were false, responding as quickly and accurately as possible.
The task included 23 trials comprising a practice block with two items and
three test blocks of 7 trials. There were three critical underinformative cases using
the quantifier some, each presented in one of three test blocks. The rest of the
items comprised an equal number of true and informative, and semantically false
utterances with the quantifiers some, all, and none.

Scalar implicatures binary judgment task.

This
questionnaire was formed based on three questionnaires designed by other researchers: the Alberta Language Environment Questionnaire (Paradis, 2011), the
Alberta Language Development Questionnaire (Paradis, Emmerzael, & Duncan,
2010), and the Family Affluence Scale (Currie et al., 2008).
Besides the items on the child's language use and exposure, the questionnaire
also required information regarding the child's date of birth, gender, and the child's
and parents' places of birth, among other topics.
Finally, three scores of the family's SES could be extracted from the questionnaire: the family's wealth as measured by the Family Affluence Scale and each
parent's level of education. Regarding maternal and paternal level of education,
completion of junior high school was scored as 1, senior high school as 2, professional training in addition to completing senior high school as 3, and higher
education as 4.

Socioeconomic status (SES) and language background questionnaire.

Language measures.

An SMG version of the test adapted from English
(Dunn & Dunn, 1981) was administered as a measure of receptive vocabulary.

PPVT--REVISED (PPVT).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

799

The test was further adapted to and recorded in CG by the first author, who is a
native CG speaker. The adaptations in the CG version were minimal and included
phonetic changes in the pronunciation of words and also the substitution of SMG
words with the corresponding CG words in cases where a more widely used CG
word existed. This test was administered only to the monolingual children and a
subset of 17 bilectal children. The former group received the task in SMG while
the latter in both CG and SMG.
The standardized SMG version
(Vogindroukas, Protopapas, & Sideridis, 2009) of the test (Renfrew, 1995) was
administered to assess expressive vocabulary. For the bilectal and multilingual
children, words in both CG and SMG were accepted as correct.

WORD FINDING VOCABULARY TEST (WFVT).

Nonverbal fluid intelligence test.

In this test (Wechsler, 1999), participants were presented with pictures depicting a matrix from which a section
was missing. They were required to complete the matrix by pointing at or stating
the number corresponding to the correct response from five possible choices.

THE WASI MATRIX REASONING TEST (IQ).

RESULTS
Preliminary analyses

A PCA was conducted on the implicature
measures extracted from the various parts of the implicatures test (number of accurate responses in each implicature subtest). These scores indicated performance
in the CG language version of the test for bilectals and multilinguals, and in the
SMG language version for monolinguals. However, because there was a ceiling
level of performance for all children in the relevance implicature subtest, scores
from this part were not included in further analyses. Correlations between the
various implicature measures are presented in Table 1.
The PCA on the four implicature indicators revealed only one factor with
an eigenvalue above Kaiser's criterion of 1. This factor explained 36.8% of the
variance. Table 2 summarizes the PCA results.

Principal component analyses (PCA).

Composite scores. A composite score was computed for overall performance
in the implicatures test (overall implicature score--Greek). The overall score was
calculated by averaging participants' scores in each subtest of the implicature task
except for the relevance part in which ceiling performance was observed for all
groups. The overall implicature--Greek score reflected performance in CG for
bilectals and multilinguals and in SMG for monolinguals. Furthermore, for 17 of
the bilectal children, a second overall implicature composite score was calculated
based on their performance in the SMG version of the test (overall implicature
score--SMG).
The following composite scores were also used: general language ability 1
(GLA-1), general language ability 2 (GLA-2), general language ability SMG

Table 1. Bivariate correlations (Spearman rho) between implicature scores, executive control, and background variables

Metaphor
Manner
Scalars act-out
Scalars binary
Implic. total
Version
Gender
Age
IQ
SES
GLA-1
WM
Inhibitiona

Relevance

Metaphor

Manner

Scalars
Act-Out

Scalars
Binary

Implic.
Total

Version

Gender

Age

IQ

SES

LA-1

WM

.12
.20*
.37**
.18*
.30**
-.02
-.03
.48**
.37**
.01
.46**
.26**
.36**

.13
.23**
.16
.60**
-.33**
.05
.25**
.14
.07
.20*
.12
.02

.09
.14
.51**
-.10
.08
.24**
.26**
.02
.21*
.23**
.07

.30**
.64**
.01
.10
.48**
.23**
-.08
.44**
.38**
.11

.69**
-.07
-.01
.29**
.22*
.12
.31**
.23**
.13

-.23**
.09
.48**
.34**
.08
.46**
.40**
.14

-.10
.011
.07
-.18*
-.05
.01
.12

.03
.02
-.02
-.03
.01
-.02

.58**
-.12
.47**
.64**
.29**

.00
.36**
.57**
.28**

-.02
-.04
.14

.39**
.23**

.25**

Note: All implicature and language scores are from tests taken in Cypriot Greek by multilinguals and bilectals and in Standard Modern Greek by
monolinguals. Relevance, scores in the subtest on relevance implicatures; Metaphor, scores in the subtest on metaphors; Manner, scores in the subtest
on manner implicatures; Scalars act-out, scores in the act-out subtest on scalar implicatures; Scalars binary, scores in the binary judgment subtest on
scalar implicatures; Implic. total, implicature composite score; Version, task version of the implicatures test; Age, participants' age (years); IQ, scores
in the matrix reasoning test of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence; SES, socioeconomic status composite score; GLA-1, general language
ability 1 composite score; WM, working memory.
a
Measure was reversed scored so that a higher value indicates better performance.
*p = .05 (two tailed). **p = .01 level (two tailed).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

801

Table 2. Summary results of exploratory factor
analysis on the four implicature measures
Task Measure

Factor 1 Loadings

Metaphor
Manner
Scalars binary
Scalars act-out
Eigenvalues
Variance

.56
.44
.69
.70
1.47
36.79%

Note: The task measures are the number of correct
responses. The factor loadings are for Factor 1: pragmatics. Metaphor, scores in the implicature subtest
on metaphors; Manner, scores in the implicature subtest on manner implicatures; Scalars binary, scores
in the binary judgment task on scalar implicatures;
Scalars act-out, scores in the act-out task on scalar
implicatures.

(GLA-SMG) and SES. GLA-1 and GLA-2 were measures of language proficiency
in CG for bilectals and multilinguals and in SMG for monolinguals. The former
was computed by transforming into z scores and then averaging the WFVT score
Greek2 and the language comprehension score Greek (indicating performance in
the filler items of the implicatures test taken in CG by bilectals and multilinguals
and in SMG by monolinguals). The latter was calculated for the sample of children who also took the PPVT, by collapsing the PPVT score Greek (indicating
performance in the CG version of the PPVT for bilectals and in the SMG version
for monolinguals) and the GLA-1 score into a new single indicator of language
ability in Greek. Moreover, the GLA-SMG score was created for the bilectal and
monolingual children who also took the SMG version of the PPVT by averaging
participants' z transformed scores in the WFVT, the filler items of the implicatures
test (taken in SMG), and the PPVT (also taken in SMG). Finally, maternal level
of education, paternal level of education, and Family Affluence Scale score were
also collapsed into a single score (in the same way as above) indicating SES.
Main analyses

Between-group analyses on implicature understanding were performed in two
stages. In the first step, the performance of the three groups of children was
compared to each other. To this end, the three groups were matched in age by
excluding from the analyses all multilingual and bilectal children who were above
9 years or below 6 years of age.
In the second stage, the performance of a subset of 17 bilectal children was
contrasted to that of the monolingual group. This second comparison provided
the opportunity to (a) contrast the pragmatic performance of the two groups when
more reliably controlling for language proficiency in the language of testing (CG

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

802

or SMG; since both groups in this comparison were further given the PPVT);
(b) compare the performance of bilectal and monolingual children in each of
the bilectals' varieties (since the bilectal children in this comparison further took
the implicatures test in SMG); and (c) obtain a more reliable and robust test of
potential group differences in implicature performance (since the two groups were
comparable in several important background factors such as age, gender, IQ, SES,
language comprehension in the language of testing and in SMG, ethnicity/culture,
language of education, and immigration history).
Where between-group analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) were conducted,
the following variables were included as covariates: any background measures for
which statistically significant differences were found between the groups compared and background variables that significantly correlated with the outcome
variable. This allowed us to partial out the effect of any of the background measures on the dependent variables and thus to obtain a purer measure of the effect
of interest (language group) and also ensured that any group differences in the
background variables were not responsible for the presence or absence of group
effects on the outcome variables.3
Task version (1 vs. 2) for the implicatures test was also included as a betweensubjects factor in the analyses in the cases where a significant correlation was
found with implicature performance.
Comparison 1: Multilinguals versus bilectals versus monolinguals (matched
in age)
Participants. In the following analyses, the performance of 44 bilectal children
(21 boys, 23 girls; ages 6;3-9, mean age = 7;6, SD = 0;9 years), 26 multilinguals
(15 boys, 11 girls; ages 6;2-9, mean age = 7;7, SD = 0;9 years), and 25 monolinguals (15 boys, 10 girls; ages 6;2-9, mean age = 7;4, SD = 0;9 years) was
compared.

Background information for the three language groups in
this comparison is presented in Table 3. Language characteristics of the multilingual group as based on the Language Background Questionnaire are summarized
in Table 4.
Bilectal, multilingual, and monolingual children did not statistically differ in
age, F (2, 92) = 0.696, p >.05, gender, F (2, 92) = 0.587, p >.05, or language
comprehension--Greek (in CG for bilectals and multilinguals, and in SMG for
monolinguals), F (2, 92) = 0.319, p > .05. Nevertheless, there were significant
differences in SES, F (2, 89) = 9.622, p < .05, IQ, F (2, 92) = 3.377, p < .05,
partial 2 = 0.07, and expressive vocabulary, F (2, 92) = 44.183, p < .05, partial
2 = 0.5.
Regarding SES, there was a significant difference between bilectals and multilinguals, in that bilectal children were of a lower SES than multilingual children (p
< .05, multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction applied). For IQ, a multilingual advantage over monolinguals was found (p < .05, Bonferroni correction
for multiple comparisons applied). Finally, with respect to expressive vocabulary,
monolingual children had a significantly higher expressive vocabulary score than
Background measures.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

803

Table 3. Descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) on background
measures (raw values) in comparison 1 by language group
Group
Bilectals (n = 44)
Mean
SD
Multilinguals (n = 26)
Mean
SD
Monolinguals (n = 25)
Mean
SD

Age

FAS

7;6
0;9

6
1.9

7;7
0;9
7;4
0;9

LoPE

LoME

IQ

LC-G

WFVT-G

3
1

3.2
0.8

13.8
6.5

0.08
0.7

32.4
5.2

6.9
1.8

3.8
0.6

4
0

16.4
7.5

0.17
0.5

19.8
10.8

5.6
1.5

3.6
0.8

3.7
0.6

11.8
5

0.17
0.4

37.8
4.9

Note: Age, participants' age (years;months); IQ, scores in the matrix reasoning test of the
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence; LC-G, scores in the language comprehension
test (taken in Cypriot Greek by bilectals and multilinguals and in Standard Modern Greek
by monolinguals); FAS, Family Affluence Scale scores; LoPE, level of paternal education;
LoME, level of maternal education; WFVT-G, scores in the Word Finding Expressive
Vocabulary Test (taken in Greek).
Table 4. Language characteristics of the multilingual group based on the Language
Background Questionnaire in comparison 1
Group

AoO CG

AoO En

CG Home

En Home

SMG

DoBE

Multilinguals (n = 26)
Mean
SD

1.9
4.6

9.9
20.6

2.6
0.9

2.5
0.9

2
0.9

.6
.2

Note: AoO CG, age (months) of onset of exposure to Cypriot Greek; AoO En, age (months)
of onset of exposure to English; CG Home, amount of exposure to/use of CG at home
(maximum score = 4); En Home, amount of exposure to/use of English at home (maximum
score = 4); SMG, total amount of exposure to/use of Standard Modern Greek (maximum
score = 4); DoBB, degree of balanced exposure to/use of CG and English (range = 0-1,
with a higher value indicating more balanced exposure to/use of two languages).

both bilectal and multilingual children, and bilectal children were significantly
better than multilinguals (all ps < .05, Bonferroni correction applied). Within the
multilingual group, CG-dominant children exhibited better vocabulary skills than
their English-dominant multilingual peers, although their scores were still significantly lower than bilectal and monolingual participants (all ps < .05, Bonferroni
correction applied). Further analyses indicated that the scores of both multilingual
and bilectal children were within the normal monolingual range: bilectal scores
were significantly higher than the 20th percentile, t (26) = 5.698, p < .05, and
multilingual scores did not significantly differ from the 20th percentile, t (14) =
1.024, p > .05. The same was true for both the CG-dominant, t (9) = 1.612, p
> .05, and English-dominant, t (4) = -1.3600, p > .05, multilinguals' expressive

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

804

vocabulary performance.4 In general, the results on expressive vocabulary are in
line with existing research (e.g., Bialystok et al., 2010; Oller & Eilers, 2002; Oller
et al., 2007) and validate accounts that attribute lower vocabulary or grammatical
performance in bilinguals to environmental factors related to bilingual children's
language input rather than to deficits of any kind (cognitive, perceptual, or other;
see, e.g., Ahtar & Menjivar, 2012; Hoff et al., 2012; Oller et al., 2007; Thordardottir, 2011). They also corroborate previous suggestions and experimental evidence
in the bilingualism literature that high language proximity between the language
pairs spoken by bilinguals (or bilectals) closes the gap in their vocabulary development relative to monolinguals (e.g., Barac & Bialystok, 2012; Bialystok & Feng,
2011).
Implicature scores included in the following analyses
reflected performance in CG for bilectals and multilinguals and in SMG for monolinguals. Mean scores and SDs for the various measures from the implicatures test
by language group are reported in Table 5. Correlations between implicature scores
and background variables can be found in Table 1.
Implicatures test--Greek.

An ANCOVA was conducted with group
(multilinguals vs. bilectals vs. monolinguals) and task version (1 vs. 2) as betweensubjects factors, and IQ, GLA-1, age, and SES as covariates. The results of this
analysis were as follows. The effect of group was not significant, F (2, 82) =
0.808, p > .05, partial 2 = 0.02. Moreover, there was a significant effect of task
version, F (1, 82) = 11.678, p < .05, in that version 1 was easier than version
2. Finally, a significant Group x Task Version interaction emerged, F (2, 82) =
3.111, p = .05, partial 2 = 0.07.
In order to further investigate this interaction, two follow-up ANCOVAs (with
the same covariates as above) were conducted separately for each version of the
implicatures test. These ANCOVAs showed a clearly nonsignificant effect of group
in version 2 of the test, F (2, 38) = 0.59, p > .05, and a marginally nonsignificant
effect of group in version 1 of the test, F (2, 40) = 3.15, p = .054, partial 2 = 0.14.
The marginally nonsignificant effect of group in version 1 was due to a numerical
advantage for multilinguals and monolinguals over bilectals. However, post hoc
pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction applied showed that neither the
multilingual nor the monolingual advantage was statistically significant (both ps
> .09).
To determine whether multilingual and bilectal children exhibited equivalent
to monolinguals implicature performance despite their lower core language proficiency, a similar ANCOVA as above was conducted with the language comprehension score--Greek instead of the GLA-1 score included as a covariate.
Remember that, contrary to expressive vocabulary, the three groups did not differ
in terms of the language comprehension score--Greek. The language comprehension score, though, significantly and positively correlated with overall implicature
performance, Spearman  = 0.51, p < .05 (two tailed), and for this reason it was
covaried in the analysis. Results were the same as in the previous ANCOVA, for
the effect of group: F (2, 82) = 0.340, p > .05, apart from the Group x Task

Overall Implicature composite score.

Table 5. Descriptive statistics on measures from the implicatures test (raw values) in comparison 1 by language group
Bilectals
(n = 44)
Task
All implicature
measures combined
Relevance
Metaphor
Manner
Scalars act-out
Scalars binary
Fillers
picture-selection
Fillers act-out
Fillers binary

Multilinguals
(n = 26)

Monolinguals
(n = 25)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Fa

Partial
2

2.2
2.9
2.1
2.1
2.4
2.2

0.5
0.3
0.8
0.8
1.1
1.2

2.3
2.9
2.1
2.1
2.6
2.4

0.6
0.4
1
0.8
0.9
1

2.3
3
2.4
1.9
2.6
2.2

0.6
0
0.8
0.8
1
1.1

0.81b
NA
1.73b
0.56c
1.92c
0.61c

0.02
NA
0.04
0.01
0.04
0.02

6.8
23.3
16.2

0.4
2.4
1.9

6.8
23.6
16.6

0.5
1.4
1.3

6.8
23.6
16.6

0.4
1.3
2

0.36d
1.51d
0.46d

0.01
0.03
0.01

Note: All implicature scores are from the implicatures test received in Cypriot Greek by multilinguals and bilectals and in
Standard Modern Greek by monolinguals. The results of between-group analyses of covariance (multilinguals vs. bilectals
vs. monolinguals) on these measures are also reported. Relevance, scores in the subtest on relevance implicatures; Metaphor,
scores in the subtest on metaphors; Manner, scores in the subtest on manner implicatures; Scalars act-out, scores in the act-out
task on scalar impicatures; Scalars binary, scores in the binary judgment task on scalar implicatures; Fillers picture-selection,
scores in the filler items of the picture-selection part of the implicatures test; Fillers act-out, scores in the filler items of the
act-out task on scalar implicatures; Fillers binary, scores in the filler items of the binary judgment task on scalar implicatures.
a
The degrees of freedom for the error term range from 79 to 83, depending on the analysis.
b
The F ratio resulting from an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with age, IQ, socioeconomic status (SES), and general
language ability as covariates and Task Version and Group as between-subjects factors.
c
The F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age, IQ, SES, and general language ability as covariates and Group as a
between-subjects factor.
d
The F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age, IQ, and SES as covariates and Group as a between-subjects factor.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

806

Version interaction, which was marginally nonsignificant in this analysis, F (2,
82) = 3.03, p = .054.
Finally, to establish whether amount of exposure to/use of the language of
testing (CG) had an effect on implicature performance, a further analysis was
conducted on the implicature composite score with the multilingual group divided
in terms of language dominance. A 4 (Group: CG-dominant multilinguals vs.
English-dominant multilinguals versus bilectals versus monolinguals) x 2 (Task
Version: 1 vs. 2) ANCOVA with IQ, age, SES, and language ability--1 as covariates, returned a nonsignificant effect of group, F (3, 79) = 1.029, p > .05, partial
2 = 0.04, and a significant effect of task version, F (1, 79) = 10.64, p > .05.
Comparison 2: Bilectals versus monolinguals

We start by reporting the analyses comparing bilectal and monolingual children's
implicature performance in their native dialect (CG for bilectals and SMG for
monolinguals), when a more reliable control over children's language ability
was performed. Then, we describe how bilectals' and monolinguals' implicature
performance compared when both groups were tested in SMG. We note that
preliminary analyses comparing bilectal children's pragmatic performance in CG
and SMG indicated no significant differences, t (16) = -1.509, p > .05.
Seventeen bilectal (10 boys, 7 girls; ages 6;3-8;9, mean age = 7;6,
SD = 0;9 years) and 25 monolingual children (15 boys, 10 girls; ages 6;2-9, mean
age = 7;4, SD = 0;9 years) were included in the following analyses.

Participants.

Table 6 outlines background information about the two
groups. The two groups did not differ in age, t (40) = 0.868, p > .05, gender, t
(40) = -0.074, p > .05, language comprehension--Greek, t (40) = -0.48, p >
.05, language comprehension--SMG, t (40) = 0.77, p > .05, IQ, t (40) = 1.246,
p > .05, or SES, t (38) = -1.373, p > .05.
However, monolingual children significantly outperformed bilectal children in
both expressive (WFVT), t (40) = -4.365, p < .05, and receptive vocabulary
(PPVT; when each group took the test in their native variety: t (40) = -2.212, p <
.05, r = .3; and when both groups took the test in SMG: t (40) = -1.907, p = .06,
r = .3.
Background measures.

Descriptive statistics for all measures from the implicatures test by language group for this comparison can be found in Table 7.

Implicatures test--Greek.

Overall implicature composite score (after more reliably controlling for group
differences in language proficiency). An ANCOVA on the overall implicature

measure, with group (bilectals vs. monolinguals) and task version (1 vs. 2) as
between-subjects factors, language ability--2, age, and IQ as covariates indicated
a nonsignificant effect of group, F (1, 35) = 0.52, p > .05, partial 2 = 0.02, and
a significant Group x Task Version interaction, F (1, 35) = 7.38, p < .05, partial
2 = 0.17.

Table 6. Descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) on background measures (raw values) in comparison 2 by language group
Group

Age

FAS

LoPE

LoME

IQ

LC-G

WFVT-G

PPVT-G

Bilectals (n = 17)
Monolinguals (n = 25)

7;6 (0;9)
7;4 (0;9)

5.9 (2)
5.6 (1.5)

3 (1.1)
3.6 (0.8)

3.3 (1)
3.7 (0.6)

14.1 (7.3)
11.8 (5)

0.1 (0.4)
0.17 (0.4)

30.6 (5.6)
37.8 4.9

95 (16.4)
106.4 (16.5)

Note: Age, Age (years;months); FAS, Family Affluence Scale scores; LoPE, level of paternal education; LoME, level of maternal education;
IQ, scores in the matrix reasoning test of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence; LC-G, language comprehension test scores (taken in
Cypriot Greek by bilectals and multilinguals and in Standard Modern Greek by monolinguals); WFVT, Word Finding Expressive Vocabulary
Test score (taken in Greek); PPVT-G, Peabody Picture Receptive Vocabulary Test score (taken in Cypriot Greek by bilectals and in Standard
Modern Greek by monolinguals).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

808

Table 7. Descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) on measures from the
implicatures test (raw values) in comparison 2 by language group
Bilectals
(n = 17)
Task
All implicature
measures combined
Relevance
Metaphor
Manner
Scalars act-out
Scalars binary
Fillers
picture-selection
Fillers act-out
Fillers binary

Monolinguals
(n = 25)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Fa

Partial 2

2.2
2.9
2.1
2.1
2.4
2.4

0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
1.1
1.2

2.3
3
2.4
1.9
2.6
2.2

0.6
0
0.8
0.8
1
1.1

0.52b
NA
6.03*c
1.7d
0.30d
2.27d

0.01
NA
0.14
0.05
0.01
0.05

6.8
23.9
15.9

0.4
0.3
1.8

6.8
23.6
16.6

0.4
1.3
2

0.09e
0.53e
1.36e

0.00
0.01
0.03

Note: The results of between-group analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs; bilectals vs.
monolinguals) on the implicature measures are also reported. All implicature scores are
from the implicatures test received in Cypriot Greek by bilectals and in Standard Modern Greek by monolinguals. Relevance, scores in the subtest on relevance implicatures;
Metaphor, scores in the subtest on metaphors; Manner, scores in the subtest on manner implicatures; Scalars act-out, scores in the act-out task on scalar impicatures; Scalars binary,
scores in the binary judgment task on scalar implicatures; Fillers picture selection, scores
in the filler items of the picture-selection part of the implicatures test; Fillers act-out,
scores in the filler items of the act-out task on scalar implicatures; Fillers binary, scores in
the filler items of the binary judgment task on scalar implicatures.
a
Degrees of freedom for the error term range from 34 to 38, depending on the analysis.
b
F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age, IQ, and general language ability 2 as
covariates and Task Version and Group as between-subjects factors.
c
F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age and general language ability 2 as covariates
and Task Version and Group as between-subjects factors.
d
F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age, IQ, and general language ability 2 as
covariates and Group as a between-subjects factor.
e
F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with age and IQ as covariates and Group as a
between-subjects factor.
*p < .05.

Follow-up ANCOVAs on overall implicature performance for each version
separately (with the same covariates as in the previous analysis) revealed a clearly
nonsignificant effect of group in version 1 of the test, t (17) = 0.17, p > .05, and
a significant effect of group in version 2 of the test, t (15) = 2.33, p < .05, r = .5,
indicating a bilectal advantage.
Mean scores and standard deviations for children's
performance in the SMG version of the implicatures test are reported by language
group in Table 8.

Implicatures test--SMG.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

809

Table 8. Descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) on measures from the
implicatures test (raw values) in comparison 2 by language group
Bilectals
(n = 17)
Task
All implicature
measures combined
Relevance
Metaphor
Manner
Scalars act-out
Scalars binary
Fillers
picture-selection
Fillers act-out
Fillers binary

Monolinguals
(n = 25)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Fa

Partial 2

2.4
3
2.3
2.3
2.6
2.3

0.7
0
0.8
0.6
1
1.1

2.3
3
2.4
1.9
2.6
2.2

0.6
0
0.8
0.8
1
1.1

2.58b
NA
0.18b
5.48*b
0.51b
0.83b

0.06
NA
0.01
0.13
0.01
0.02

6.8
23.9
16.6

0.4
0.3
1.8

6.8
23.6
16.6

0.4
1.3
2

0.01c
0.95c
0.02c

0.00
0.02
0.00

Note: All implicature scores are from the implicatures test received in Standard Modern
Greek by both bilectals and monolinguals. The results of between-group analyses of
covariance (ANCOVAs; bilectals vs. monolinguals) on these measures are also reported.
Relevance, scores in the subtest on relevance implicatures; Metaphor, scores in the subtest
on metaphors; Manner, scores in the subtest on manner implicatures; Scalars act-out,
scores in the act-out task on scalar impicatures; Scalars binary, scores in the binary
judgment task on scalar implicatures; Fillers picture selection, scores in the filler items of
the picture-selection part of the implicatures test; Fillers act-out, scores in the filler items
of the act-out task on scalar implicatures; Fillers binary, scores in the filler items of the
binary judgment task on scalar implicatures.
a
Degrees of freedom for the error term range from 38 to 40, depending on the analysis.
b
F ratio resulting from an ANCOVA with general language ability--SMG as a covariate
and Group as a between-subjects factor.
c
F ratio resulting from an ANOVA with Group as a between-subjects factor.
*p < .05.

An ANCOVA on the implicature--SMG
score with group as a between-subjects factor (bilectals vs. monolinguals) and
GLA-SMG as a covariate showed no significant differences between the two
groups, t (39) = 1.61, p = .116, r = .26. The results were the same when including
the language comprehension score--SMG instead of the GLA-SMG score as a
covariate, t (39) = 0.268, p > .05, r = .04.

Overall Implicature composite score.

Were the children included in the between-group analyses too competent
with implicature for significant differences between the three language
groups to emerge?

In order to examine this possibility, we divided the whole sample of children tested as part of this study (including the children not included in the
between-group analyses above) into three age groups: (a) very young children (n

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

810

= 19, mean age = 5;2, SD = 0;4, age range = 4;3-5;8); (b) middle-aged children
(n = 97, mean age = 7;6, SD = 0;9, age range = 6;2-9); and (c) older children
(n = 23, mean age = 10;1, SD = 0;9, age range = 9;01-12;2). Middle-aged
children were the participants included in the between-group analyses on implicature performance reported in the previous sections. We then conducted a
between-group analysis on overall implicature performance in Greek with age
group as a between-subjects factor. This analysis indicated a significant effect of
age group, F (2, 136) = 25.182, p < .05. Planned contrasts indicated that the
younger age group (mean performance = 1.33, SD = 0.7) performed significantly
worse than the middle-aged group (mean performance = 2.22, SD = 0.5; p <
.05) and that the middle-aged group performed significantly worse than the older
group (mean performance 2.49, SD = 0.5; p < .05). These results indicate a developmental trend in children's implicature understanding skills. More important,
they show that the children included in the between-group analyses on implicature
performance (the middle-aged group) were yet not at the peak of their implicature understanding skills. This suggests that there was still room in children's
pragmatic skills for further improvement, if bilingualism had a positive effect on
children's implicature understanding performance.
Power of statistical analyses for the effect of language group

To examine the power of our statistical comparisons to detect an effect of language
group on overall implicature performance, we first calculated the likely magnitude
of the bilingualism effect on pragmatic ability based on the three previous studies
by Siegal et al. (2007, 2009, 2010), which tested similar skills in preschool-aged
children. To do so, we conducted a basic meta-analysis on SPSS using the syntax
files provided by Field and Gillett (2010). Table 9 shows the included studies,
the effect sizes from each study (by comparison), and the sample size for each
comparison.
The results of the meta-analysis showed that the mean effect size based on
Hedges and Vevea's (1998) random-effects model was r = .39; the 95% confidence
interval was 0.27 (lower) and 0.49 (upper), which had a significant associated z
score (z = 6.24, p < .001). This represents a medium to large effect size according
to Cohen (1988). We thus calculated the power of our between-group statistical
tests to detect an effect of the magnitude found by the Siegal et al. studies (2007,
2009, 2010) in combination (see O'Keefe, 2007; Sun, Pan, & Wang, 2011). We
focus here on the first comparison that included the larger samples from each
group, since both comparisons yielded similar results.
A power calculation using G*Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007)
indicated that the first comparison had a power of 0.96 for the main effect of group
(for an ANOVA with three groups and a total sample of 95 children), which is
well above Cohen's (1988) recommended level of 0.8.5 We further calculated the
power of our statistical comparison to detect a group effect of moderate size (f =
0.25; to allow for a more conservative estimate of the effect size than that expected
based on the studies by Siegal et al.). This power calculation indicated that the
first comparison had a power of 0.56 for the main effect of group, which is well
below the recommended level of 0.8 (Cohen, 1988). Nevertheless, these power

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

811

Table 9. Summary of Siegal et al. (2007, 2009, 2010) studies included in the basic
meta-analysis and associated effect sizes
Study

Experiment

Bilinguals (n)

Monolinguals (n)

Pearson r a

N

2007
2007
2009
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010

NA
NA
1
2
2
1
2
2

English-Japanese (20)
English-Japanese (20)
Slovenian-Italian (22)
Slovenian-Italian (38)
Slovenian-Italian (38)
German-Italian (36)
English-Japanese (33)
English-Japanese (33)

English (21)
Japanese (23)
Slovenian (19)
Slovenian (41)
Italian (43)
Italian (41)
Japanese (59)
Japanese (59)

.26*
.6**
.5**
.29*b
.28*b
.64**
.30**c
.27**d

41
43
41
79
81
77
92
92

a

Effect size for the comparison between bilinguals and monolinguals on overall performance in the Conversational Violations Test. A positive effect indicates better bilingual
performance.
b
Effect size calculated by averaging the effect sizes for the between-group comparisons
on each individual maxim.
c
Effect size for the comparison between bilinguals and monolinguals when bilinguals took
the test in English and monolinguals in Japanese (and verbal mental age in English for
bilinguals and in Japanese for monolinguals was covaried in the analysis).
d
Effect size for the comparison between bilinguals and monolinguals when both groups
took the test in Japanese (and verbal mental age in Japanese was covaried in the analysis).
*p < .05. **p < .01.

calculations do not take into account two aspects of our statistical analyses that are
known to have a positive effect on power. The first is the use of ANCOVA, which
allows removing the effect of factors that correlate with the dependent measure of
interest (and hence reduces error variance and improves the relationship between
group and the dependent variable). The second is the measurement of implicature
understanding skill through multiple indicators that leads to more reliable estimates of this ability (Cohen, 1988, pp. 535-542; Rushton, Brainerd, & Pressley,
1983).
Regarding the first aspect, in our between-group comparisons we included three
factors that correlated with pragmatic performance (see Table 1): language ability,
IQ, and age. A regression analysis of language ability--1, IQ, and age on overall
implicature performance showed that these three variables accounted collectively
for 32% of the total variance in the dependent measure. Using the formula in
Cohen (1988, pp. 540-541), this means that an ANCOVA comparison with these
three factors as covariates would need only 68% of participants to achieve a power
of 0.8 compared to a comparison without these variables covaried. In essence,
this means a gain of 50 participants, which brings the power level of the group
comparison in this study to 0.76, just below the required level of 0.8.
We would expect, however, that the above estimates of power are even higher.
When multiple measures of a target construct are tested, and these measures show
some degree of convergent validity and are combined into a single indicator of
that component, variance idiosyncratic to each task is averaged out and general

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

812

variance accumulates (see Carlson, 2003; Rushton et al., 1983). This leaves a less
biased, more stable, more reliable, and purer estimator of the relevant component
(Rushton et al., 1983) and achieves "more psychometric precision" (Carlson, 2003,
p. 42). This reduction in error in the dependent measure and consequent increase
in reliability is also salutary for power as noted by Cohen (1988, p. 537).
The relation among implicature performance, children's language
proficiency, and EC

In order to explore the verbal and nonverbal cognitive skills that potentially predict
children's implicature performance, correlational analyses were conducted. These
analyses were performed on the overall implicature composite score that reflected
implicature performance in CG for multilinguals and bilectals, and in SMG for
monolinguals.
Antoniou et al. (2016) reported that a PCA on six indicators of EC ability
revealed two distinct components of EC, which they interpreted as representing inhibition and WM (with the Simon effect, stop-signal reaction time, and the
switching cost loading on the first factor and the rest on the second factor). Following the PCA, Antoniou et al. (2016) formed composite scores from the measures
that loaded on each factor by transforming into z scores and then averaging the
relevant scores. Thus, the correlational analyses reported here were conducted
with these two EC composite scores: inhibition and WM.
For all groups, measures of theoretical interest included the two EC composite
scores. Age and language ability are also two factors that have been found in some
studies to affect children's implicature understanding skills, and for this reason,
correlations with these aspects were also considered (GLA-1 was included as a
measure of children's language proficiency in the language of testing; see, e.g.,
Johnson, 1991; Norbury, 2005; Rundblad & Annaz, 2010, and references therein
for effects of language ability and Guasti et al., 2005; Noveck, 2001; Pouscoulous
et al., 2007; Winner, 1997; Winner, Levy, Kaplan, & Rosenblatt, 1988, for effects
of age). Correlations between these measures and implicature performance are
presented in Table 1 for the whole sample of children in this experimental study.
Independent variables that significantly correlated with implicature performance
were included in the regression analyses as predictors.
The first regression analysis was conducted on the whole sample of participants
in this study with age, GLA-1, WM, IQ, and task version as predictors. Overall,
this regression model was significant, F (5, 127) = 15.465, p < .05, accounting for
38% of the variance in the dependent measure. When looking at the coefficients,
only age, GLA-1, and task version significantly predicted overall implicature
performance, the association with the first two measures being positive and the
association with version being negative, t (127) = 3.400, p < .05, t (127) = 2.745,
p < .05, t (127) = -3.793, p < .05, respectively. The results of this linear regression
analysis are presented in Table 10.
Similar regression analyses were conducted for each group of participants separately (monolinguals, bilectals, and multilinguals). The regression analysis for the
monolingual group included GLA-1 and task version as predictors and revealed
only a significant negative effect of version, t (22) = -2.60, p < .05, and a positive
effect of GLA-1, t (22) = 2.69, p < .05. The regression analysis for the bilectal

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

813

Table 10. Results of multiple regression
analysis on implicature performance based
on the whole sample of children

Constant
Age
WM
IQ
Version
GLA-1

B (SE)

B

1.629 (0.306)
0.135** (0.040)
0.083 (0.073)
0.002 (0.008)
-0.334** (0.88)
0.196** (0.071)

0.333
0.110
0.026
-0.27
0.227

Note: Age, Age (years); WM, working memory
composite score; IQ, scores in the matrix reasoning test of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale
of Intelligence; Version, task version of implicatures test; GLA-1, general language ability 1
composite score. R2 = .38; F (5, 127) = 15.465
(p < .05).
*p < .05. **p < .01.

group included age, GLA-1, WM, inhibition, and IQ as predictors. When looking
at the individual predictors, there was only a significant positive effect of GLA-1,
t (54) = 2.93, p < .05. Finally, the regression analysis for the multilingual group
included age, GLA-1, WM, IQ, and task version and revealed only a significant
positive effect of age, t (39) = 3.38, p < .05, and a significant negative effect of
version, t (37) = -4.589, p < .05.
DISCUSSION

The present research investigated how growing up with two languages or two
different varieties of the same language affects the ability to understand implicatures in children. We were also interested in potential relations between pragmatic
language understanding and EC. There were several interesting findings of this
study, and these are discussed in the following sections.
The components of implicature understanding skill

A PCA on children's scores from four implicature subtests (on metaphor, manner, and SI comprehension) revealed only a single factor of implicature performance. This was not a trivial result given that the scores for each implicature
type were extracted from different subtests that varied methodologically (e.g.,
in terms of instructions, method of response, and verbal demands). In terms of
the generalized-particularized implicature debate, this finding provides support to
pragmatic theories (e.g., Geurts, 2010; Grice, 1975; Sperber & Wilson, 1995/1986)
that treat all types of pragmatically inferred meanings as the outcome of a single
pragmatic interpretation process that involves uncovering the speaker's intentions
behind an utterance. On the contrary, this result is not easily accommodated by

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

814

theories that postulate a categorical distinction in the mechanisms involved in
deriving PCIs and GCIs (Chierchia, 2004; Levinson, 2000).
The effects of childhood multilingualism and bilectalism on implicature
understanding

Our study did not provide any hard evidence for differences in multilingual,
bilectal, and monolingual children's implicature understanding skills. When considering the more reliable indicators of pragmatic ability (the overall implicature
composite scores), some differences emerged, but these differences were not robust
and not in the direction of one group of children consistently outperforming the
others. Comparison 1 indicated better multilingual and monolingual performance
relative to bilectals. However, this advantage was evident in only one of the two
task versions of the implicatures test and was not significant in the follow-up analyses and post hoc pairwise comparisons between the three groups. Furthermore,
there were some indications for a bilectal advantage relative to monolinguals in
overall implicature performance when children's language proficiency was more
reliably controlled in Comparison 2. However, again, this difference in performance favoring bilectals was evident only in one version of the implicatures task
when bilectals and monolinguals were tested in their native dialects (bilectals
in CG and monolinguals in SMG) and was not significant when bilectal and
monolingual children's implicature performance in SMG was considered. Thus,
it seems fair to conclude that there was no strong evidential basis in this study on
which to maintain that the three groups differed in their implicature understanding
skills.
Furthermore, multilingual children exhibited monolingual-like implicature understanding whether considering children who were dominant in the language of
testing (CG) or children who were dominant in English. Similarly, bilectals performed comparably to monolinguals whether they were tested in their dominant,
native variety (CG) or in their second, nonnative variety (SMG). Finally, multilingual and bilectal children exhibited comparable to monolinguals implicature
performance even when no statistical control was performed on their lower formal
language proficiency.
These results in combination show that multilingual and bilectal children exhibit comparable to monolinguals level of implicature understanding regadless of
factors such as level of language proficiency or language dominance.
Toward reconciling the null multilingual effect on implicature understanding
with previous positive reports

However, the above conclusion stands in contrast to the findings of the studies
by Siegal et al. who reported precocious bilingual development either in similar
(2007) or closely related pragmatic-communicative skills (2009, 2010), and even
in the face of bilingual children's lower language abilities. Here, we consider
several explanations that might help reconcile the discrepancy in the findings.
To start with, Siegal et al.'s (2007) finding of a bilingual advantage in generating
SIs is a single finding in the literature and it is possible that it is not replicable

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

815

(a Type I error).6 The present study provides some evidence in support of this
position since it included a similar (albeit not fully identical) task, but obtained
no evidence for enhanced multilingual performance. Both the Siegal et al. (2007)
task and the binary judgment task in the current study required children to judge
the accuracy of sentences using the quantifiers some and all as descriptions of
various scenarios, and both tasks required the generation of a SI in order to reject
the critical underinformative sentences. Yet the two studies obtained different
results. Furthermore, the present study did not document a multilingual advantage
in understanding SIs in a second task that tested the same type of implicature,
but had a different format (action-based task). This observation makes it unlikely
that the present study gave rise to a Type II error in two tasks compared to the
likelihood of a Type I error in Siegal et al. (2007) who used just one task.
Two additional explanations are related to the particular test employed in the
Siegal et al. (2009, 2010) studies. First, Siegal et al.'s (2009, 2010) CVT examined
the ability to detect utterances that violated conversational rules, while the pragmatic test in the present study investigated the skill to interpret implicatures. It is
likely that the documented bilingual advantage in detecting violations of Gricean
maxims does not extend to the ability to understand implicatures. We can see only
one reason why this might not be the case. As described earlier, experimental evidence shows that bilingual children excel in almost all components that have been
theoretically and/or experimentally linked to the process of implicature understanding (e.g., EC, detecting violations of Gricean maxims, ToM) but lag behind
in core language knowledge. It is conceivable that superior implicature performance was not obtained in this study because the pragmatic task used posed more
demands on children's language proficiency than the test employed in Siegal et al.
(2009, 2010). This might have neutralized any potential multilingual advantages
in other implicature-related facets. In support of this view, the regression analyses
conducted on the whole sample of children indicated that core language ability was
the primary factor affecting children's implicature understanding performance.
Second, Katsos, Roqueta, Estevan, and Cummins (2011) have questioned the
CVT's validity as a test of pragmatic ability. Specifically, they argued that the
CVT falls short of being a real test of pragmatic sensitivity, at least as far as the
maxims of quality, relation, and politeness are concerned. As Katsos et al. (2011,
p. 44) note, given the question Have you seen my dog?, children can reject an
answer such as Yes, he's in the sky on the grounds of it being an implausible
statement, just by drawing on their encyclopedic knowledge about the world and
the likelihood of dogs being in the sky, and not because they were sensitive to
the maxim of quality. Katsos et al. (2011) express similar concerns about the
statements used to investigate children's sensitivity to the maxim of relation (e.g.,
I know your name as a response to the question What game do you like?). Finally,
they contend that identification of rude utterances such as the ones used by Siegal
et al. (2009, 2010) to test children's sensitivity to the maxim of politeness (No,
it's disgusting as a response to the question Do you like my dress?) depends on
culture-specific social norms rather than on "culture-independent considerations
of communicative efficiency that underpin the maxims of quantity, relation and
manner" (Katsos et al., 2011, p. 44). Nevertheless, it should be noted that Siegal
et al. did report a bilingual advantage for the items on the maxims of manner (Siegal

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

816

et al., 2009, 2010) and quantity II (Siegal et al., 2009, 2010) that unequivocally
tested pragmatic sensitivity.
Third, another explanation for the contrast in the results might be that this study
included children of an older age (school-aged children between 6 and 9 years old)
than the children tested in Siegal et al. (2007, 2009, 2010; preschoolers between
4 and 6 years old). It is possible that the impact of bilingualism is more profound
during the preschool years, a period during which pragmatic understanding is at
the very early stages of development and children present difficulties in a range
of pragmatic tasks (see, e.g., Guasti et al., 2005; Noveck, 2001; Pouscoulous
et al., 2007; Vosniadou, 1987; Winner, 1997). Alternatively, one might argue that
monolingual children catch up with their bilingual peers as they become older
and accumulate more experience in interpreting pragmatic language. Thus, even
though our data shows that a multilingual/bilectal benefit is not found in early
school-aged children, it cannot exclude the possibility that such an advantage
might be found when testing younger children.
It should be clarified that the lack of significant differences between the language groups cannot be attributed to lack of variability in children's pragmatic
performance or to the fact that the children in our study were too competent with
implicature for significant differences to emerge. Overall implicature performance
across the three groups was at 73% in the current study, which is far from ceiling.
Furthermore, this level of performance is lower than the 79.5% and 74.4% overall
performance obtained in the CVT by Siegal et al. (2009, their experiments 1 and
2, respectively) and the 80% and 79% obtained by Siegal et al. (2010, their experiments 1 and 2, respectively). This shows that our task had more variability in
children's performance than the CVT in Siegal et al. (2009, 2010). Furthermore,
the fact that significant differences between bilinguals and monolinguals were
found in the experiments by Siegal et al. but not in the present one, suggests that
the null effect in our experiment cannot be attributed to a high level of performance
or a lack of sufficient variability. Finally, the implicature understanding skills of
the children included in the between-group analyses on implicature comprehension (aged 6;2-9;0 years) were not yet at a peak level, but were still developing,
as indicated by the fact that the implicature performance of these children was
significantly lower than that of a group of older children (aged 9;01-12;2, whose
data were discarded in the between-group analyses due to the matching in age).

The cognitive foundations of implicature understanding in children

Another purpose of this study was to investigate the cognitive factors that affect
implicature understanding in children. A regression analysis on the data from the
whole sample of children indicated that language proficiency in the language of
testing, as well as age, were the critical predictors of implicature understanding.
The findings of this analysis suggest that implicature understanding is a pragmatic-
communicative skill that largely depends on children's language abilities.
Further regression analyses, however, on each of the three groups of children
individually revealed an interesting divide. While for monolingual and bilectal
children general language ability emerged as the decisive factor, for multilingual

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

817

children there was a clearly nonsignificant effect of language proficiency and only
a significant positive contribution of age.
How is it possible to account for this pattern of results? One interpretation
might be that multilingual, bilectal, and monolingual children achieve the same
ends when interpreting pragmatic language but through a different route. The
findings of the present study indicate that, in general, implicature understanding
is a pragmatic-communicative ability that primarily draws on children's language proficiency. This of course might be particularly true for children with
better-developed language skills such as monolingual and bilectal children. The
well-documented delays in bilingual children's language development, however,
suggest that bilingual children might be less able to rely on their core language
knowledge when comprehending implicatures. In this respect, they need to accomplish the implicature interpretation process in a different way. This possibility
is further reinforced by the fact that age was a significant predictor of pragmatic
performance only within the multilingual group, suggesting that other nonlinguistic factors, besides EC, that develop with age are possibly involved in and sustain
the process of computing implicatures in multilinguals.
Exactly what these other nonlinguistic cognitive resources or this alternative
way of understanding implicatures might be is beyond the reach of this study, and
such a discussion can only be speculative. One possibility is that bilingual children
compensate for their disadvantage in language ability by being more attentive and
sensitive to contextual aspects of an utterance, as suggested by Siegal et al. (2010).
Another option might be that bilinguals engage to a greater degree their (potentially
better-developed) ToM skills.
The role of confounding factors

In the current study, we controlled for several factors that correlate with bilingualism and/or that affect implicature performance by matching the groups in
the relevant variables and/or by measuring these variables and excluding them
as potential confounds through the use of ANCOVA. Ethnicity, culture, and immigration status were also controlled by default given the groups of children
compared.
Language proficiency was carefully measured via two measures in Comparison
1 and three measures in Comparison 2. Thus, we can be fairly confident that
the language proficiency composite scores calculated from these measures were
reliable indicators of the target skill and that the ANCOVA adequately adjusted for
differences between the groups. No significant differences in overall implicature
performance emerged even when comparing bilectal and monolingual children
(who showed smaller differences in language proficiency as seen in the analyses
on expressive vocabulary in Comparison 1) or even when more robustly controlling
for differences in language proficiency by covarying a composite score of three
language measures in Comparison 2.
Similarly, for SES, three different indicators were aggregated into a single composite measure, which was covaried in the between-group analyses. Again, it seems
reasonable to assume that this composite score precisely and reliably measured
this sociodemographic facet and that the ANCOVA led to appropriate adjustments

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

818

of differences between the three groups. Furthermore, SES cannot confound the
results of the between-group analyses because it did not significantly correlate
with implicature performance in this study. In addition, significant differences in
SES were found only between the multilingual and bilectal children. Thus, in the
critical comparisons between multilingual and monolingual children, and between
bilectal and monolingual children that tested for the effects of main interest, the
groups were of comparable SES.
Between-group differences in nonverbal fluid intelligence were controlled for
by covarying performance in the WASI matrix reasoning test in all the betweengroup analyses on overall implicature understanding skill. According to Miller
and Chapman (2001, p. 45), the application of ANCOVA is acceptable when
the between-group differences on the covariate do not reflect true population
differences, but can be attributed to chance. A review of the literature reveals that
there is no expectation for a bilingual advantage in nonverbal fluid intelligence,
and the majority of studies that tested this aspect of cognition in bilingual and
monolingual children reported a null bilingual effect (see Barac et al., 2014; but
see Marzecova, Asanowicz, Kriva, & Wodnicka, 2013; Tao, Marzecova, Taft,
Asanowicz, & Wodniecka, 2011). This raises the possibility that the positive
effect of multilingualism on IQ in this study was not a true effect and was due to
chance.
However, even if the multilingual advantage in IQ performance is real, does
this pose any challenges on our interpretation of the results in this study? Our
answer is again no, and several different arguments can be offered to ground this
response. If between-group differences in IQ reflect a true effect, then the only
error that could possibly be committed in our analyses is a Type II error against
monolinguals (i.e., that there is a monolingual advantage over multilinguals that
was not detected because the between-group difference in IQ was not adequately
controlled). This by itself is a novel finding given that one would expect, not
a monolingual advantage, but a medium to large multilingual advantage based
on previous research. However, we do not think that this scenario is plausible.
First, the WASI matrix reasoning test is part of a widely used cognitive battery
whose psychometric characteristics have been investigated and established. For
participants' scores in the matrix reasoning test, Wechsler (1999) reports splithalf reliability of 0.96 and test-retest reliability of 0.72 for the age range in this
sample. Second, we also calculated the reliability of this score based on the sample
of children in our study. Cronbach  for the IQ score is 0.956, which is quite high
(see Field, 2013, p. 715). Third, even though IQ significantly correlated with
implicature understanding skill, the regression analyses indicated that it does not
actually affect pragmatic performance and that the significant correlation can be
explained in terms of third factors (age, EC, or language proficiency). Fourth,
it is possible that the multilingual advantage in the WASI matrix reasoning test
was due to multilinguals' enhanced EC skills. If this is true, then this would
justify treating IQ as an EC measure. Again, differences in EC cannot explain
the between-group results as indicated by the nonsignificant effect of EC on
implicature understanding in the regression analyses. Fifth and finally, in the
second comparison of the current study, bilectal and monolingual subgroups were
used that did not statistically differ in terms of either SES or fluid intelligence

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

819

performance. Yet, again, no significant differences between the two groups were
obtained in overall implicature understanding.
APPENDIX A
The (socio)linguistic situation in Greek-speaking Cyprus and the relation
between CG and SMG
The sociolinguistic terrain in Greek-speaking Cyprus has been often described as diglossic with CG being the low variety and SMG the high variety (Arvaniti, 2010; Rowe &
Grohmann, 2013; but see Auer, 2005; Karyolemou, 2006). CG and SMG are both dialects
of Greek. CG is natively acquired and used in everyday communication. SMG is acquired
sequentially, mainly through formal education (from kindergarten onward, around the age
of 5), it is the language of education, and it is also the language used in formal situations,
particularly writing, public speaking, and in the media. It is also the official language of
the Republic of Cyprus and the language spoken by Hellenic Greeks in the Republic of
Greece.
CG and SMG exhibit a high degree of language similarity. To begin with, the two
varieties are genetically related. According to the traditional comparative method, the two
dialects are classified as parts of the Greek language family of Indo-European languages
(Lewis, Gary, & Fennig, 2014, see Classification under Greek Language entry; see also
Lyovin, 1997). Furthermore, the Ethnologue (Lewis et al., 2014, see Dialects under Greek
Language entry) reports a lexical similarity of 84%-93% between the two varieties, with an
85% similarity being the cutoff point for two variants being dialects of the same language7
(see Newton, 1972, pp. 111-112; Terkourafi, 2005, p. 316). Finally, there is some degree
of intelligibility between the two dialects as spoken by native speakers among themselves
with some varieties of CG being more easily understood by SMG native speakers than
others.
Nevertheless, the two dialects also show differences in both grammar and the lexicon
(see, e.g., Terkourafi, 2005): morphology (e.g., CG has verbs that are formed with the
suffix -isko, as in CG [minisko], I stay, instead of the SMG [meno]), syntax (e.g., CG
uses a clefting strategy for forming wh-questions, which does not exist in SMG, as in the
CG [inda mbu kamnis?], meaning what is it that you are doing, opposed to the SMG [ti
kaneis]; Grohmann, Panagiotidis, & Tsiplakou, 2006), phonetics and phonology (e.g., in
CG the voiced fricatives [v], [], [] are sometimes deleted intervocalically, so the SMG
[tianizo], meaning I fry, becomes [tianizo] in CG), semantics (e.g., the word [lalo] means
I crow in SMG and I say in CG), pragmatics (Greek Cypriots and Hellenic Greeks often
use different politeness strategies; e.g., Terkourafi, 1997), and lexis (e.g., for the word
run, SMG speakers use the word [trexo], while CG speakers frequently use the word
[vuo]).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

820

APPENDIX B

Table B.1. Linguisitc material used in the picture-selection part of the implicatures test

Item

Task
Version

Correct
Response

1

Picture 2

2

Picture 1

1

Picture 1

2

Picture 2

1

Picture 1

2

Picture 2

1

Picture 2

2

Picture 1

1

Picture 2

Practice Items
1
2

George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, shall I open the window?"
His mother replied: "Yes, it's very hot in here."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, shall I open the window?"
His mother replied: "No, it's very cold outside."
Relevance Implicature Items

3

4

5
6
7
8

George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, can I go to the beach with
my friends?"
His mother replied: "You are ill."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, can I go to the beach with
my friends?"
His mother replied: "Don't forget to take some
sunscreen with you."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, can I buy some ice cream?"
His mother replied: "I've got money in my wallet."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, can I buy some ice cream?"
His mother replied: "You are ill."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, shall I feed the dog?"
His mother replied: "The dog chow is in the kitchen."
George and his mother were in the living room. George
asked his mother: "Mom, shall I feed the dog?"
His mother replied: "I've just fed the dog."
Metaphor Items

9

Today, George's father's favorite football team was
playing a game. George's father went to the stadium
to watch the game. His team did not play well and
lost. George heard the final score on the news. He
wondered how his father would feel when coming
back home. He didn't know whether his father would
feel sad because his favorite team lost or angry
because the team did not play well. When George's
father returned home, he was a melting snowman.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

821

Table B.1 (cont.)

Item
10

11

12

13

Today, George's father's favorite football team was
playing a game. George's father went to the stadium
to watch the game. His team did not play well and
lost. George heard the final score on the news. He
wondered how his father would feel when coming
back home. He didn't know whether his father would
feel sad because his favorite team lost or angry
because the team did not play well. When George's
father returned home, he was a thundering cannon.
George's father had a dog that he loved dearly. The dog
lived in a fenced area in the backyard of the house.
Today, George's father was at work and George was
told to feed the dog. George gave the dog some food
but, when leaving, he accidentally left the fence door
open. The dog escaped and George could not find
him anywhere. George wondered how his father
would feel when he told him about the dog. He didn't
know whether his father would feel sad because his
beloved dog had gone or angry because George had
carelessly left the fence door open. When George
told his father what had happened, George's father
was a foaming sea.
George's father had a dog that he loved dearly. The dog
lived in a fenced area in the backyard of the house.
Today, George's father was at work and George was
told to feed the dog. George gave the dog some food,
but when leaving, he accidentally left the fence door
open. The dog escaped and George could not find
him anywhere. George wondered how his father
would feel when he told him about the dog. He didn't
know whether his father would feel sad because his
beloved dog had gone or angry because George had
carelessly left the fence door open. When George
told his father what had happened, George's father
was a knocked down tower.
Today, George's father's favorite singer was in the town
for a concert. The tickets for the concert were limited
and they soon sold out. George's father, though,
managed to buy two tickets, one for himself and one
for George's mother. He kept the tickets on a table in
the living room. At some point, however, George
accidentally spilled water on the table and ruined the
tickets. George wondered how his father would feel
upon finding out. He didn't know whether his father
would feel sad because he would miss his favorite
singer's concert or angry because George had
carelessly ruined the tickets. When George's father
found out what had happened, he was a rumbling
thunder.

Task
Version

Correct
Response

2

Picture 1

1

Picture 1

2

Picture 2

1

Picture 1

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

822

Table B.1 (cont.)

Item
14

Today, George's father's favorite singer was in the town
for a concert. The tickets for the concert were limited
and they soon sold out. George's father, though,
managed to buy two tickets, one for himself and one
for George's mother. He kept the tickets on a table in
the living room. At some point, however, George
accidentally spilled water on the table and ruined the
tickets. George wondered how his father would feel
upon finding out. He didn't know whether his father
would feel sad because he would miss his favorite
singer's concert or angry because George had
carelessly ruined the tickets. When George's father
found out what had happened, he was a sinking ship.

Task
Version

Correct
Response

2

Picture 2

1
2
1
2
1
2

Picture 2
Picture 1
Picture 2
Picture 1
Picture 1
Picture 2

1
2
1
2
1
2
1

Picture 2
Picture 1
Picture 1
Picture 2
Picture 2
Picture 1
Picture 1

2

Picture 3

1

Picture 3

Manner Implicature Items
15
16
17
18
19
20

In this picture, a man opened the door.
In this picture, a man made the door open.
In this picture, a man made the safe open.
In this picture, a man opened the safe.
In this picture, a man spilled the water on the floor.
In this picture, a man made the water spill on the floor.
Filler Items

21
22
23
24
25
26
27

28

29

In this picture, a man is sleeping.
In this picture, a man turned off the alarm clock.
In this picture, a man unlocked the lock.
In this picture, a man broke the lock.
In this picture, a boy is playing in the sand.
In this picture, a boy is swimming.
George and his mother were in the living room.
George's friends were going to play football and
George really wanted to join them. George asked his
mother: "Mom, can I play football with my friends?"
George's mother replied: "No, you have a test at
school tomorrow."
George and his mother were in the living room.
George's friends were going to play football and
George really wanted to join them. George asked his
mother: "Mom, can I play football with my friends?"
George's mother replied: "Yes, your football is in the
kitchen."
George and his mother were in the living room.
George's favorite film was going to come on TV in a
little while and George really wanted to watch it.
George asked his mother: "Mom, can I watch TV?"
George's mother replied: "Yes, I would like to watch
TV, too."

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

823

Table B.1 (cont.)

Item
30

31

32

George and his mother were in the living room.
George's favorite film was going to come on TV in a
little while and George really wanted to watch it.
George asked his mother: "Mom, can I watch TV?"
George's mother replied: "No, the baby is sleeping."
George and his mother were in the living room. His
parents had just bought him a new bike and George
really wanted to go out and ride it. George asked his
mother: "Mom, can I go play with my bike?"
George's mother replied: "No, you haven't finished
your homework yet"
George and his mother were in the living room. His
parents had just bought him a new bike and George
really wanted to go out and ride it. George asked his
mother: "Mom, can I play with my bike?"
George's mother replied: "Yes, but be careful not to
get hurt"

Task
Version

Correct
Response

2

Picture 2

1

Picture 3

2

Picture

Table B.2. Linguistic material used in the binary judgment part of the implicatures test

Item

Target
Utterance

Visual
Display

Utterance
Status

Expected
Response

Practice Items
33
34

There are hearts on
none of the cards.
There are rings on all
of the cards.

5/5

False

Incorrect

5/5

True and
informative

Correct

3/5

True but
underinformative
True and informative

Correct
Incorrect
Correct

0/5

False

Incorrect

5/5

True and informative

Correct

3/5

False

Incorrect

3/5

False

Incorrect

Test Items
35
36
37
38
39
40

There are hearts on
some of the cards.
There are hearts on
some of the cards.
There are hearts on
some of the cards.
There are hearts on all
of the cards.
There are hearts on all
of the cards.
There are hearts on
none of the cards.

5/5

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

824

Table B.2 (cont.)

Item
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55

Target
Utterance

Visual
Display

Utterance
Status

Expected
Response

There are hearts on
none of the cards.
There are stars on
some of the cards.
There are stars on
some of the cards.
There are stars on
some of the cards.
There are stars on all
of the cards.
There are stars on all
of the cards.
There are stars on
none of the cards.
There are stars on
none of the cards.
There are rings on
some of the cards.
There are rings on
some of the cards.
There are rings on
some of the cards.
There are rings on all
of the cards.
There are rings on all
of the cards.
There are rings on
none of the cards.
There are rings on
none of the cards.

0/5

True and informative

Correct

5/5
3/5

True but
underinformative
True and informative

Correct
Incorrect
Correct

0/5

False

Incorrect

5/5

True and informative

Correct

3/5

False

Incorrect

3/5

False

Incorrect

0/5

True and informative

Correct

5/5
3/5

True but
underinformative
True and informative

Correct
Incorrect
Correct

0/5

False

Incorrect

5/5

True and informative

Correct

3/5

False

Incorrect

3/5

False

Incorrect

0/5

True and informative

Correct

Note: Critical underinformative utterances appear in bold. The rest of the test utterances
are filler items.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

825

Table B.3. Linguistic material used in the act-out part of the implicatures test

Item

Target
Utterance

Visual
Display

Utterance
Status

Expected
Response

Practice Items
56
57
58

Two of the
boxes have
dolphins.
Two of the
boxes have
turtles.
Three of the
boxes have
elephants.

0/5

False

Add one dolphin in each
one of two empty boxes.

2/5

True

No action

5/5

False

Remove two elephants
from the boxes

Test Items
59

Some of the
boxes have
turtles.

5/5

True but
underinformative

60

Some of the
boxes have
turtles.
Some of the
boxes have
turtles.
All of the
boxes have
turtles.
All of the
boxes have
turtles.
All of the
boxes have
turtles
None of the
boxes have
turtles
None of the
boxes have
turtles.
None of the
boxes have
turtles.
Some of the
boxes have
elephants.

2/5

True and informative

0/5

False

5/5

True and informative

2/5

False

Add one turtle in each one
of the three empty boxes.

0/5

False

Add one turtle in each one
of the five empty boxes.

2/5

False

Remove the two turtles
from the boxes.

0/5

True and informative

No action

5/5

False

Remove all turtles from the
boxes.

5/5

True but
underinformative

Remove at least one and
no more than four of
the elephants from the
boxes.
No action

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

Remove at least one and
no more than four
turtles from the boxes.
No action
No action or add one turtle
in at most two of the
three empty boxes.
Add at least one and no
more than four turtles in
the boxes.
No action

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

826

Table B.3 (cont.)

Item
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77

78
79
80
81
82

Target
Utterance

Visual
Display

Utterance
Status

Expected
Response

Some of the
boxes have
elephants.
Some of the
boxes have
elephants.
All of the
boxes have
elephants.
All of the
boxes have
elephants.
All of the
boxes have
elephants
None of the
boxes have
elephants.
None of the
boxes have
elephants.
None of the
boxes have
elephants.
Some of the
boxes have
dolphins.

2/5

True and informative

0/5

False

5/5

True and informative

No action or add one
elephant in at most two
of the three empty boxes.
Add at least one and no
more than four elephants
in the boxes.
No action

2/5

False

0/5

False

2/5

False

0//5

True and informative

No action

5/5

False

Remove all elephants from
the boxes.

5/5

True but
underinformative

2/5

True and informative

0/5

False

5/5

True and informative

Remove at least one and
no more than four of
the dolphins from the
boxes.
No action
No action or add one
dolphin in at most two of
the three empty boxes.
Add at least one and no
more than four dolphins
in the boxes.
No action

2/5

False

0/5

False

Some of the
boxes have
dolphins.
Some of the
boxes have
dolphins.
All of the
boxes have
dolphins.
All of the
boxes have
dolphins.
All of the
boxes have
dolphins.

Add one elephant in each
one of the three empty
boxes.
Add one elephant in each
one of the five empty
boxes.
Remove the two elephants
from the boxes.

Add one dolphin in each
one of the three empty
boxes.
Add one dolphin in each
one of the five empty
boxes.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

827

Table B.3 (cont.)
Target
Utterance

Visual
Display

None of the
boxes have
dolphins.
None of the
boxes have
dolphins.
None of the
boxes have
dolphins.

2/5

False

Remove the two dolphins
from the boxes.

0/5

True and informative

No action

5/5

False

Remove all dolphins from
the boxes.

Item
83
84
85

Utterance
Status

Expected
Response

Note: Critical underinformative utterances appear in bold. The rest of the test utterances
are filler items.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Parts of this research have been funded by an ESF Experimental Pragmatics Network
(Euro-XPrag) collaborative grant and an ESRC Experimental Pragmatics Network in the
United Kingdom (XPrag-UK; RES-810-21-0069) to both authors, and an Alexander Onassis Foundation scholarship for graduate studies and a postdoctoral fellowship from the
Wiener-Anspach Foundation to the first author.

NOTES
1.

2.

3.

Grice (1975, 1989) did not propose a maxim of politeness (be polite), although he did
discuss the possibility that such a maxim might be necessary to provide a full account
of pragmatic meaning (Grice, 1989, p. 28).
We collapse the distinction between CG and SMG and call the score, WFVT score--
Greek because, in the expressive vocabulary test, words coming from both varieties
were accepted as correct when testing multilingual and bilectal children.
Field (2013, p. 486) and Huitema (2011) note that the independence of the covariate
and the experimental effect is not a statistical requirement. Zinbarg Suzuki, Uliaszek,
and Lewis (2010, p. 3) also note that it is consensually meaningful to use ANCOVA
when differences on the covariate are not a central, inherent, conceptual part of the
group variable (e.g., in the case of lower language proficiency in bilinguals, one can
include language proficiency as a covariate, if there exist bilinguals in real life who
do not differ from monolinguals in language proficiency). Differences between the
comparison groups on the covariate, however, might bias the ANCOVA and lead to
an error. This bias in ANCOVA might arise when the groups differ on the covariate
but the covariate is not reliably measured (i.e., includes measurement error; see, e.g.,
Reichardt, 1979, who also describes other sources of bias in ANCOVA, which are not
relevant here). This situation will lead to an underadjustment of differences between the
comparison groups. Nevertheless, when bias in the ANCOVA is due to the unreliability
of the covariate, including the covariate into the analysis is generally better than not

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

4.

5.

6.

7.

828

including it at all. The inclusion of the covariate will lead to some partial, but possibly
not complete, adjustment of differences between the two groups on the covariate
(see Huitema, 2011; Miller & Chapman, 2001; Reichardt, 1979; Zinbarg et al., 2010,
for elaborate discussions of these issues). We return to this briefly in the Discussion
section, where we discuss the issue of confounds in our experiment.
Vogindroukas et al. (2009) provide norms only for monolingual children aged 5 to 8
years old. For this reason, only scores from bilectal and multilingual children within
this age range were converted into percentiles.
Note that we first had to convert the effect size r to an effect size f (the effect size used
by G*Power) using the formulas reported in Cohen (1988). The conversion indicated
that an effect size r = .39 equals an effect size f = 0.42.
Remember that Siegal et al. (2009, 2010) did not test implicature comprehension in
their studies but a related pragmatic skill: the ability to detect violations of conversational maxims. We note, though, that when considering performance in the items
on the maxim of quantity I (which is the maxim on which computation of SIs is
based), Siegal et al. (2009) found no significant differences between bilinguals and
monolinguals either in their Experiment 1 (where the bilingual advantage was found
in overall performance and not in a specific maxim) or in their Experiment 2 (where
a significant Language Group x Maxim interaction was reported, and the bilingual
advantage was found only in the items for the maxim of relation, quality, manner,
and quantity II). Siegal et al. (2010) did not include any items on quantity I in their
experiments.
According to Ethnologue, "The percentage of lexical similarity between two linguistic
varieties is determined by comparing a set of standardized wordlists and counting
those forms that show similarity in both form and meaning. Percentages higher than
85% usually indicate a speech variant that is likely a dialect of the language with
which it is being compared. Unlike intelligibility, lexical similarity is bidirectional or
reciprocal" (Lewis et al., 2014; see Dialects under Language Information section). It
is not clear, however, why Ethnologue suggests this percentage of lexical similarity as
the cutoff point for distinguishing between dialects and languages.

REFERENCES
Adesope, O. O., Lavin, T., Thompson, T., & Ungerleider, C. (2010). A systematic review and metaanalysis of the cognitive correlates of bilingualism. Review of Educational Research, 80,
207-245.
Akhtar, N., & Menjivar, J. A. (2012). Cognitive and linguistic correlates of early exposure to more
than one language. Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 42, 41-78.
Anton, E., Dunabeitia, J. A., Estevez, A., Hernandez, J. A., Castillo, A., Fuentes, L. J., & Carreiras,
M. (2014). Is there a bilingual advantage in the ANT task? Evidence from children. Frontiers
in Psychology, 5, 398.
Antoniou, K., Grohmann, K., Kambanaros, M., & Katsos, N. (2016). The effect of childhood bilectalism
and multilingualism on executive control. Cognition, 149, 18-30.
Arvaniti, A. (2010). Linguistic practices in Cyprus and the emergence of Cypriot Standard Greek.
Mediterranean Language Review, 17, 15-45.
Auer, P. (2005). Europe's sociolinguistic unity, or: A typology of European dialect/standard constellations. In N. Delbecque, J. van der Auwera, & D. Geeraerts (Eds.), Perspectives on variation:
Sociolinguistic, historical, comparative (pp. 7-41). Berlin: de Gruyter.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

829

Barac, R., & Bialystok, E. (2012). Bilingual effects on cognitive and linguistic development: Role of
language, cultural background, and education. Child Development, 83, 413-422.
Barac, R., Bialystok, E., Castro, D. C., & Sanchez, M. (2014). The cognitive development of young
dual language learners: A critical review. Early Childhood Research Quarterly. Advance online
publication. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2013.08.004
Bergen, L., & Grodner, D. J. (2012). Speaker knowledge influences the comprehension of pragmatic
inferences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 1450-
1460.
Bernicot, J., Laval, V., & Chaminaud, S. (2007). Nonliteral language forms in children: In what order
are they acquired in pragmatics and metapragmatics? Journal of Pragmatics, 39, 2115-2132.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., Green, D. W., & Gollan, T. H. (2009). Bilingual minds. Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 10, 89-129.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., & Luk, G. (2012). Bilingualism: Consequences for mind and brain. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 16, 240-250.
Bialystok, E., & Feng, X. (2011). Language proficiency and its implications for monolingual and
bilingual children. In A. Y. Durgunoglu & C. Goldenberg (Eds.), Language and literacy development in bilingual settings (pp. 121-138). New York: Guilford Press.
Bialystok, E., Luk, G., Peets, K. F., & Yang, S. (2010). Receptive vocabulary differences in monolingual
and bilingual children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 13, 525-531.
Bialystok, E., Poarch, G., Luo, L., & Craik, F. I. (2014). Effects of bilingualism and aging on executive
function and working memory. Psychology and Aging, 29, 696.
Bialystok, E., & Senman, L. (2004). Executive processes in appearance-reality tasks: The role of
inhibition of attention and symbolic representation. Child Development, 75, 562-579.
Blom, E., Kuntay, A. C., Messer, M., Verhagen, J., & Leseman, P. (2014). The benefits of being
bilingual: Working memory in bilingual Turkish-Dutch children. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 128, 105-119.
Bott, L., Bailey, T. M., & Grodner, D. (2011). Distinguishing speed from accuracy in scalar implicatures.
Journal of Memory and Language, 66, 123-142.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The onset and time course of
scalar inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437-457.
Breheny, R., Ferguson, H. J., & Katsos, N. (2013a). Investigating the timecourse of accessing conversational implicatures during incremental sentence interpretation. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 28, 443-467.
Breheny, R., Ferguson, H. J., & Katsos, N. (2013b). Taking the epistemic step: Toward a model of
on-line access to conversational implicatures. Cognition, 126, 423-440.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalised scalar implicatures generated by
default? An on-line investigation into the role of context in generating pragmatic inferences.
Cognition, 100, 434-463.
Carlson, S. M. (2003). Executive function in context: Development, measurement, theory, and experience. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 68, 138-151.
Carlson, S. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Bilingual experience and executive functioning in young
children. Developmental Science, 11, 282-298.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity phenomena, and the syntax/pragmatics interface.
In A. Belletti (Ed.), Structures and beyond (pp. 39-103). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chierchia, G. (2006). Broaden your views: Implicatures of domain widening and the "logicality" of
language. Linguistic Inquiry, 37, 535-590.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B. (2011). The grammatical view of scalar implicatures and
the relationship between semantics and pragmatics. In P. Portner, C. Maienborn, & K. von
Heusinger (Eds.), Semantics: An international handbook of natural language meaning. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

830

Currie, C., Molcho, M., Boyce, W., Holstein, B., Torsheim, T., & Richter, M. (2008). Researching health inequalities in adolescents: The development of the Health Behaviour in SchoolAged Children (HBSC) family affluence scale. Social Science and Medicine, 66, 1429-
1436.
de Abreu, P. M. E., Cruz-Santos, A., Tourinho, C. J., Martin, R., & Bialystok, E. (2012). Bilingualism
enriches the poor enhanced cognitive control in low-income minority children. Psychological
Science, 23, 1364-1371.
Degen, J., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2015). Availability of alternatives and the processing of scalar
implicatures: A visual world eye-tracking study. Cognitive Science. Advance online publication.
de Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are more logical under cognitive load: Dual task
impact on scalar implicature. Experimental Psychology, 54, 128-133.
Dieussaert, K., Verkerk, S., Gillard, E., & Schaeken, W. (2011). Some effort for some: Further evidence
that scalar implicatures are effortful. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 2352-
2367.
Dunabeitia, J. A., Hernandez, J. A., Anton, E., Macizo, P., Estevez, A., Fuentes, L. J., & Carreiras, M.
(2014). The inhibitory advantage in bilingual children revisited: Myth or reality? Experimental
Psychology, 61, 234.
Dunn, L., & Dunn, D. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test--Revised. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods,
39, 175-191.
Field, A. (2013). Discovering statistics using SPSS (4th ed.). London: Sage.
Field, A. P., & Gillett, R. (2010). How to do a meta-analysis. British Journal of Mathematical and
Statistical Psychology, 63, 665-694.
Gathercole, V. C. M., Thomas, E. M., Kennedy, I., Prys, C., Young, N., Guasch, N. V., & Jones,
L. (2014). Does language dominance affect cognitive performance in bilinguals? Lifespan
evidence from preschoolers through older adults on card sorting, Simon, and metalinguistic
tasks. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 11. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00011
Genesee, F., Tucker, G. R., & Lambert, W. E. (1975). Communication skills of bilingual children.
Child Development, 46, 1010-1014.
Geurts, B. (2010). Quantity implicatures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Green, D. W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 515-530.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics
(Vol. 3, pp. 225-242). New York: Seminar Press.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Grodner, D., Klein, N., Carbary, K., & Tanenhaus, M. (2010). "Some," and possibly all, scalar
inferences are not delayed: Evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment. Cognition, 116,
42-55.
Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. (2005). The effect of speaker-specific information on pragmatic inferences.
In N. Pearlmutter & E. Gibson (Eds.), The processing and acquisition of reference. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Grohmann, K. K., Panagiotidis, P., & Tsiplakou, S. (2006). Properties of wh-question formation
in Cypriot Greek. In M. Janse, B. D. Joseph, & A. Ralli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Modern Greek Dialects and Linguistic Theory (pp. 83-98). Patras:
University of Patras.
Guasti, T. M., Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Foppolo, F., Gualmini, A., & Meroni, L. (2005). Why children and adults sometimes (but not always) compute implicatures. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 20, 667-696.
Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (1998). Fixed- and random-effects models in meta-analysis. Psychological
Methods, 3, 486-504.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

831

Hoff, E., Core, C., Place, S., Rumiche, R., Senor, M., & Parra, M. (2012). Dual language exposure and
early bilingual development. Journal of Child Language, 39, 1-27.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009a). On-line interpretation of scalar quantifiers: Insight into the
semantics-pragmatics interface. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 376-415.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009b). Semantic meaning and pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds:
Evidence from real-time spoken language comprehension. Developmental Psychology, 45,
1723.
Huitema, B. (2011). The analysis of covariance and alternatives: Statistical methods for experiments,
quasi-experiments, and single-case studies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Johnson, J. (1991). Developmental versus language-based factors in metaphor interpretation. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 83, 470.
Kambanaros, M., Grohmann, K., Michaelides, M., & Theodorou, E. (2012). Comparing multilingual
children with SLI to their bilectal peers: Evidence from object and action picture naming.
International Journal of Multilingualism, 10, 60-81.
Karyolemou, M. (2006). Reproduction and innovation of communicative patterns in a former"diglossic" community. In R. Muhr (Ed.), Reproduction and innovation in language
and communication in different language cultures [Reproduktionen und Innovationen in
Sprache und Kommunikation verschiedener Sprachkulturen] (pp. 39-56). Vienna: Peter
Lang.
Katsos, N., Roqueta, C. A., Estevan, R. A. C., & Cummins, C. (2011). Are children with specific
language impairment competent with the pragmatics and logic of quantification? Cognition,
119, 43-57.
Klein, R. M. (2015). Is there a benefit of bilingualism for executive functioning? Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18, 29-31.
Kovacs, A. M. (2008). Early bilingualism enhances mechanisms of false-belief reasoning. Developmental Science, 12, 48-54.
Kroll, J. F., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Understanding the consequences of bilingualism for language
processing and cognition. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 497-514.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized conversational implicature.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewis, M. P., Gary, F. S., & C. D. Fennig (Eds.). (2014). Ethnologue: Languages of the world (17th
ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL International. Retrieved from http://www.ethnologue.com
Lyovin, A. (1997). An introduction to the languages of the world. New York: Oxford University Press.
Martin-Rhee, M. M., & Bialystok, E. (2008). The development of two types of inhibitory control in
monolingual and bilingual children. Bilingualism Language and Cognition, 11, 81.
Marty, P. P., & Chemla, E. (2013). Scalar implicatures: Working memory and a comparison with only.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 403.
Marzecova, A., Asanowicz, D., Kriva, L. U., & Wodniecka, Z. (2013). The effects of bilingualism on
efficiency and lateralization of attentional networks. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
16, 608-623.
Miller, G. A., & Chapman, J. P. (2001). Misunderstanding analysis of covariance. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 110, 40.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000).
The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex "frontal lobe"
tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Newton, B. (1972). The generative interpretation of dialect: A study of modern Greek phonology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nicoladis, E., Palmer, A., & Marentette, P. (2007). The role of type and token frequency in using past
tense morphemes correctly. Developmental Science, 10, 237-254.
Norbury, C. F. (2005). The relationship between theory of mind and metaphor: Evidence from children
with language impairment and autistic spectrum disorder. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 23, 383-399.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

832

Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than adults: Investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165-188.
O'Keefe, D. J. (2007). Brief report: Post hoc power, observed power, a priori power, retrospective
power, prospective power, achieved power: Sorting out appropriate uses of statistical power
analyses. Communication Methods and Measures, 1, 291-299.
Oller, D. K., & Eilers, R. E. (2002). Language and literacy in bilingual children. Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Oller, D. K., Pearson, B. Z., & Cobo-Lewis, A. B. (2007). Profile effects in early bilingual language
and literacy. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 191-230.
Paap, K. R. (2014). The role of componential analysis, categorical hypothesising, replicability and
confirmation bias in testing for bilingual advantages in executive functioning. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 26, 242-255.
Paap, K. R., Johnson, H. A., & Sawi, O. (2014). Are bilingual advantages dependent upon specific
tasks or specific bilingual experiences? Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 26, 615-639.
Paap, K. R., Johnson, H. A., & Sawi, O. (2015). Bilingual advantages in executive functioning either
do not exist or are restricted to very specific and undetermined circumstances. Cortex. Advance
online publication.
Paap, K. R., & Sawi, O. (2014). Bilingual advantages in executive functioning: Problems in convergent
validity, discriminant validity, and the identification of the theoretical constructs. Frontiers in
Psychology: Language Sciences, 5, 962.
Panizza, D., Chierchia, G., & Clifton, C. J. (2009). On the role of entailing patterns in the interpretation
and processing of numerals and scalar quantifiers. Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 503-
518.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures: Experiments at the semantics-pragmatics
interface. Cognition, 86, 253-282.
Paradis, J. (2010). Bilingual children's acquisition of English verb morphology: Effects of language
exposure, structure complexity, and task type. Language Learning, 60, 651-680.
Paradis, J. (2011). Individual differences in child English second language acquisition: Comparing child-internal and child-external factors. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1, 213-
237.
Paradis, J., Emmerzael, K., & Duncan, T. S. (2010). Assessment of English language learners: Using
parent report on first language development. Journal of Communication Disorders, 43, 474-
497.
Pouscoulous, N., Noveck, I., Politzer, G., & Bastide, A. (2007). A developmental investigation of
processing costs in implicature production. Language Acquisition, 14, 347-376.
Reichardt, C. S. (1979). The statistical analysis of data from non-equivalent group designs. In T. Cook
& D. Campbell (Eds.), Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis issues for field settings
(pp. 147-205). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Renfrew, C. (1995). Word Finding Vocabulary Test. (4th ed.). Oxon: Winslow.
Rowe, C., & Grohmann, K. K. (2013). Discrete bilectalism: Towards co-overt prestige and diglossic
shift in Cyprus. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 2013, 119-142.
Rundblad, G., & Annaz, D. (2010). Development of metaphor and metonymy comprehension: Receptive vocabulary and conceptual knowledge. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 28,
547-563.
Rushton, J. P., Brainerd, C. J., & Pressley, M. (1983). Behavioral development and construct validity:
The principle of aggregation. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 18.
Siegal, M., Iozzi, L., & Surian, L. (2009). Bilingualism and conversational understanding in young
children. Cognition, 110, 115-122.
Siegal, M., Matsuo, A., Pond, C., & Otsu, Y. (2007). Bilingualism and cognitive development: Evidence
from scalar implicatures. In Y. Otsu (Ed.), Proceedings of the Eighth Tokyo Conference on
Psycholinguistics (pp. 265-280). Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:4
Antoniou & Katsos: Multilingualism, bilectalism, and pragmatics

833

Siegal, M., & Surian, L. (2007). Conversational understanding in young children. In E. Hoff & M. Shatz
(Eds.), Blackwell handbook of language development (pp. 304-323). Oxford: Blackwell.
Siegal, M., Surian, L., Matsuo, A., Geraci, A., Iozzi, L., Okumura, Y., & Itakura, S. (2010). Bilingualism
accentuates children's conversational understanding. PLOS ONE, 5, e9004.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
(Original work published 1986)
Sun, S., Pan, W., & Wang, L. L. (2011). Rethinking observed power. Methodology, 7, 81-87.
Tao, L., Marzecova, A., Taft, M., Asanowicz, D., & Wodniecka, Z. (2011). The efficiency of attentional
networks in early and late bilinguals: The role of age of acquisition. Frontiers in Psychology,
2, 123.
Terkourafi, M. (1997). The discourse functions of diminutives in the speech of Cypriot Greeks and
Mainland Greeks (Unpublished master's dissertation, University of Cambridge).
Terkourafi, M. (2005). Understanding the present through the past: Processes of koineisation in Cyprus.
Diachronica, 22, 309-372.
Theodorou, E., Kambanaros, M., & Grohmann, K. K. (2013). Specific language impairment in Cypriot
Greek: Diagnostic issues. Linguistic Variation, 13, 217-236.
Thordardottir, E. (2011). The relationship between bilingual exposure and vocabulary development.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 15, 426-445.
Tomlinson, J. M., Bailey, T. M., & Bott, L. (2013). Possibly all of that and then some: Scalar implicatures
are understood in two steps. Journal of Memory and Language, 69, 18-35.
Valian, V. (2015). Bilingualism and cognition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18, 3-24.
Vogindroukas, I., Protopapas, A., & Sideridis, G. (2009). Test of Expressive Vocabulary [in Greek].
Chania: Glafki.
Vosniadou, S. (1987). Children and metaphors. Child Development, 58, 870-885.
Waggoner, J. E., & Palermo, D. S. (1989). Betty is a bouncing bubble: Children's comprehension of
emotion-descriptive metaphors. Developmental Psychology, 25,152.
Waggoner, J. E., Palermo, D. S., & Kirsh, S. J. (1997). Bouncing bubbles can pop: Contextual sensitivity
in children's metaphor comprehension. Metaphor and Symbol, 12, 217-229.
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI). San Antonio, TX: Pearson
Assessment.
Winner, E. (1997). The point of words: Children's understanding of metaphor and irony. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Winner, E., Levy, J., Kaplan, J., & Rosenblatt, E. (1988). Children's understanding of nonliteral
language. Journal of Aesthetic Education, 22, 51-63.
Yow, W. Q., & Markman, E. M. (2011a). Bilingualism and children's use of paralinguistic cues to
interpret emotion in speech. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 14, 562-569.
Yow, W. Q., & Markman, E. M. (2011b). Young bilingual children's heightened sensitivity to referential
cues. Journal of Cognition and Development, 12, 12-31.
Zinbarg, R. E., Suzuki, S., Uliaszek, A. A., & Lewis, A. R. (2010). Biased parameter estimates and
inflated Type I error rates in analysis of covariance (and analysis of partial variance) arising
from unreliability: Alternatives and remedial strategies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119,
307-319.

