C Cambridge University Press 2015 doi:10.1017/S136672891500084X
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 20 (3), 2017, 457-472 

Processing grammatical
evidentiality and time reference
in Turkish heritage and
monolingual speakers

S E C K I N A R S L A N
International Doctorate for Experimental Approaches to
Language and Brain (IDEALAB), University of Groningen,
The Netherlands;
University of Potsdam, Germany;
University of Newcastle, UK;
University of Trento, Italy;
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia;
Center for Language and Cognition (CLCG), Department of
Linguistics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

D O RT E D E KO K
Department of Linguistics, University of Tubingen, Germany

RO E L I E N BA S T I A A N S E
Center for Language and Cognition (CLCG), Department of
Linguistics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(Received: July 29, 2014; final revision received: November 9, 2015; accepted: November 9, 2015; first published online 18 December 2015)

In the current study, we examined how adult heritage and monolingual speakers of Turkish process evidentiality (the
linguistic expression of information source) through finite verb inflections and time reference, expressed on non-finite
participles. A sentence-verification task was used to measure participants' sensitivity to evidentiality and time-reference
violations in Turkish. Our findings showed that the heritage speakers were less accurate and slower than the monolinguals in
responding to both evidentiality and time-reference violations. Also, the heritage speakers made more errors and had longer
RTs when responding to evidentiality violations as compared to time-reference violations. The monolinguals had longer RTs
(and more accurate responses) to time reference than to evidentiality violations. This study shows that evidentiality is
susceptible to incomplete acquisition in Turkish heritage speakers. It is suggested that the requirement for simultaneous
processing at different linguistic levels makes the evidentiality markers vulnerable.
Keywords: evidentiality, time reference, heritage language speaker, Turkish-Dutch bilingualism

Introduction
Heritage speakers are early bilingual individuals who have
grown up acquiring a minority language alongside the
dominant language spoken in a country (Benmamoun,
Montrul & Polinsky, 2013). Heritage speakers typically
acquire their first language (L1) from birth in family
settings while they are either exposed to the majority
language simultaneously or shortly after the onset to
L1 (i.e., at school). However, exposure to L1 tends to
be more limited during heritage speakers' childhood
and L2 gradually gains dominance as compared to
monolingual acquisition. Hence, in adulthood, it is


We thank Pinar Arslan, Claudia Felser, Katrina Gaffney, Paul Slomp,
and Margriet Zwiers for their help during different stages of this study.
We are grateful to Ludovica Serratrice and the three anonymous BLC
reviewers for their constructive feedback and comments on earlier
versions of this paper. The first author is supported by an Erasmus
Mundus grant for the International Doctorate for Experimental
Approaches to Language and Brain' (IDEALAB) by the European
Commission under grant no <2012-1713/001-001-EMII EMJD>.

assumed that heritage speakers have not reached the
`ultimate attainment' of their L1 as compared to their
monolingual peers (Montrul, 2002, 2008; Polinsky, 2006).
That is, heritage speakers' knowledge of their L1 grammar
is thought to be incomplete due either to `inadequate input
conditions' during early childhood (Montrul, 2008) or to
effects of attrition after full acquisition of the L1 (Polinsky,
2011).1
Not all areas of heritage speakers' L1 structures
are equally affected by incomplete acquisition or
attrition, however. Inflectional morphology has shown
to be particularly vulnerable across different languages
(Albirini, Benmamoun & Chakrani, 2013; Albirini,
1

Please note that we use the term `incomplete acquisition' in its narrow
sense to label permanent losses in certain grammatical features or
syntactic constraints in heritage speakers' L1; see Montrul (2011).
Also note that incomplete acquisition assumes that a part of a language
has not been fully acquired while attrition means that a language
structure has been acquired before it is attrited. Whether or not
incomplete acquisition and attrition result in differential outcomes
in adult heritage speakers is beyond the scope of the current study.

Address for correspondence:
Mr. S. Arslan, M.A., M.Sc., Center for Language and Cognition (CLCG), Research Group Neurolinguistics, University of Groningen, PO Box 716,
9700 AS, Groningen, The Netherlands.
seckin1984@gmail.com

458

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

Benmamoun & Saadah, 2011; Anderson, 1999, 2001;
Bolonyai, 2002, 2007; Montrul, 2002, 2008, 2009;
Montrul, Bhatt & Bhatia, 2012; Polinsky, 2006, 2008;
Rothman, 2007; Silva-Corvalan, 1994). Other properties
(e.g., word order, verb agreement) have been shown to
be virtually unaffected (Albirini et al., 2013; Albirini
et al., 2011; Bolonyai, 2007). However, heritage speakers'
knowledge of their L1 inflectional morphology is rather
asymmetrically affected and there is not a unified
explanation for these `asymmetries'. For the purpose
of the current study, we will consider the following
two accounts: `interface vulnerability' and `maturational
constraints'.
The interface vulnerability account states that heritage
speakers' incomplete knowledge of their L1 structures
is correlated with a difficulty of integrating information
from different linguistic levels (Bolonyai, 2007; Montrul,
2002, 2009; Montrul et al., 2012; Rothman, 2007). This
is captured by the Interface Hypothesis2 (Sorace, 2000;
Sorace & Filiaci, 2006; Sorace & Serratrice, 2009).
According to this hypothesis, structures at the interface
of two linguistic domains, in particular the syntaxpragmatics interface, are more problematic for heritage
speakers than structures that can be processed at one
single level. To illustrate, Bolonyai (2007) showed that
possessive agreement in Hungarian, which corresponds
to the syntax-semantics interface, is more prone to errors
than verb agreement in the production of young heritagespeakers' production. Similarly, Montrul et al. (2012)
showed that adult heritage speakers of Hindi are less
sensitive to case morphemes that signal semantic content
(e.g., specificity) than to morphemes that do not, on
both oral production and grammaticality judgment tasks.
Rothman (2007) reported that adult heritage-speakers
of Brazilian Portuguese perform poorer when verifying
uninflected infinitives compared to inflected verbs on
a grammaticality judgment-task. As an explanation,
Sorace and Serratrice (2009, pp. 199-200) propose
that bilingual individuals may have access to "fewer
processing resources and may therefore be less efficient
at integrating multiple types of information efficiently".
Hence, bilingual speakers are assumed to rely on `default'
forms during online processing or production to reduce
processing costs.
A second theory attributes heritage speakers'
incomplete knowledge of the L1 verbal inflections to
maturational constraints. Within this perspective, the
Regression Hypothesis holds that language attrition
exhibits the reversed pattern of language acquisition3

(Jakobson, 1941). According to this hypothesis, structures
acquired later in life are more likely to attrite
first in bilingual speakers (Keijzer, 2010). Heritage
speakers' asymmetrical incomplete acquisition patterns
have been shown to be partly governed by maturational
constraints (Montrul, 2008). Using an elicitation and a
grammaticality judgment task, Montrul (2009) showed
that adult heritage speakers of Spanish retained their
sensitivity to Aspect (Preterite-Imperfect) but not to
Mood (Subjunctive-Indicative) distinctions. Mood is
acquired later than Aspect in Spanish, and, thus, the
author argues that her findings are reconcilable with the
Regression Hypothesis.
The present study aims to contribute to the understanding of whether and how inflectional morphology in adult
heritage speakers of Turkish living in the Netherlands
(i.e., early bilinguals of Turkish-Dutch) is affected during
online sentence processing. As most of the studies
presented above concentrated on heritage speakers living
in the United States, incomplete acquisition and attrition
patterns in heritage speakers speaking L2 languages other
than English is less well known. Turkish is one of
the most widely spoken minority languages in Western
Europe. It has a rich inflectional paradigm, like so-farstudied languages, but also presents grammatical features
yet to be investigated in heritage speakers. First, in
Turkish, finite verbs referring to the past are inflected for
EVIDENTIALITY , which encodes how the speaker obtained
information about an event. Second, reference to past or
future time frames is not only expressed on the finite
verb, but also on non-finite participles. In the next section,
features of evidentiality and time reference through nonfinite participles in Turkish are described.

2

4

3

Please note that the Interface Hypothesis originally sought to account
for the performances of native-like bilinguals in their second language;
see also Sorace (2011) for arguments.
Please note that the Regression Hypothesis originally sought to
account for language loss in aphasia (Jakobson, 1941). For instance,

Expression of evidentiality and time reference in
Turkish
Evidentiality expresses information sources that the
speaker has for his or her statement, such as witnessing,
report and inference (see Aikhenvald, 2004). In Dutch,
evidentiality is not marked on the verb. In Turkish,
however, speakers have two options to choose from,
depending on whether a past event is known on the
basis of `direct' or `indirect' information4 (Aksu-Koc &
Slobin, 1986; Slobin & Aksu, 1982). Both direct and
indirect information source perspectives are exclusively

de Bot and Weltens (1991) cautions against extending the Regression
Hypothesis to attrition in bilingualism settings, but see Keijzer (2010)
for arguments.
Evidential morphology marks past events when appended on simple
verbs (i.e., past reading is the default one). However, evidential forms
are not restricted to past contexts and may well mark present states
(e.g., Sezer, 2001). The current study deals with the use of the
evidential forms in reference to past events only.

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
marked by inflectional morphemes, as given in (1)-(2),
respectively.
(1)

(2)

Direct evidential form: 5
Adam yemegi
yedi
Man
food ACC eat DIRECT EVID 3 SG
"The man ate the food" [witnessed past]
Indirect evidential form:
Adam yemegi
yemis
Man
food ACC eat INDIRECT EVID 3 SG
"The man ate the food" [reported/inferred past]

The use of the direct evidential inflection -DI, in (1),
indicates that the speaker witnessed all stages of that event
-from beginning to end. The use of the indirect evidential
-(I)mIs, in (2) conveys that the speaker has either inferred
the event or heard about it from another speakers. 6
Within the evidential paradigm, the indirect evidential
is the `marked' form, as it conveys a spectrum of indirect
information sources depending on contexts, whereas
the direct evidential is taken to be a default or less
marked form (Johanson, 2003). Furthermore, the indirect
evidential harbours rather complex semantics, as it is
assumed to have epistemically modal connotations (AksuKoc, 1988, 2000). That is, the use of an indirect evidential
is often correlated with the speaker's attitude towards
the `certainty' or `reliability' of information in his/her
proposition (see also Palmer, 1986).
Arguably, an indirect evidential is the preferred form
in non-first-person contexts, since its use presupposes
that the speaker is not the first-hand source. According
to Aikhenvald (2004), uses of indirect evidentials in
first-person contexts often expose counter-intuitive
semantic effects. For instance, in Turkish, the indirect
evidential indicates `lack of control of the speaker'
when used in first-person contexts, if verb semantics
allow (Aksu-Koc & Slobin, 1986). Nonetheless, when
the action requires intentionality, the use of an indirect
evidential in first-person contexts results in rather
unreasonable readings as shown in (3).

5

6

Abbreviations of glosses: 1 SG = first person singular, 3 SG = third
person singular, ABL = ablative, ACC = accusative, DIRECT EVID
= direct evidential, FUTURE PART = future participle, GEN =
genitive, INDIRECT EVID = indirect evidential, NEG = negation,
PAST PART = past participle, POSS = possessive, S.PART = subject
participle
Some researchers treat -mIs as an inferred evidence marker and
-(I)mIs as a reported evidence marker (Aksu-Koc, 1988; AksuKoc & Slobin, 1986; Csato, 2000), whereas others traditionally
analyze inferred and reported contexts as connotations of the same
morphological unit. We do not deal with specific distinctions between
inferred and reported forms but take both as the indirect evidential
for the purposes of the current investigation.

459

(3) ?Dun aksam kitap okumusum
Last night book read INDIRECT EVID 1 ST SG
"Last night I read a book" [speaker claims that s/he
did not participate in this action]
Turkish participles embedded in object-relative clauses
do not convey evidential content. These participles are
inflected, but they are non-finite. Albeit not formally
marked for Tense, these non-finite participles undertake
the role of referring to past and future events (ErguvanliTaylan, 1993; Underhill, 1972). Examples for past (4) and
future (5) participles are given below.
(4)

Past participle:
Kizin
yazdigi
mektup
Girl GEN write PAST PART ACC letter
geldi
arrive PAST. DIRECT EVID
"The letter that the girl wrote arrived"

(5)

Future participle:
Kizin
yazacagi
mektup
Girl GEN write FUTURE PART ACC letter
gelecek
arrive FUTURE
"The letter that the girl will write will arrive"

The past participle morpheme -DIK conveys past events
and non-future states. For instance, in (4), the use of -
DIK signals that the action of writing the letter occurred
before the time of speech. The future participle morpheme
-EcEk, by contrast, expresses situations that are yet to
come. For example, -EcEk in (5) encodes that the action
of writing the letter has not yet happened at the time of
speech.

Acquisition of evidentiality and participles in
monolingual Turkish children
Aksu-Koc (1988) studied the production and comprehension of EVIDENTIAL VERB FORMS in monolingual
Turkish children (aged 3-6). Her data showed that
evidential morphology emerge shortly before the age
of 4, and that the direct evidential emerges earlier
than the indirect evidential by a few months. However,
successful comprehension of evidential morphemes does
not stabilize before the age 6. Ozturk and Papafragou
(2007) found that monolingual children (aged 3-6)
produced evidential morphemes virtually faultlessly, but
had difficulties recognizing the semantic and pragmatic
information expressed by the different evidential forms.
Ozturk and Papafragou (2008) showed that children
(aged 5-7) use the direct evidential form more often
correctly than the indirect evidential form and that the
latter form was hardly used in younger age groups. The
study also indicated that the children at the age of 7 had

460

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

more problems discriminating information obtained from
indirect sources than from visually witnessed events.
Slobin (1986) investigated the development of
participles in relative clauses in 3-4;8 year-olds
performing a narrative task. He found that the use of
participles is limited in all age groups. Similarly, AksuKoc (1994) showed that the past participle (-DIK) does
not emerge before the age of 5 in monolingual children's
narratives. Ekmekci (1990) compared Turkish children's
(aged 3-6) interpretation of sentences with relative
clauses containing participles and simple sentences
without relative clauses, using a sentence-imitation and
a production task. The author showed that, by the age
of 6, children tend to understand both the relative clauses
and the simple sentences equally well. Nonetheless, Ozge,
Marinis, and Zeyrek (2010) showed that Turkish children's
(aged 5-8) production of object relatives (containing -
DIK participle form) are prone to errors even in the oldest
group.
Studies on evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
Evidentiality and time reference, as signalled by
inflectional morphology, have been scarcely studied in
Turkish heritage-speakers. What is known about the
possible erosion of evidential forms is restricted to a
handful of narrative studies. Aarssen (2001) showed
that Turkish heritage speakers (aged 4-10) born in the
Netherlands tend to overuse the present progressive over
the evidential forms in their retellings of FROG STORIES.
Akinci (2003) reported similar findings for heritage
speakers (aged 12-17) born in France. Specifically,
Aarssen (2001) observed a high number of inappropriate
choices of evidentiality7 where speakers shift from one
evidential form to the other without a clear pragmatic
reason. Since evidential morphemes indicate how the
speaker knows an event, the use is expected to remain
consistent during a story. Aarssen's (2001) findings imply
that the heritage speakers' control over semantic and
pragmatic content signaled by the evidential forms is not
yet consolidated by the age of 10.
Karakoc (2007) investigated narrative production in
heritage speakers born in Germany (aged 5-8) using
a fairy tale retelling-task. Her data pointed to similar
directions as the previously mentioned studies: the
evidential forms are inconsistently used. Notably, the
heritage speakers did not produce any narratives with the

7

The direct and indirect evidential forms can also be used to introduce
`temporal shifts' such as foreshadowings or flashbacks from the ongoing temporal basis of the narrative. These are not regarded as
inappropriate choices. What is meant by an `inappropriate choice'
here is to shift between the direct and indirect evidential forms without
establishing that what has been said in an utterance is known through
a different type of information source form the previous.

indirect evidential as the dominant form, 8 although the
indirect evidential is the appropriate form for (re)telling
a fairytale in Turkish. Aksu-Koc (1994) found that
monolingual Turkish children are able to use the indirect
evidential as a narrative convention, and that by the age of
9, monolingual children tend to pattern with adults in their
ability to narrate events using a consistent inflection-form.
Arslan and Bastiaanse (2014) analyzed narratives
produced by heritage speakers in the Netherlands (aged
16-18) using a spontaneous-speech interview, a picture
description, and a storytelling task. Compatible with the
aforementioned studies, the heritage speakers made a
large number of substitution errors by using the direct
evidential in contexts where the indirect evidential was
more appropriate. The data indicated that the heritage
speakers used the evidential forms to refer to past events,
ignoring information source distinctions.
To summarize, previous studies have shown that
Turkish monolingual children acquire the direct evidential
earlier than both the indirect evidential and participle
forms (Aksu-Koc, 1988; Ekmekci, 1990; Ozturk &
Papafragou, 2007, 2008). The evidential forms tend to
be problematic in both child and adult heritage-speakers'
narratives (e.g., Aarssen, 2001; Arslan & Bastiaanse,
2014). Nevertheless, there are still some questions to
be answered. For instance, it is unclear whether Turkish
heritage speakers are aware of the semantic and pragmatic
content carried by the evidential morphemes; this is the
topic of the current study.
The current study
We administered a sentence-verification task to adult
Turkish heritage speakers living in the Netherlands
and to a reference group of Turkish monolingual
speakers living in Turkey. The objective was to study
participants' sensitivity to sentences with evidentiality
and time reference violations, as measured by accuracy
and response times (RTs). This allowed us to explore
heritage speakers' sensitivity to violations of the semantic
and pragmatic contents of differential verb inflection
morphemes. The question was to what extent incomplete
acquisition or attrition of inflectional morphology
in Turkish heritage speakers affects their sentence
processing. To address this, we posed two research
questions:
(Q1) Do Turkish heritage speakers differ from
monolingual Turkish speakers in processing
evidentiality violations in finite verbs and timereference violations in non-finite participles?
8

Inflection for tense/aspect or evidentiality is considered as the
dominant tense (also called as `favored' or `anchor' tense) in narratives
when it used in more than a certain proportion (i.e., two-thirds) of all
utterances produced (Aksu-Koc, 1994).

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
(Q2) Do Turkish heritage speakers differ in processing
evidentiality violations in finite verb inflections
from that of time-reference violations in non-finite
participles?
Considering the studies on heritage speakers in the United
States, verb inflections are susceptible to incomplete
acquisition. This was confirmed by the narrative
studies on Turkish heritage speakers. Therefore, it is
expected that the adult heritage speakers will encounter
more problems than monolingual Turkish speakers
while processing both evidentiality and time reference
violations. Nevertheless, the hypotheses introduced above
predict an asymmetry in the heritage speakers' responses.
The Interface Hypothesis predicts that integrating
differential information from multiple linguistic domains
is effortful, and that marked forms are more prone to
processing limitations than default forms. Hence, the
Interface Hypothesis anticipates that the heritage speakers
will make more errors when responding to evidentiality
violations than to time-reference violations, and that
detecting indirect evidential violations will be more
difficult than detecting direct evidential violations. The
Regression Hypothesis predicts that heritage speakers will
experience less difficulty processing violations by a direct
evidential than both indirect evidential and time reference
violations, as the latter two are acquired later by Turkish
children. In sum, the heritage speakers' performances are
predicted as follows:
Interface hypothesis
Regression hypothesis

indirect evidential < direct
evidential < time reference
direct evidential < indirect
evidential = time reference

Methods
Participants
Twenty-one heritage speakers of Turkish living in The
Netherlands (8 females, age = 19.6, range = 16-26),
raised by native Turkish-speaking parents, were tested.
As a reference group, 24 monolingual speakers of Turkish
living in Turkey (10 females, age = 28.2, range = 18-48)
participated. The monolingual participants were college
students or graduates who never had an extended stay
in a foreign country nor spoke a second language at a
proficient level. The heritage speakers' first exposure to
both Turkish and Dutch was before the age of 4. None
of the heritage speakers were involved in employment or
education in Turkey that they only visited for summer
holidays.
To further understand the nature of their bilingualism,
the heritage speakers were given a `bilingualism history
questionnaire', adapted from Li, Sepanski, and Zhao
(2006). The responses, as shown in Appendix 1, indicated

461

that the heritage speakers typically use Turkish to
communicate with their parents, and either Turkish or
Dutch to interact with their siblings and peers. Proportions
of daily language use, as shown by the responses to the
questionnaire, were balanced between Turkish and Dutch.
The heritage speakers were asked to rate their language
abilities in both languages. As shown in Appendix 2,
all of the heritage speakers rated their language abilities
in Dutch as `advanced', whereas 61% of them did so
for Turkish. The participants were paid 10 for their
participation in the experiment.
Materials
The sentence-verification task included two parts: the first
part tested the participants' sensitivity to the evidentiality
distinctions (i.e., direct vs. indirect information) while the
second part tested their sensitivity to the time reference
distinctions (i.e., past vs. future time frames). For these
purposes, 200 Turkish sentences were constructed across
eight conditions, as illustrated in Table 1.
Evidentiality through finite verb inflections
To test evidentiality processing, 30 volition verbs, each
conveying the intentionality of an action, were selected
to construct 120 sentences across four conditions. The
same verbs appeared in all four conditions. Each verb was
matched with an inanimate object (e.g., portakal soymak
"to peel an orange"); see Appendix 3 for the list of verb
phrases. The sentences consisted of a two-word contextual
support clause followed by a critical clause. The target
verbs were situated in clause-final position of the critical
clause, which was followed by a padding phrase so that the
trials did not end with the target verbs. To establish the past
time-reference, all of the evidential sentences contained
a temporal adverb az once "just before" previous to the
critical verbs, as given in Table 1.
The sentences in the first two conditions (1 & 2:
S EEN - DIRECT and S EEN - INDIRECT) included a contextual
support clause signaling `seen' information observed by
the first person (e.g., yerken gordum "I saw him while he
was eating"). To form the correct baseline, in the S EEN DIRECT condition, the target verbs were inflected with
a direct evidential. In the S EEN - INDIRECT condition, by
contrast, the indirect evidential forms were used on the
target verb, resulting in a violation of seen information
source (see Table 1 for examples).
The sentences in the other two conditions (3 & 4:
H EARD - INDIRECT and H EARD - DIRECT) started with a
contextual support clause denoting `heard' information
reported in third-person (e.g., yerken gormusler, "they
saw him while he was eating"). This signals that the
information came from a non-firsthand source and that
the speaker himself did not witness the event. To create
the correct baseline in the condition H EARD - INDIRECT,

462

Condition

Contextual support

Critical clause

Padding phrase

(1) S EEN -D IRECT

Yerken gordum,
az once
adam yemegi
yedi.
Hem de nasil yemek! Sastim kaldim
just before man food ACC eat DIRECT EVID 3 SG
And
how eating surprise stay DIRECT EVID 1
Eat
see DIRECT EVID 1 SG
`Previously I saw the man eating; he ate the food (witnessed). I was surprised by how he ate.'

SG

(2) S EEN -I NDIRECT


Yerken gordum,
az once
adam yemegi
yemis.
Hem de nasil yemek! Sastim kaldim

just before man food ACC eat INDIRECT EVID 3 SG And
how eating surprise stay DIRECT EVID 1 SG
Eat
see DIRECT EVID 1 SG
`Previously I saw the man eating; he  ate the food (reportedly). I was surprised by how he ate.'

(3) H EARD -I NDIRECT

Yerken gormusler,
az once
adam yemegi
yemis.
Hem de bulasiklari yikamamis
And
dishes ACC washNEG . INDIRECT
Eat
see INDIRECT EVID 3 SG just before man food ACC eat INDIRECT EVID 3 SG
`Previously they saw the man eating; he ate the food (reportedly). He didn't even wash the dishes.'

EVID

bile
3 SG even


Yerken gormusler,
az once
adam yemegi
yedi.
Hem de bulasiklari yikamamis

dishes ACC washNEG . INDIRECT
Eat
see INDIRECT EVID 3 SG just before man food ACC eat INDIRECT EVID 3 SG And
`Previously they saw the man eating; he  ate the food (witnessed). He didn't even wash the dishes.'

EVID

3

(4) H EARD -D IRECT

(5) P S P S

Su okuldan
cikan
benim dun
yemek pisir-dik-im
adam yemegi begenmedi
my
yesterday food cook PAST PART POSS 1 SG
man food ACC like NEG DIRECT EVID 3 SG
That school ABL leave S . PART
`That man leaving the school (is) the man for whom I cooked food yesterday (and he) did not liked the food'

(6) F UT P S

Su okuldan
cikan
benim yarin
yemek pisir-dik-im
adam yemegi begenmedi
my
tomorrow food cook PAST PART POSS 1 SG
man food ACC like NEG DIRECT EVID 3
That school ABL leave S . PART
`That man leaving the school (is) the man for whom I cooked food tomorrow (and he) did not like the food'

(7) F UT F UT

Su okuldan
cikan
benim yarin
yemek pisir-ecek-im
adam yemegi begenmeyecek
my
tomorrow food cook FUTURE PART POSS 1 SG
man food ACC like NEG FUTURE 3 SG
That school ABL leave S . PART
`That man leaving the school (is) the man for whom I will cook food tomorrow (and he) won't like the food'

(8) P S F UT

Su okuldan
cikan
benim dun
yemek pisir-ecek-im
adam yemegi begenmeyecek
my
yesterday food cook FUTURE PART POSS 1 SG
man food ACC like NEG FUTURE 3 SG
That school ABL leave S . PART
`That man leaving the school (is) the man for whom I will cook food yesterday (and he) won't like the food'

SG

SG

bile
even

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

Table 1. Examples for the evidentiality (1-4) and time reference (5-8) sentences used in the during-listening RTs task, sentences that contain the evidentiality
violations violation are shown in conditions 2 & 4, the time reference violations are given in conditions 6 & 8.

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
the target verbs in the critical clause were inflected with
an indirect evidential. However, in the condition H EARD DIRECT , the direct evidential forms were used on the target
verbs leading to a violation of heard information source
(see Table 1 for examples).
Time reference through non-finite participles
To test participants' sensitivity to time reference
violations, 20 verbs were selected to form 80 sentences
across four conditions (see Appendix 4 for the list of
verbs). Each sentence comprised two relative clauses
followed by a matrix clause. Verb tenses of the matrix
clauses were compatible with the time reference made by
the past and future participles (see Table 1 for examples).
The first relative clause served as contextual support
while the second formed the critical clause in which the
target verbs (i.e., the past/future participle) appeared. The
target verbs used in the time reference sentences were
different from those used in the evidentiality sentences.
In the fifth condition (5: P S P S), a lexical adverb
referring to the past (dun "yesterday") was paired with
a past participle leading to a correct sentence. In the sixth
condition (6: F UTPS), the lexical adverb for the future was
followed by a past participle resulting in a time-reference
violation. In the seventh condition (7: F UTFUT), a lexical
adverb for the future (yarin "tomorrow") was matched
with a future participle, resulting in a correct sentence.
In the eighth condition (8: P SFUT), the lexical adverb for
the past was paired with a future participle resulting in a
time-reference violation.
Material evaluation through offline-ratings
The sentences constructed to test participants' processing
of evidentiality and time-reference distinctions were rated
in two separate offline questionnaires. Forty-one Turkish
monolingual speakers (19 females, age = 29.0, ranges
= 22-52) rated the evidentiality sentences and thirtyseven Turkish monolingual speakers (22 females, age =
26.8, ranges = 20-35) rated the time-reference sentences.
Each of the participants responded to one questionnaire
only and none of them took part in the main RTs task.
The participants were instructed to read the sentences
at their own pace and to rate the acceptability of the
sentences on a four-point scale (1 highly acceptable, 4
highly unacceptable).
With respect to the evidentiality violations, paired
t-tests showed that the non-violated seen information
source contexts in the condition S EEN - DIRECT were more
acceptable than the seen information contexts violated by
an indirect evidential in the condition S EEN - INDIRECT
(1.22 vs. 3.66, t(40)= -33.03, p < .001). The nonviolated heard information contexts in the condition
H EARD - INDIRECT were more acceptable than the heard
information contexts violated by a direct evidential in the

463

condition H EARD - DIRECT (1.24 vs. 3.65, t(40) = -31.2, p
< .001). The ratings did not differ between the sentences
containing a violation by direct or indirect evidentials
(3.66 vs. 3.65, t(40) = .86, p > 05) or between the
non-violated seen and heard information source contexts
containing a direct versus indirect evidential (1.22 vs.
1.24, t(40) = -.41, p > .05).
Regarding the time-reference violations, the nonviolated past participles in the condition P S P S were more
acceptable than the past time contexts violated by a future
participle in the condition P SFUT (1.88 vs. 3.84, t(36)
= -15.75, p < .001). Similarly, the non-violated future
participles in the condition F UTFUT were more acceptable
than the future time contexts violated by a past participle
in the condition F UTPS (1.98 vs. 3.92, t(36) = -15.62, p <
.001). The sentences containing a violation by either a past
or future participle did not differ from each other (3.92
vs. 3.84, t(36) = 1.51, p > .05), nor was there a difference
between the non-violated sentences with past and future
participles (1.88 vs. 1.98, t(36) = -1.58, p > .05).
Procedure
The sentences were read aloud and recorded by a female
Turkish speaker. The stimuli were programmed in Eprime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA)
and were presented in two lists counterbalanced across
the participants. A participant was presented with either
a violated or a non-violated version of the evidentiality
sentences. For instance, while one list contained a verb in
the violated, seen-information context, the other list contained the correct baseline for that verb. The violated and
non-violated sentences were equally distributed over the
lists. The non-violated sentences served as the baseline so
that participants could differentiate between violated and
grammatically correct sentences. Each list accommodated
all of the time reference sentences. If a verb had to appear
in different conditions in the same list, these items were
programmed in distant positions from each other (i.e.,
in different blocks). During the experiment, there was a
pause after each 25% of all sentences in a list (n = 35).
Each participant listened to 140 sentences in total. The
sentences were presented in pseudo-randomized order.
Data collection was done in a quiet room using a computer
equipped with headphones. The paradigm was similar to a
speeded grammaticality-judgment task used in Blackwell,
Bates, and Fisher (1996). The participants were instructed
in Turkish in the following way:
Now you will begin a language experiment in Turkish, in
which you will hear several types of sentences through your
headphones. When you see a hash tag on the screen, please
be ready. It means that a sentence is coming soon. Some of
the sentences are grammatically well-formed, but some are not.
Please listen to the sentences very carefully and press the space
bar as soon as you notice a part of the sentence mismatching the

464

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

rest of the sentence. When you press the space bar, the sentence
will not stop. If the sentence sounds good, do not do anything
and wait for the next sentence.

Analysis
In the task, RTs and response-accuracies were measured.
The data were analyzed in R version 3.1.1. (R-Core-Team,
2012) using the `lme4' package. Response-accuracies
were analyzed with generalized linear mixed-effects
regression models, as the dependent variable was binomial
(accurate vs. non-accurate). For the RTs, linear mixedeffects regression models were used. We excluded the
RTs exceeding 2.5 standard deviations above the group
means. Note that the analyses on the RTs were performed
for accurate responses only. In both evidentiality and
time-reference violations, RTs from `false alarms' (i.e.,
where a participant mistook a correct sentence to be
ungrammatical) were quite long and were not further
analyzed. Responses to one item in the evidentiality
sentences were excluded due to a technical error (i.e.,
incorrectly programmed sentence). In the analyses, both
the items and participants were introduced as random
intercepts and random slopes where applicable (Baayen,
Davidson & Bates, 2008). First, a full model was built,
and then the model was repeated with the omission of
intercepts, slopes, and fixed-effects. By using the Akaike
Information Criterion, the model that fit the data best
was reported. Post-hoc comparisons were computed with
the `multcomp' package in R using `Tukey' tests. The
sentences with evidentiality and non-finite participles
were first modeled separately and then compared to each
other in one model.

Results
Processing evidentiality through finite verb inflections
Mean response-accuracies and RTs are illustrated in
Figure 1; outputs from the mixed-effects regression
models performed on the accuracy and RTs data are
provided in Table 2. In the models, group (monolingual
vs. heritage speakers) and condition (S EEN - INDIRECT vs.
H EARD - DIRECT) were added as fixed-effects.
Regarding the response-accuracies, the model output
showed significant effects of group with negative estimatevalues. That is, the heritage speakers proved to be less
accurate than the monolinguals. While the heritage speakers were 32% accurate in their responses to the violations
by both evidential forms, the monolinguals were 92%
accurate in the S EEN - INDIRECT and 88% in the H EARD DIRECT conditions. However, no effects of condition or of
interactions between the two factors were significant.
An error analysis was performed on the inaccurate
responses to the non-violated sentences (i.e., where
participants should not have responded). Outputs from a
mixed-effects regression model showed significant effects
of group ( = 2.496, SE = 0.485, z = 5.142, p < .001)
but not of condition ( = -0.080, SE = 0.388, z =
-0.207, p = .83). The effect of group confirmed that
the monolinguals judged the non-violated sentences to
be ungrammatical less often than the heritage speakers
did. Since interactions between group and condition were
significant ( = -1.596, SE = 0.563, z = -2.834,
p = .004), post-hoc comparisons were performed. The
heritage speakers inaccurately responded to the nonviolated sentences for both types of evidential forms with

Figure 1. Mean accuracies (A) and RTs (B) of monolingual and heritage speakers' responses to the evidentiality violations
by the direct- and indirect-evidential forms. Conditions: S EEN - INDIRECT = seen information contexts violated by indirect
evidential; H EARD - DIRECT = heard information contexts violated by direct evidential.

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers

465

Table 2. Fixed-effects from the generalized linear mixed-effects model performed on
response-accuracies and fixed-effects from the linear mixed-effects model performed on
RTs to the evidentiality violations (Group = monolingual vs. heritage speakers;
Condition = S EEN -I NDIRECT vs. H EARD -D IRECT)
Fixed-effects for accuracy

z-value

p-value

8.687
-1.742
-14.453
1.337

< .001
.081
< .001
0.181

Code in R: accuracy  condition  group + (1 | participant) + (1 | item)
Fixed-effects for RTs
Estimate
SE
t-value
Intercept
3639.0
201.3
18.077
Condition
-427.6
158.6
-2.697
Group
-2067.3
125.9
-16.421
Condition x Group
593.5
172.9
3.432
Code in R: RTs  condition  group + (1 + condition | participant) + (1 | item)

p-value
< .001
.007
< .001
.001

Intercept
Condition
Group
Condition x Group

Estimate
3.199
-0.471
-4.269
0.451

an equal likelihood ( = 0.369, SE = 0.252, z = 1.467, p =
.14). The monolinguals, however, responded incorrectly
to the non-violated sentences with the indirect evidential
more often than to those with the direct-evidential forms
( = -1.075, SE = 0.481, z = -2.235, p = .025).
For RTs, the model outputs, as given in Table 2,
showed significant effects of group, condition, and an
interaction between the two factors. Negative estimatevalues of group effects affirmed that the heritage speakers
were slower in responding to the evidentiality violations
than the monolinguals. As the effects of condition and
interaction between group and condition were significant,
post-hoc tests were performed. The heritage speakers did
not differ in their RTs to the violations by either evidential
form ( = -208.2, SE = 231.1, z = -0.901, p = .36).
However, the monolinguals had longer RTs to violations
by direct evidentials, the H EARD - DIRECT condition, than
to violations by indirect evidentials, the S EEN - INDIRECT
condition ( = 177.13, SE = 75.81, z = 2.336, p = .019).
Processing time reference through non-finite
participles
Mean response-accuracies and RTs are shown in
Figure 2; outputs from the mixed-effects regression
models performed on the accuracy and RTs data are given
in Table 3. In the models, the fixed-effects were group
(monolingual vs. heritage speakers) and condition (F UTPS
vs. P SFUT).
With regard to response-accuracies, the model outputs
indicated significant effects of group but not of condition
or of interactions between these two factors. This demonstrates that the heritage speakers were less accurate in their
responses to the time reference violations than the monolinguals regardless of condition; see Figure 2. Both the

SE
0.368
0.270
0.295
0.337

heritage and monolingual speakers made errors by judging
the non-violated sentences to be ungrammatical. An error
analysis did not show significant effects of condition or
group; therefore, these errors were not further analyzed.
With regard to RTs, outputs from the model, as
shown in Table 3, indicated significant effects of group
and condition without an interaction between these two
factors. The heritage speakers were slower in their
responses to the time-reference violations than the
monolinguals. In both groups, RTs to the condition P SFUT
(i.e., violations by a future participle) were longer than to
the condition F UTPS (i.e., violations by a past participle).
However, the between- and within-group differences did
not interact.
Evidentiality and Time reference violations compared
We ran new models on the response-accuracies and
RTs for both the evidentiality and time reference
violations to compare the participants' sensitivity to these
violation types. Sentence type (evidentiality vs. nonfinite participles) and group (monolingual vs. heritage
speakers) were programmed as the fixed-effects in the
models.
With respect to the accuracy of responses, the model
outputs showed significant effects of sentence type ( =
2.878, SE = 0.147, z = 19.532, p < .001), of group (
= 3.481, SE = 0.175, z = 19.867, p < .001), and an
interaction between these two factors ( = -2.244, SE
= 0.246, z = -9.116, p < .001). The heritage speakers
were less accurate than the monolinguals. Given the
interaction between sentence type and group, post-hoc
comparisons were performed. Despite the different sizes
of difference across groups, both the heritage speakers
( = 3.010, SE = 0.156, z = 19.3, p < .001) and the

466

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse
Table 3. Fixed-effects from the generalized linear mixed-effects model performed on
response-accuracies and the linear mixed-effects model performed on RTs to the time reference
violations (Condition = monolingual vs. heritage speakers; Group = F UT P S vs. P S F UT)
Fixed effects for accuracy
Intercept
Condition
Group
Condition x Group

Estimate
2.042
< 0.001
1.367
-0.401

SE
0.276
0.200
0.290
0.361

Code in R: accuracy  condition  group + (1 | participant) + (1 | item)
Fixed effects for RTs
Estimate
SE
Intercept
2654.94
123.15
Condition
139.10
79.28
Group
-776.35
83.75
Condition x Group
45.83
110.78
Code in R: RTs  condition  group + (1 | item) + (1 | participant)

z-value

p-value

7.396
-0.003
4.708
-1.111

< .001
.997
< .001
.267

t-value
21.558
1.754
-9.270
0.414

p-value
< .001
.007
< .001
.679

Figure 2. Mean accuracies (A) and RTs (B) of monolingual and heritage speakers' responses to the time-reference violations
by the past and future participles. Conditions: F UTPS = future time contexts violated by a past verb form; P SFUT = past time
contexts violated by future verb forms.

monolinguals ( = 1.119, SE = 0.222, z = 5.024, p <
.001) were more accurate in their responses to the timereference violations than to the evidentiality violations.
Further output from post-hoc testing for all comparisons
confirmed that the heritage speakers performed worse
in responding to the evidentiality violations than to the
time-reference violations: S EEN - INDIRECT vs. F UTPS, 
= 3.006, p < .001; S EEN - INDIRECT vs. P SFUT,  = 2.995,
p < .001; H EARD - DIRECT vs. F UTPS,  = 3.025, p < .001;
H EARD - DIRECT vs. F UTPS,  = 3.014, p < .001.
With regard to RTs, the model outputs revealed
significant effects of sentence type ( = -421.7, SE
= 99.1, t = -4.256, p < .001), of group ( =

-1379.2, SE = 100.9, t = -13.665, p < .001), and
of interactions between the two factors ( = 662.4, SE
= 117.0, t = 5.663, p < .001). Overall, the heritage
speakers had longer RTs to both the evidentiality and
time-reference violations compared to the monolinguals.
Post-hoc comparisons showed that the heritage speakers
were slower in their responses to the evidentiality
violations than to the time-reference violations ( =
-519.6, SE = 101.0, z = -5.145, p < .001). The
monolinguals, however, showed the opposite pattern:
longer RTs to the time-reference violations than to
the evidentiality violations ( = 84.67, SE = 51.53,
z = 1.643, p < .001).

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
Summary of results
The Turkish heritage speakers investigated in the current
study were less accurate and slower in their responses
to both the evidentiality and time-reference violations
than Turkish monolinguals. The heritage speakers did
not differ in their responses to the violations of the
direct- and indirect-evidential verb forms. However, the
monolinguals responded with longer RTs to the violations
by a direct evidential than to the violations by an indirect
evidential. Furthermore, the heritage speakers frequently
judged the non-violated sentences with evidentiality to
be ungrammatical more often than monolinguals did.
The heritage speakers performed both less accurately and
more slowly on the evidentiality violations than on the
time-reference violations. The monolinguals showed the
opposite pattern: They had longer RTs but more accurate
responses to the time-reference violations than to the
evidentiality violations.

Discussion and conclusions
Results from this study provide us with further insights
into online processing of evidentiality and time reference
in Turkish heritage speakers. We sought to answer two
main questions. The first was whether the heritage
speakers differ in their processing of the evidentiality
and time-reference violations from the monolinguals. The
second question was whether there are differences in the
heritage speakers' sensitivity to the evidentiality and timereference violations.
With regard to the first question, our findings confirmed
that the heritage speakers were at a disadvantage
compared to the monolinguals when processing both
evidentiality and time-reference violations. The heritage
speakers demonstrated a reduced sensitivity to both
the evidentiality and time-reference violations, which
was shown by their lower accuracy and longer RTs
than the monolinguals. Regarding the second question,
an asymmetry was found in the heritage speakers'
online processing of the evidentiality and time-reference
violations. The heritage speakers were less sensitive to
evidentiality violations than to time-reference violations,
as evidenced by both their response-accuracies and RTs.
The monolinguals had longer RTs (but more accurate
responses) to the time-reference violations than to the
evidentiality violations.
Previous studies have attributed heritage speakers'
difficulties in their L1 inflectional morphology to
incomplete acquisition and / or to attrition (Montrul,
2002, 2008; Polinsky, 2006, 2011). Given the lack of
longitudinal investigations on Turkish heritage speakers'
acquisition of evidentials and past/future participles, we
consider the effects of incomplete acquisition and attrition
to be equally likely. The interesting point is, however, that

467

the heritage speakers' online processing of inflectional
forms in Turkish was selectively affected. They responded
more slowly and less accurately to the evidentiality
violations than to the time-reference violations. The
findings reported here are compatible with those of
previous studies that showed asymmetrical erosion of
inflectional morphology in heritage speakers of other
languages (e.g., Bolonyai, 2007; Montrul, 2002, 2009;
Montrul et al., 2012; Rothman, 2007). In the Introduction,
two accounts for the asymmetries were discussed:
interface vulnerability (i.e., the Interface Hypothesis) and
maturational constraints (i.e., the Regression Hypothesis).
Interface vulnerability
According to the Interface Hypothesis, integrating information from different linguistic levels into an interface
(e.g., syntax-pragmatic) is vulnerable to language attrition
(see Sorace, 2000; Sorace & Filiaci, 2006; Sorace & Serratrice, 2009). Therefore, the Interface Hypothesis predicts
that the evidentiality violations pose greater difficulties
to heritage speakers than the time-reference violations.
This is what we have found. Hence, our findings can be
explained by the vulnerability of the syntax-pragmatic
interface. In evidential morphology, morphosyntactic
knowledge has to be integrated with the knowledge
from domains of semantics and pragmatics, thus the
evidential forms easily erode under attrition or incomplete
acquisition. The past and future participles, by contrast,
are non-finite verb forms used in object-relative clauses,
and thus, their semantic and pragmatic content (i.e., time
reference) are bound by the arguments of matrix clause
verbs (see Enc, 1987; Underhill, 1972). In principle, the
use of these participle forms can be licensed by syntactic
knowledge. In accordance with the Interface Hypothesis,
the heritage speakers' sensitivity to time referenceviolations by participle forms was relatively spared.
The Interface Hypothesis makes another prediction.
According to Sorace and Serratrice (2009), bilinguals are
likely to encounter more difficulty processing `marked'
forms compared to default forms. In Turkish, the indirect
evidential is the marked form, as it is used in differential
information source contexts (i.e., inference and report).
The direct evidential, that is linked to direct experience,
is the default form within the evidential paradigm (see
Johanson, 2003). Therefore, it is expected that the heritage
speakers encounter more difficulties with the violations
by an indirect evidential as compared to those by a direct
evidential. Our data do not support such an interpretation.
Instead, the heritage speakers performed equally poorly
in responding to the violations by a direct evidential
(less marked form) and by an indirect evidential (more
marked form). Therefore, our data do not support the
idea that marked forms are more vulnerable to processing
limitations than the unmarked forms.

468

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

Maturational constraints
A specific claim about the compatibility of heritage speakers' incomplete knowledge of inflectional
morphology and the age of acquisition has been made
in Montrul (2009). Her data indicated that incomplete
acquisition and attrition might affect heritage speakers
as a mirror image of acquisition, compatible with the
Regression Hypothesis. According to this hypothesis,
the first acquired-language structure is least affected by
language attrition. In monolingual children's acquisition,
the direct evidential is mastered before the indirect
evidential and participle forms (e.g., Aksu-Koc, 1988;
Ekmekci, 1990; Ozge et al., 2010). Therefore, the
Regression Hypothesis predicts that heritage speakers
perform better in responding to violations by a directevidential form as compared to the violations by indirectevidential and participle forms. This is not what we
found. The heritage speakers were equally poorly in
responding to the violations by both evidential forms,
whereas processing of participles was relatively good.
The heritage speakers' relatively better performance on
time-reference violations by the participles is not what
the Regression Hypothesis predicts.
Data on Turkish children's acquisition of evidential
and participle inflectional morphology are limited. The
available studies indicate that the conceptual development
of the direct-evidential form precedes that of the indirect
evidential. This is reasonable, since the indirect evidential
form requires higher cognitive functions (e.g., inferential
reasoning), which may not be fully developed in younger
children when the direct evidential is already mastered.
Moreover, the indirect evidential is more complex in its
semantics as it may also mark epistemic modality. Given
the acquisition data, at the age of 6-7, the conceptual
development of the indirect evidential form is not yet
complete (e.g., Aksu-Koc, 1988; Ozturk & Papafragou,
2007, 2008). At this point, lack of acquisition studies
on evidential morphology in older age groups (e.g., 7-
12)9 prevents us from further contemplating the exact
relationship of incomplete acquisition patterns found in
heritage speakers with maturational constraints.
Evidentiality: A vulnerable grammar domain
The current study has shown that Turkish heritage
speakers' sensitivity to semantic and pragmatic content
signaled by the evidential morphemes is considerably
eroded under attrition and/or incomplete acquisition.
Recall that heritage speakers under investigation
performed equally poorly in responding to violations in
both evidential forms. This can be explained by problems
in discriminating between different information sources
9

A. Aksu-Koc, personal communication, 13 June 2015.

carried by the evidential morphemes. That is, when they
are given a sentence in which the information source
context mismatches the evidential verb form, the heritage
speakers encounter difficulties. However, our data suggest
that heritage speakers are aware of the fact that the
evidential forms indicate past events. Recall that all the
evidential test sentences contained past temporal adverbs.
Therefore, the heritage speakers must have processed the
evidentiality violations as acceptable, as both evidential
forms are taken to refer to the past. The error analysis
supports this claim. The heritage speakers judged the nonviolated evidential sentences to be ungrammatical more
often than the non-violated time-reference sentences.
Possibly, erosions in the heritage speakers' sensitivity
to the evidentiality violations are due to transfer effects
from L2 (Dutch), which lacks evidential verb forms.
Our data suggest that the heritage speakers are not fully
aware of the information source distinctions carried by the
evidential morphology, although they seem to understand
that both evidential forms indicate past events. That is,
in Turkish heritage grammar, the semantic content of
the evidential morphemes may be simplified, especially
when the dominant language lacks these forms. This is
in line with what Montrul (2010) reported for the objectmarking paradigm in Spanish; Polinsky (2006) for Aspect
distinctions in Russian; Kim, Montrul, and Yoon (2009)
and Gurel and Yilmaz (2011) for the pronominal systems
in Korean and Turkish heritage grammars. However, given
the lack of a reference group of bilingual speakers of
two languages that both have grammatical markers for
evidentiality, it is impossible to be sure about the extent to
which the evidential system is prone to effects of language
transfer.
Finally, two interesting processing asymmetries
emerged from our monolingual group that were absent
in the heritage speakers. The first was that monolinguals
reacted more quickly to seen information sources violated
by an indirect evidential than to heard information
sources violated by a direct evidential. Recall that
speaking about one's personally perceived information
as though it had been heard from another speaker is
counter-intuitive (Aikhenvald, 2004). The monolingual
Turkish speakers rejected such mismatches immediately,
as shown by shorter RTs to violations by indirect
evidentials than to violations by direct evidentials.
However, this counter-intuitive semantic effect, reflected
in the monolingual data, is not present in the heritage
speakers who demonstrated no differences in their
responses to the evidentiality violations. The second
processing asymmetry was a speed-accuracy trade-off
pattern as shown by the monolinguals' more accurate
but longer responses in detecting the time-reference
violations compared to the evidentiality violations. The
time reference violations were constructed by mismatches
between time-contexts and the participle verb forms in the

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
embedded relative-clauses. Therefore, it is conceivable
that the speed-accuracy trade-off pattern was due to the
monolinguals' increased `attention', as the relative clauses
are rather complex forms. The heritage speakers were both
less accurate and slower in their RTs to the evidentiality
violations than the time-reference violations.
In conclusion, the findings from the current study
indicate that heritage speakers performed more poorly
than monolinguals in processing both evidentiality
and time reference violations. Additionally, processing
evidentiality violations proved more effortful for heritage
speakers than processing time-reference violations by

469

non-finite participle forms positioned in relative clauses.
The data documented in this study do not support the
Regression Hypothesis. We have argued that the heritage
speakers' poorer performance on evidentiality violations
can be explained by the fact that these verb forms require
integration of information from different linguistic levels,
in this case at the syntax-pragmatics interface. This is
in line with the Interface Hypothesis. It looks as though
evidentiality is `simplified' in Turkish heritage grammar,
and, thus, heritage speakers are less likely to be aware
of the semantic and pragmatic requirements of evidential
morphology.

Appendix 1. Summary of Turkish heritage speakers' responses to the bilingualism history questionnaire.
First contact to

Turkish

Dutch

Exposed before school age?
First learned through social interaction
First learned in a classroom through formal instruction
Dominant language in interaction with
Mother
Father
Siblings / peers
Dominant language in following circumstances
Counting numbers
Arithmetic operations
Having a dream
Express anger or happiness
Express names of dates, days, months

95%
90%
9%

91%
0%
100%

90%
81%
43%

4%
14%
52%

24%
10%
57%
48%
14%

76%
90%
43%
52%
86%

Age of first contact to Turkish
Being read
Writing
Listening
Age of first contact to Dutch
Being read
Writing
Listening

1-3
38%
19%
91%

3-7
43%
43%
5%

7-14
19%
37%
5%

14 +
0%
4%
0%

24%
9,5%
67%

67%
67%
29%

9,5%
24%
5%

0%
0%
0%

How much of your communication during the day occurs in . . . ?
<10 % 25 % 50 % 75 % >90 %
Dutch
0%
10%
62%
24%
5%
Turkish 10%
29%
48%
14%
0%
How many hours during the day do you spend listening to . . . ?
<1
1-3
3-5
5-7
>7
Dutch
33%
62%
5%
0%
0%
Turkish 57%
19%
24%
0%
0%
How many hours in a day do you spend reading in . . . ?
<1
1-3
3-5
5-7
>7
Dutch
29%
33%
14%
5%
19%
Turkish 86%
14%
0%
0%
0%

470

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse
Appendix 2. Turkish heritage sparkers' self-ratings of language abilities in
Turkish and Dutch = percent participants per language proficiency level.

Turkish
Reading Comprehension
Listening Comprehension
Writing Output
Speaking Output
Dutch
Reading Comprehension
Listening Comprehension
Writing Output
Speaking Output

Poor

Intermediate

Functional

Good

Advanced

0%
0%
9,5%
5%

29%
9,5%
9,5%
9,5%

29%
5%
38%
5%

38%
24%
38%
9,5%

5%
62%
5%
67%

0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%

14%
14%
14%
9,5%

86%
86%
86%
90,5%

Appendix 3. List of verb phrases used to construct
the evidentiality sentences. English translations are
given below each verb phrase in italics.
Verb phrases
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Yemegi yemek
To eat the food
Evi kiralamak
To rent the house
Bardagi kirmak
To break the glass
Elbiseyi utulemek
To iron the dress
Haliyi supurmek
To sweep the carpet
Balonu sisirmek
To inflate the balloon
Kapiyi kilitlemek
To lock the door
Sutu icmek
To drink the milk
Cicekleri sulamak
To water the flowers
Arabayi yikamak
To wash the car
Domatesi dogrramak
To chop the tomatoes
Resmi yirtmak
To tear the picture
Esyayi tasimak
To move the property
Gazeteyi yakmak
To burn the newspaper
Mektubu yazmak
To write the letter

Appendix 4. List of verb phrases used to construct
the time reference sentence. English translations are
given below each verb phrase in italics.

Verb phrases (continued)
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Yemegi dokmek
To spill the food
Evi boyamak
To paint the house
Bardagi doldurmak
To fill the glass
Elbiseyi katlamak
To fold the dress
Haliyi silkmek
To whisk the carpet
Balonu patlatmak
To blow up the balloon
Kapiyi acmak
To open the door
Sutu isitmak
To warm the milk
Cicekleri budamak
To prune the flowers
Arabayi satmak
To sell the car
Domatesi toplamak
To pick the tomatoes
Resmi cizmek
To draw a picture
Esyayi saklamak
To hide the property
Gazeteyi okumak
To read the newspaper
Mektubu gonderdi
To send the letter

Verb phrases
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10

Yemegi pisirmek
To cook the food
Oyuncagi bozmak
To break the toy down
Cicegi almak
To buy the flowers
Sofrayi hazirlamak
To prepare the dinner table
Kazagi ormek
To knit the sweatshirt
Cevizi kirmak
To break the walnuts
Kahveyi ismarlamak
To order the coffee
Tokati atmak
To slap a smack
Keki yapmak
To make the cake
Gitari calmak
To play the guitar

Verb phrases (continued)
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

18
19
20

Soru sormak
To ask a question
Catali saplamak
To stab the fork
Cayi kaynatmak
To boil the tea
Fotografi cekmek
To take the fotograph
Ozur dilemek
To beg pardon
Telefon etmek
To make a phone call
Altini takmak
To pin the gold
(on somebody)
Para vermek
To give away money
Laf sokmak
To speak with sarcasm
Resimi gostermek
To show the picture

References
Aarssen, J. (2001). Development of temporal relations
in narratives by Turkish-Dutch bilingual children. In
L. T. Verhoeven & S. Stromqvist (Eds.), Narrative
development in a multilingual context. (pp. 209-231).
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2004). Evidentiality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Processing evidentiality in Turkish heritage speakers
Akinci, M. (2003). Temporal anchoring of texts in Turkish
of first and second generation Turkish immigrants in
France. In A. S. Ozsoy, D. Akar, M. Nakipoglu-Demiralp,
E. Erguvanli-Taylan & A. Aksu-Koc (Eds.), Studies in
Turkish linguistics (pp. 289 - 297): Bogazici University
Press.
Aksu-Koc, A. (1988). The acquisition of aspect and modality:
The case of past reference in Turkish. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Aksu-Koc, A. (1994). Development of linguistic forms: Turkish.
In R. A. Berman & D. I. Slobin (Eds.), Relating events in
narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study. (pp. 329-
385). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Aksu-Koc, A. (2000). Some aspects of the acquisition of
evidential in Turkish. In L. Johanson & B. Utas (Eds.),
Evidentials: Turkic, Iranian and neighbouring languages.
(pp. 15-28). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Aksu-Koc, A., & Slobin, D. I. (1986). A psychological account
of the development and use of evidentials in Turkish. In
C. Wallace & J. Nichols (Eds.), Evidentiality. The linguistic
coding of epistemiology. (pp. 159-167): Ablex Publishing
Corporation.
Albirini, A., Benmamoun, E., & Chakrani, B. (2013). Gender
and number agreement in the oral production of Arabic
Heritage speakers. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
16(01), 1-18.
Albirini, A., Benmamoun, E., & Saadah, E. (2011). Grammatical
features of Egyptian and Palestinian Arabic heritage
speakers' oral production. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 33(02), 273-303.
Anderson, R. T. (1999). Loss of gender agreement in L1 attrition:
Preliminary results. Bilingual Research Journal, 23(4),
389-408.
Anderson, R. T. (2001). Lexical morphology and verb use
in child first language loss: A preliminary case study
investigation. International Journal of Bilingualism, 5(4),
377-401.
Arslan, S., & Bastiaanse, R. (2014). Tense/aspect and
Evidentiality in narrative speech of Turkish-Dutch bilingual
speakers. Paper presented at the 17th International
conference on Turkish linguistics, University of Rouen,
France.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390-
412.
Benmamoun, E., Montrul, S., & Polinsky, M. (2013). Defining an
"ideal" heritage speaker: Theoretical and methodological
challenges Reply to peer commentaries. Theoretical
Linguistics, 39(3-4), 259-294.
Blackwell, A., Bates, E., & Fisher, D. (1996). The time course
of grammaticality judgement. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 11(4), 337-406.
Bolonyai, A. (2002). Case systems in contact: Syntactic and
lexical case in bilingual child language. Southwest journal
of linguistics, 21(2), 1.
Bolonyai, A. (2007). (In) vulnerable agreement in incomplete
bilingual L1 learners. International Journal of Bilingualism, 11(1), 3-23.

471

Csato, E. A. (2000). Turkish mis-and imis-items. Dimensions
of a functional analysis. In L. Johanson & B. Utas (Eds.),
Evidentials: Turkic, Iranian and neighbouring languages
(pp. 29-46). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
de Bot, K., & Weltens, B. (1991). Recapitulation, regression, and
language loss. In H. W. Seliger & R. M. Vago (Eds.), First
language attrition (pp. 31-51). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ekmekci, O. (1990). Acquisition of relativization in Turkish.
Paper presented at the Fifth international conference on
Turkish linguistics, London University, England.
Enc, M. (1987). Anchoring conditions for tense. Linguistic
inquiry, 633-657.
Erguvanli-Taylan, E. (1993). Turkce'de-DIK ekinin yantumcelerdeki islevi uzerine. Dilbilim Arastirmalari Dergisi, 161-
171.
Gurel, A., & Yilmaz, G. (2011). Restructuring in the
L1 Turkish grammar: Effects of L2 English and L2
Dutch. Language, Interaction and Acquisition/Langage,
Interaction et Acquisition, 2(2), 221-250.
Jakobson, R. (1941). Kindersprache, Aphasie, und allgemeine
Lautgezetze. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell.
Johanson, L. (2003). Evidentiality in Turkic. In A. Y. Aikhenvald
& R. M. W. Dixon (Eds.), Studies in evidentiality (pp. 273-
290). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Keijzer, M. (2010). The regression hypothesis as a framework
for first language attrition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 13(01), 9-18.
Kim, J.-H., Montrul, S., & Yoon, J. (2009). Binding
interpretations of anaphors by Korean heritage speakers.
Language Acquisition, 16(1), 3-35.
Li, P., Sepanski, S., & Zhao, X. (2006). Language history
questionnaire: A Web-based interface for bilingual
research. Behavior Research Methods, 38(2), 202-210.
Montrul, S. A. (2002). Incomplete acquisition and attrition
of Spanish tense/aspect distinctions in adults bilinguals.
Bilingualism: Language and cognition., 5(1), 39-68.
Montrul, S. A. (2008). Incomplete acquisition in bilingualism:
Re-examining the age factor. Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing.
Montrul, S. A. (2009). Knowledge of tense-aspect and mood
in Spanish heritage speakers. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 13(2), 239-269.
Montrul, S. A. (2010). Dominant language transfer in adult
second language learners and heritage speakers. Second
Language Research, 26(3), 293-327.
Montrul, S. A. (2011). Multiple interfaces and incomplete
acquisition. Lingua, 121(4), 591-604.
Montrul, S. A., Bhatt, R. M., & Bhatia, A. (2012). Erosion of
case and agreement in Hindi heritage speakers. Linguistic
Approaches to Bilingualism, 2(2), 141-176.
Ozge, D., Marinis, T., & Zeyrek, D. (2010). Production of
relative clauses in monolingual Turkish children. Paper
presented at the 34th Annual Boston University Conference
on Language Development, Boston University.
Ozturk, O., & Papafragou, A. (2007). Children's acquisition
of evidentiality. Paper presented at the Proceedings from
the the 31st Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development, Boston University.

472

Seckin Arslan, Dorte de Kok and Roelien Bastiaanse

Ozturk, O., & Papafragou, A. (2008). Acquisition of evidentiality
and source monitoring. Paper presented at the Proceedings
from the the 32nd Annual Boston University Conference
on Language Development, Boston University.
Palmer, F. R. (1986). Mood and modality. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Polinsky, M. (2006). Incomplete acquisition: American Russian.
Journal of Slavic Linguistics, 14(2), 191-262.
Polinsky, M. (2008). Heritage Language Narratives. In
D. Brinton, O. Kagan & S. Bauckus (Eds.), Heritage
languages: A new field emerging. New York: Routledge.
Polinsky, M. (2011). Reanalysis in adult heritage language.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 33(02), 305-
328.
R-Core-Team. (2012). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria:
http://www.r-project.org/.
Rothman, J. (2007). Heritage speaker competence differences,
language change, and input type: Inflected infinitives in
Heritage Brazilian Portuguese. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 11(4), 359-389.
Sezer, E. (2001). Finite inflection in Turkish. In E. ErguvanliTaylan (Ed.), The verb in Turkish (pp. 1-46). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.

Silva-Corvalan, C. (1994). Language Contact and Change:
Spanish in Los Angeles. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slobin, D. I. (1986). The acquisition and use of relative clauses
in Turkic and Indo-European languages. In D. I. Slobin &
K. Zimmer (Eds.), Studies in Turkish linguistics (pp. 273-
289). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Slobin, D. I., & Aksu, A. A. (1982). Tense, aspect and modality
in the use of the Turkish evidential. In P. J. Hopper (Ed.),
Tense-aspect: Between semantics and pragmatics (pp. 185-
200). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sorace, A. (2000). Syntactic Optionality in Non-Native
Grammars. Second Language Research, 16(2), 93-102.
Sorace, A. (2011). Pinning down the concept of "interface" in
bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1(1),
1-33.
Sorace, A., & Filiaci, F. (2006). Anaphora resolution in nearnative speakers of Italian. Second Language Research,
22(3), 339-368.
Sorace, A., & Serratrice, L. (2009). Internal and external
interfaces in bilingual language development: Beyond
structural overlap. International Journal of Bilingualism,
13(2), 195-210.
Underhill, R. (1972). Turkish participles. Linguistic inquiry,
3(1), 87-99.

