Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence
in late bilingualism
Evidence from the container-content relation
Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

University of Arizona, USA / University of Texas at Austin, USA

The container-content relation represents a set of nominal configurations unexplored in the acquisition literature. Whereas in English the switch from a nounnoun compound (water bottle) to a noun-prepositional phrase (bottle of water)
is associated with a semantic shift from container to content, Spanish and Arabic
adopt single canonical configurations for both conditions, noun-prepositional
phrase and noun phrase, respectively. Importantly, Spanish, Arabic, and English
display structural overlap in the content condition maintained by head-first isomorphic strings. In the container condition, they show structural dissimilarity;
whereas English uses a head-final construction, Arabic and Spanish consistently
use head-first constructions. Results from an elicited sentence-reordering task
demonstrate that advanced late learners pattern native speakers when tested in
Spanish but not when tested in English. Additionally, when tested in English,
Arabic-speaking and Spanish-speaking learners overextend their L1 canonical
configurations to both conditions. Furthermore, bilingual native speakers do not
perform at ceiling, suggesting bidirectional cross-linguistic influence.
Keywords: bidirectional cross-linguistic influence, structural overlap, syntaxsemantics interface, container-content relation

Introduction
Cross-linguistic influence (CLI) is a well-studied phenomenon in bilingualism,
with specific lines of inquiry at the initial and later stages of acquisition. Recently,
the focus of attention in post-puberty second language (L2) learners has shifted
from examining the unidirectional influence of the first language (L1) on the L2
(e.g., Gass & Selinker, 1992; Kellerman & Sharwood Smith, 1986) to bidirectional
transfer from the L2 to the L1 (e.g., Cook, 2003; Grosjean, 1998; Jarvis & Pavlenko,
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.15012.aza | Published online: 6 February 2017
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 8:4 (2018), 411-445.
issn 1879-9264 | e-issn 1879-9272 (c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

412 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

2008; Pavlenko, 2000; Pavlenko & Jarvis, 2002). Investigating the bidirectional nature of CLI sheds light on how the speaker's L1 matured system changes as a result
of the growing effect of the L2.
The following two factors have been considered significant in the triggering,
conditioning, and modulation of CLI:
(i) Internal versus external interfaces (see Sorace, 2011; White, 2011)
(ii) Structural overlap (see Muller & Hulk, 2001; Yip & Matthews, 2009).
Importantly, research findings on these two factors are still far from being conclusive. For example, whereas a large body of research concluded that linguistic phenomena at the syntax-semantics interface are vulnerable in bilingualism
(Borgonovo, de Garavito, & Prevost, 2008; Cuza & Frank, 2011; Sorace, 2005),
other studies provided evidence that syntax-semantics interface properties are indeed acquirable by L2 speakers (e.g., Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, & Anderson, 1997;
Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, & Swanson, 2001; Montrul, 2011) and it is the interface of
syntax and pragmatics that remains vulnerable (Sorace & Serratrice, 2009, Tsimpli
& Sorace, 2006). Others provided evidence that the latter interface is also acquirable by advanced L2 speakers (see Rothman, 2009; Rothman & Iverson, 2008;
Slabakova & Montrul, 2003; White, 2009, for an overview). For Sorace (2011),
there is a current need for further investigations of different linguistic phenomena
and different directional constellations to further examine CLI at the interfaces.
Further discussions of CLI at the interfaces have been complicated by the role
of structural overlap (Serratrice & Sorace, 2009). The structural overlap theory
(Hulk & Muller, 2000; Muller & Hulk, 2001; Yip & Matthews, 2009) predicts that
if language A allows more than one option for a structure, and language B overlaps
with one of these options, bidirectional CLI may occur in this option; the language
B-type is preferred over the option not overlapping (Foroodi-Nejad & Paradis,
2009). Further, bilinguals produce utterances in language A with the language
B-type option more than monolinguals. Consequently, convergence of the target
structure may be delayed. Previous SLA studies provided conflicting evidence to
the predictions of the overlap theory. For example, White (1987, 1991) showed
that the option that transfers to the L2 from the L1 is not necessarily the overlapping one. Furthermore, discussions have been complicated with the question of
how to operationalize the overlapping structural phenomena. For example, there
is a dispute as to whether the significant level of overlap is at the abstract (Muller
& Hulk, 2001) or the surface word order level (Yip & Matthews, 2009). Strik and
Perez-Leroux (2011) explain that this issue is in need of further exploration.
The present article examines bidirectional CLI in the acquisition of an understudied linguistic structure known as the container-content relation (coffee
cup versus cup of coffee) (Varela, 2012) by advanced adult Spanish-English and


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 413

Arabic-English bilinguals. This particular case pertains to the syntax-semantics
interface in English, but not in Spanish or Arabic. In English, the semantic weight
of each equivalent element is not distributed equally across the two constructions;
the switch from one of these structures to the other is associated with a semantic
shift. For example, the shift from the cup-of-coffee construction- a composite of the
head (N1), preposition (P) and the modifier/complement (N2) - to the coffee-cup
construction- a composite that starts with the modifier/complement (N2) then
the head (N1)- is associated with a subtle semantic shift from the content to the
container or vice versa. On the other hand, Spanish and Arabic adopt a single
canonical configuration each, N1PN2 and N1N2, respectively, for expressing both
the container and the content conditions, where ambiguity is dispelled through
context. Importantly, across these three languages, there is structural overlap in
the content condition maintained by isomorphic strings that are left-headed/headinitial. In the container condition, however, they show structural dissimilarity;
whereas English uses a right-headed/head-final construction, Arabic and Spanish
consistently use left-headed/head-first constructions.
Given that comparing L2 learners to a monolingual control group is often
deemed a comparative fallacy (Birdsong & Gertken, 2013; Bley-Vroman, 1983;
Slabakova, 2011, 2013), this study uses bilingual speakers for both the test and
control groups. In doing this, we adopt a bidirectional framework, where the
aforementioned groups switch roles depending on the language in question (e.g.,
Gruter, Lieberman, & Gualmini, 2010; Ionin, Montrul, & Crivos, 2013; Slabakova,
2006). This permits a detailed analysis of the linguistic knowledge of the L2 communities who are acquiring target constructions in opposite directions. We include
a classical monolingual speaker group (English natives) as a basis for comparison,
as well as to uncover any potential individual variation of this unexplored linguistic phenomenon in the monolingual norm (Amaral & Roeper, 2014; Borgonovo et
al., 2008; Dbrowska, 2012).
The following article is structured as follows: Section (2) provides theoretical
background in four areas: (i) the container-content distinction in English, Spanish,
and Arabic; (ii) why the container-content distinction is a syntax-semantics interface property; (iii) the L2 acquisition of relevant nominal constructions; and (iv)
the L2 acquisition of interface phenomena more generally. Section (3) pertains to
the study itself, including research questions, participant profiles, materials, and
results. Section (4) offers the discussion, which considers the implications of the
results to the broader bilingual acquisition theory, and a brief conclusion.

414 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

Background
Structural phenomenon under consideration
Compounding is defined as the adjoining of at least two individual lexemes in order to form a single novel one (Bauer, 1983, 2009). Proof that the constituents are
behaving as one syntactic unit can be derived from the fact that no element, neither functional nor lexical, can intervene between the two lexemes (Dobrovolsky,
O'Grady, & Katamba, 1997). Researchers distinguish between several types of
compounds, including synthetic configurations, where the second element is deverbal (e.g., truck driver), and root configurations, where the second element is not
derived from a verb (e.g., coffee cup). Consider the following N2N1 root compound
in (1) below:
(1)

N
N2

N1

coffee

cup

Coffee cup is an endocentric compound because it is composed of the head cup,
which carries the bulk of the semantic weight, and is modified by the coffee constituent, which constricts the meaning of the aforementioned head. Endocentric
nominal compounds are productive in English, where speakers are able to create
and interpret them as the need arises. While the semantic relationship between
the two elements is dependent on the context, a compound may in time become
lexicalized (Anderson, 1992; Lieber, 2006). For example, a coffee cup is most likely a cup used for coffee rather than a cup in which one stores coffee, or a cup
with a coffee design on it. Another important observation from (1) is that English
compounds are syntactically right-headed or head-second (Bauer, 1983, 2009;
Lieber, 2006). Left adjunction is the process typically used in English syntax for
forming compounds.
Curiously, (1) can be paraphrased with a noun plus prepositional phrase modifier construction (N1PN2) without any decrement in acceptability. This phrase
structure is the result of merging the head with the prepositional phrase as demonstrated by (2) below:


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 415

(2)

NP
PP

N1
cup

P

N2

of

coffee

Constructions (1) and (2) pertain to the so-called container-content relation
(CCR). What makes the CCR interesting is that modification of the structure from
N2N1 to the equivalent N1PN2 construction or vice versa is associated with a semantic shift. This is represented by (3):
(3) a.

Michael washed the wine glass/*glass of wine in the dishwasher.
(container condition)
 b. Michael enjoyed the glass of champagne/*champagne glass. (content
condition)

In (3a), Michael washed what was presumably a dirty glass. If one wishes to specify
the type of glass, then the wine glass (N2N1) construction is preferred. This is because the glass of wine (N1PN2) construction carries the [+full] feature and it is
pragmatically odd to place a full glass into the dishwasher. On the other hand, as
represented by (3b), one does not drink a container, rather, the content carried by
the container. Following the logic of the first example, Michael enjoys the glass of
champagne (N1PN2) and not the champagne glass (N2N1).
Importantly, a semantic shift associated with the modification of N2N1 to
N1PN2 constructions is not always categorical in English, as demonstrated in
Table 1 below:
Table 1. Noun-noun versus noun-prepositional phrase equivalent constructions in
English
Noun-noun (N2N1)
1 coffee + cup

Conclusion
Noun-prepositionnoun phrase (N1PN2)
cup + of coffee

semantic shift from container to content

2 operations + director director + of operations

equivalent constructions and contrasting
head positions

3 book + title

title + of book

equivalent constructions and contrasting
head positions

4 frog + man

*man + of frog

acceptable versus unacceptable

Working as an operations director [+animate head], for a company can optionally
be paraphrased as a director of operations. Interestingly, in the N1PN2 construction,

416 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

the head constituent is now on the left, with the prepositional phrase modifier
adjoined to the right. The optional use of N2N1 compounds and a nominal construction in which the head noun of a phrase takes a PP complement, as in the
school president and the president of the school is not uncommon in English. N1PN2
constructions engage in optional relationships with other structures as well. Take
for example genitive noun phrases, where the of-genitive phrase (the president of
the school) can be paraphrased by the s-genitive (the school's president), again with
contrasting head positions (Marull, 2015; Rosenbach, 2014; also see Al-Shaer,
(2014) for an extensive contrastive review of Arabic and English). There are also
instances of N2N1 compounds with a [-animate head] that may be paraphrased
with an N1PN2 configuration without a semantic shift. For example, the book title
and the title of the book are possible in English. Importantly, there are instances
of N2N1 compounds that cannot be paraphrased with an N1PN2 configuration
without a decrement in acceptability judgment. For example, the combination of
the constituents frog and man, which can refer to a diver, a being that is part-man
part-frog, a lover of frogs, or a frog scientist, is ungrammatical in the N1PN2 form.
Spanish, a headfirst or left-headed language, on the other hand, favors the
N1PN2 when forming nominal configurations (Moyna, 2011; Piera, 1995; Snyder,
1995) arguably due to lack of novel compounding productivity. This is not to say
that compounds do not exist in Spanish, just that they are rare (Liceras & Diaz,
2000) and they are left-headed (N1N2). Furthermore, the few Spanish N1N2 compounds that do exist have more lexicalized or fixed meanings. For example, without the aid of significant context, the Spanish equivalent of frogman "hombre rana"
would require significant context to mean anything other than a diver (Snyder,
1995). Given that compounding is not productive in Spanish, it is not surprising
that the head merges with the prepositional phrase to form N1PN2 constructions.
The container and the content relation is no exception, as illustrated in (3):
(3)

NP
N1
taza
cup

PP
P

N2

de
of

cafe
coffee

For example, taza de cafe means both "cup of coffee" and "coffee cup", where ambiguity is dispelled via surrounding contextual cues. In other words, when comparing Spanish to English, the content condition is syntactically congruent, while the
container condition is not.


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 417

The third language of reference in this study is Arabic, a left-headed language
like Spanish. As discussed in Ryding (2005) and Alhawary (2011), the equivalent
English productive endocentric root compounds are expressed in Arabic by the
construct phrase, also referred to as the genitive construct or the annexation structure. Whereas the construct phrase applies to English nominal root compounds,
it extends to several types of noun-noun configurations in Arabic, including but
not limited to, partative, purpose, possession, kinship, location, and measurement
categories. Arabic syntax, like Spanish syntax but unlike English structure, is left
headed. Thus, the two nouns in the construct phrase are ordered head first (N1)
then modifying constituent (N2) (e.g., Bauer, 2009; Kremers, 2005).
Benmamoun (2000) outlines three characteristics of this construction in
Arabic. First, the members of the construct state, the head (al-mudaaf) and the
complement (al-mudaaf ilayhi) tend to be adjacent. Second, they both constitute a
single prosodic unit. Third and most importantly, only the last member of the construct state carries the marker of definiteness in definite constructions. Although
these three features of the construct state are clear, the derivation of this construction in Arabic syntax has been controversial (see Benmamoun & Choueiri, 2013;
Borer, 1996; Fassi Fehri, 1999; Mohammad, 1989, for an overview). Shlonsky
(2004) proposed a phrasal analysis, according to which the construct state is a
composite of a genitive case-assigning head (because the complement always takes
the genitive case) and a complement, which cannot move away from the head.
The surface construction of the construct state is realized by merging the head
and its complement. Whereas Benmamoun (2000) agrees with Shlonsky (2004)
that merging is entailed in the derivation of the construct state, he thinks that
this merging is post-syntactic. The presence of case on the second noun and the
insertion of the definite marker between the head and the complement in definite
constructions suggest a phrasal status, as demonstrated by (4):
(4)

NP
N1

N2

finjn-u
cup-nom

qahwat-in
coffee-gen

In terms of the container-content relation specifically in Arabic, finjn-u qahwat-in "cup coffee" refers to both the container and the content conditions. As
in Spanish, this ambiguity is dispelled via context. Importantly, the Arabic noun
phrase configuration should not be confused with the English nominal compound. Compounding in Arabic, as in Spanish, is not productive, with only
very rare cases (Holes, 2004). These very rare compounds are left-headed. The

418 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

container-content relation is no exception. Although Spanish and Arabic diverge
in the canonical construction, they both adopt headfirst constructions, N1PN2 and
N1N2, respectively.

The container-content relation as a syntax-semantics interface property
In anticipation of section 2.4, which reviews the SLA literature on interfaces, let us
briefly reiterate why we consider the container-content relation a syntax-semantics
interface phenomenon in English, but not in Spanish or Arabic. In line with extant
literature (e.g., Borgonovo et al., 2008; Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, & Anderson, 1997;
Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, & Swanson, 2001), the syntax-semantics interface specifically pertains to instances of constructions that have more than one possible configuration, where the shift between these options is associated with a subtle shift in
meaning. As introduced in Table (1), noun-noun and noun-prepositional phrase
equivalent constructions in English are not categorically associated with a shift in
meaning. In some instances the structures are interchangeable, while in others, the
latter form might be ungrammatical. However, there is a unique subset of equivalent constructions called the container-content relation, where the N2N1 (e.g., coffee cup) and N1PN2 (e.g., cup of coffee) forms are both perfectly grammatical but
do not have the same interpretative possibilities. Due to a shift in semantic weight
across each of the equivalent elements motivated by the structural alteration, the
former is restricted to the container interpretation and the latter is restricted to
the content interpretation. An adequate account of the CCR cannot be reached
without reference to both syntax and semantics, indeed, the interconnection of
the two. For Spanish and Arabic, on the other hand, the container-content property does not pertain to the syntax-semantics interface. Both languages adopt a
single configuration for expressing both the container and the content conditions,
N1PN2 and N1N2, respectively. Ambiguity is then dispelled through context.

Nominal compounding in SLA studies
A select number of studies have been conducted on the acquisition of NN compounds and other relevant nominal configurations in the adult bilingual population. Liceras and colleagues investigated the acquisition of nominal compounds
by second language learners of Spanish across a series of studies. For example,
Liceras and Valenzuela (1998) examined the compounding parameter (Snyder,
1995, 2001) in the interlanguage of English-speaking and French-speaking learners of Spanish at different proficiency levels. The compounding parameter claims
that compounding productivity is inherently related to complex predicates such as
resultatives, particles, and double-object constructions. Results from a translation


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 419

and a grammaticality judgment task found that beginning French-speaking learners of Spanish were more successful than their English-speaking counterparts at
translating NN compounds and rejecting the ungrammatical forms. The study approached this difference as an effect for L1 constructions in L2 acquisition. At
more advanced levels of proficiency, both groups of L2 learners attained a markedly higher level of accuracy.
In another study, Liceras and Diaz (2000) explored the acquisition of the rare
Spanish NN compounds (e.g., perro policia "police dog" and hombre arana "spider man") by native speakers of several languages from both Indo-European and
non-Indo-European families. By way of picture-naming tasks, the results from
the L1 English group showed that L2 Spanish beginners produced non-Spanish
compounds (e.g., pirata barco "pirate ship") almost half the time. Non-target production was negatively correlated with proficiency, where advanced learners' outperformed intermediates, who outperformed beginners. The authors concluded
that although advanced learners were affected by their L1, Spanish left-headed
compounds are indeed learnable and productive in Spanish interlanguage, despite
the input providing very limited positive evidence. Moreover, there was a clear effect for L1 head directionality, particularly in less proficient learners.
In a third study, Liceras, Diaz, and Salomaa-Robertson (2002) examined whether adult L2 learners acquire the morphological and syntactic properties of Spanish
NN compounds. Specifically, the study asked whether the participants were sensitive to the word marker that triggers left-headed adjunction in Spanish. For Piera
(1995), the structural differences between English and Spanish compounds are due
to the constraints associated with an abstract word marker feature in Spanish. Data
from adult French-speaking, English-speaking, and Finnish-speaking learners of
Spanish were elicited by way of a picture naming task and a paraphrasing task.
Results demonstrate that NN compounding is a productive interlanguage strategy
and not a marked option, providing evidence against Snyder's (1995, 2001) compounding parameter. With reference to head direction, the authors find that the
participants' L1 is a significant factor. That is to say, all three test groups diverged
from the control group in their production of left-headed and right-headed compounds. Finally, the authors argue that the overextension of the N1PN2 construction that yielded meaningless constructions (e.g., hombre de hormiga and arana de
hombre) serves as an avoidance strategy, which patterns English head direction.
Only a handful of studies have been conducted on the L2 English acquisition of NN compounds by adult learners. Boucher (1990) and Boucher, Danna,
and Sebillot (1993) examined head-modifier ordering, among other things, in the
acquisition of compounds by L1 French speakers. Specifically, participants were
asked to name compounds without a guiding context. They concluded that the
participants showed some degree of awareness of English modifier plus head order.

420 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

This result was taken as renewed evidence for a proposal by Clark (1993) that predicted that syntactic consistency of head-complement ordering may determine
the ease of complex phrase structure formation in language acquisition. However,
the study reported that some of the participants' responses were dominated by
ordering errors (e.g., *bee-worker versus worker-bee) and a few learners resorted
to inserting a morpho-syntactic marker between the head and the complement, a
strategy that is commonly used in their L1 French.
Foroodi-Nejad and Paradis' (2009) study, despite its focus on bilingual children, is particularly relevant to this current study. It explored the effect of structural overlap (Dopke, 2000; Hulk & Muller, 2000; Muller & Hulk, 2001) and
dominance (Yip & Matthews, 2000) on the acquisition of compounds by Persian
- English bilingual children via translation and production tasks. Because Persian
permits optionality in the head position in NN compounds (both right-headed
and left-headed are possible), whereas English is strictly right-headed, structural
overlap theory predicts transfer effects from English (the one option language,
where only cat fish is possible) to Persian (the two option language, where mahi
ghermez "gold fish" and gorbe mahi "catfish" are possible) and not from Persian to
English. That is, Persian-English bilingual children are expected to produce more
right-headed responses in Persian than monolinguals because this is the option
that overlaps with English. No cross-linguistic effect is expected from Persian to
English. Using a novel compound production task guided by color pictures, results
partially supported the predictions of the structural overlap theory. Bilingual children preferred left-headed compounds in Persian and right-headed compounds in
English. Importantly, the bilinguals differed from the Persian monolinguals in that
their preference rate of the right-headed compounds was higher than the monolingual group. Furthermore, Persian-dominant bilinguals performed more like
Persian monolinguals than English-dominant bilinguals in Persian. However, the
reverse was not true, where English-dominant bilinguals did not show the same
pattern in English. The study concluded that CLI effects found in the production
of NN compounds are conditioned by a multitude of factors including structural
overlap and language dominance.
Slabakova (2002) explored the ability of English-speaking and Frenchspeaking learners of Spanish to reset the compounding parameter (Snyder, 1995,
2001), which specifically claims that languages permit complex predicates such
as resultatives, particles, and double-object constructions if and only if they can
productively form NN compounds. She further argued that English represents the
superset value of the parameter, while Spanish and French represent the subset
value. This is because in English both N2N1 compounds and N1PN2 configurations
are used interchangeably. In Spanish and French, only the N1PN2 construction
is permitted. Given that these constructions are ungrammatical in Spanish and


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 421

French and grammatical in English, L2 learners must reset the compounding parameter when they need to productively form NN compounds. Slabakova predicts
that if the Subset Principle (Berwick, 1985) is in effect, then English and French
native speakers learning Spanish will initially adopt the subset value, rejecting NN
compounds. However, if English native speakers acquiring Spanish initially exhibit
the English value of the parameter and fail to reject NN compounds, while French
native speakers demonstrate greater accuracy in rejecting NN compounds, then
L1 transfer effects (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1996) are most likely at play. Results of
the forced choice elicitation task supported the transfer hypothesis, where French
low-level groups and their English counterparts performed significantly different
from one another. Slabakova (2002) concluded that at initial stages of L2 acquisition the L1 parameter value is transferred, and at later stages of learning, the L1
parameter is reset.

Interface phenomena in SLA studies
The Interface Hypothesis (IH), first introduced by Sorace and colleagues (Sorace,
2005; Sorace & Filiaci, 2006), has spurred increasing interest in advanced adult
L2 studies (e.g., Montrul, 2011; Rothman, 2009; Sorace & Serratrice, 2009). It
attempts to explain the protracted instability in advanced adult bilinguals. Two
types of interfaces are differentiated: internal and external. Internal interfaces refer
to the linguistic phenomena in which syntax interfaces with other modules in language such as morphology and semantics. External interfaces, on the other hand,
refer to the linguistic phenomena in which syntax interfaces with other `higher'
modules in the cognitive system (e.g., syntax-pragmatics and syntax-discourse)
(see Sorace, 2011; Sorace & Serratrice, 2009 for further discussion).
According to the IH, interface phenomena are generally harder to acquire
than non-interface phenomena (Lozano, 2006; Sorace & Filiaci, 2006; Valenzuela,
2006). Tsimpli and Sorace (2006) argue that phenomena that pertain to the syntax-pragmatics interface are more vulnerable and harder to acquire than phenomena that involve "formal properties of the language system alone" (p. 1). The
syntax-semantics phenomena, according to this distinction, are less likely to cause
problems at advanced stages of L2 learning. White (2011) distinguishes between
two versions of the IH. According to version I, properties that pertain to internal
interfaces are more vulnerable than syntax proper phenomena. Version 2 suggests
that properties that pertain to internal interfaces such as the syntax-semantics interface are less vulnerable than these that pertain to external interfaces such as the
syntax-pragmatics interface.
Several studies were conducted to examine the acquisition of linguistic phenomena that pertain to the interfaces in adult bilinguals. The syntax-pragmatics

422 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

interface and the syntax-semantics interface, in particular, were explored in many
studies. The key question underlying these studies was to determine the vulnerability of the interface phenomena. Research results are still divided. Rothman
(2009) examined the acquisition of null vs. overt subject pronoun distribution by
English-speaking learners of Spanish, a phenomenon that pertains to the syntaxpragmatics interface. The study compared between the performance of an intermediate group (n = 28) and an advanced group (n = 23) on a co-reference interpretation task, a felicitousness judgment task, and a pragmatic context translation
task. Results showed that intermediate learners were insensitive to the pragmatic
constraints in null and overt subject distribution, despite small differences. This
is consistent with the prediction of the Interface Hypothesis. However, the advanced learners' performance was native-like, contrary to the predictions of the
hypothesis. The study concluded that syntax-pragmatics properties are not fated
for residual optionality as evidenced by the interface proponents.
Ivanov (2009) explored the acquisition of topicality and clitic doubling in
Bulgarian by English speakers, a case of syntax-discourse interface constructions.
Along the same lines of Rothman (2008), the study examined the performance of
an advanced group (n = 10) and an intermediate group (n = 14). The learners' L1
English lacks the clitic system of marking referential direct and indirect objects.
Using a context sentence elicitation task in which the participants were required
to evaluate the appropriateness of a situation (given in speaking and in writing) on
a five-point scale, results showed that almost all of the advanced learners showed
sensitivity to the clitic doubling options. Further, they demonstrated a nativelike performance on topic and focus. The intermediate group, on the other hand,
showed a strong preference for the infelicitous non-clitic doubling options in the
topic conditions as a result for their L1 word order effect. The author concluded
that whereas the syntax-pragmatic properties are not acquirable by the intermediate learners, they are in fact acquirable by the advanced learners, which runs
against Sorace's (2005) proposal.
Results of studies on the L2 adult acquisition of syntax-semantics phenomena are also controversial. In a series of studies, Dekydtspotter and colleagues examined the acquisition of a number of syntax-semantics interface phenomena by
English-speaking learners of French. In one study, Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, and
Anderson (1997) examined the acquisition of the process-result distinction in
dyadic nominals. In English, the dyadic process nominal (e.g., the proof of this
theorem by/of this professor is very frequent) and dyadic result nominal (e.g., the
proof of this theorem by/of this professor is very interesting) can be expressed by a
by-marked agent or by an of-marked agent. In French, a dyadic result noun is followed either by a de-marked agent or by a par-marked agent. In a dyadic process
nominal, the agent cannot be marked by the preposition de, but rather only by


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 423

the preposition par `by'. The shift from de- to par- entails a shift in meaning from
result to process. Using an acceptability judgment task, data from 90 adult native
English-speaking learners of French showed that low and intermediate learners
were sensitive to the process-result distinction. The same result was also found for
advanced learners. These results were interpreted as evidence that linguistic phenomena at the syntax-semantics interface are indeed acquirable in interlanguage
grammar at various developmental stages.
In another study, Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, and Swanson (2001) examined
whether English-speaking learners of French were sensitive to the syntax-semantics interface of the left-branch combine `how many' extractions in English-French
interlanguage. This linguistic phenomenon can be found either together with its
nominal restriction de livres `of books', forming continuous constituents (i.e., combine de livres), or separated from its nominal restriction forming a discontinuous constituents (combine...de livres). These two constructions do not have the
same interpretative possibilities. For example, if the combine interrogative is about
how many books two students are buying, the continuous constituents refer to the
books in common that those two students are buying (i.e., narrow scope). The discontinuous constituents, on the other hand, refer to the all the books that they are
buying (i.e., wide scope). Using a truth value judgment test of 28 test items introduced by a scenario that sets up a combien question, results showed the intermediate learners strikingly showed a statistically significant difference in the acceptance
of wide scope answers to continuous versus discontinuous combien interrogatives.
Similarly, for the advanced group there was a clear difference in their acceptance of
wide scope answers with continuous versus discontinuous combien. These results
were interpreted as support for the ability of the intermediate learners to distinguish wide and narrow scope for continuous and discontinuous interrogatives.
Other studies provided evidence that the syntax-semantics interface phenomena are vulnerable and hard to acquire. Borgonovo et al., (2008) explored the acquisition of mood in Spanish relative clauses by French-speaking learners. The
determiner phrases in Spanish relative clauses (e.g., El capitan que ha/haya dado
la orden tiene que ser juzgado) if signaled with an indicative mood, it correlates
with specificity. If signaled with a subjunctive mood, it marks non-specificity. In
addition to interpretation judgment tasks used in the literature, the study made a
methodological adaptation at which the participants were introduced first with the
form, and then examined what interpretation it may trigger. The study also used
a sentence combination felicity task at which the participants were given pairs of
sentences and were asked to judge how naturally they combine. Results found that
the intermediate and advanced learners were sensitive to the appropriate mood
according to the context; appropriate and inappropriate moods on specific and
non-specific contexts yielded significant differences with the intermediate and the

424 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

advanced groups. Results of the combination felicity task provided a similar pattern with the advanced groups, but not with the intermediate group. These results
supported the vulnerability and optionality of linguistic phenomena at the syntaxsemantics interface.
Another study that concluded that the syntax-semantics interface phenomena
are harder to acquire is Cuza and Frank (2011). It examined the acquisition of
Spanish double-que questions by heritage learners. Using an elicited production
task, an acceptability judgment task, and a preference task, the authors found significant difficulties in the production and acceptability of double-que questions.
Contrary to the prediction of the interface hypothesis that suggests no difficulties
at the syntax-semantics interface phenomena, the participants showed no distinction in their acceptability of the double-que in statements versus questions. Only
when the two structures were presented together were the participants sensitive to
the semantic shift introduced by double-que.

The present study
In summary, English, Spanish, and Arabic provide several points of divergence,
which have implications for the learners' task. In certain nominal configurations such as the container-content relation, English is the two-option language,
while both Spanish and Arabic are the one-option languages as demonstrated
in Table (2) below:
Table 2. Linearization of the container-content relation in English, Spanish, and Arabic
Spanish

Arabic

English

Container

N1PN2

N1N2

N2N1

Content

N1PN2

N1N2

N1PN2

Optional configurations in English (N2N1 and N1PN2) are rendered as single canonical configurations in Arabic (N1N2) and Spanish (N1PN2). In these configurations, the leftmost constituent carries the bulk of the semantic weight. Furthermore,
whereas the latter two languages do not produce compounds productively and are
obligatorily headfirst, English is a productive compounding language and is rightheaded. Other than headedness, optionality is non-categorical in English, where
sometimes the equivalent constructions are truly optional, sometimes the N1PN2
form is associated with a decrement in acceptability judgment, and other times it
is associated with a semantic shift such as in the container-content relation (see
Table 1). This non-categorical input could lead to learnability issues for L2 learners
of English. Second, the container-content relation in the direction of English is an


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 425

interesting syntax-semantics interface case, but not in the direction of Spanish or
Arabic. This allows for testing for its vulnerability. Equally importantly, the aforementioned structural realities of English, Spanish, and Arabic offer an interesting
ground for testing for the role of structural overlap in the CLI. The three languages
under consideration display clear overlap in the content condition (the N1PN2
construction), but not in the container condition (the N1N2 construction).

Research questions and predictions
The following three specific research questions motivate the present study:
RQ1:Do advanced Spanish-speaking and Arabic-speaking learners of English
face difficulties in the acquisition of the container-content relation?
RQ2:Do advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish face difficulties in producing left-headed N1PN2 constructions to convey the container meaning?
RQ3:Do advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish and English-speaking
learners of Arabic diverge from a native monolingual English control
group in their knowledge of the container-content relation as a result of
the L2 (Spanish and Arabic) influence on the L1 (English)?
For RQ1, the structural overlap theory predicts strong cross-linguistic influence
in the L1-L2 direction in the overlapping structure. Since the three languages use
similar isomorphic strings that are left-headed/head-initial in the content condition, it is predicted that this will result in persistent difficulties due to the overextension of this condition in the direction of English. Specifically, Spanish-speaking
learners of English may overextend the single N1PN2 option in Spanish to the
container-content relation where N2N1 and N1PN2 English varieties are not interchangeable. Similarly, it is likely that Arabic-speaking learners of English would
overextend the N1N2 option from Arabic to contexts that denote both the container and the content relationship (refer to Tables 1 and 2). If the test groups produce significantly more non-target constructions for the content condition, then
structural overlap effects cannot solely account for the acquisition challenges. The
non-categorical optionality that is characteristic of the English input and the mapping complexity associated with syntax-semantics interface-related configurations
contribute to the learners' difficulties.
With respect to RQ2, given that the container-content relation does not pertain to the syntax-semantics interface in Spanish, and the structural overlap theory
does not predict transfer effects in the direction of Spanish, the advanced Englishspeaking learners of Spanish are not expected to face difficulties in producing leftheaded configurations (N1PN2) to convey the container meaning.

426 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

With respect to RQ3, the structural overlap theory predicts bidirectional crosslinguistic influence in the L2-L1 direction in the overlapping option. Specifically,
it is predicted that advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish and Englishspeaking learners of Arabic will diverge from a native English monolingual control group in their knowledge of the container-content relation in their L1 English.
That is, since English, Spanish, and Arabic converge on the content condition,
the aforementioned bilinguals are expected to produce more N1PN2 constructions for the content condition when tested in English than the monolinguals.
Furthermore, the absence of the N2N1 forms and the use of N1N2 in Arabic and
N1PN2 in Spanish is expected to result in the production of more left headed/
headfirst forms in the container condition. This implies cross-linguistic effects of
the L2 (Spanish and Arabic) on the L1 (English).

Participant profile
A total of 80 individuals participated in this study. As represented in Table (3)
below, they were divided into five groups: advanced Spanish-speaking learners
of English (n = 16); advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish (n = 19); advanced Arabic-speaking learners of English (n = 17); advanced English-speaking
learners of Arabic (n = 17); and an English monolingual group (n = 11). Before the
beginning of the study, each participant completed a language history questionnaire presented in either Spanish or English by request. The first section elicited
information on sociolinguistic background in order to both divide the participants
into their respective test groups and to control for several variables associated with
age and experience. Information such as birthplace, age, gender, education level,
language spoken as a child, and parents' L1 was requested. The second section
elicited information about their proficiency ratings in their L1s and L2s. Selected
demographic data and proficiency ratings are further broken down in Table (3):
Table 3. Participant demographic data and proficiency ratings
Learner group

Number of Age range/mean
participants

Proficiency
ratings
L1

L2

Spanish-speaking learners of English

16

21-37 (mean: 27) 5.9/6.0 5.2/6.0

English-speaking learners of Spanish

19

21-38 (mean: 27) 5.9/6.0 4.7/6.0

Arabic-speaking learners of English

17

25-48 (mean: 33) 5.7/6.0 5.5/6.0

English-speaking learners of Arabic

17

23-31 (mean: 26) 5.8/6.0 4.6/6.0

English monolinguals

11

18-23 (Mean: 19) NA

NA

Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 427


All but two of the advanced Spanish-speaking learners of English had received
their undergraduate degree (or were working on a graduate degree) in a large
public university in the United States at the time of testing. In all cases, their parents' first language was Spanish and the language spoken at home during childhood was exclusively Spanish. In terms of the advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish, the majority were enrolled in a Spanish graduate program and
taught Spanish on a weekly basis at time of testing. Their parents' first language
was English and the language spoken at home during childhood was exclusively
English. The Arabic-speaking learners of English were recruited from Egypt. At
the time of testing, they worked in different fields such as engineering, academia,
translation, ESL examination, and graphic design, amongst others. The Englishspeaking learners of Arabic were undergraduate and graduate students currently
studying Arabic in a large public university in the United States. They were instructed by a native speaker of Arabic, who implemented an integrated teaching
method (personal communication with instructor). Last, the monolingual English
control group were recruited from a large university in the southwest of the United
States. All participants self-reported as having taken less than one semester of university-level foreign language instruction. Furthermore, both of their parents were
native speakers of English and had spoken to them exclusively in English during
their childhood.
In order to remain consistent across experiments, proficiency ratings of the
four bilingual groups were determined by the method of self-rating. Self-ratings
are extensively used as a measure of linguistic ability (e.g., McIntyre, Noels, &
Clement, 1997; Shameem, 1998) and have been shown to correlate with linguistic performance (e.g., Flege, MacKay & Piske, 2002).1 Furthermore, self-ratings
enable an equivalent proficiency metric across all the languages in the present
study. Bilingual participants were specifically asked to judge their reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills on a scale of 1.0 "not well" to 6.0 "nativelike". All
four groups self-rated their L1 as the native-like, dominant language, and their
L2 as being highly advanced. Only participants who were not exposed to the L2
before school age and who rated it at 3.5/6.0 or higher were included in the study.
As illustrated in Table (3), consistently they all rated their L1 higher than their L2.

Methods and design
Data elicitation consisted of an elicited sentence reordering and completion task
(Cuza, 2013; Frank, 2013). Specifically, participants were presented with a series
1. Self-rating across the L2 groups was determined to be an adequate proficiency measure due
to the lack of the same proficiency test that could be used.

428 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

of sentences with linguistic fragments scrambled in a random order, with missing
functional words (prepositions, articles), and an unconjugated verb. They were
then asked to reorder the fragments, to conjugate the verb, and to insert any missing elements in order to produce an appropriate sentence given the constraints
imposed by a short preamble. If the participant did not include every word in
the wordlist, added more than articles or prepositions, or left the verb unconjugated, then the response was thrown out. Spanish speakers and Arabic speakers
were tested in English as their L2. Also, English speakers who acquired Arabic
and Spanish as their L2s were tested in English as their L1. Last, English speakers were tested in Spanish as their L2. The Spanish examples were not acceptable
N1N2 compounds and the Arabic equivalents of the English examples were all NPs
with an obligatory article before the complement/modifier (N2). The Spanish and
Arabic examples were all ambiguous in that they either convey the container or
the content meaning.
Both the Spanish and English versions of the study are composed of 16 test
items and 16 fillers for a total of 32 items. Eight of the test items represent the
container condition and the other eight the content condition. All test items (see
Appendix 1) and fillers were scrambled so as to insure that no two identical conditions appeared consecutively, and the order of the head noun and the modifier
were equally distributed in order to avoid any priming effects associated with order of presentation. Furthermore, half of the participants took the English task
first, and the other half the Spanish one. Sample preambles, test items, and target
responses for the container condition in English and Spanish are represented by
(5) and (6) respectively, while (7) and (8) pertain to the content condition.
(5) Michael found an empty glass from the New Year's party.
(Preamble)
 /Michael/to wash/glass/champagne/
(Test item)
 Michael washed the champagne glass.
(Target response)
(6)




Luis quiere que la jarra este fria antes de llenarla con una bebida.
"Luis wants the mug to be cold before pouring a drink in it."
/Luis/enfriar/cerveza/jarra/ "/Luis/to chill/beer/mug/"
Luis enfrio la jarra de cerveza. "Luis chilled the beer mug."

(7) John is finally able to relax and pour himself a drink.
 /John/to enjoy/mug/beer/
 John enjoyed the mug of beer.
(8)




Laura consiguio la ultima coca cola pero no actuo de forma interesada.
"Laura got ahold of the last coca cola but she did not act selfishly."
/Laura/compartir/refresco/lata/ "/Laura/to share/soda/can/"
Laura compartio la lata de refresco. "Laura shared her can of soda."


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 429

As demonstrated above, each test item was introduced by a one-sentence preamble.
This short introduction served the purpose of eliciting either a container or content
response. The container constituents included bottle, mug, glass, cup, and can for
English, and botella, jarro, vaso, taza, and lata for Spanish. These heads are combined
with the content modifiers beer, wine, coffee, champagne, water, soda, tea for English
and cerveza, vino, cafe, champan, agua, refresco, and te for Spanish. The resulting
compound constructions are fully transparent in that both constituents, the head
and the modifier, are related to the meaning of the whole construction. Importantly,
all resulting Spanish test item configurations are not acceptable as N1N2 compounds.

Results
Spanish-English bilinguals
The two independent variables in the results of the Spanish-English and EnglishSpanish directions are the within-subjects factor language (English versus Spanish)
and the between-subjects factor group (native speaker versus nonnative speaker).
The dependent variable is binary, where contingent on the condition; the target
and non-target response is either the N2N1 or N1PN2 construction. Target and
non-target responses were converted to a score of "1.0" and "0.0", respectively.
Table (4) below provides a summary of the descriptive statistics of the SpanishEnglish and English-Spanish bilinguals:
Table 4. Descriptive statistics in Spanish-English bilinguals and English monolinguals
Group

Target
Language

Condition

N2N1
tokens

Percent
(%)

L1 Spanish-L2 English

English

Container

51/114

45

63/114

55

Content

20/120

17

100/120

83

Container

89/145

61

56/145

39

1/147

1

146/147

99

L2 Spanish-L1 English

English

Content
English monolinguals
L1 English-L2 Spanish
L2 English-L1 Spanish

English
Spanish
Spanish

N1PN2
tokens

Percent
(%)

Container

69/83

83

14/83

17

Content

10/67

13

67/77

87

Container

2/134

2

132/134

98

Content

0/138

0

138/138

100

Container

0/117

0

117/117

100

Content

0/97

0

97/97

100

It is immediately apparent that the compounding strategy for the container-content relation is different in English and Spanish. Specifically, both native speakers (NS) and nonnative speakers (NNS) of Spanish exclusively produced N1PN2

430 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

constructions for both the container and content conditions. Results are displayed
in Figure 1 below:
0.99

1
0.9

0.98 1.00

1.00

1.00

0.83

L2
L1

0.8
0.7

0.61

0.6
0.5

0.45

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

English container

English content

Spanish container

Spanish content

Figure 1. Proportion target form produced in English and Spanish

A binary logistic regression design was selected in order to further analyze the
repeated measures with a binary outcome. Both the language (z = -8.3, p < .001)
and group (z = 2.2, p < .05) factors were found to be statistically significant. This
motivated two planned chi-square analyses, where the equation was re-specified
in order to shed light on the main effect of group in both Spanish and English
container and content conditions. The English results showed that NS significantly
outperformed NNS for both the container (x2(1) = 7.1, p < .01) and the content
(x2(1) = 23.3, p < .001) conditions. In Spanish, as represented by Table (4), there
are no examples of non-target N2N1 forms produced by NS and only 2% in the
NNS data (x2(1) = 1.8, p = 0.18). Furthermore, there are no attested cases of nontarget N2N1 performance in the Spanish content condition.
Comparing the above results to an English monolingual group offers another pattern. The performance of the English monolingual group was high in
the content condition (87%) and slightly lower in the container condition (83%).
Curiously, in both conditions their scores were far from being entirely perfect.
Recall that the average rates of the content and the container conditions of the
English-Spanish bilinguals when tested in English were 99% and 61% in the two
conditions, respectively. Interestingly, there was a statistical difference between
scores of the two groups in the content condition: (x2(1) = 32.585, p < .000). We
posit that this difference is attributed to the bidirectional cross-linguistic effect
(from L2 Spanish to L1 English). Specifically, the similar isomorphic string constrained by head directionality between Spanish and English regulates cross-linguistic influence in the L1 and the L2 (to be subsequently discussed).


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 431

Arabic-English bilinguals
Table (5) below provides a summary of the descriptive statistics collected from
the sentence completion and reordering task in the Arabic-English and EnglishArabic bilinguals when tested in English. As with the Spanish-English bilinguals,
a binary logistic regression design was chosen due to the categorical nature of
the dependent variable. The two independent variables in this equation are group
(native versus nonnative) and condition (container versus content). The difference
in total responses across groups can be accounted for by the different number of
participants in each group as well as the responses that could not be included in
the final analysis. As with Spanish-English bilinguals, if the participant did not
include every word in the wordlist or added more than articles or prepositions,
or left the verb unconjugated or the answer blank, the response was thrown out.
Table 5. Descriptive statistics in Arabic-English bilinguals and Engish monolinguals
Group

Target
Language

Condition

L1 Arabic-L2 English

English

Container

53/131

40

78/131

60

Content

13/128

10

115/128

90

Container

108/126

86

18/126

14

Content

L2 Arabic-L1 English

English

English monolinguals

English

N2N1
tokens

Percent
(%)

N1PN2
tokens

Percent
(%)

 1/133

1

132/133

99

Container

69/83

83

14/83

17

Content

10/67

13

67/77

87

A binary logistical regression analysis returned main effects for the group (z = 4.3,
p < .001) and condition (z = .80, p < .001) factors. The results from the condition
variable suggest that participants as a whole performed more target-like in the
content (90%) than the container condition (40%), supporting the conclusion
from the Spanish-English bilinguals that the container condition provided more
of a challenge.
As we did with the Spanish-English bilinguals, we compared the production
averages of the Arabic-English bilinguals of the content condition to those of the
English monolinguals to determine if there is a bidirectional CLI of L2 Arabic on
L1 English. There was a strong significant difference between the production average of both groups on the content condition: (x2(1) = 18.513, p < .000).

Comparison between Spanish-English and Arabic-English bilinguals
A planned post hoc analysis comparing the Spanish-English bilingual results (see
Table 4) to the Arabic-English bilinguals' (see Table 5) demonstrates that the other
language is not a significant factor in the content condition. Both L1 English groups

432 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

perform at ceiling (mean of both groups was 99%), x2(1) = .01, p = .9436, while L2
groups perform slightly below (mean of Arabic-English bilinguals was 83% and
mean of Spanish-English bilinguals was 90%), x2(1) = 2.28, p = .1313. Group (NS
vs. NNS) on the other hand, does reach significance, x2(1) = 2.13, p < .05. Overall,
these results suggest that the high statistical significance found in the group and
other language factors is driven by the container condition items.
In the container condition items, L1 English participants produced more
N2N1 responses than L2 English participants (z = 1.47, p < .001). Interestingly,
whether the other language was Spanish or Arabic proved to be a significant factor,
where Arabic speakers produced significantly more N2N1 constructions (z = .77,
p < .001). A significant effect was found for the other language factor in the L1
English groups, x2(1) = 20.11, p < .001, but not the L2 English groups, x2(1) = .46,
p = .499.
In summary, results from the advanced Arabic-speaking learners of English
elaborated on the curious finding that advanced Spanish-speaking learners do not
perform at ceiling in the English container condition. It specifically demonstrated
that advanced Arabic-speaking learners perform better. Furthermore, the other
language factor is only significant in the direction of the L1, whereas L2 Arabic
and Spanish groups do not perform significantly different from one another. These
results are depicted in Figure (2) below, with the L2 English groups collapsed.
1

Proportion NN constructions

0.9

0.86

0.8
0.7

0.61

0.6
0.5

0.43

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

L2 English

L1 English-L2 Spanish

L1 English-L2 Arabic

Figure 2. Proportion N-N constructions produced in English container condition

As demonstrated in Figure (2), the L2 English groups produce fewer N2N1 constructions than the L1 English-L2 Spanish group, which produces fewer N2N1
constructions than the L1 English-L2 Arabic group. The finding that the container
condition appears to be more difficult than the content condition is equally valid


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 433

for advanced Spanish-speaking learners of English (45% versus 83% target performance) and advanced Arabic-speaking learners of English (40% versus 90%).
Also, it is more difficult for the native speakers of English who are advanced
Spanish learners (61% versus 99% target performance) as well as for those who
are advanced Arabic learners (86% versus 99%). This finding is further supported
by an individual analysis in Table (6) below, where participants were divided into
five distinct categories. These divisions included participants who produced zero
N2N1 constructions, less than 50%, exactly 50%, greater than 50%, and finally all
N2N1 constructions.
Table 6. Individual participant production of N2N1 constructions for English container
condition
L1 SpanishL2 English

L1 ArabicL2 English

L2 ArabicL1 English

L2 SpanishL1 English

No N2N1

4 of 16

3 of 17

0 of 17

1 of 19

Low N2N1 (< 50%)

5 of 16

7 of 17

1 of 17

4 of 19

Med N2N1 (= 50%)

1 of 16

2 of 17

1 of 17

4 of 19

High N2N1 (> 50%)

3 of 16

5 of 17

6 of 17

6 of 19

All N2N1

3 of 16

0 of 17

9 of 17

4 of 19

The results of this analysis demonstrate that individual variation is high in both
NS and NNS English groups. For the two NNS groups, 19/33 (57.5%) participants produce fewer than 50% N2N1 constructions. This is compared to only 6/36
(16.6%) of the participants in the NS group. Following a similar trend, only 11/33
(33.3%) of the NNS produce target forms more than 50% of the time as compared
to 25/34 (73.5%) of the NS. Upon further analysis of the NS group specifically, it
appears that Arabic learners did better than Spanish learners in the English container condition. Thus, the complexity of the container-content relation appears to
lead to individual variation in both and NS and NNS populations. Such variation
was not observed when the English-Spanish bilinguals were tested in Spanish (to
be subsequently discussed).

English monolingual group
As discussed in the introduction, we included a monolingual speaker group not
only as a comparison to our bilingual control groups, but also to shed light on any
potential individual variation within in the monolingual norm. The monolingual
group means across the container and content conditions are 83% and 87% target
responses, respectively. Further, as can be seen in Figure 3 below, there is considerable inter-speaker and intra-speaker variability in sensitivity to this distinction. Out of the 11 participants, only one performed at ceiling in both conditions

434 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

Proportion (%) target

(100%). Of the remaining participants, two scored in the 88%-100% range, four in
the 75%-100% range, and four in the 67%-71% range.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Container

100

71

88

83

88

71

75

75

100

75

88

Content

100

83

88

67

75

83

86

100

71

100

100

Figure 3. Individual sensitivity to the container-content relation in monolinguals

In summary, all participants in the monolingual group clearly display knowledge
of the container-content relation, though the contrast is not at ceiling and there
is high variability across participants. As one reviewer points out, this may not be
surprising given that the CCR is an interface property. Our finding adds to the
literature arguing that interface properties not only tend to be vulnerable but also
more susceptible to variation (Sorace, 2006, 2000). For example, Sorace (2000)
found variability and gradience with auxiliary preference in Italian amongst the
monolingual norm. Our finding also contributes to the growing evidence of inter-speaker variation in the monolingual norm more generally (Adams & RossFeldman, 2003; Birdsong, 2009; Dbrowska, 2012). A reviewer suggests that as
the complexity of the structure increases and becomes more frequent in the written as opposed to the oral mode, distinguishing participants along the lines of
metalinguistic abilities becomes increasingly more important. Finally, task effect
is another possible explanation for the variation within our study. However, the L2
Spanish-L1 English group's performance in the content condition was at ceiling,
which we interpret as evidence against the possibility of task effects.

Discussion and conclusion
The present study examined the bidirectional cross-linguistic effects in the acquisition of the container-content relation. Results of the bilingual groups suggest that
advanced Spanish-speaking and Arabic-speaking learners of English faced persistent difficulties in the acquisition of the container-content relation. Specifically,
the container condition, which does not structurally overlap with their L1s, was


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 435

more difficult than the content condition, which overlaps with their L1s. The effect
of non-categorical optionality in the input and the mapping complexity associated with syntax-semantics interface-related configurations appear to be crucial.
For the second research question, similar difficulties were not found for advanced
English-speaking learners of Spanish, where both NS and NNS exclusively produced left-headed N1PN2 constructions in both conditions. For the third research
question, when tested in English, a collapsed native speaker bilingual group produced more non-target N1PN2 constructions for the container condition than
did the monolingual control group. This result emphasizes the potential role of
isomorphic strings and structural overlap in the conditioning of cross-linguistic
influence effects not only in the direction of the L2, but also the L1.
These results suggest that structural overlap and input conditions account to
varying degrees for the non-target performance and the cross-linguistic effects,
depending on the bilingual group and language pairing. The overlap theory proposes that cross-linguistic influence is conditioned when the one and only option
in language A is equivalent to or matches one of two (or more) available options in
language B. This results in a cross-linguistic influence in the direction of the structurally similar option in language B (Dopke, 2000; Foroodi-Nejad & Paradis, 2009;
Hulk & Muller, 2000; Muller & Hulk, 2001). The overall results from the sentence
reordering and completion task demonstrated that when a significant isomorphic
string constitutes structural overlapping (Yip & Matthews, 2009) conditioned by
head directionality (Liceras & Diaz, 2000; Liceras et al., 2002; Slabakova, 2002),
CLI effects not only prevailed but were also bidirectional. Spanish-speaking and
Arabic-speaking learners of English tended to overextend the N1PN2 configuration to both the content and the container conditions. Further, they produced
more N1PN2 constructions than monolinguals.
Sorace and Serratrice (2009) argued that structural overlap plays an important role in the acquisition of syntax-semantics interface phenomena. Results of
this study provide evidence to this premise. Specifically, the Spanish-English results suggest that the target performance in the container condition is significantly
lower than that of the content condition, a result that is robust across the ArabicEnglish findings. The significantly better performance in the content condition
contributes to the literature that speaks to the underspecified "overlap", "matches",
and "equivalent" structures in bilingual studies (Strik & Perez-Leroux, 2011). It
implies that the relevant surface analogue is determined by the linear structure
of the equivalent constructions. It is evident that head directionality plays a major role in determining this structural analogue. The content condition configurations in English, Spanish, and Arabic (N1PN2, N1PN2, and N1N2, respectively)
share the headfirst property, which constitutes structural overlap. Though surface
forms of the content condition in Arabic and Spanish are not of the exact string

436 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

and internal structure, left-headedness triggered a similar effect across test groups.
When tested in the content condition in English as their L2, Arabic speaking and
Spanish speaking learners showed comparable performance in the L1-L2 direction (compare 83% to 90%, respectively). When tested in English as their L1, they
showed very similar L2-L1 effects (compare 100% to 99%). Importantly, the fact
that Arabic is typologically distant (a Semitic language) from English and Spanish
and uses a different script shows how the structurally similar analogue between
the three languages in the content condition results in robust cross-linguistic
influence effects.
Additionally, the results provide evidence that certain constructions that pertain to the syntax-semantics interface are inherently difficult for L2 learners. In
English, the choice between the N2N1 and the N1PN2 configurations is associated
with a subtle shift of the semantic focus from container to content, respectively.
The Spanish-English and Arabic-English bilinguals have not fully acquired the
container-content relation. This is evidenced by the fact that they produced significantly more non-target constructions in the container condition when compared to a native bilingual group and a monolingual group. Thus, it appears that
the English container-content relation is a vulnerable construction. The learning
task of the English-Spanish bilinguals as compared to the Spanish-English and
the Arabic-English bilinguals showed escalating levels of difficulty. Whereas the
former community of learners were required only to reformulate the nominal
compound to match the canonical configuration in Spanish, the task of the latter
communities was more difficult. They had to detect whether each construction
signified the container or the content. When moving in the direction of a second
language, where the container-content relation does not hold, advanced learners
simply render both configurations in the single canonical form. This observation
was noticed in the English-Spanish bilinguals, where the L2 participants consistently and accurately converted the N2N1 compound to the N1PN2 configuration.
Contrary to other studies that argue against the vulnerability of the syntaxsemantics interface (e.g., Dekydtspotter, Sprouse, & Swanson, 2001; Tsimpli &
Sorace, 2006), we found that advanced L2 learners of English do have difficulty
shifting to the N2N1 constructions in order to convey the container meaning. This
resulted in persistent optionality in their L2 English. It is proposed that variable
and non-categorical input contributes to the learner difficulties in distinguishing the content from the container conditions. By non-categorical input, we refer
more generally to the optionality of the N2N1 and N1PN2 configurations. For example, in English the preposition for can be used to create a marked and infrequent construction that refers to the container condition. This noise in the input
may have contributed to the overextension of the N1PN2 construction to the container condition. What is more, this variability is further complicated by the fact


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 437

that in English the shift from the N2N1 to the N1PN2 is not always associated with a
semantic shift as pertains to the content-container relation (e.g., wine glass versus
glass of wine). In other instances, the switch is truly optional and both configurations are equivalent (e.g., the school president versus the president of the school).
Finally, some N2N1 compounds do not have an equivalent N1PN2 form (e.g., frogman versus *man of frog). This complex relationship between N2N1 and N1PN2
configurations further complicates the task of acquiring the container-content relation in English. We posit that noise in the input created by the variable and noncategorical relationship between the N2N1 compounds and N1PN2 configuration
contribute to the non-target performance.
The lack of quality input is an important factor to consider for the nonnativelike performance in the acquisition of phenomena that pertain to the syntax-semantics interface (Sorace & Serratrice, 2009; Sorace, 2014). The container-content
distinction is not usually incorporated in L2 English curricula, and consequently,
is not taught in L2 English classrooms. This results in the reduction of quality
input that differentiates the container and the content distinctions. This means
that advanced L2 learners are offered fewer opportunities to map the N1PN2 and
the N2N1 constructions with their associated meanings. Therefore, the Spanishspeaking and Arabic-speaking learners of English may not have associated optionality in input with a semantic shift, the reality that may have affected their overall
accuracy in the target content and container constructions.
We conclude that recovery from CLI effects in advanced stages of late L2 acquisition of certain linguistic phenomena is modulated by the complexities associated with the syntax-semantics interface, the input conditions, and structural
overlap. As a result, some linguistic phenomena remain persistently difficult to
acquire. Importantly, even within the same type of interfaces, not all phenomena are at the same level of difficulty. Thus, the perspective to the acquisition of
the interfaces should not be `monolithic' (White, 2011). Another conclusion that
arises from this study is that L1 speakers' knowledge is indeed influenced by their
prolonged exposure to the second language. In this study, the prolonged exposure to a second language that does not distinguish between the container and the
content forms seems to have affected the participants' knowledge of this relation
in their L1. It is clear that L1 competence is not impenetrable. In other words,
producing language structures in the L2 over time has consequences for accessing
and entrenching these structures in the L1. Thus, performance in one language is
affected, at least in part, by the use of the other language.
Importantly, the bidirectional CLI effects in the bilingual control group
(Pavlenko, 2000) and the non-target performance unrelated to CLI effects found
in the monolinguals support the hypothesis that comparing L2 learners to a
monolingual control alone is a flawed practice (Bley-Vroman, 1983; Cook, 1997;

438 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank

Ortega, 2013, 2014; Rothman, 2008, 2011). We align with Slabakova (2011) in our
belief that it is crucial to adopt a control group that has comparable late exposure
and proficiency in a second language in order to control for an otherwise variable
inhibitory control mechanism, amongst other variables. Furthermore, in the spirit
of Birdsong and Gertken (2013), the results of this study show that the use of both
bilingual and monolingual groups as controls offers informative insights about the
constructs of nativeness and nativelikeness, suggesting that the very definitions of
these constructs need to be further reconsidered.
This investigation raises a number of questions for future research. First, since
reading and writing in Arabic go right to left, Arabic-speaking learners of English
may have an advantage over speakers of other languages such as Spanish in the
processing N2N1 compounds. This can be tested using online processing tasks.
Another research question that arises is whether the container-content relation
in English will be more difficult to acquire than the cases where the N2N1 can
be paraphrased with N1PN2 without a shift in meaning (e.g., using the preposition "for" to maintain a container interpretation- bottle for water). Future studies
should also consider experiments that allow for teasing apart the role of conflicting input, syntax-semantics interface, and superficial overlap. Better methodological designs (including triangulated tasks) and new language pairings could allow
for examining each factor independently. Further, the renewed evidence that variability in the syntax-semantics interface extends to non-native as well as native
speaker groups should be further explored, where special attention should be paid
to factors related to education and metalinguistic ability.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Alejandro Cuza, David Giancaspro, Thomas Bever, Samira Farwaneh, and
three anonymous reviewers for providing us with valuable feedback en route to publication. We
would also be remiss not to mention that a long time ago, in a faraway place, David Birdsong
inspired us to view cross-linguistic influence effects with a bidirectional lens. All remaining
errors are our own.

References
Adams, R., & Ross-Feldman, L. (2003). An investigation of determinacy in the grammar of NS
and end-state NNS. Paper presented at Georgetown University Roundtable on Languages
and Linguistics (GURT), Georgetown, D.C.
Alhawary, M. T. (2011). Modern standard Arabic grammar: A learner's guide. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 439
Al-Shaer, I. (2014). Arabic and English genitive constructions: A corpus-based contrastive analysis of patterns and equivalence. Languages in Contrast, 14, 163-190.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lic.14.2.01als

Amaral, L., & Roeper, T. (2014). Multiple grammars and second language representation. Second
Language Research, 30, 3-36.https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658313519017
Anderson, S. (1992). A-morphous morphology (Vol. 62). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511586262
Bauer, L. (1983). English word-formation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139165846

Bauer, L. (2009). Typology of compounds. In R. Lieber & P. Stekauer (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of compounding (pp.343-356). Oxford: Oxford University press.
Benmamoun, E. (2000). The feature structure of functional categories: A comparative study of
Arabic dialects (Vol. 16). Oxford: Oxford University press.
Benmamoun, E. & Choueiri, L. (2013). The syntax of Arabic from a generative perspective. The
Oxford Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. In J. Owens (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of Arabic
linguistics (pp.115-164). Chicago: Oxford University Press.
Berwick, R. (1985). The acquisition of syntactic knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Birdsong, D. (2009). Age and the end state of second language acquisition. In W.C. Ritchie &
T.K. Bhatia (Eds.), The new handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 401-424). Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group.
Birdsong, D., & Gertken, L. M. (2013). In faint praise of folly: A critical review of native/nonnative speaker comparisons, with examples from native and bilingual processing of French
complex syntax. Language, Interaction & Acquisition, 4(2), 107-133.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lia.4.2.01bir

Bley-Vroman, R. (1983). The comparative fallacy in interlanguage studies: The case of systematicity. Language Learning, 33, 1-17.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1983.tb00983.x
Borer, H., (1996). The construct in review. In J. Lecarme, J. Lowenstamm, & U. Shlonsky (Eds.),
Studies in Afroasiatic grammar (pp. 30-61). Holland Academic Graphics: The Hague.
Borgonovo, C., De Garavito, J. B., & Prevost, P. (2008). Methodological issues in the L2 acquisition of a syntax/semantics phenomenon: How to assess L2 knowledge of mood in Spanish
relative clauses. In J. Bruhn de Garavito & E. Valenzuela (Eds.), Selected Proceedings of the
10th Hispanic Linguistics Symposium (pp.13-24). Somerville: Cascadilla.
Boucher, P. (1990). Teaching compound nouns in English. CIEREC/Travaux, LXXVI. France:
Universite de Saint Etienne.
Boucher, P., F. Dannam & P. Sebillot (1993). Compounds: An intelligent tutoring system for
learning to use compounds in English. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 6, 249-272.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0958822930060306

Clark, V. (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511554377

Cook, V. (1997). Monolingual bias in second language acquisition research. Revista Canaria de
Estudios Ingleses, 34, 35-50.
Cook, V. (2003). Effects of the second language on the first (Vol. 3). Clevedon, N.Y.: Buffalo:
Multilingual Matters.
Cuza, A. (2013). Crosslinguistic influence at the syntax proper: Interrogative subject - verb inversion in heritage Spanish. The International Journal of Bilingualism, 17, 71-96.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006911432619

440 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank
Cuza, A., & Frank, J. (2011). Transfer effects at the syntax - semantics interface: The case of
double que questions in heritage Spanish. The Heritage Language Journal, 8, 66-89.
Dbrowska, E. (2012). Different speakers, different grammars: Individual differences in native
language attainment. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 2(3), 219-253.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.2.3.01dab

Dekydtspotter, L., Sprouse, R. A., & Anderson, B. (1997). The interpretive interface in L2 acquisition: The process-result distinction in English-French interlanguage grammars. Language
Acquisition, 6(4), 297-332.https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327817la0604_2
Dekydtspotter, L., Sprouse, R. A., & Swanson, K. A. (2001). Reflexes of mental architecture in second-language acquisition: The interpretation of combien extractions in English-French interlanguage. Language Acquisition, 9(3), 175-227.https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327817la0604_2
Dobrovolsky, M., Katamba, F., & O'Grady, W. D. (1997). Contemporary linguistics: An introduction. London: St. Martin's Press.
Dopke, S. (2000). Generation of and retraction from cross-linguistically motivated structures in
bilingual first language acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3(3), 209-226.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728900000341

Fassi-Fehri, A. (1999). Arabic modifying adjectives and DP structures. Studia Linguistica, 53,
105-154.https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9582.00042
Flege, J. E., MacKay, I. R., & Piske, T. (2002). Assessing bilingual dominance. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 23(04), 567-598.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716402004046
Foroodi-Nejad, F., & Paradis, J. (2009). Crosslinguistic transfer in the acquisition of compound
words in Persian - English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12(04), 411-
427.https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728909990241
Frank, J. (2013). Derivational complexity effects in bilingual adults: Instances of interrogative inversion in Spanish. In J. Cabrelli Amaro et al. (Eds.), Selected Proceedings of the
16th Hispanic Linguistics Symposium (HLS). (pp. 143-155). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Proceedings Project.
Gass, S., & Selinker, L. (Eds.), (1992). Language transfer in language learning. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.5
Grosjean, F. (1998). Studying bilinguals: Methodological and conceptual issues. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 1(2), 131-149.https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672899800025X
Gruter, T., Lieberman, M., & Gualmini, A. (2010). Acquiring the scope of disjunction and negation in L2: A bidirectional study of learners of Japanese and English. Language Acquisition,
17(3), 127-154.https://doi.org/10.1080/10489223.2010.497403
Holes, C. (2004). Modern Arabic: Structures, functions, and varieties. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Hulk, A. and Muller, N. (2000). Bilingual first language acquisition at the interface between
syntax and pragmatics. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3, 227-44.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728900000353

Ivanov, I. (2009). Topicality and clitic doubling in L2 Bulgarian: A test case for the interface
hypothesis. In M. Bowles, T. Ionin, S. Montrul, & A. Tremblay (Eds.), Proceedings of the
10th Generative Approaches to Second Language Acquisition Conference (GASLA) (pp.
17-24). Chicago.
Ionin, T., Montrul, S., & Crivos, M. (2013). A bidirectional study on the acquisition of plural noun phrase interpretation in English and Spanish. Applied Psycholinguistics, 34(03),
483-518.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716411000841


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 441
Jarvis, S., & Pavlenko, A. (2008). Crosslinguistic influence in language and cognition. London:
Routledge.
Kellerman, E. & Sharwood-Smith, M. (1986). Crosslinguistic influence in second language acquisition. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Kremers, J. (2005). Adjectival Constructs in Arabic. Linguistische berichte, 203, 331-348.
Liceras, J., Diaz, L., & Salomaa-Robertson, T. (2002). The compounding parameter and the
word-marker hypothesis. In A. T. Perez-Leroux & J. M Liceras (Eds.), The acquisition of
Spanish morphosyntax (pp. 209-237). Netherlands: Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-0291-2_8

Liceras, J. M. and Diaz, L. (2000). Triggers in L2 Acquisition: The case of Spanish N-N compounds. Studia Linguistica, 54(2), 197-211.https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9582.00060
Liceras, J. M., & Valenzuela, E. (1998). The compounding parameter in L2 acquisition: The subset principle revisited. Paper presented at the Generative Approaches to Second Language
Acquisition (GASLA). Pittsburgh, PA.
Lieber, R. (2006). English word-formation processes. In P. Stekauer & R. Lieber (Eds.), Handbook
of word-formation (pp. 375-428). Dordrecht: Springer.
Lozano, C. (2006). The development of the syntax-information structure interface: Greek learners of Spanish. In V. Torrens & L. Escobar (Eds.), The acquisition of syntax in Romance languages (pp. 371-399), Amsterdam: John Benjamins.https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.41.18loz
MacIntyre, P. D., Noels, K. A., & Clement, R. (1997). Biases in self-ratings of second language
proficiency: The role of language anxiety. Language Learning, 47(2), 265-287.
https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.81997008

Marull, C. H. (2015). Syntactic position constrains cross-linguistic activation. Linguistic
Approaches to Bilingualism, 5(2), 153-179.https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.5.2.01mar
Mohammad, M.A., (1989). The sentential structure of Arabic. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Southern California.
Montrul, S. (2011). Interfaces and incomplete acquisition. Lingua 121(4), 591-604.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2010.05.006

Moyna, M. (2011). Compounds words in Spanish: Theory and history. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.https://doi.org/10.1075/cilt.316
Muller, N. & Hulk, A. (2001). Crosslinguistic influence in bilingual language acquisition: Italian
and French as recipient languages. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 4, 1-21.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728901000116

Ortega, L. (2013). SLA for the 21st century: Disciplinary progress, transdisciplinary relevance,
and the bi/multilingual turn. Language Learning, 63(s1),1-24.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00735.x

Ortega, L. (2014). Understanding second language acquisition. New York: Routledge.
Pavlenko, A. (2000). L2 influence on L1 in late bilingualism. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 11(2),
175-205.
Pavlenko, A., & Jarvis, S. (2002). Bidirectional transfer. Applied Linguistics, 23(2), 190-214.
https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/23.2.190

Piera, C. (1995). On Compounding in English and Spanish. Washington: Georgetown University
Press.
Rosenbach, A. (2014). English genitive variation - the state of the art. English Language and
Linguistics, 18(2), 215-262.https://doi.org/10.1017/S1360674314000021
Rothman, J. (2008). Linguistic epistemology and the notion of monolingualism. Sociolinguistic
Studies, 2(3), 441-458.https://doi.org/10.1558/sols.v2i3.441

442 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank
Rothman, J. (2009). Pragmatic deficits with syntactic consequences: L2 pronominal subjects and
the syntax-pragmatics interface. Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 951-973.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2008.07.007

Rothman, J. (2011). On the comparative fallacy of comparisons and why SLA is bilingualism.
Invited colloquium, (Why) Does SLA Need a Bilingual Turn?. Iowa State University, USA.
Rothman, J., & Iverson, M. (2008). Poverty-of-the-stimulus and SLA epistemology: Considering
L2 knowledge of aspectual phrasal semantics. Language Acquisition, 15(4), 270-314.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10489220802352206

Ryding, K. C. (2005). A reference grammar of Modern Standard Arabic. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511486975
Schwartz, B. & Sprouse, R. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access model.
Second Language Research, 12, 40-72.https://doi.org/10.1177/026765839601200103
Shameem, N. (1998). Validating self-reported language proficiency by testing performance in
an immigrant community: The Wellington Indo-Fijians. Language Testing, 15(1), 86-108.
Shlonsky, U. (2004). The form of Semitic noun phrases. Lingua, 114(12), 1465-1526.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2003.09.019

Slabakova, R. (2002). The compounding parameter in second language acquisition. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 24(4), 507-540.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102004011
Slabakova, R. (2006). Learnability in the second language acquisition of semantics: A bidirectional study of a semantic parameter. Second Language Research, 22(4), 498-523.
https://doi.org/10.1191/0267658306sr277oa

Slabakova, R. (2011). The bilingual/multilingual native control. Paper presented at the Second
Language Research Forum (SLRF). Ames: Iowa.
Slabakova, R. (2013). Adult second language acquisition: A selective overview with a focus on
the learner linguistic system. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 3, 48-72.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.3.1.03sla

Slabakova, R., & Montrul, S. (2003). Genericity and aspect in L2 acquisition. Language
Acquisition, 11(3), 165-196.https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327817la1103_2
Snyder, W. (1995). Language acquisition and language variation: The role of morphology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Dissertation.
Snyder, W. (2001). On the nature of syntactic variation: Evidence from complex predicates and
complex word-formation. Language, 77, 324-342.https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.2001.0108
Sorace, A. (2000). Gradients in auxiliary selection with intransitive verbs. Language, 76(4), 859-
890.https://doi.org/10.2307/417202
Sorace, A. (2005). Selective optionality in language development. In L. Cornips & K. Corrigan,
(Eds.), Syntax and Variation (pp. 55-80). John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
https://doi.org/10.1075/cilt.265.04sor

Sorace, A. (2006). Gradedness and Optionality in Mature and Developing Grammars. G.
Fanselow, C. Fery, M. Schlesewsky, and R. Vogel (Eds.), Gradience in Grammar Generative
Perspectives (pp. 106-123). Oxford: Oxford University press.
Sorace, A. (2011). Pinning down the concept of "interface" in bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches
to Bilingualism, 1(1), 1-33.https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.1.1.01sor
Sorace, A., & Serratrice, L. (2009). Internal and external interfaces in bilingual language development: Beyond structural overlap. International Journal of Bilingualism, 13(2), 195-210.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006909339810

Sorace, A., & Filiaci, F. (2006). Anaphora resolution in near-native speakers of Italian. Second
Language Research, 22(3), 339-368.https://doi.org/10.1191/0267658306sr271oa

Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 443

Strik, N., & Perez-Leroux, A. T. (2011). Jij doe wat girafe?: Wh-movement and inversion in
Dutch-French bilingual children. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1(2), 175-205.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.1.2.03str

Tsimpli, I, Sorace, A. (2006). Differentiating interfaces: L2 performance in syntax - semantics
and syntax - discourse phenomena. In D. Bamman, T., Magnitskaia, & C. Zaller, (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development
(pp.653-664). Cascadilla Press, Somerville.
Valenzuela, E. (2006). L2 end state grammars and incomplete acquisition of Spanish CLLD constructions. In R. Slabakova, S. Montrul, & P. Pr'evost, (Eds.), Inquiries in Linguistic Development
(pp. 283-304). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.https://doi.org/10.1075/z.133.16val
Varela, S. (2012). Derivation and Compounding. In J. Ignacio, H. A. & E. O'Rourke (Eds.), The
Handbook of Hispanic Linguistics, (pp. 209-226). Wiley: Blackwell.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118228098.ch11

White, L. (1987). Markedness and second language acquisition: The question of transfer. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 9, 261-286.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100006689
White, L. (1991). Argument structure in second language acquisition. French Language Studies,
1, 189-207.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959269500000983
White L. (2009) Grammatical theory: Interfaces and L2 knowledge. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia
(Eds.), The new handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 49-68). Leeds: Emerald Group.
White, L. (2011). Second language acquisition at the interfaces. Lingua, 121(4), 577-590.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2010.05.005

Yip, V. & Matthews, S. (2009). Cross-linguistic influence in bilingual and multilingual contexts.
Invited paper at the 2009 International Symposium on Bilingualism (ISB7). University of
Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Appendix I. English test items
(Spanish test items are translations of the items below)
1. Preamble
2. Test item
3. Target response
1. David was at a crowded bar when he dropped his empty glass.
/onlookers said/he/to break/glass/wine/
Onlookers said he broke his wine glass.
2. George wants the mug to be cold before pouring a drink in it.
/George/to refrigerate/mug/beer/
George refrigerates his beer mug.
3. Meredith wishes everyone a happy New Year with a toast.
/Meredith/to finish/glass/champagne/
Meredith finishes her glass of champagne.
4. Lauren cleaned out her closet with her mom.
/her mother said/she/to find/cup/tea/her childhood/
Her mother said she found a teacup from her childhood.

444 Mahmoud Azaz and Joshua Frank
5. Twenty people came to Ronald's party.
/they said/Ronald/to pour/everyone/glass/wine/
They said Ronald poured everyone a glass of wine.
6. Ricky did not share any of his water with his friends.
/his travel companions said/he/to pour/bottle/water/his face/
His travel companions said he poured the bottle of water on his face.
7. Vince stepped on the empty can.
/Vince/to crush/can/soda/
Vince crushed the soda can.
8. Melanie got ahold of the last coca cola but she did not act selfishly.
/Melanie/to share/can/soda/
Melanie shared the can of soda.
9. Isaac saw a mysterious empty plastic bottle floating in the ocean.
/his girlfriend said/it/to be/bottle/water/only/
His girlfriend said it was only a water bottle.
10. Elizabeth is really tired this morning and has to make a presentation.
/her colleagues said/she/to drink/large/coffee/cup/
Her colleagues said she drink a large cup of coffee.
11. John is finally able to relax and pour himself a drink.
/John/to enjoy/mug/beer/
John enjoyed the mug of beer.
12. Michael found an empty glass from the New Year's party.
/Michael/to wash/glass/champagne/
Michael washed the champagne glass.
13. Stephanie went shopping and found a nice ceramic mug that she could use daily.
/her friends said/she/to buy /mug/ coffee/
Her friends said she bought a coffee mug.
14. John put the empty bottle in the recycler.
/John/to recycle /bottle/ wine/
John recycled the wine bottle.
15. Mark was asked to bring extra wine to the party.
/Mark/to buy/bottle/wine/
Mark bought a bottle of wine.
16. Julius decided to boil some water before his guests arrived.
/his guests said/he/to serve/everyone/cup/tea/
His guests said he served everyone a cup of tea.


Bidirectional cross-linguistic influence 445

Authors' addresses
Mahmoud Azaz
Assistant Professor of Arabic Language &
Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition
& Teaching
University of Arizona
School of Middle Eastern & North African
Studies
Marshall Bldg. 440 845 N. Park Ave.
PO Box 210158B Tucson, AZ 85721-0158
USA
mazaz@email.arizona.edu

Publication history
Date received: 13 April 2015
Date accepted: 28 November 2016
Published online: 6 February 2017

Joshua Frank
Department of Spanish and Portuguese
The University of Texas at Austin
BEN 2.116
150 W. 21st Street, Stop B3700
Austin, TX 78712-1155
USA
jfrank18@utexas.edu

