Applied Psycholinguistics 39 (2018), 437-459
doi:10.1017/S014271641700042X

Grounded cognition: Comparing
Language x Space interactions in
first language and second language
DANIELA KATHARINA AHLBERG, HEIKE BISCHOFF, BARBARA
KAUP, DOREEN BRYANT, and JESSICA VANESSA STROZYK
University of Tubingen
Received: July 27, 2016

Accepted for publication: June 1, 2017

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Jessica Strozyk, Department of Psychology, University of Tubingen, Schleichstrasse 4, 72076,
Tubingen, Germany. E-mail: jessica.strozyk@uni-tuebingen.de
ABSTRACT
The experiential traces account claims that language comprehension in one's first language (L1) is
based on the reactivation of experiential traces that stem from experiencing the corresponding objects,
states, or events. However, it remains unclear to what extent this is transferable to second language
(L2) comprehension. In the present study, we compared German L1 speakers with German L2 speakers
whose L1 uses similar or different spatial terms as German. In an adaptation of the Stroop paradigm,
participants were instructed to respond to the font color of German spatial prepositions (e.g., auf "on,"
uber "above," and unter "under/below") by either an upward or a downward hand movement, resulting
in compatible or incompatible responses. We found significant compatibility effects for all speakers,
but also clear differences between speakers of different L1s. The results thereby support the assumption
that experiential traces built during L1 usage play an important role in L2 processing.
Keywords: embodied cognition; experiential traces; second language processing; spatial prepositions

A particular linguistic skill that seems very challenging to acquire in a second
language (L2) is the use of spatial terms, in particular spatial pre- or postpositions
(e.g., Alonso, Cadierno, & Jarvis, 2016; Bryant, 2012; Coventry & Garrod, 2004;
Coventry, Guijarro-Fuentes, & Valdes, 2012; Griehaber, 1999; Ijaz, 1986; Lutke,
2008; Munnich & Landau, 2010). While the acquisition of syntax and the case
system in the L2 is similar to first language (L1) acquisition, the acquisition of the
genus system and prepositions differs between L1 and L2 (Kaltenbacher & Klages,
2006). Especially in the case of spatial prepositions, persistent learning difficulties
are observable even for children with an early age of acquisition (AoA; Bryant,
2012). Children tend to use the wrong prepositions in different configurations, as
for instance using the word auf ("on") instead of uber ("above") as in the following
expression from a 9-year-old Turkish child, who started learning German at the age
of 4: "Die Teekanne ist auf dem Ofen" ("The teapot is on the oven") in response to a
picture showing a teapot on a shelf above an oven (Bryant, 2012). It is also important
to note that the later the L2 is learned, the greater the differences between L1 and
(c) Cambridge University Press 2017 0142-7164/17

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

438

L2 acquisition of German become, and therefore, L2 learners experience greater
difficulties in acquiring the L2 with increasing AoA (Hyltenstam & Abrahamson,
2003; Long, 1990; Rosch, 2001).
Spatial pre- or postpositions are part of the fine-structural level of a language
(Talmy, 1983), and they allow speakers to describe where objects are in space, and
listeners to find objects based on simple locative descriptions in which one object
is located in relation to a reference object (Coventry, Prat-Sala, & Richards, 2001).
Communicating by means of these spatial terms can be seen as a basic skill of a
competent speaker, as spatial descriptions pervade our lives and occur in a wide
range of contexts, from locating objects, to reasoning about the world, to understanding the concept of place (Coventry & Garrod, 2004). Although spatial preor postpositions originally exclusively encoded spatial relations between physical
entities, over time these spatial terms have also developed a rich set of nonspatial
meanings (Tyler & Evans, 2003) and are used in more abstract and metaphorical
configurations, for instance, when talking about the temporal domain (e.g., the
future lies before us, while the past is behind us), the quantitative domain (e.g.,
more is up, while less is down), or when talking about mood (e.g., happy is up,
while sad is down; Coventry & Garrod, 2004; Cuyckens & Zawada, 2001; Tyler
& Evans, 2003).
One possible reason for the learning difficulties of spatial pre- or postpositions may be that the source language and the target language differ with respect
to the nature of spatial categorization, and learners therefore run into difficulties when trying to transfer aspects relating to spatial categorization from their
L1 to the L2. This concept of transfer or cross-linguistic influence is seen as a
multifaceted phenomenon (Jarvis & Pavlenko, 2008) accepted by the majority of
linguists. However, some researchers (e.g., Krashen, 1983; Newmark, 1966) claim
that influences of L1 on L2 are merely temporary communicative strategies due to
knowledge gaps in L1 and not due to interference. Accordingly, they declare this
phenomenon to be of marginal interest for L2 acquisition. A main theory in transfer
research is the contrastive analysis hypothesis developed by Fries (1945) and Lado
(1957) stating that similar structures in L1 and L2 lead to a positive transfer with
an easy acquisition, whereas structural differences cause acquisition difficulties
(negative transfer). While a strong version of the contrastive analysis hypothesis
could not be maintained because of a large amount of empirical counterevidence
(e.g., Hernandez-Chavez, 1972; Hyltenstam, 1977; Kleinmann, 1977), a weaker
version of it is overall well received.
Phenomena of linguistic transfer have been observed in all language areas,
including phonology (Leather, 2003), morphology (Collins, 2002), and syntax
(Schwartz & Sprouse, 1996; White, 2003). The phenomenon we discuss in this
paper relates to language-mediated concepts and belongs therefore to conceptual
transfer. As Jarvis and Pavlenko (2008, p. xii) point out, "Languages differ with
respect to the aspects of reality that they give prominence to. These differences
have implications for how speakers of different languages perform both verbal and
nonverbal tasks in either their native or a later-learned language."
Languages often differ in the way in which they map linguistic terms onto spatial
relations (Coventry & Garrod, 2004). Thus, the way the L2 carves up the world
into spatial categories is often quite different from the way the L1 carves up the

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

439

world (Becker & Carroll, 1997). According to the thinking-for-speaking hypothesis (Slobin, 1996, p. 89), "[. . .] each native language has trained its speakers to pay
different kinds of attention to events and experiences when talking about them."
The training of spatial categorization and its labeling begins during childhood: at
the early age of 14 to 20 months children begin to talk about space, and they do
so according to the conventions of the target language (Choi & Bowerman, 1991).
According to Slobin (1996), once a category is set, it shows a strong resistance to
a posterior restructuring. As a consequence, acquiring L2 prepositions should be
more difficult for learners whose L1 exhibits fewer or different spatial categories
(Coventry et al., 2012). Languages like German, English, or Russian, for instance,
differ from languages like Turkish and Korean with respect to the upper subspace.
German, English, and Russian distinguish between locations at the boundary between reference object and relatum (auf "on") and locations in the upper subspace
(uber "above"). If a reference object has contact with the upper surface of the relatum, a boundary relation is used (Becker & Caroll, 1997). In contrast, a reference
object in Turkish or Korean can be located in the upper subspace regardless of
contact (Becker & Carroll, 1997; Munnich, Landau, & Dosher, 2001). Therefore,
with regard to the vertical axis, the feature "contact" in those languages is irrelevant. If categories are not set in L1, it is possible that the learners do not notice
them in the L2 input. In line with this idea, Bryant (2012) showed that learners of
German as L2 with Turkish as L1 detected the frequent auf ("on") as the sound
string for their L1 concept of "upper subspace" and consequently used auf in "on"
as well as in "above" configurations.
In research on the psychology of language, the theory of experiential traces
(Zwaan & Madden, 2005) has received much attention during the last decade.
According to this theory, bodily experiences are a crucial part of language comprehension. This account has gained a high degree of support in L1 research, and
we now want to investigate whether it also applies to L2 processing. In particular,
we believe that this account will contribute to a better understanding of the specific
difficulties that L2 learners face when trying to acquire the meanings of German
spatial prepositions. The theory of experiential traces (Zwaan & Madden, 2005) is
part of the rather new framework of embodied cognition in which language is seen
as tightly linked to perception and action (Barsalou, 1999, 2008). According to
this theory, during every interaction with the world, a trace resembling the actions
and perceptions of this experience is generated. These traces are later reactivated
when accessing the same concept. In that sense, language comprehension is the
reactivation of experiential traces. More specifically, when linguistic labels often
co-occur with certain objects, situations, and events in early childhood, experiential traces stemming from hearing a word get associated with the experiential traces
stemming from experiencing its referent. Thus, a word such as dog gets associated
with experiential traces stemming from hearing, smelling, seeing, or touching a
dog. Later on, when the word is processed, these traces become reactivated and
presumably provide the basis for comprehension. Similar assumptions can be made
for spatial prepositions. When a small child hears a spatial preposition such as on
or under, this will often be in a situation where someone (possibly the child itself)
places a reference object into a particular spatial location (e.g., Look, I am placing
the plant on the table) or draws attention to a particular spatial relation in the

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

440

context (e.g., Look, the cat is under the chair). Thus, with years of co-occurrences
of this type, spatial prepositions will become associated with a rich set of experiential traces that stem from experiencing reference situations that can be described
by means of these prepositions. These experiential traces then presumably become
reactivated when the spatial prepositions are encountered again, and provide the
basis for comprehension.
The theory of experiential traces has gained a lot of support in the field of L1
processing (e.g., Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Richter, Zwaan, & Hoever, 2009;
for an overview, see Jirak, Menz, Buccino, Borghi, & Binkofski, 2010, or the
contributions in Coello & Fischer, 2016; Fischer & Coello, 2016). For example,
Lachmair, Dudschig, De Filippis, de la Vega, and Kaup (2011) investigated the
activation of location information using words whose referents are typically found
in the upper vertical space (e.g., airplane) or lower vertical space (e.g., worm).
In one of their experiments, the original Stroop paradigm (Stroop, 1935) was
adapted to investigate the processing of these words. In particular, the native German participants in this experiment responded to up and down words with upward
or downward movements depending on the font color. Reading the words or accessing their meaning was not required by the experimental task. Nevertheless, a
strong compatibility effect could be observed with shorter response times in compatible conditions (e.g., airplane and upward response) compared to incompatible
conditions (e.g., airplane and downward response), suggesting that experiential
traces became automatically activated when processing individual words. Spatial
compatibility effects of this sort have proven to be extremely stable. They were
observed no matter whether the task required lexical access and no matter whether
participants noticed the manipulation. They were also observed for verbs (e.g., rising vs. falling) and for masked stimuli. Finally, these spatial compatibility effects
were also observed in tasks focusing on attention shifts to the upper or lower space,
as well as in tasks involving the planning of eye movements toward upper or lower
locations (for an overview, see Kaup, de la Vega, Strozyk, & Dudschig, 2016). In
addition to the above-mentioned studies showing the automatic activation of sensorimotor processes in language comprehension, there are also studies showing
that sensorimotor processes can foster comprehension skills. For instance, Glenberg, Brown, and Levin (2007) found that manipulating objects mentioned in a
text could improve text comprehension in 6- to 8-year-old children. Compared to
children who only reread the text, children who manipulated the relevant objects
were able to answer questions about the text with higher accuracy and could even
draw inferences. This supports the view that learning through different senses and
connecting these learning experiences to linguistic expressions can foster learning
and language comprehension abilities.
The results discussed so far focused on processing and acquiring an L1. While
this research supports the view that a network of experiential traces is built during
L1 acquisition, what happens when people learn and use an L2 remains unclear.
However, whether the theory of experiential traces is transferrable to L2 comprehension certainly is an important question. Theoretically, one possibility would be
that the terms of the L2 get integrated into the already existing network of experiential traces that was built up during L1 acquisition. Alternatively, the L2 might
stay separated from the L1's experiential network and gradually get connected

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

441

to experiential traces obtained during the use of the L2. These two possibilities
seem to fit well with considerations from the literature on L2 acquisition. Some
models of L2 acquisition propose that the semantic representations of L1 and L2
are shared across languages (e.g., the revised hierarchical model; Kroll & Stewart, 1994; the bilingual interactive activation plus model; Dijkstra & Van Heuven,
2002). Applied to the experiential traces account, these models would predict that
embodiment effects should be observed in both L1 and L2 processing. Other models argue that semantic representations in the L2 are partially overlapping with L1
representations but may be less detailed (see the sense model; Finkbeiner, Forster,
Nicol, & Nakamura, 2004). This would lead to the prediction that embodiment
effects in L2 speakers are reduced or absent, at least when language proficiency is
still rather low and learners have little everyday experience with using the language
(De Grauwe, Willems, Rueschemeyer, Lemhofer, & Schriefers, 2014).
There is a growing body of research investigating embodiment effects in L2
learners (e.g., Bergen, Lau, Narayan, Stojanovic, & Wheeler, 2010; De Grauwe
et al., 2014; Dudschig, de la Vega, & Kaup, 2014). De Grauwe et al. (2014) found
evidence for embodiment for L1 as well as for L2 speakers on a neural basis. In
their functional magnetic resonance imaging study, the participants, Dutch native
speakers and German native speakers who learned Dutch as an L2, did a lexical
decision task on visually presented Dutch motor and nonmotor verbs. The participants had to respond to pseudowords (i.e., pronounceable words that do not carry
a meaning, e.g., ralmen) and withhold their responses to actual words allowing
the authors to measure brain activity while the participants were passively reading
the words. After the main experiment, the participants rated the words for motorrelatedness. Both L2 and L1 speakers showed similar increases of activation in the
motor and sensory-motor brain areas for motor compared to nonmotor verbs, for
both cognates (orthographically similar words depicting the same meaning in the
two languages, e.g., nemen in Dutch and nehmen in German) and noncognates (orthographically dissimilar words depicting the same meaning in the two languages,
e.g., gooien in Dutch and werfen in German). This result is interesting, as it shows
the involvement of the motor cortex during motor word comprehension and thus
embodiment of these words in L2 speakers and thereby supports the view of the
revised hierarchical and bilingual interactive activation plus models. In addition,
Dudschig et al. (2014) were also able to find evidence for embodiment effects in
L2 speakers of English with German as L1 in a behavioral paradigm. They used
the Stroop paradigm from Lachmair et al. (2011) to investigate whether L2 words,
referring to objects typically located in the upper or lower vertical space, would automatically activate location-specific experiential traces and thus facilitate upward
or downward responses, respectively. Their participants saw L2 English words
like sun and root presented in different colors and got the instruction to respond
only to the font color with the corresponding upward or downward movement. The
results revealed a typical compatibility effect, with faster responses for compatible
trials (e.g., upward response to sun) compared to incompatible trials (e.g., upward
response to root). This study thereby showed that a reactivation of experiential
traces also takes place in L2 processing.
The studies mentioned so far mainly focused on the processing of words that
exist in both L1 and L2. However, many words do not have a direct equivalent in

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

442

different languages (Bowerman, 1996; Stringer, 2010), as discussed above for the
spatial prepositions auf and uber. The question now arises whether words of the
L2 that have no direct equivalent in the L1 are integrated into the already existing
network of experiential traces of L1, and if so, how exactly this is accomplished.
In the present study, we investigated how spatial prepositions are processed by
learners of German as an L2 as well as by German native speakers. We were
particularly interested in comparing embodiment effects related to the processing
of spatial prepositions in German native speakers with the embodiment effects
potentially observed in different groups of L2 learners. For that reason, we investigated German native speakers and compared them to L2 speakers whose native
language uses similar spatial terms as German with respect to the upper part of
space (English and Russian) and L2 speakers whose native language uses different
spatial terms than German (Turkish and Korean). The English prepositions on and
above,1 and the Russian prepositions  (na) and 2 (nad) can be seen as near
equivalents to auf and uber. In contrast, Turkish uses either ustunde or uzerinde,3
which are used interchangeably, and Korean uses only 4 (wi) for both spatial
configurations plus or minus () contact in the upper subspace. One additional
difference is that, while English and Russian use prepositions, the above-named
terms in Turkish and Korean are handled as postpositions (Becker & Carroll, 1997;
Munnich et al., 2001).
Based on Bryant's (2012) studies and on Slobin's (1996) statement about the
rigidity of a category once it is set, our hypothesis was that newly learned words
would be connected to the preexisting experiential traces of the L1, and that the
nature of the embodiment effects found in the L2 would, therefore, depend on
the specific L1 of the participants. More specifically, in our study we focused on
the prepositions auf and uber, as we predicted differences in the processing of these
spatial terms in German native speakers and L2 learners of German depending on
the nature of their L1. We presented these terms in an adaptation of the Stroop
paradigm, similar to the one used by Lachmair et al. (2011) and Dudschig et al.
(2014), in which participants were required to respond to the words by an upward
or downward movement of the arm depending on the font color of the stimuli.
This setup resulted in compatible (e.g., upward response to auf) and incompatible
(e.g., upward response to unter) trials. For German native speakers, we expected
larger compatibility effects for uber compared to auf, because uber implies a larger
distance between theme and relatum on the vertical axis. In addition, while both auf
and uber can be used nonspatially in German, nonspatial usage is more common
for auf (e.g., Ich freue mich auf die Party "I am looking forward to the party";
aufraumen "to tidy up"). For L2 speakers of German, we predicted different results
depending on their particular L1. We expected the English and Russian L1 speakers
to show a similar processing difference between auf and uber as the German native
speakers, because the split of the upper subspace into  contact is also present
in English and Russian. For the Turkish and Korean L1 speakers, we predicted a
different pattern. These speakers should show stronger effects for auf in comparison
to uber. In their L1, the category split of the upper subspace into  contact is not
present, but as auf is much more frequent in the German input,5 we expected them
to transfer their experiential traces to this term. This prediction is in line with the
above-mentioned finding that Turkish learners of German used auf for all instances

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

443

in which they would have used ustunde or uzerinde in their native language (Bryant,
2012). If we observe different effects depending on the L1 of the participants, this
would also fit well with coactivation accounts of bilingualism (e.g., Blumenfeld
& Marian, 2013; Kroll, Bobb, & Hoshino, 2014), which assume that in bilinguals
both languages, L1 and L2, are always active during language processing. The
speaker needs to decide which language to use and then needs to suppress the not
needed language. Applied to our hypothesis, this would mean that the experiential
traces related to corresponding L1 terms always get coactivated when participants
are processing L2 terms. As a result, different groups of participants with different
L1s should show different results during L2 processing.
To summarize, we presented three groups of participants (German native speakers, German L2 speakers with Russian or English as their L1, and German L2
speakers with Korean or Turkish as their L1) with four German words, the three
prepositions auf, uber, and unter related to our hypotheses and the filler item ab.
Participants responded to the font color of the words with an upward or downward
arm movement, and we expected the compatibility effect to differ in dependence
of the native language of the participants.
METHOD
Participants

Overall, 149 people participated in this study in exchange for course credit or
financial reimbursement. All participants were students or employees of the University of Tubingen, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and gave informed
consent prior to participation.
Forty-nine of these participants were German native speakers (38 female, 11
male; age: M = 22.9 years, SD = 4.4 years). Forty-eight participants had German
as an L2 and an L1 with a similar split of the upper subspace into  contact as
German (similar-L1 group). Twenty-four of them had English as their L1 and 24
had Russian as their L1. Three participants of this group needed to be excluded,
as they were German/English bilinguals. They had learned German from their
parents or other family members before entering kindergarten. Of the remaining
45 participants in this group, 31 were female and 14 were male (age: M = 25.9
years, SD = 4.5 years). The last group of participants consisted of 52 people
with German as an L2 and an L1 that does not split the upper subspace into 
contact (dissimilar-L1 group). Twenty-four of them were native Koreans and 28
had Turkish as their L1. Nine of the Turkish native speakers had to be excluded, as
they were German/Turkish bilinguals. They had learned German from their parents
or other family members before they entered kindergarten. Of the remaining 43
participants in this group, 35 were female and 8 were male (age: M = 24.7 years,
SD = 5.8 years).
The similar-L1 group started learning German between 8 and 28 years of age
(AoA: M = 16.0 years, SD = 5.7 years); the dissimilar-L1 group started learning
German between 3 and 26 years of age (AoA: M = 14.5 years, SD = 6.7 years).
The AoA did not differ significantly between the groups, t (85) = 1.08, p = .282.6
Most of the L2 participants learned at least one additional language other than

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

444

Table 1. Distribution of age of acquisition and language
proficiency (number of participants per category)

Age of acquisition
Early (3-6 years)
As a child (7-12 years)
As teenager or adult (>12 years)
Language proficiency CEFR levels
A2
B1
B2
C1
C2

Similar-L1
Group

Dissimilar-L1
Group

0
16
28

10
2
31

2
3
7
16
17

5
7
15
4
12

Note: L1, first language; CEFR, Common European Frame of Reference. The stages of language acquisition were adapted from Klein
(1992); Language proficiency was measured on a 6-point scale referring to the CEFR levels (Verhelst et al., 2009). When participants
judged themselves as being between two CEFR levels, we categorized them as the higher one.

their native language and German. Except for one Russian-Ukrainian bilingual,7
none of them started learning the additional languages before the age of 5 years.
Therefore, we can safely assume that the system of experiential traces had already
been established in the native language before the participants started learning
another language.
All participants reported to speak German at least at level A2 of the Common
European Frame of Reference (CEFR; Verhelst, Van Avermaet, Takala, Figueras,
& North, 2009; for a detailed description of the CEFR, see below). The similarL1 group (proficiency: M = 4.9, SD = 1.1) had a higher proficiency than the
dissimilar-L1 group (proficiency: M = 4.2, SD = 1.4), t (86) = 2.64, p = .010;
however, on average both groups were categorized as independent language users
(cf. description below). For an overview of how many participants fell into each
AoA and proficiency category, see Table 1.
Materials and apparatus

Three German words served as stimuli, namely, uber, auf, and unter. Hereby,
auf and uber served as referents for the upper dimension, and unter served as
referent for the lower dimension. The preposition unter often comes to mind as
a counterpart for the preposition uber (uber und unter). For counterbalancing
purposes, we wanted to have counterparts for both uber and auf. We therefore
included the word ab ("off/down") as a filler word in our experimental task because
this word often comes to mind as a counterpart for the preposition auf (auf und
ab). It is important to note however that the particle ab is not a spatial preposition

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

445

Figure 1. Experimental setup. The keyboard was implemented under a vertical plane in front
of the participants. At the beginning of each trial, the participant pressed the two middle keys,
one with the left hand and the other with the right hand. A response was made by releasing the
correct middle button (upper middle button for an upward response, lower middle button for
a downward response), pressing the upper or lower button, and returning back to the released
middle button, while the other hand rested on the respective middle button.

but mostly combines productively with verbs without expressing the meaning of
"down." Consider, for example, abwischen ("to wipe"), ablehnen ("to reject"), and
abmachen ("to arrange"). Its only spatial usage is as part of the directional adverb
abwarts ("downward"), which probably also explains why it comes to mind as a
counterpart of auf. We thus do not include the word ab in our analyses.
The four words were presented in four different font colors: blue (RGB 0,
0, 255), orange (RGB 255, 128, 0), lilac (RGB 150, 0, 255), and brown (RGB
140, 80, 20). Each word appeared equally often in each color. For each participant, two colors were associated with upward responses, and two were associated
with downward responses. By using four colors instead of two, we made the task
more complex, which results in overall slower response times. We decided to use
this common practice for language experiments using adaptations of the Stroop
paradigm (e.g., Lachmair et al., 2011; Dudschig, de la Vega, & Kaup, 2015) because we wanted to make sure that the participants had enough time to process
the word before responding. When using only two colors, responses might have
been initiated before the meaning of the word had been accessed (cf. the conflict
monitoring theory; Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001). Responses
were recorded using a PS/2 computer keyboard adapted with a locally constructed
overlay (Figure 1).
Participants other than German natives received a short questionnaire after the
main experiment assessing their language background and proficiency. They were
asked how they learned German (e.g., at school), at what age they started to learn,
and to rate their language proficiency on a 6-point scale referring to the levels of
the CEFR (Verhelst et al., 2009). According to the CEFR, language proficiency
is divided into six categories: A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, and C2.8 The two A levels
refer to the learner as a basic user, who interacts with natives in a very simple
way and can use basic expressions and later on phrases or describe routines. The
B levels see the learner as an independent user who can understand main points

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

446

of standard conversations and later on texts. At this stage, he becomes able to
interact with natives in a more spontaneous and more fluent way. The C levels
describe a proficient user, who can use the language flexibly and effectively for
social, academic, and professional purposes. In the latest stage, the user virtually
understands everything that is heard or read, and even is able to use idiomatic
expressions (Verhelst et al., 2009). The CEFR is widely used in Germany, and
language courses are usually categorized according to these levels. Therefore, we
can safely assume that participants were able to make this judgement accurately.
Procedure and design

Each trial started with a fixation cross, displayed in the center position of the
screen for 1000 ms. Afterward the stimulus was presented at the same position as
the fixation cross until the participant responded by releasing one of the middle
buttons. After button release, a blank screen was shown until the corresponding
upper or lower button was pressed. Between trials, a white screen was shown for
1000 ms.
Participants were instructed to push down the two middle buttons of the response
box (see Figure 1) at the beginning of each trial and to keep their hands in this
position until responding. One half of the participants used the right hand for
the upper middle button and the left hand for the lower middle button. For the
other half of the participants, this mapping was reversed. All participants were
instructed to respond to the font color of the stimuli, as quickly and accurately as
possible, by means of an upward or downward arm movement. That is, participants
had to release the respective middle button and press the upper or lower button,
depending on the color of the presented word, before returning to the middle
button. The upper and the lower buttons were each associated with two of the
four possible colors. This mapping of colors to response direction was balanced
across participants. All possible color pairs occurred equally often. Unlike in the
traditional Stroop task, the response direction that the font colors indicated, and
not the font color itself, was defining the compatibility conditions (compatible
condition; e.g., upward response to uber; incompatible condition: e.g., downward
response to uber). This is a common procedure in many Stroop-like experiments
nowadays (for an overview, see MacLeod, 1991).
The mapping of colors to response direction was explained to the participants in
the beginning of the experiment and was practiced in a short block of 16 stimuli,
each presented twice, which were not used during the experimental blocks. In contrast to the experimental blocks, the participants received feedback about response
accuracy during this practice block. The instructions, including the information
on color assignment, were only given at the beginning of the experiment and were
not repeated throughout the experiment.
Following the practice block, participants completed 4 experimental blocks during which each of the words auf, uber, unter, and ab was repeated 80 times, resulting in a total number of 320 trials. Since ab was used as a filler item (see above),
this resulted in a 3 (stimulus: auf, uber, unter) x 2 (response direction: upward vs.
downward) x 3 (group: German natives, similar-L1 group, dissimilar-L1 group)
mixed design with stimulus and response-direction as within-subjects factors and

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

447

group as a between-subjects factor. The dependent variables were the accuracy rate
and the release time of the middle button. To analyze the data, we performed mixed
analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with repeated measures on the within-subjects factors. In addition, we analyzed the compatibility effect on reaction times for each
stimulus and in each group separately.
RESULTS

Three participants, two German natives and one Korean native, were excluded
from the analysis due to an error rate9 above 15%. The remaining participants
committed an error on 4.2% of the trials. These trials were excluded from the
analysis of response times. Furthermore, release responses faster than 200 ms and
slower than 3000 ms were excluded, as well as responses deviating by more than 3
SD from the mean of each cell (Participant x Stimulus x Response). This outlier
elimination reduced the data set by 1.8%.
Accuracy rates

Upward responses were slightly more accurate (96.1%) than downward responses
(95.6%). However, this effect failed to reach significance, F (1, 131) = 3.39, p =
.068, p2 = 0.025. There was a significant interaction between the stimulus and
the response direction showing the expected compatibility effect, F (2, 262) =
31.46, p < .001, p2 = 0.194. For the words auf and uber, upward responses (auf:
96.3%, uber: 96.5%) were more accurate than downward responses (auf: 95.4%,
uber: 95.5%), and for the word unter, upward responses were less accurate than
downward responses (upward: 93.9%, downward: 97.3%). There was no significant three-way interaction, F (4, 262) = 1.04, p = .387, p2 = 0.016, indicating that
the compatibility effect did not differ across groups. All other effects did not reach
significance (all ps > .10). For the average accuracy rates in each cell (Group x
Stimulus x Response direction) see Table 2. We did not include the means for ab,
since this word was only used as a filler item. However, as expected, accuracy rates
for ab did not differ between upward (95.8%) and downward responses (96.1%),
t (133) = -0.81, p = .419.
Response times

Table 3 shows the average response times for each group, stimulus, and response
direction. Just as for the accuracy rate analysis, we did not include the means for
ab, since it was only used as a filler item. However, as expected, the response times
for downward responses (610 ms) and upward responses (617 ms) to ab did not
differ significantly, t (133) = -1.27, p = .206.
Our ANOVA showed that there was a significant main effect of group,
F (2, 131) = 6.56, p = .002, p2 = 0.091, due to overall faster response times
for the German natives (551 ms) than for the other two groups: similar-L1 group,
650 ms, F (1, 90) = 12.68, p < .001, p2 = 0.123; dissimilar-L1 group, 626 ms, F
(1, 87) = 8.25, p = .005, p2 = 0.087. The two groups with German as an L2 did not
differ significantly from each other (F < 1). As expected, the interaction between

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

448

Table 2. Average accuracy rates and corresponding standard deviations
in percentages per group
German
Natives

Auf
Upward response
Downward response
Uber
Upward response
Downward response
Unter
Upward response
Downward response

Similar-L1
Group

Dissimilar-L1
Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

96.7
95.3

3.7
6.3

95.9
95.7

3.9
3.9

96.1
95.2

4.1
5.2

97.1
95.4

3.2
5.2

96.9
95.1

3.1
4.1

95.5
96.1

4.9
3.9

94.7
97.2

4.8
3.5

93.7
97.3

7.0
2.9

93.2
97.5

6.9
3.3

Table 3. Average response times and corresponding standard deviations
in milliseconds per group
German
Natives

Auf
Upward response
Downward response
Uber
Upward response
Downward response
Unter
Upward response
Downward response

Similar-L1
Group

Dissimilar-L1
Group

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

548
553

97
112

634
667

152
172

601
642

118
166

542
558

87
111

633
672

155
184

613
635

128
172

565
540

108
112

674
617

190
135

661
606

176
148

stimulus and response direction was significant, F (2, 262) = 47.55, p < .001,
p2 = 0.266, showing the expected compatibility effect of faster response times for
upward than downward responses for the words auf (upward: 594 ms, downward:
619 ms) and uber (upward: 595 ms, downward: 620 ms) and the reverse effect for
the word unter (upward: 632 ms, downward: 586 ms). Most important, and also
as predicted, we obtained a significant three-way interaction between group, stimulus, and response direction, F (4, 262) = 3.84, p = .005, p2 = 0.055, indicating
that the compatibility effect differed across groups. Therefore, we will analyze this
effect in more detail separately for the three groups below. The interaction between
group and stimulus did approach but not reach significance, F (4, 262) = 2.23, p
= .067, p2 = 0.033. All other effects also did not reach significance (all Fs < 1).

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

Response time [ms]

700

449

Upward responses
Downward responses

650

600

550

500
auf

uber

unter

Stimulus
Figure 2. Mean response times of German natives for correct responses as a function of response direction and stimulus. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals for the pairwise
comparisons (according to Loftus & Masson, 1994).

German natives. The average response times for the German native participants

are displayed in Figure 2. A separate ANOVA for just this group with stimulus and
response direction as within-subjects factors showed that there was a significant
compatibility effect, F (2, 92) = 14.38, p < .001, p2 = 0.238. For the word uber,
upward responses were faster than downward responses, F (1, 46) = 4.23, p =
.045, p2 = 0.085; for the word unter, the reverse was true, F (1, 46) = 9.26, p =
.004, p2 = 0.168. There was, however, no significant difference between upward
and downward responses for the word auf, F (1, 46) = 0.47, p = .496, p2 = 0.010.
Similar-L1 group. As can be seen in Figure 3, there was a significant compatibility

effect in this group, too, represented by a significant interaction between stimulus
and response direction, F (2, 88) = 18.71, p < .001, p2 = 0.298. Separate analyses
for the three stimuli revealed significant compatibility effects for all three words
with shorter response times for upward compared to downward responses for auf,
F (1, 44) = 16.28, p < .001, p2 = 0.270, and uber, F (1, 44) = 8.96, p = .005,
p2 = 0.169, and shorter response times for downward compared to upward responses for the word unter, F (1, 44) = 15.32, p < .001, p2 = 0.258.10
Dissimilar-L1 group. This group also showed a compatibility effect represented in

a significant interaction between stimulus and response direction, F (2, 82) = 18.30,
p < .001, p2 = 0.309 (see Figure 4). There were significant compatibility effects

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

Response time [ms]

700

450

Upward responses
Downward responses

650

600

550

500
auf

uber

unter

Stimulus
Figure 3. Mean response times of the similar-first language group as a function of response
direction and stimulus. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals for the pairwise comparisons (as per Loftus & Masson, 1994).

for the word auf with shorter response times for upward compared to downward
responses, F (1, 41) = 7.96, p = .007, p2 = 0.163, and for the word unter, with
shorter response times for downward compared to upward responses, F (1, 41) =
12.96, p < .001, p2 = 0.240. No significant compatibility effect was obtained for
uber, F (1, 41) = 2.56, p = .117, p2 = 0.059.
DISCUSSION

In this study, we investigated whether embodiment plays a role in L2 comprehension. In particular, we were interested in whether processing German spatial
prepositions such as auf, uber, and unter would influence subsequent upward or
downward directed response movements not only for German native speakers but
also for nonnative speakers learning German as an L2. If so, this would support
the view that experiential traces (Zwaan & Madden, 2005) are not only built and
reactivated in L1 processing but also play a role in L2 processing.
Three groups of participants (German native speakers, German L2 speakers
with an L1 with a similar split of the upper subspace as German, and German L2
speakers with an L1 without that split of the upper subspace) processed German
prepositions in an adaptation of the Stroop paradigm in which they responded with
an upward or downward directed response movement depending on the font color.
We found a significant compatibility effect, reflected in an interaction between the

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

Response time [ms]

700

451

Upward responses
Downward responses

650

600

550

500
auf

uber

unter

Stimulus
Figure 4. Mean response times the dissimilar-first language group as a function of response
direction and stimulus. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals for the pairwise comparisons (according to Loftus & Masson, 1994).

meaning of the spatial prepositions and the direction of the response movement,
for all three groups. Overall, responses were faster and more accurate in conditions
in which the meaning of the preposition was compatible to the response direction
(e.g., upward movement for uber; downward movement for unter) compared to
conditions in which the two were incompatible (e.g., upward movement for unter;
downward movement for uber). This result shows that the Stroop paradigm is
suitable for the investigation of spatial prepositions, as the observed compatibility
effect is similar to the one obtained with nouns referring to entities with a typical location in vertical space (airplane vs. worm, e.g., Lachmair et al., 2011).
In addition, this result implies that experiential traces already get activated when
people read small units like prepositions, which can be considered further evidence for embodied theories of comprehension. This finding is also in line with
previous research using subliminal presentations of spatial prepositions (Ansorge,
Kiefer, Khalid, Grassl, & Koenig, 2010) and with research on the Simon effect in
response to spatial words (Khalid & Ansorge, 2013). One might argue that these
results could also be explained by assuming that participants internally verbalized
the response direction when planning the response in the present paradigm (i.e.,
verbalizing "upward" when detecting a particular font color) and that this causes
the compatibility effect with the meaning of the presented preposition. However,
a recent study conducted in our lab indicated that language-space compatibility
effects are observed even in a modified Stroop paradigm where there is no stable

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

452

mapping of colors to response directions, and inner speech can therefore be ruled
out as the main contributing factor (Dudschig & Kaup, 2016).11 We therefore can
be quite sure that the compatibility effect observed in this experiment (interaction
of stimulus and response direction) constitutes an embodiment effect and reflects
the automatic activation of experiential traces during word processing.
Furthermore, that we found compatibility effects not only for the German natives but also for the two groups of German L2 speakers supports the view that
experiential traces are being reactivated during L2 processing. Even the dissimilarL1 group showed a compatibility effect, even though the spatial terms of their L1
cannot be matched directly to the German system during L2 learning. This finding
suggests that the reactivation of experiential traces plays an important role not
only in L1 processing but also in the processing of an L2, even if this is quite
dissimilar to the participants' native language. A relevant question now is whether
these experiential traces rely on the L1 or represent a new network of traces associated with the L2. More information with respect to this question can be obtained
when comparing the observed pattern of results for the nonnative speakers with
that observed for German native speakers.
As predicted, German native speakers processed auf and uber differently, even
though both words refer to the upper dimension. It seems that uber is more strongly
connected with spatial experiential traces than auf, since for auf the attributed spatial dimension neither interfered with nor facilitated the response. One possibility
is that these differences reflect variations in the way these prepositions carve up the
upper space. While uber refers to objects that do not touch the relatum, auf refers
to objects that are in direct contact with the relatum. Therefore, we can expect to
find stronger compatibility effects for uber than for auf. It is however surprising,
that there was no compatibility effect for auf at all.
We had initially predicted that the pattern of results in the similar-L1 group
should be the same as for German natives. This was not the case. Whereas German
native speakers showed no effect for auf, the participants in the similar-L1 group
did, suggesting that they processed auf spatially. One possible reason for this
difference in comparison to German native speakers might be that German L1
speakers first learn auf as spatially related, but, as mentioned above, the word
auf is also frequently used in various contexts in which the spatial meaning is no
longer obvious (e.g., aufhoren "to stop/terminate," aufmachen "to open sth," sich
auf etwas freuen "to look forward to sth."). It therefore appears possible that the
spatial meaning fades away throughout the lifetime as people gain more nonspatial
experiences with this word, which explains why there was no compatibility effect
for auf in the German native speakers. However, this hypothesis needs further
testing before definite conclusions can be drawn. One possibility would be to
compare adult language processing with that of children who are just starting to
learn these words and, therefore, have different linguistic experiences than adults.
Another possibility would be a control study where the spatial meaning would be
clearly triggered, for example, by using prepositional phrases. A possible reason
why the L2 speakers with a Russian or English background showed compatibility
effects for both auf and uber is that the equivalent for auf in their native languages
is used spatially to a stronger degree than auf in German. If they transferred the
experiential traces of their L1 onto the respective German preposition, this might

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

453

explain the significant compatibility effect for auf. This interpretation would also
be in line with the coactivation account (Blumenfeld & Marian, 2013; Kroll et al.,
2014) according to which bilinguals always activate both languages (see above).
However, at least in English on also has multiple nonspatial usages. Thus, clearly
more research is needed that investigates this post hoc explanation of the results
before any definite conclusions can be drawn.
For the dissimilar-L1 group, we had expected a different processing pattern
than for German L1 speakers, since their native languages, Korean and Turkish,
do not distinguish between contact and noncontact along the vertical axis, and are
therefore not directly connectable to German words when learned. We found clear
processing differences between this group and the other two groups. As expected,
Korean and Turkish native speakers did not show a larger effect for uber compared
to auf, which presumably reflects that their L1s do not distinguish between the two
corresponding spatial relations, and they, therefore, do not retrace this distinction
in the German input. These speakers not only did not show a larger effect for
uber compared to auf (as the German natives did), but quite the contrary was the
case: they showed a significant compatibility effect for auf but not for uber. We
consider it likely that this difference is related to auf being much more frequent
compared to uber (Quasthoff, Fiedler, & Hallsteinsdottir, 2011) and also acquired
much earlier (Bryant, 2012; Grimm, 1975). Concerning the different word formation products with the respective morphemes, many more words with the prefix
auf- (5,591 word form entries) exist than with the prefix uber- (4,065 word form
entries; see Quasthoff et al., 2011). These frequency differences might account for
the reversal of the effect, as the L2 speakers search for the equivalent of their spatial
terms related to the upper dimension and the first spatial term they learn is auf,
which is then taken as the equivalent. Uber, which is learned later, is then harder
to connect, in particular because the category of spatial relations needs a split-up
in this case. Korean and Turkish native speakers probably simply transferred all
their experiential traces related to the upper vertical space to the more frequent
term auf, which they learned first, and more or less ignored the less frequent uber.
In that case, uber would not be processed in an embodied way, at least not at early
stages of learning. If this assumption is actually true, one might expect to find
differences between participants with higher and lower language proficiency in
German. Possibly, uber leads to compatibility effects only for highly proficient
L2 speakers of German because they either transfer the experiential traces of their
L1 also to uber or with enough experiences they build new traces for their L2.
To tentatively investigate this question, we included language proficiency as an
additional factor in the analysis of this group. We categorized the participants into
two groups according to their language proficiency. Speakers with a CERF level of
A2, B1, or B2 were considered as mid- to low- proficient; speakers with a CERF
level of C1 or C2 were considered highly proficient. The analysis revealed a significant interaction between stimulus, response direction, and language proficiency,
F (2, 78) = 3.35, p = .040, p2 = 0.077, indicating that a difference exists between
the high and mid- to low-proficiency groups. In order to gain more information
with respect to our hypotheses concerning the role of language proficiency, we
analyzed the compatibility effects for the three stimuli and the two proficiency
groups separately. For the mid- to low-proficiency group, auf showed a signifi-

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

454

cant compatibility effect, t (26) = -2.26, p = .016, one-tailed, while for uber no
significant compatibility effect was obtained, t (26) = 1.06, p = .149, one-tailed.
In the high-proficiency group, auf as well as uber showed significant compatibility effects: auf, t (14) = -1.77, p = .049, one-tailed; uber, t (14) = -1.91, p =
.038, one-tailed. These findings fit with the assumption that uber is acquired later
than auf also in L2 acquisition. However, these results have to be interpreted with
caution, since they were obtained with a small sample of low power leading only
to significant results when tested one-tailed, and because this explanation is quite
post hoc. More research is needed to investigate these points in detail.
Taken together, we found evidence for embodiment in L1 and in L2 processing.
Experiential traces were reactivated in all tested groups. Furthermore, our results
indicated that the observed processing differences between the groups depend
on the learned native language, as hypothesized by Slobin (1996). In addition,
our results can also be taken as evidence for and an extension of the coactivation account (Blumenfeld & Marian, 2013; Kroll et al., 2014), by showing that
not only phonological or orthographical information relating to the L1 is activated during L2 processing but also the experiential knowledge related to the L1
as well.
Our study provides a good starting point for further investigations into the nature
of embodiment effects during L2 processing. Future studies are needed to find out
whether other factors besides the nature of the native language are relevant. We
found first evidence that language proficiency might be important, as was also
suggested by De Grauwe et al. (2014) and Vukovic (2013). Further variables that
could be relevant but that were not tested in the current study are AoA, language
contact, and conditions of language use. Furthermore, it would be interesting to
investigate the effects of language proficiency using a more objective measure
compared to the rather subjective indication of language proficiency that we used
in the present study. Once we know more about how experiential traces are built
and used during L2 acquisition and which moderating factors are at work, we
might be able to gain a better understanding of the precise difficulties to learn
spatial prepositions in an L2.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the LEAD Graduate School, a project of the Excellence
Initiative of the German federal and state governments under Grant GSC1028. This study
was part of the doctoral dissertation of the first author conducted at the LEAD Graduate
School.

NOTES
1.
2.
3.

With regard to frequency, on occupies rank 17, above occupies rank 896. An alternative expression of above is over with rank 124 (Davies, 2008).
 (na) occupies frequency rank 4;  (nad) occupies rank 181 (Sharoff, Umanskaya, & Wilson, 2013).
Although both words are used interchangeably, ustunde with Rank 647 is less frequent
than uzerinde with Rank 92 (Aksan et al., 2012).

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

455

(wi) occupies Rank 119 in word frequency. Although in the above stated literature
wi is seen as a postposition, it is also referred to as a common noun (National Institute
of Korean Language, 2005). An alternative expression would be the verb nohta ("put
on"; Choi & Hattrup, 2012).
Auf occupies Rank 11 of all words (frequency = 8.0%) whereas uber is at Rank 45
with a frequency of 2.7%. Auf is used four times more often than uber. Considering
only prepositions, auf occupies Rank 5 and uber Rank 12 (see Quasthoff et al., 2011).
One participant in the similar-L1 group did not provide a year or an age at which she
started learning German and is therefore not included in this analysis. She reported
to have started learning German in school and does therefore meet our inclusion
criterion of not being bilingual.
Russian and Ukrainian both use  (na) and  (nad) for "above" and "on," which
is why we did not exclude that person.
We coded these levels from 1 to 6 in order to be able to analyze group differences.
For participants who rated themselves as being in between two levels, we used the
average score of these two levels (e.g., someone rating himself as being between B1
and B2 was coded as 3.5).
We coded a trial as being incorrect when the incorrect middle button was released
and/or when the incorrect upper or lower button was pressed.
Because the English under and the German unter are cognates, while the Russian
 and German unter are noncognates, it would have been possible that Russian
L1 speakers and English L1 speakers differ in their responses to this word. However, there were no significant differences between the English and Russian L1
speakers with F < 1 in the general analysis as well as in a separate analysis for
unter only.
More specifically, in this experiment, participants saw words in the center of the screen
in four different font colors, as well as four colored rectangles, located above, below,
left, and right of the word stimulus. The participants' task was to make a movement
in the direction of the rectangle that matched the font color of the word stimulus,
whereby the location of the colored rectangles randomly changed from trial to trial.
Participants could therefore not facilitate their response by memorizing a rule such
as "red is upward," and it is therefore highly unlikely that inner speech is responsible
for the observed compatibility effects.

REFERENCES
Aksan, Y., Aksan, M., Koltuksuz, A., Sezer, T., Mersinli, U., Demirhan, U. U., . . . Yildiz, i. (2012).
Construction of the Turkish National Corpus (TNC). Paper presented at the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations, Istanbul. Retrieved from http://www.
lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/991_Paper.pdf
Alonso, R., Cadierno, T., & Jarvis, S. (2016). Cross-linguistic influence in the acquisition of spatial
prepositions in English as a L2. In R. Alonso (Ed.), Cross-linguistic influence in SLA (pp.
93-120). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Ansorge, U., Kiefer, M., Khalid, S., Grassl, S. I., & Koenig, P. (2010). Testing the theory of embodied
cognition with subliminal words. Cognition, 116, 303-320. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.
05.010

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

456

Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X99002149
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093639
Becker, A., & Carroll, M. (1997). The acquisition of spatial relations in a second language. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Bergen, B., Lau, T. T. C., Narayan, S., Stojanovic, D., & Wheeler, K. (2010). Body part representations
in verbal semantics. Memory & Cognition, 38, 969-981. doi:10.3758/MC.38.7.969
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2013). Parallel language activation and cognitive control during spoken word recognition in bilinguals. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 37-41.
doi:10.1080/20445911.2013.812093.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). Conflict
monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108, 624-652. doi:10.1037/0033295X.108.3.624.
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for language. In P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson,
L. Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.), Language and space (pp. 385-436). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bryant, D. (2012). Lokalisierungsausdrucke im Erst-und Zweitspracherwerb: Typologische, ontogenetische und kognitionspsychologische Uberlegungen zur Sprachforderung in DaZ (Thema
Sprache-Wissenschaft fur den Unterricht, 2). Baltmannsweiler, Germany: Schneider Verlag
Hohengehren.
Choi, S., & Bowerman, M. (1991). Learning to express motion events in English and Korean: The influence of language-specific lexicalization patterns. Cognition, 41, 83-121. doi:10.1016/00100277(91)90033-Z
Choi, S., & Hattrup, K. (2012). Relative contribution of perception/cognition and language on spatial
categorization. Cognitive Science, 36, 102-129. doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01201.x
Coello, Y., & Fischer, M. H. (2016). Foundations of embodied cognition: Vol. 1. Perceptual and
emotional embodiment. London: Routledge.
Collins, L. (2002). The roles of L1 influence and lexical aspect in the acquisition of temporal morphology. Language Learning, 52, 43-94. doi:10.1111/1467-9922.00177
Coventry, K., Guijarro-Fuentes, P., & Valdes, B. (2012). On the first and second language acquisition of
spatial language. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 12, 219-230. doi:10.1080/13875868.2012.
713058
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing and acting: The psychological semantics of
spatial prepositions. New York: Psychology Press.
Coventry, K. R., Prat-Sala, M., & Richards, L. (2001). The interplay between geometry and function
in the comprehension of over, under, above, and below. Journal of Memory and Language, 44,
376-398. doi:10.1006/jmla.2000.2742
Cuyckens, H., & Zawada, B. (Eds.). (2001). Polysemy in cognitive linguistics: Selected papers from
the Fifth International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Davies, M. (2008) Word frequency data--Corpus of Contemporary American English. Retrieved May
4, 2016, from http://www.wordfrequency.info/
De Grauwe, S., Willems, R. M., Rueschemeyer, S. A., Lemhofer, K., & Schriefers, H. (2014). Embodied
language in first- and second-language speakers: Neural correlates of processing motor verbs.
Neuropsychologia, 56, 334-349. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.003
Dijkstra, T., & Van Heuven, W. J. (2002). The architecture of the bilingual word recognition system: From identification to decision. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 5, 175-197.
doi:10.1017/S1366728902003012
Dudschig, C., de la Vega, I., & Kaup, B. (2014). Embodiment and second-language: Automatic activation of motor responses during processing spatially associated L2 words and emotion L2 words
in a vertical Stroop paradigm. Brain & Language, 132, 14-21. doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2014.02.002

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

457

Dudschig, C., de la Vega, I., & Kaup, B. (2015). What's up? Emotion-specific activation of vertical space during language processing. Acta Psychologica, 156, 143-155.
doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2014.09.015
Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2016). Is it all task-specific? The role of binary responses, verbal mediation
and saliency for eliciting language-space associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Advance online publication. doi:10.1037/xlm0000297
Finkbeiner, M., Forster, K., Nicol, J., & Nakamura, K. (2004). The role of polysemy in masked
semantic and translation priming. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 1-22. doi:10.1016/
j.jml.2004.01.004
Fischer, M. H., & Coello, Y. (2016). Foundations of embodied cognition: Vol. 2. Conceptual and
interactive embodiment. London: Routledge.
Fries, C. (1945). Teaching and learning English as a foreign language. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Glenberg, A. M., Brown, M., & Levin, J. R. (2007). Enhancing comprehension in small reading
groups using a manipulation strategy. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32, 389-399.
doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2006.03.001
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 9, 558-565. doi:10.3758/BF03196313
Griehaber, W. (1999). Die relationierende Prozedur. Zu Grammatik und Pragmatik lokaler Prapositionen und ihrer Verwendung durch turkische Deutschlerner. Munster, Germany: Waxmann.
Grimm, H. (1975). On the child's acquisition of semantic structure underlying the wordfield of prepositions. Language and Speech, 18, 97-119. doi:10.1177/002383097501800201
Hernandez-Chavez, E. (1972). Early code separation in the second language speech of Spanishspeaking children. Paper presented at the Stanford Child Language Research Forum, Stanford
University.
Hyltenstam, K. (1977). Implicational patterns in interlanguage syntax variation. Language Learning,
27, 383-411.
Hyltenstam, K., & Abrahamsson, N. (2003). Maturational constraints in second language acquisition.
In C. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 539-588).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Ijaz, I. H. (1986). Linguistic and cognitive determinants of lexical acquisition in a second language.
Language Learning, 36, 401-451. doi:10.1111/j.1467-1770.1986.tb01034.x
Jarvis, S., & Pavlenko, A. (2008). Crosslinguistic influence in language and cognition. New York:
Routledge.
Jirak, D., Menz, M. M., Buccino, G., Borghi, A. M., & Binkofski, F. (2010). Grasping language--
A short story on embodiment. Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 711-720. doi:10.1016/
j.concog.2010.06.020
Kaltenbacher, E., & Klages, H. (2006). Sprachprofil und Sprachforderung bei Vorschulkindern mit Migrationshintergrund. In B. Ahrenholz (Ed.), Kinder mit Migrationshintergrund. Spracherwerb
und Fordermoglichkeiten (pp, 80-97). Freiburg, Germany: Fillibach.
Kaup, B., de la Vega, I., Strozyk, J., & Dudschig, C. (2016). The role of sensorimotor processes in meaning composition. In M. H. Fischer & Y. Coello (Eds.), Foundations of embodied cognition: Vol. 2. Conceptual and interactive embodiment (pp. 46-70). London:
Routledge.
Khalid, S., & Ansorge, U. (2013). The Simon effect of spatial words in eye movements: Comparison
of vertical and horizontal effects and of eye and finger responses. Vision Research, 86, 6-14.
doi:10.1016/j.visres.2013.04.001
Klein, W. (1992). Zweitspracherwerb (Studienbuch Linguistik, 5th ed.). Frankfurt am Main, Germany:
Anton Hain.
Kleinmann, H. (1977). Avoidance behavior in adult second language acquisition. Language Learning,
27, 93-107.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

458

Krashen, S. (1983). Newmark's "ignorance hypothesis" and current second language acquisition theory.
In S. Gass & L. Selinker (Eds.), Language transfer in language learning (pp. 135-153). Rowley,
MA: Newbury House.
Kroll, J. F., Bobb, S. C., & Hoshino, N. (2014). Two languages in mind: Bilingualism as a tool to
investigate language, cognition, and the brain. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 159-163. doi:10.1177/0963721414528511
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for
asymmetric connections between bilingual memory representations. Journal of Memory and
Language, 33, 149-174. doi:10.1006/jmla.1994.1008
Lachmair, M., Dudschig, C., De Filippis, M., de la Vega, I., & Kaup, B. (2011). Root versus roof:
Automatic activation of location information during word processing. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 18, 1180-1188. doi:10.3758/s13423-011-0158-x
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across cultures. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Leather, J. (2003). Phonological acquisition in multilingualism. In M. Garcia Mayo & M. Garcia Lecumberri (Eds.), Age and the acquisition of English as a foreign language (pp. 23-58).
Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence intervals in within-subject designs. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 476-490. doi:10.3758/bf03210951
Long, M. H. (1990). Maturational constraints on language development. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 12, 251-285. doi:10.1017/S0272263100009165
Lutke, B. (2008). Beobachtungen zur Raumreferenz in mundlichen Erzahlungen von Grundschulkindern mit Deutsch als Erst-und Zweitsprache. In B. Ahrenholz (Ed.), Zweitspracherwerb. Diagnosen, Verlagno, Voraussetzungen (pp. 151-170). Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany:
Fillibach.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological Bulletin, 109, 163-203. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.109.2.163
Munnich, E., & Landau, B. (2010). Developmental decline in the acquisition of spatial language.
Language Learning and Development, 6, 32-59. doi:10.1080/15475440903249979
Munnich, E., Landau, B., & Dosher, B. (2001). Spatial language and spatial representation: A crosslinguistic comparison. Cognition, 81, 171-208. doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(01)00127-5
National Institute of Korean Language. (2005). Research of frequency of modern Korean usage (Hyeondae Gugeo Sayong Bindo Josa 2). Retrieved May 16, 2016, from http://korean.go.kr/front/
reportData/reportDataView.do?mn_id=45&report_seq=1&pageIndex=1)
Newmark, L. (1966). How not to interfere with language learning. Language learning: The individual
and the process. International Journal of American Linguistics, 40, 77-83.
Quasthoff, U., Fiedler, S., & Hallsteinsdottir, E. (2011). Frequency dictionary German: Haufigkeitsworterbuch Deutsch. Leipzig, Germany: Leipziger Uni-Verlag.
Richter, T., Zwaan, R. A., & Hoever, I. (2009). Acquiring experiential traces in word-referent learning.
Memory & Cognition, 37, 1187-1196. doi:10.3758/MC.37.8.1187
Rosch, H. (2001). Deutsch als Zweit- und Fremdsprache. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access model.
Second Language Research, 12, 40-72. doi:10.1177/026765839601200103
Sharoff, S., Umanskaya, E., & Wilson, J. (2013). A frequency dictionary of Russian: Core vocabulary
for learners. London: Routledge.
Slobin, D. (1996). From "thought and language" to "thinking for speaking." In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 70-96). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Stringer, D. (2010). The gloss trap. In Z.-H. Han & T. Cadierno (Eds.), Linguistic relativity in SLA:
Thinking for speaking (pp. 102-124). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643-662. doi:10.1037/h0054651

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:2
Ahlberg et al.: Comparing Language x Space interactions in L1 and L2

459

Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L. Pick & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial
orientation: Theory, research, and application (pp. 225-282). Boston: Springer.
Tyler, A., & Evans, V. (2003). The semantics of English prepositions: Spatial scenes, embodied meaning
and cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Verhelst, N., Van Avermaet, P., Takala, S., Figueras, N., & North, B. (2009). Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, teaching, assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vukovic, N. (2013). When words get physical: Evidence for proficiency-modulated somatotopic motor
interference during second language comprehension. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, &
I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 3711-3716). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
White, L. (2003). Second language acquisition and universal grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zwaan, R. A., & Madden, C. J. (2005). Embodied sentence comprehension. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan
(Eds.), Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action in memory, language, and
thinking (pp. 224-245). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

