Applied Psycholinguistics 39 (2018), 1117-1146
doi:10.1017/S0142716418000267

Liu vs. Liu vs. Luke? Name influence on
voice recall
BRIANNE SENIOR, JOBIE HUI and MOLLY BABEL
University of British Columbia
Received: February 27, 2017

Revised: March 6, 2018

Accepted: March 17, 2018

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Molly Babel, 2613 West Mall, Department of Linguistics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4 Canada. E-mail: molly.babel@ubc.ca
ABSTRACT
Listeners are better at remembering voices speaking in familiar languages and accents, and this finding
is often dubbed the language-familiarity effect (LFE). A potential mechanism behind the LFE relates
to a combination of listeners' implicit knowledge about lower level phonetic cues and higher level
linguistic processes. While previous work has established that listeners' social expectations influence
various aspects of linguistic processing and speech perception, it remains unknown how such
expectations might affect talker recognition. To this end, Mandarin-accented English voices and
locally accented English voices were used in a talker recognition paradigm in conditions which paired
voices with stereotypically congruent names (Mandarin-accented English voice as Chen and locally
accented English voice as Connor) and stereotypically incongruent names (vice versa). Across two
experiments, listeners showed greater recall for the familiar, local voices than the Mandarin-accented
ones, confirming the basic premise of the LFE. Further, incongruent accent/name pairings negatively
affected listeners' performance, although listeners with experience speaking Mandarin were less
influenced by the incongruent accent/name pairings. These results indicate that the LFE, while relying
largely on listeners' ability to parse linguistic information, is also affected by nonlinguistic information
about a talker's social identity.

Speech perception goes beyond extracting information from an unfolding
acoustic signal. Listeners must store information from the speech stream for later
use for both linguistic and social purposes. For example, when confronted with a
speech signal, listeners must retain information about that talker's voice so that
when they later encounter the same voice, they are able to identify the talker. We
are able to recognize the voice of a familiar talker (e.g., your best friend)
regardless of whether they say, for example, dogs /dz/ or cats /kaets/, despite
the phonemic differences between these words. Previous research has shown that
our ability to learn and later recognize and recall voices, here termed talker
recognition, depends on our familiarity with the language background of the
speakers. In general, listeners are better able to identify voices speaking in the
listener's native language than they are at identifying voices in a foreign language
(e.g., Goggin, Thompson, Strube, & Simental, 1991; Perrachione & Wong, 2007;
Thompson, 1987; Winters, Levi, & Pisoni, 2008), and this finding has been
dubbed the language-familiarity effect (LFE). This proposed effect describes the
(c) Cambridge University Press 2018 0142-7164/18

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1118

observation that, for example, monolingual English-speaking listeners better
recognize voices speaking English than they do if the same voices are speaking
an unfamiliar language such as German, whereas German monolingual listeners
show the reverse pattern of results (Goggin et al., 1991). Similar observations
have been made when listeners are exposed to a speaker of their native language
who has an unfamiliar or foreign accent. Here, listeners show decreased accuracy
in identifying foreign-accented speakers, with recognition accuracy for voices of
the listener's "own-accent" surpassing accuracy for voices with a less familiar or
foreign accent (e.g., Goggin et al., 1991; Stevenage, Clarke, & McNeill, 2012;
Thompson, 1987). These findings would seem congruent with a LFE for accents,
where listeners are not only better at recognizing talkers of a familiar language
but also familiarly accented talkers.
A proposed mechanism behind the LFE in voice recognition lies in listeners'
implicit knowledge about which phonetic cues are talker-specific in a familiar
language, but not being able to tease apart talker-specific and language- or accentgeneral phonetic cues in an unfamiliar language (Perrachione, in press; Winters
et al., 2008). That is, listeners have implicit knowledge about the distribution of
acoustic-phonetic parameters for sounds in their language (e.g., vowel formants,
voice onset time, energy distribution in a fricative, timing relationships between
articulatory and laryngeal movements, etc.) and are able to parse phonetic variation accordingly in a familiar language. However, being unfamiliar with the
sound categories in an unfamiliar language, listeners do not know whether a
phonetic cue indicates a particular sound category or a talker-specific trait. Any
model of spoken language recognition relying entirely on the bottom-up intake of
the acoustic-phonetic distributions of sounds, however, can only take an
experienced listener so far. Listeners use knowledge about words to facilitate the
categorization and recognition of the phonetic signal. For example, in the classic
Ganong effect, when presented with a sound ambiguous between /t/ and /d/,
listeners will be more likely to categorize the sound as /t/ when it is spliced onto
/aesk/, forming the real word task versus the nonword dask (Ganong, 1980). Thus,
listeners' perceptions of phonetic variation are heavily influenced by probabilistic
phonological and lexical knowledge (e.g., Pitt & McQueen, 1998; Pitt & Szostak,
2012), and there is convincing evidence from selective adaptation that these are
not decision-level processes (Samuel, 2001).
In addition to the linguistic influences on perception and recognition, listeners'
social expectations can exert their own influence on linguistic processing and
perception. As listeners parse the speech stream, they use information from their
experiences to generate expectations about speakers and their social identities (for
an overview, see Drager, 2010). These expectations are often stereotyped and
overgeneralized deterministic views about the connections between accents,
speech styles, and sociocultural behaviors. Listener expectations about a speaker's age, socioeconomic status, gender, nationality, and sexual orientation affect
linguistic processes such as vowel and fricative categorization (Drager, 2011;
Hay, Warren, & Drager, 2006; Johnson, Strand, & D'Imperio, 1999; Munson,
Jefferson, & McDonald, 2006; Niedzielski, 1999; Strand & Johnson, 1996).
At the lexical level, listener expectations and associations between accent and

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1119

race affect recognition of words (Staum Casasanto, 2008). Categorization and
recognition at the phoneme and word levels are the building blocks involved in
more global assessments like perceived accentedness and intelligibility (quantified as the proportion of words correctly recognized in an utterance). For
example, listeners' stereotyped expectations about the relationship between language and ethnicity appear to bias listeners to perceive the speech from ethnically
Asian individuals as less intelligible and more accented (Babel & Russell, 2015;
Rubin, 1992;; see also Devos & Banaji, 2005). Yi, Phelps, Smilijanic, &
Chandrasekaran (2013) suggest that the loss of intelligibility of Korean-accented
English is at least partly related to American listeners' beliefs about Asianness
and foreignness.
Speech perception is thus a process that leverages both linguistic and social
knowledge. If listener expectations influence linguistic processing, is it also the
case that listeners' social associations influence talker recognition? In the following experiments, we manipulate listeners' social expectations by manipulating
the types of names assigned to various talkers to examine the role of social factors
in talker recognition. Typically, talker recognition tasks involve a training phase
in which listeners are familiarized with the different voices and an identification
phase in which listeners must recognize and identify various talkers. Identification phases have consisted of recognizing old and new talkers in a voice lineup
(Goggin et al., 1991; Thompson, 1987), identifying the avatar (Bregman & Creel,
2014; Orena, Theodore, & Polka, 2015; Perrachione, Del Tufo, & Gabrieli, 2011)
or number (Xie & Myers, 2015) associated with each voice, and providing the
name associated with each voice (Perrachione & Wong, 2007; Winters et al.,
2008). In the latter method, each voice is paired with a name, and listeners
respond by selecting the name of the talker they think is speaking. Little has been
reported on the names used in these studies. For example, Perrachione and Wong
(2007, p. 1902) used "language-appropriate, familiar monosyllabic names" that
included the Chinese names Chen, Hong, Liu, Peng, and Wei. Given the robust
evidence in the sociophonetic literature that listeners' social expectations affect
categorization of phonemes, words, and global talker properties, it is likely that
these methodological decisions may have introduced social information beyond
the acoustic signal that could have affected how accurately listeners recalled the
voices, as talker recognition tasks rely on listeners learning a speaker's vocal
characteristics (i.e., who is talking) rather than the linguistic content of what they
are saying.
A substantial literature has established that names carry social weight and thus
provide information about a speaker. Names elicit different impressions, both
positive and negative, about an individual. When exposed to a first name, individuals make assumptions about the person possessing that name, including how
caring, successful, trustworthy, and emotionally stable the individual is (Leirer,
Hamilton, & Carpenter, 1982; Mehrabian, 2001). Names can also influence how
we perceive an individual's physical characteristics, with socially "desirable"
names increasing the perceived attractiveness of an individual (Garwood, Cox,
Kaplan, Wasserman, & Sulzer, 1980). Such assumptions elicited by names may
even lead us to treat others differently solely on the basis of their names. Bertrand

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1120

and Mullainathan (2004) found that employers in Boston and Chicago are more
likely to respond favorably to resumes with White-sounding names than to the
same resumes with stereotypically Black-sounding names. In a similar study,
Spriestma (2013) sent essays to primary teachers in Germany and had them
score each essay. Some of the writers of these essays were assigned Turkish
names (a large, migrant population in Germany) whereas others were given
German names; a minority of teachers scored essays associated with a Turkish
name significantly lower than similar quality essays paired with German names.
Similar findings have been found by researchers in the United States where
teachers have been shown to assign lower scores to students with African
American-sounding names than to students with White-sounding names, even
when the student's race was controlled for (Anderson-Clark, Green, & Henley,
2008).
Taken together, this body of literature establishes that names are important as
they interface with individuals' expectations. Given that social expectations affect
recognition processes from sounds to sentences, we test whether social expectations also affect talker recognition. We do this in an experiment that pairs
natively accented English voices and Mandarin-accented English-speaking voices
with English names and Chinese names (e.g., Luke vs. Liu). Listeners are either
presented with congruent accent/name pairs (e.g., a natively accented English
speaker assigned the name Luke and a Mandarin-accented speaker assigned the
name Liu) or incongruent accent/name pairs (e.g., a native-accented English
speaker named Liu and a Mandarin-accented speaker named Luke). We test
whether names affect voice recognition on listeners with and without experience
with the Mandarin language. If the LFE relies largely on listeners' ability to parse
phonetic information as talker specific or accent general, we would not expect
accent/name congruency to affect listeners' abilities to recall voices; we would
only predict that listeners with Mandarin experience will perform more accurately
on the Mandarin-accented voices than listeners with no Mandarin knowledge.
Given the social implications imbued in names and the influence of social
knowledge and listener expectations on the recognition of the speech stream, we
predict a reduction in listeners' talker recognition performance when the talkers in
the task are assigned a name that is incongruent with the talker's accent.
Experiment 1 establishes that accent/name pairings affect talker recognition
accuracy in a between-listener design. Experiment 2 replicates this basic finding
in a within-listener design and attempts to decipher the mechanism that decreases
performance in incongruent accent/name pairings.
EXPERIMENT 1
Method
Speakers. We recorded five speakers of Mandarin-accented English and five

native English monolingual speakers. Mandarin speakers self-identified as native
speakers of Mandarin Chinese, none reported being fluent speakers of English,
and none reported using English as their dominant language. At the time of

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1121

recording, speakers had spent an average of 3 years in Vancouver (range = 1-5;
SD = 1.5). All Mandarin-accented speakers were male and had a mean age of 25
years (range = 19-27; SD = 3.3). Native English speakers reported speaking a
variety of Canadian English, had spent their entire life on the West Coast of
British Columbia (either in the Lower Mainland or on Vancouver Island), and had
lived in Vancouver for at least 5 years. All speakers were male, with a mean age
of 23 years (range = 21-27; SD = 2.5).
The two sets of voices were collected separately. The native English speakers
were recorded using a Sound Devices USB PreAMP and head-mounted
microphone with a 44,100-Hz sampling rate. Speakers read 10 sentences taken
from Bradlow and Alexander (2007). All were declarative sentences in either the
present (n = 6) or past tense (n = 4) with one or two clauses. Five of these
sentences consisted of a final word that was highly predictable from the preceding
context while the other 5 sentences had a final word that was unpredictable. The
high-predictability sentences were slightly longer than the low-predictability
sentences. The high-predictability sentences contained five to nine words (M = 7,
SD = 1.58), whereas the low-predictability sentences all contained five words. A
full list of sentences is provided in Appendix A. Recording took place in a soundattenuated booth. Each sentence was presented on the screen using Microsoft
PowerPoint, and participants advanced to the next slide when they finished
reading the sentence. They were asked to read each sentence three times, and the
best utterance, that which was free of false starts, fillers, and mispronunciations,
was selected. The Mandarin speakers were recorded with a standing microphone
and Sound Devices USB PreAMP in a quiet room.1 Due to a technical error, three
of the Mandarin-accented speakers were recorded with a 48,000-Hz sampling
rate while the remaining speakers were recorded at 44,100 Hz. The Mandarin
speakers read all 120 sentences from Bradlow and Alexander (2007), but only the
10 aforementioned sentences that were recorded by the native English speakers
were used. This ensured that the sentence lists were identical across the two voice
sets. An experimenter was present during recording and asked the speaker to
repeat the sentence if he or she made any mistakes or did not produce the
sentence fluently.
Sentences from all 10 speakers were trimmed to remove leading and trailing
silence in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2017); all trimming was done at zero
crossings to avoid introducing transients into the recordings. On average,
recordings from the Mandarin speakers were longer and more variable in length
(M = 2.25 s, SD = 1.56) than those from the native English speakers (M = 1.56 s,
SD = 0.35), and within each set of voices, high-predictability sentences were
longer (Mandarin-accented: M = 2.59 s, SD = 0.65; native English: M = 1.74 s,
SD = 0.40) than low-predictability sentences (Mandarin-accented: M = 1.91 s,
SD = 0.36 seconds; native English: M = 1.37 s, SD = 0.14). All files were RMS
amplitude normalized to 73 dB in Praat, and in this process it was confirmed that
no samples were clipped.
If a talker's voice is highly variable, it may be harder to consistently learn and
associate with a name. However, if all of the voices from an accent together make
the accent more variable, that variability may aid in making each voice within an

1122

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

accent perceptually unique. To quantify accent variability, Table 1 provides summary
statistics for selected acoustic measures by accent. Table 2 provides these data by
talker. Because all speakers produced the same sentences, the duration of each
sentence is equivalent to speech rate. Fundamental frequency was estimated using
REAPER (https://github.com/google/REAPER). The lower and upper 10% quantiles
were removed to account for measurement misestimation, and the remaining data
were standardized to semitones on a per-talker basis. Variance ratios were used to
compare these average values for duration and normalized f0 for the two accents
(following Johnson, Westrek, Nazzi, & Cutler, 2011). The average duration and
normalized f0 values for the Mandarin-accented voices tended to be more variable as
a group in terms of duration, Mandarin-accented: M = 2.25 s, SD = 0.32, native
English: M = 1.56 s, SD = 0.12; F (4, 4) = 6.53, p = .105, and normalized f0,
Mandarin-accented M = 3.29 semitones, SD = 1.22, native English M = 2.58,
SD = 0.41; F (4, 4) = 8.78, p = .03.2 These trends for the Mandarin-accented English
speakers to be more variable than the native accent English speakers would
potentially assist listeners in associating and identifying these Mandarin-accented
voices, as each voice would potentially be more perceptually unique.
We also conducted an analysis of voice similarity for two reasons: to establish
that the voices merit being categorized as two accents and to determine that one
set of voices is not inherently more similar than the other on a spectral level.
While an ideal analysis of accent and speaker similarity may be composed of
listener judgments (though sensitivity to such parameters are a side effect of the
LFE), we compared speakers acoustically using mel-frequency cepstral
coefficients (MFCCs, a method of speech parameterization frequently used for
speech recognition) and a dynamic time warping algorithm using Phonological
Corpus Tools (Hall, Allen, Fry, Mackie, & McAuliffe, 2016). The MFCC
analysis used 26 triangular filters and 12 orthogonal coefficients. The dynamic
time warping algorithm sought the lowest cost path through a distance matrix that
was time independent. The distance value was output as a similarity value, where
1 equals a perfect match. All matched sentences were compared across 10
speakers such that there were 100 native English to native English comparisons,
100 Mandarin to Mandarin comparisons, and 450 Mandarin to English
comparisons. The cross-accent voice comparisons were more different
Table 1. Selected summary acoustics by accent

Accent
Mandarin
Native
English

Duration in
seconds
(all sentences)
Mean (SD)

Duration in seconds
(high-predictability
sentences)
Mean (SD)

2.25 (1.56)
1.56 (0.35)

2.59 (0.65)
1.74 (0.40)

Duration in seconds
(low-predictability
f0 in
sentences)
semitones
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
1.91 (0.36)
1.37 (0.14)

3.28 (0.58)
2.57 (0.36)

1123

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

Table 2. Selected summary acoustics by talker
f0 in semitones
Talker
CHM109
CHM111
CHM113
CHM116
CHM117*
ENM101*
ENM102
ENM103
ENM104
ENM105

Accent
Mandarin
Mandarin
Mandarin
Mandarin
Mandarin
Native English
Native English
Native English
Native English
Native English

Duration in seconds
Mean (SD)
2.53
1.74
2.30
2.19
2.48
1.44
1.48
1.56
1.55
1.76

(0.61)
(0.53)
(0.51)
(0.56)
(0.65)
(0.21)
(0.31)
(0.32)
(0.33)
(0.49)

Mean (SD)

Min, Max

2.36
2.4
5.14
3.94
2.59
2.58
1.91
3.02
2.59
2.78

0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,

(1.31)
(1.42)
(2.63)
(2.25)
(1.53)
(1.56)
(1.05)
(1.97)
(1.8)
(1.8)

5.2
5.87
9.81
8.63
6.01
5.68
4.02
7.05
6.62
6.66

Note: Talkers with * were used only in Experiment 1. ENM, native English-speaking
males. CHM, Chinese males speaking Mandarin-accented English.

(M = 0.02, SD = 0.001) than either within-accent voice comparison (English-
English pairs: M = 0.023, SD = 0.002; Mandarin-Mandarin pairs: M = 0.024,
SD = 0.002). Mean by-talker combination (averaged over the 10 sentences)
similarity values were used as the dependent measure in analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with accent (Mandarin-English, English-English, Mandarin-Mandarin) as the independent variable, returning a main effect of accent, F (2,
42) = 26.88, p < .001. Planned comparisons confirm that the Mandarin-English
comparisons were more different than Mandarin-Mandarin, t (11) = 5, p = .0004,
and English-English, t (11.5) = 5.18, p = .0003, comparisons, and that the two
same-accent comparisons are not different, t (17.75) = -0.28, p = .78. This
confirms that the within accent voices do not differ in terms of acoustic-phonetic
variability. To confirm that the voices differed acoustically in terms of
perceivable accent, the similarity values were translated into distance values,
which were multidimensionally scaled to two dimensions. This computation is
shown in Figure 1. Dimension 1 provides a clear separation between the
Mandarin-accented voices and the native English voices, indicating that on
acoustic-phonetic grounds, these voices are easily separable into distinct groups.
Dimension 2 shows vertical spread for each of the accent groups, with a clear
voice outlier in CHM111 for the Mandarin accented group. This suggests that on
acoustic-phonetic grounds, the Mandarin accented voices might be more distinct
because of the outlier status of CHM111, which might give these voices an
advantage in the talker recognition task (Kreiman & Papcun, 1991; Orchard &
Yarmey, 1995; Papcun, Kreiman, & Davis, 1989, Yarmey, 1991). It could also be
the case that Dimension 2 accounts for residual variance that is neither interesting
nor meaningful.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1124

Figure 1. Two-dimensional scaling solution based on the mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC)
acoustic-similarity of the 10 voices. Labels beginning with ENM are native English-speaking males,
and those with CHM are Chinese males who speak Mandarin-accented English.

Names. We used five stereotypically North American ("English") male names

(Connor, Gabriel, John, Luke, and Steven) and five Romanized Chinese male
names (Chen, Hong, Liu, Peng, and Wei). Within each subset of names, we
avoided names that shared the same onset consonant to alleviate any effects of
phonological competition.
We generated a list of common North American English names based on the
experimenters' intuitions and experiences with names in Vancouver, British
Columbia. These names were pretested with a name/ethnicity association pretest
in which participants were asked for each name "Which ethnicity do you most
associated this name with?" Possible responses were White Canadian, Asian
Canadian, and other. On the basis of these preliminary results, we selected five
potential English names: Bob, Connor, Jake, Luke, and Stephen. These names
were then compared to one another using statistics from the British Columbia
Vital Statistics Agency (http://www.vs.gov.bc.ca/babynames/). We sought to
select English names with similar birth popularity trajectories in British Columbia
over the past 20 years. Because Bob did not exist as a name in the database and
the similar name Bobby was comparably less popular, this name was swapped
with the name Gabriel; this name better matched the popularity trajectory of the
other English names. For the same reason, Jake was replaced with John, and the
spelling of Stephen was changed to Steven.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1125

As the Vital Statistics Agency only reports names for which five or more
babies are born with that name, the relative infrequency of common Chinese baby
names prevented us from retrieving similar population trajectories in choosing
Chinese names. When selecting Chinese names, we used the names from
Perrachione and Wong (2007). We favored these names for reasons relating to
phonetic composition and cultural naming practices. These names did not include
any phonemes that are not in the English phonetic inventory, such as the onsets in
names like Xiu [io] and Qing [i], which may have caused additional
difficulty for participants unfamiliar with Mandarin phonology. Names that are
harder to pronounce (e.g., Colquhoun) are dispreferred compared to names that
are less difficult to pronounce (e.g., Smith), even when other factors such as name
length and orthographic regularity are controlled for (e.g., Laham, Koval, &
Alter, 2012).
To confirm intuitions about the language backgrounds associated with each
names, we conducted a visual analogue scale-rating task to assess the names.
Twenty-one individuals from the University of British Columbia community
voluntarily completed this task after they had taken part in an unrelated study.
Participants were presented with a form in hard-copy that asked "Who do you
associated the name ________ with?" and then instructed to make a mark in pen
along a 10-cm scale with endpoints "native speaker of Mandarin" and "native
speaker of English" to indicate their rating. A vertical dash indicated the midpoint
on the scale. We controlled for left-right positivity associations by giving half the
participants scales with "native speaker of Mandarin" as the left endpoint and half
with the same label as the right endpoint. The names were displayed
alphabetically to avoid ordering them in a way that might influence ratings.
We converted these ratings into a numerical scale, coding a response of
"native speaker of English" as 100 and a response of "native speaker of
Mandarin" as 0. Three participants chose to circle the endpoint label; in such
cases, their response was counted as either 100 or 0 depending on the label
circled. All other measurements were taken to the nearest millimeter. While
most participants marked a vertical line on the scale to indicate their rating,
other participants responded by marking Xs, circles, upside-down triangles, and
checkmarks along the scale. Xs were measured from the intersection of the two
diagonal lines, and circles (or ovals) were measured from the midpoint of the
circle's horizontal diameter. Both upside-down triangles and checkmarks were
measured from the bottom vertex. Two participants each had one name where
they marked their response ambiguously (i.e., they made multiple marks on the
scale), and these two data points (one name scale for each participant) were
discarded.
The five names divided into the two name groups are shown in Figure 2 and
confirm our intuitions about which type of name was associated with which type
of speaker in Vancouver. As a group, our Chinese names (Chen, Hong, Liu,
Peng, and Wei) received lower ratings (M = 15, SD = 3) than the North American
English names (Connor, Gabriel, John, Luke, and Steven; M = 83, SD = 3). Note
that while both types of names occupy the middle range of the continuum, the
distribution peaks higher in the middle for the more stereotypically English

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1126

Figure 2. Density plot of the ratings of the names used in Experiments 1 and 2 where native speaker of
Mandarin (0) and native speaker of English (100) were the endpoints.

names. This suggests that some participants view these names as equally
appropriate for native speakers of English or Mandarin.
To test whether the Chinese names were more challenging to learn and
associate with entities generally, we conducted a brief experiment in the same
format (exposure, training, test) as the talker recognition task. Instead of voices,
the names were paired with simple shapes selected from the preset shape
options in Adobe Photoshop. Each shape was filled with a unique color. A
small sample (n = 14) of participants completed the task where name type
(Chinese or English) was blocked and counterbalanced across participants. To
account for the fact that some shapes may be much more unique than others,
name/shape pairings were randomized across participants, with each participant
receiving a different set of pairings. Participants' performance varied
considerably on this task, but they were overall very accurate. Performance at
test was insignificantly more accurate on the English names (M = 92%,
SD = 18) than the Chinese names (M = 87%, SD = 23), t (13) = 1.02, p = .33,
Cohen's d = 0.24. This suggests that with greater power, the small benefit for
the English names may have been reliable, but there is no large difference
between how easily learned and associated these names are.
Listeners. The recruitment, compensation, and procedures for this study were

approved by the Behavioural Research Ethics Board at the University of British
Columbia. One hundred twenty-nine English-speaking listeners completed the talker
recognition task. They were recruited through the University of British Columbia
linguistics subject pool and were compensated with either course credit or $7 for their
time. One participant was removed because of a self-reported a hearing disability.
This left 128 participants. Of these participants, 65 self-reported experience speaking

1127

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

Mandarin (mean age of 20.5, range = 17-48, SD = 4.1), whereas the remaining 63
participants had no experience with Mandarin (mean age of 21.6, range = 17-45,
SD = 5.6).
Of the 65 Mandarin-speaking participants, 25 reported speaking Mandarin
fluently, 20 reported speaking fairly well, and 20 reported speaking poorly. Of
these participants, 29 reported also speaking English natively and a further 21
said English was the dominant language they used. Fifteen participants did not
report English as their dominant language. On average, these participants started
learning Mandarin at 5.8 years of age (median age of 4 years, range = 0-25,
SD = 5.9).3 Within the non-Mandarin-speaking group, 48 of the 63 participants
reported English as their native language, 9 reported English as their dominant
language, 5 did not have English as their native or dominant language, and 1 did
not specify. While we base our categorization of participants based on their selfreport of speaking Mandarin, we refer to this distinction simply as Mandarin
experience, generalizing their self-reported speaking abilities to assume listening
experience with Mandarin as well. Tables 3a and 3b provide a summary of the
listener groups for Experiment 1.
Procedure

Our methods followed Perrachione and Wong (2007). Participants completed a
talker recognition task consisting of five parts: (a) exposure to voices, (b) training,
(c) practice quiz, (d) final test, and (e) a questionnaire. All parts were presented
using E-Prime 2.0 software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA), and
listeners wore AKG K240 headphones while seated in sound-attenuated cubicles.
Participants received verbal instructions at the beginning of the experiment and
Table 3. Listener demographics (Experiment 1)
a. Listeners' self-reported experience speaking Mandarin for Experiment 1
Total number of participants
128
Self-reported experience with
65
speaking Mandarin
Fluent
25
Fairly well
20
Poorly
20
Self-reported no experience with
63
speaking Mandarin
b. Listeners' self-reported familiarity and use of English for Experiment 1
Mandarin-speaking Non-Mandarin-speaking
participants
participants
English used as native language(s)
English used as dominant language
English neither native nor dominant
language
No specification for use of English

29
21
15

48
9
5

0

1

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1128

written instructions on screen prior to each part. Following Perrachione and
Wong (2007), we emphasized that the subjects should focus on who was talking
rather than the content of the speakers' utterances. The experiment took
approximately 30 min to complete.
Exposure. Listeners were first familiarized with the five voices and their asso-

ciated names. They saw the first name on the screen and heard the voice associated with that name produce a sentence. Then, they saw the next name appear
on the screen and heard the next speaker produce the same sentence. This continued until listeners had been introduced to all five speakers and their assigned
names. In all conditions, the exposure sentence was always the high-predictability
sentence The good boy is helping his mother and father.
Training. The training phase consisted of five trials, one corresponding to each

of the five speakers. On each trial, listeners were presented with the same sentence they had heard in exposure; this sentence was read by one of the five
speakers. Participants saw all five names on the screen (in a random order that
remained constant across all participants), and they were asked to identify the
name of the speaker who was reading the sentence by pressing the corresponding
button on the response box. Participants received feedback on whether their
response was correct; if incorrect, they were provided with the name of the
correct speaker. Participants had 5000 ms to respond. If they did not respond
within that interval, participants received a message on the screen informing them
that no response had been detected, and the experiment advanced to the next trial.
Practice quiz. Listeners performed the same task as in the training phase.
However, they were presented with four additional, novel sentences and asked to
generalize what they had learned about the voices to novel stimuli from the same
speakers. The practice quiz consisted of 25 trials (5 sentences x 5 speakers), and
listeners received feedback as to the correct response.
Final test. In the final test, listeners performed the same task, but had to identify

5 new sentences in addition to the sentences they had been exposed to in the
previous three sections. The final test consisted of 50 trials (10 sentences x 5
speakers), and participants did not receive feedback about whether their response
was correct.
Questionnaire. To close, participants completed a short questionnaire evaluating

their language background and experience speaking Mandarin. A copy of this
questionnaire is available in Appendix B.
Excluding the questionnaire, participants underwent this process twice, with
one block for each accent type. Upon completion of the two blocks, participants
responded to the questionnaire. Accent was a within-subjects factor and both
accent/name congruency and Mandarin experience were between-subjects
factors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1129

Results

Trials without a response (n = 165) were removed from the data set. The
remaining data were analyzed in a repeated measure ANOVA. Speaker accent
(Mandarin, native) was repeated across listeners, and accent/name pairing
(congruent, incongruent) and Mandarin experience (Mandarin-English bilingual,
no Mandarin) were between-listener dependent variables. The dependent variable
was listener accuracy averaged across trials.
There was a main effect of speaker accent, F (1, 124) = 174.27, p < .001,
^2G = 0:29, which replicates the LFE on an accent level. Listeners were more
accurate on the native English-speaking voices (M = 65%, SD = 9) than the
Mandarin-accented voices (M = 45%, SD = 3). There was also a main effect of
accent/name pairing, F (1, 124) = 5.43, p = .021, ^2G = 0:03. Listeners were more
accurate when accent/name pairings were congruent (M = 58%, SD = 3) than
when they were incongruent (M = 52%, SD = 3). While listeners who were
Mandarin-English bilinguals performed more accurately on the task (M = 58%,
SD = 3), overall compared to listeners with no Mandarin experience (M = 53%,
SD = 3), this effect was not significant, F (1, 124) = 3.47, p = .07, ^2G = 0:0196.
None of the interactions were significant: Mandarin Experience x Accent/Name
Pairing, F (1, 124) = 0.01, p = .92, ^2G = 0:00006; Mandarin Experience x
Accent: F (1, 124) = 0.12, p = .73, ^2G = 0:0003; Accent x Accent/Name Pairing:
F (1, 124) = 1.51, p = .22, ^2G = 0:003; Mandarin Experience x Accent x Accent/
Name Pairing: F (1, 124) = 2.17, p = .143, ^2G = 0:005.
Figure 3 presents accuracy data from Experiment 1 with the y-axis showing the
proportion of correct responses for the Mandarin accented voices and native
accented voices for the congruent (light gray bars) and incongruent (darker gray
bars) accent/name pairs. The x-axis separates these data according to listeners'
experience with Mandarin. Listeners were more accurately overall with native
accents, and listeners were overall more accurate with congruent accent/name

Figure 3. Proportion of voices correctly identified (y-axis) by name in Experiment 1 for (a) Mandarin
accented voices and (b) native English voices. The x-axis separates listeners based on whether they are
Mandarin-English bilinguals. Lighter gray bars show congruent accent/name pairings, and the darker
gray bars show incongruent accent/name pairings. Error bars show standard error.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1130

pairings. Mandarin-English bilinguals tended to be more accurate at learning the
names and the voices, but this appears to be somewhat variable across the accent
and name combinations.
Discussion

The results of this experiment partially replicate the basic premise of the LFE:
listeners were overall more accurate at remembering speakers' names and faster at
providing those responses in a familiar accent, the local accent, than in a less
familiar accent, Mandarin-accented English. Despite our acoustic measurements
indicating that the Mandarin voices may have been slightly more dissimilar and
thus more perceptually unique than the native English voices, listeners did not find
it easier to identify the Mandarin-accented voices. However, the Mandarin-English
bilinguals did not perform better on the Mandarin-accented voices than the group
without Mandarin experience as the LFE would predict. It is possible that despite
not speaking Mandarin, the non-Mandarin-speaking listeners still had enough
relevant experience with hearing Mandarin-accented English due to the prevalence
of Mandarin speakers in Vancouver.
Listeners who were Mandarin-English bilinguals tended to do better overall on
the task compared to the listeners who had no experience with Mandarin, but not
significantly so. This runs counter to previous findings such as that of Xie and
Myers (2015), who found that Mandarin-English bilinguals outperform monolingual English listeners on talker recognition tasks for both familiar and unfamiliar accents. Xie and Myers argue that listeners with experience with tone
perception, through either musical training or experience speaking a tone
language like Mandarin, show improved talker recognition accuracy.4 Our
Mandarin-English bilingual listener populations differ from other Mandarin-
English populations studied within the talker recognition literature (e.g., Xie &
Myers, 2015, who used late English learning bilinguals). In Vancouver, it is not
the case that most Mandarin speakers, even those who speak Mandarin natively,
learned English later in life. The 22 native Mandarin speakers collectively have
an average age of English onset of 8.42 (median = 8, SD = 3.46). Over half of
these 22 native Mandarin speakers reported also speaking English fluently, and
all but 1 speak English fluently or fairly well. Many Mandarin speakers in
Vancouver are simultaneous Mandarin-English bilinguals, Mandarin heritage
speakers, or early second language English learners. In addition, the balance of
our Mandarin-English population skews toward English dominance; 77% of the
Mandarin-English bilinguals in this sample were also native speakers of English
or identified English as their dominant language. This tipping of the scales toward
English could indicate that this sample did not have enough experience with tones
to show a global boost in talker recognition, as predicted by Xie and Myers. This
all builds to the Mandarin-English bilinguals in our study not being necessarily
more familiar with Mandarin-accented English than the local native variety of
English. Therefore, it is perhaps not surprising that Mandarin-English bilinguals
in our sample would perform better on the native English voices than the
Mandarin-accented voices. Rather, since the Mandarin-English listeners are more

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1131

familiar with Mandarin-accented English than the listeners with no Mandarin
experience, we might have expected the Mandarin-English bilinguals to do better
on the Mandarin-accented English voices than the listeners without any Mandarin
experience; however, we found no evidence of this interaction.
It merits mention that the demographics of Vancouver make our listener
samples for both groups extremely heterogeneous, consisting of both selfreported native and nonnative English speakers. Crucially, this means that any
differences between the groups are presumably not solely due to differences in
native English speaker status.
Performance in our task was crucially affected by social cues in the form of
accent/name assignment. Listener performance was more adversely affected by
incongruent accent/name pairings. This suggests that in addition to talker
recognition relying on a listener's familiarity with the accent or language, it is
also affected by perceived fit of the speakers' names. There are two possible
interpretations for the finding that incongruent accent/name pairings negatively
affect native accents more than Mandarin ones. One possibility is that the pairing
of a voice and name affects the perceived accentedness of the voice (Babel &
Russell, 2015; Kang & Rubin, 2009), causing an illusory lack of familiarity and
attenuation of the LFE or a perceived increase in familiarity and enhancement of
the LFE, though, to our knowledge, there is no evidence for illusory effects of the
LFE on talker recognition. A second possible interpretation is that listeners
assume speakers have stereotypically Chinese or English names, and thus have a
more challenging time making unexpected accent/name associations.
Experiment 2 tests this latter possible interpretation by using a new design that
pairs Mandarin and native accents with stereotypically Chinese and English
names in single blocks that are either congruent or incongruent accent/name
pairings. As in Experiment 1, accent was a within-subjects factor; crucially, in
Experiment 2, accent/name congruency was also made a within-subjects factor. In
Experiment 1, listeners completed two blocks, one for each set of voices, and
were presented with names that were either always congruent with the speaker's
accent or always incongruent with the speaker's accent. In Experiment 2, listeners
again completed two blocks. Here, however, each block contained both native
English voices and Mandarin-accented voices, and the first block contained
congruent accent/name pairings while the second contained incongruent accent/
name pairings or vice versa. This design permits an error analysis to see whether
the name type affects the kind of errors made. Upon completion of the talker
recognition task, participants in Experiment 2 also completed an accentedness
rating task with or without names to examine whether name association colors the
perceived foreign accentedness of speakers' voices.
EXPERIMENT 2

Experiment 2 endeavored to elucidate the mechanism behind the results of
Experiment 1 by using a design that combined Mandarin and native accents in a
single block.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1132

Method
Speakers. The same speakers as in Experiment 1 were used. To alleviate the

overall difficulty of the task, we present listeners with four voices per block (two
Mandarin-accented speakers and two natively accented speakers), removing two
speakers from the design. The most accurately identified Mandarin-accented
speaker and the least accurately identified native accented speaker were removed
from the voice set.
Names. We used the same names as in Experiment 1, but removed the names

associated with the removed speakers (Steven and Wei).
Listeners. The recruitment, compensation, and procedures for this study were

approved by the Behavioural Research Ethics Board at the University of British
Columbia. Ninety-two listeners completed the task. They were recruited through
the University of British Columbia linguistics subject pool and were compensated
with either course credit or $7 for their time. Two participants were removed
because they self-reported having speech, language, or hearing disabilities or
disorders. This left 90 participants, 46 of whom self-reported experience speaking
Mandarin (mean age of 21.3, range = 17-31, SD = 3) and 44 of whom had no
experience speaking Mandarin (mean age of 24.2, range = 17-66, SD = 10).
Of the Mandarin-speaking participants, 20 of these 46 participants also spoke
English natively, 8 did not speak English natively but reported it as their
dominant language, 17 did not report English as their native or dominant
language, and 1 did not specify. On average, Mandarin-speaking participants
started learning Mandarin at age 4.1 (median age of 2, range = 0-19, SD = 5).5
Twenty-eight of these participants reported speaking Mandarin fluently, 9 spoke
Mandarin fairly well, and a further 9 reported speaking Mandarin poorly. Within
the non-Mandarin-speaking group, 33 of these participants were native English
speakers, 6 were not native English speakers but reported English as their
dominant language, and 5 did not report English as their native language or their
dominant language. Tables 4a and 4b provide listener demographics for
Experiment 2.
Procedure

Experiment 2 consisted of two parts: (a) a talker recognition task and (b) a
foreign-accentedness rating task. The talker recognition task followed the same
structure as in Experiment 1 with the following exceptions: each block contained
only four speakers rather than five; within each block, listeners encountered
voices of both accent types (i.e., two Mandarin-accented speakers and two native
English speakers); and we used a within-subjects accent/name congruency
manipulation, with listeners completing both an incongruent and a congruent
block. All names were displayed on the screen in alphabetical order. Twelve
versions of the experiment were created; in 6, participants completed the congruent block followed by the incongruent block, while in the other 6 the order of

1133

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

Table 4. Listener demographics (Experiment 2)
a. Listeners' self-reported experience speaking Mandarin for Experiment 2
Total number of participants
92
Self-reported experience with speaking
46
Mandarin
Fluent
28
Fairly Well
9
Poorly
9
Self-reported no experience with
44
speaking Mandarin
Removed for self-reported speech,
2
language, hearing disorders
b. Listeners' self-reported familiarity and use of English for Experiment 2
Mandarin-speaking
Non-Mandarinparticipants
speaking participants
English used as native language(s)
English used as dominant language
English neither native nor dominant
language
No specification for use of English

20
8
17

33
6
5

1

0

these blocks was reversed. The speaker combinations were balanced so that each
voice was assigned to both the congruent accent/name condition and the incongruent accent/name condition (i.e., the first Mandarin speaker was called Liu in
one version of the experiment but Luke in another) and so that each speaker
appeared with every other speaker at least once across the 12 lists. Across these
12 versions, each speaker was only ever associated with two names (one congruent and one incongruent).
In the second part of the experiment, we exposed listeners to the sentence
stimuli from Part 1 and had them make judgments about speaker accentedness.
On each trial, participants were presented with a visual analogue scale with
endpoints "strong foreign accent" and "no foreign accent" and were instructed to
click along the line to make their rating. We controlled for left-right positivity
associations by giving half the participants scales with "no foreign accent" as the
left endpoint and half with the same label as the right endpoint. While listening to
the voice and making their rating, participants saw either a congruent name, an
incongruent name, or no name above the scale. The task was blocked by sentence
such that listeners heard a single sentence from all 8 speakers before moving onto
the next sentence (10 sentences x 8 speakers = 80 trials). This was done to
present listeners with the same words and phonological categories to offer a better
comparison of pronunciation differences in judging accentedness. Within each
sentence block the voices were blocked by accent, with the voices randomized
within each accent. The order of the accents within each sentence was counterbalanced between listeners. Sentence order was randomized across participant.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1134

Results
Accuracy. Trials without responses were removed from the data set. For the

remaining data set, listener accuracy was used as the independent variable in an
ANOVA with speaker accent (Mandarin accent, native accent) and accent/name
pairing (congruent, incongruent) as independent variables repeated across listeners and Mandarin experience (Mandarin-English bilingual, no Mandarin
experience) as between-listener independent variable.
There was a main effect of speaker accent, F (1, 88) = 76.87, p < .001,
^2G = 0:12. Listeners were more accurate at recalling the names of native accented
speakers (M = 86%, SD = 15) than Mandarin-accented speakers (M = 73%,
SD = 9). There were also main effects of Mandarin experience, F (1,
88) = 6.37, p = .01, ^2G = 0:03, and accent/name pairing, F (1, 88) = 6.87,
p = .01, ^2G = 0:01, as well as an interaction between the two, F (1, 88) = 4.33,
p = .04, ^2G = 0:008. While Mandarin-English bilinguals (M = 83%, SD = 10)
were overall more accurate than listeners with no Mandarin language experience
(M = 76%, SD = 9.8) and all listeners were generally more accurate at congruent
accent/name pairings (M = 82%, SD = 13) than incongruent accent/name pairings
(M = 78%, SD = 11), planned comparisons between congruent and incongruent
accent/name pairings for the two listener groups showed that listeners with no
Mandarin language experience were more accurate on congruent accent/name
pairings, t (87) = 3.13, p = .002, Cohen's d = 0.36. Mandarin-English bilinguals
showed statistically equivalent performance with both congruent and incongruent
accent/name pairings, t (91) = 0.41, p = .68, Cohen's d = 0.05. None of the other
interactions in the ANOVA were significant, Mandarin Experience x Accent: F
(1, 88) = 2.5, p = .12, ^2G = 0:004; Accent x Accent/Name Pairing: F (1,
88) = 0.83, p = .37, ^2G = 0:002; Mandarin Experience x Accent x Accent/Name
Pairing: F (1,88) = 0.58, p = .45, ^2G = 0:001.
These data are visualized in Figure 4. Proportion of voices correctly identified
at test is shown on the y-axis, and the figure separates performance by listeners'
experience with Mandarin (x-axis), accent/name pairing (congruent pairings in
light gray, incongruent pairings in dark gray), and speaker accent separated.
While Mandarin-English bilinguals are more accurate on the native accent, they
show no effect of accent/name pairing. Listeners without any Mandarin language
knowledge, however, make more errors on Mandarin and native English accents
when the accent/name pairing is incongruent.
Error Type. Within a block, we wanted to count what kind of errors listeners

made; that is, when they made errors, did they confuse a speaker with the other
speaker of the same accent/name type or did they apply the wrong accent/name
entirely? To address this question, we categorized listener errors as either
different-accent errors or same-accent errors. There were a total of 1,438 wrong
answers across all listeners, which we coded by accent (Mandarin, native),
accent/name pairing (congruent, incongruent), and Mandarin experience (Mandarin-English bilingual, no Mandarin knowledge). For all groups, same-accent
errors were more common than different-accent errors. That is, listeners were

1135

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

Figure 4. Proportion of voices correctly identified (y-axis) by name in Experiment 2 for (a) Mandarin
accented voices and (b) native English voices. The x-axis separates listeners based on whether they are
Mandarin-English bilinguals. Lighter gray bars show congruent accent/name pairings, and the darker
gray bars show incongruent accent/name pairings. Error bars show standard error.

Table 5. Analysis of deviance table for the generalized regression model for the error
analysis
Residual
df

Residual
deviance

p value

5.84
1.03
5.69
2.72
2.31
12.88

1436
1435
1434
1433
1432
1431

1207.4
1206.4
1200.7
1198
1195.7
1182.8

.016*
.31
.017*
.099
.128
.0003***

1.48

1430

1181.3

.224

Term

df Deviance

Accent
Accent/name pairing
Mandarin experience
Accent x Accent/Name Pairing
Accent x Mandarin Experience
Accent/Name Pairing x Mandarin
Experience
Accent x Accent/Name Pairing x
Mandarin Experience

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Note: p values marked by * indicate significance at the < .05 level, and that marked
with *** indicates a p value of < .001.

more likely to confuse a speaker with a speaker of the same accent, regardless of
the accent/name pairing or listeners' backgrounds. However, the degree of this
same-accent error bias varied across groups. We tested whether same-accent
errors (coded as 1) and different accent errors (coded as 0) were equally common
across experimental groups and conditions using a logistic regression with accent
error as the dependent variable and accent, accent/name pairing, and Mandarin
experience as independent variables. These results are summarized in Table 5 in
an analysis of deviance table for the model.
There were more same-accent errors for the Mandarin-accented English voices,
demonstrating that regardless of whether a Mandarin-accented voice was named
Chen or Connor, listeners were more likely to confuse it with the other Mandarin-

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1136

Figure 5. Proportion of same-accent errors in Mandarin Experience (x-axis) and accent/name pairing.
Congruent accent/name pairings are shown with light gray bars, and the incongruent accent/name
pairings are in the darker gray bars. The y-axis shows the proportion of same-accent errors.

accented voice in the block. For the natively accented voices, same-accent errors
were also more common than different-accent errors, but there were
proportionally fewer for the native accents. This demonstrates that the accents
of the Mandarin-accented speakers were more confusable, independent of the
accent/name pairings.
Mandarin-English bilinguals made fewer same-accent errors than listeners
without any knowledge of Mandarin. Language experience also interacted with
accent/name pairings, and this interaction is shown in Figure 5. Listeners with no
Mandarin knowledge made proportionally more same-accent errors on congruent
trials than incongruent trials. This means that a Mandarin-accented voice, whose
name was Liu, was more likely to be erroneously identified as Peng than a
Mandarin-accented voice, whose name was Luke, was erroneously identified as
Gabriel or vice versa. Confusing voices of the same accent occurred more when
the accent/name pairs were congruent than incongruent for the listeners with no
Mandarin knowledge. Mandarin-English bilinguals, by contrast, showed lower
same-accent error rates overall, but their performance by accent/name pairings is
reversed: they have higher same accent error rates when the accent/name pairings
are incongruent. This means that Mandarin-English bilingual listeners made
more same-accent errors, proportionally, on blocks with incongruent accent/name
pairings. They were more likely to call a Mandarin-accented voice name Luke,
Gabriel than they were to call a Mandarin-accented voice named Liu, Peng.
Foreign accentedness ratings. Listeners' mouse click locations along the x-axis

of a line marked with a midpoint and labeled endpoints strong foreign accent and
no foreign accent comprise the data for the foreign accentedness ratings. These
ratings were normalized by taking the pixel value of the midpoint of the visual
analogue line as the scale's midpoint. Scales were flipped such that the left end of

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1137

Figure 6. Boxplot of perceived foreign accentedness ratings for (a) Mandarin accents and (b) native
English accents in congruent, incongruent, and no name pairings (x-axis) by listeners with no
Mandarin knowledge (light gray) and Mandarin-English bilinguals (dark gray). Perceived foreign
accentedness from the VAS scale is shown on the y-axis. Here, 0 denotes the visual midpoint of the
scale. Negative values indicate listener judgments of strong foreign accentedness, and positive values
indicate perceptions of no foreign accentedness.

the scale corresponded to strong perceived foreign accentedness and the right to
no perceived foreign accent. Separate mixed effects models were run for the two
accent types with normalized Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) ratings as the
dependent variable. Accent/name pairing (congruent, incongruent, no name) and
Mandarin experience were independent variables. There were by-listener random
intercepts. Neither analysis returned any significant effects. Figure 6 provides
boxplots illustrating distributions of listeners' ratings for Mandarin and native
accents, respectively. This figure illustrates clear rating differences for the two
accent types and the lack of clear patterns across groups.
Discussion

Experiment 2 used a within-subjects accent/name congruency manipulation
where within counterbalanced blocks, listeners were presented with two
Mandarin-accented voices and two native accented voices that were either
associated with stereotypically congruent or incongruent names. Listeners also
completed a visual analogue task where they rated the talkers' accents either with
congruent names, incongruent names, or no names. In the talker recognition task,
listeners were overall more accurate with the native accents, which replicates our
finding from Experiment 1 with this population and voice set and confirms the
basic premise of the LFE with accents. Experiment 2 also replicated our finding
from Experiment 1 that the congruency of accent/name pairings matters: listeners
were overall more accurate on congruent pairings than incongruent pairings,

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1138

though this effect was moderated by an interaction with listeners' experience with
Mandarin. While in Experiment 1 we only found a trend toward Mandarin-
English bilinguals being more accurate overall on the task, a finding that is
predicted based on reported findings in the literature (e.g., Xie & Myers, 2015),
Experiment 2 provides clear evidence for Mandarin-English bilinguals being
more accurate on talker recognition tasks. As mentioned above, Experiment 2
showed that language experience interacted with sensitivity to the accent/name
pairings. Accuracy for listeners who were Mandarin-English bilinguals was not
affected by accent/name pairing. Listeners who had no Mandarin language
experience, however, were more accurate on the congruent accent/name blocks,
indicating socially incongruous pairing impaired listeners' abilities to recall
voices.
The within-subjects accent/name congruency manipulation of this experiment
allowed us to examine the kinds of errors listeners made. We approached this
analysis in terms of same-accent or different-accent errors. There were more
same-accent errors for the Mandarin-accented English voices, which shows that
independent of the name, listeners were more likely to confuse a Mandarinaccented voice with the other Mandarin-accented voice. The less familiar accent
was more confusable, again confirming a basic premise of the LFE with accents.
The error analysis also revealed an important interaction between accent/name
pairings and Mandarin experience. Listeners with no Mandarin knowledge made
more same-accent errors on congruent trials than incongruent trials. These listeners were more likely to confuse two Mandarin-accented talkers when they
were assigned to stereotypically Chinese names than when those same voices
were paired with stereotypically English names. Name familiarity seemingly
affected the ability of listeners without Mandarin experience to recall and
associate names and voices. Those with Mandarin experience had slightly lower
error rates and they showed the opposite pattern: these listeners made more same
accent errors when accent/name patterns were incongruent. That is, listeners with
Mandarin experience were somewhat more likely to call a native English voice
whose name was Liu, Peng and a Mandarin-accented voice whose name was
Gabriel, Luke. Why do these two listener groups show opposing patterns with
respect to the proportion of same-accent errors? We reason that Mandarinaccented voices are more challenging overall, as evidenced by the lower accuracy
and longer response times to this accent. Individuals with no Mandarin language
experience are likely less familiar with the stereotypically Chinese names
(Heffernan, 2010), and thus find these names more challenging to associate with a
voice that is also unfamiliar. This means that Mandarin-accented voices with
congruent accent/name pairings will be more challenging on two fronts, accent
familiarity and name familiarity, increasing same-accent error rates for the listeners with no Mandarin experience. However, Mandarin-English bilinguals who
have more experience with both the accent and the names show higher sameaccent error rates for the socially incongruent associations, demonstrating a
preference for voices and names that match in terms of cultural association.
The accentedness rating task did not show any differences in perceived
accentedness for these voices across conditions. This might be because these

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1139

voices differed greatly in terms of accentedness. Another possibility, suggested
by a reviewer, is that listeners simply elected to ignore the names, as they were
not deemed relevant to the task.
GENERAL DISCUSSION

These results suggest that talker recognition involves more than experience with
the sound patterns of particular languages. Decades of research provide evidence
that listeners show better talker recognition ability with languages and accents
with which they are familiar (e.g., Goggin et al., 1991; Perrachione & Wong,
2007; Thompson, 1987; Winters et al., 2008). As in Experiment 1, the results of
Experiment 2 revealed a main effect of speaker accent. All listeners more
accurately recalled the native English voices than the Mandarin-accented English
voices. This finding is indicative of a LFE for accents, as all listeners in our study,
even those with Mandarin experience, were likely more familiar with the local
accent of English than they were with Mandarin-accented English. Experiment 2
also replicated the finding from the first experiment that accent/name pairings
influence how accurately listeners performed on the talker recognition task, with
higher accuracy on congruent accent/name pairing trials than when the pairings
were incongruent. In addition, Experiment 2 showed two effects not present in the
first experiment. In Experiment 2, listeners with Mandarin experience showed
better talker recognition overall, which also replicates the boost in performance
for Mandarin speakers in Xie and Myers (2015). Experiment 2 also uncovered an
interaction between Mandarin experience and accent/name pairing; whereas
listeners with no Mandarin experience did better with congruent accent/name
pairings, the Mandarin-English bilinguals performed equivalently with both
types of names.
Expectations and social factors add a complicating layer in many aspects of
speech processing whereby associations between subtle pronunciation patterns
and regional identity (Niedzielski, 1999), a speaker's age (Drager, 2011), and
apparent language background through ethnic stereotypes (Babel & Russell,
2015; Rubin, 1992) shift listeners' reported percepts. This robust sociophonetic
literature illustrates that listeners analyze the speech signal differently based on
social dimensions. Relatedly, in the current study we demonstrate that listeners'
abilities to recognize individuals' voices is affected by socially and culturally
determined accent/name pairings. Listeners were more accurate on socially
congruent accent/name combinations. This effect of accent/name pairings varied
according to listeners' language experiences. Listeners are less accurate at
incongruent accent/name combinations, and there was some evidence that listeners with Mandarin experience made fewer errors. Our error analysis in
Experiment 2, however, demonstrates that listeners with different language
backgrounds made different types of errors. Listeners with Mandarin language
experience were more likely to make same-accent errors on trials where names
and accents were socially and culturally incongruous. Listeners without Mandarin
language experience, in contrast, made more errors when the names and voices

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1140

were paired in ways that matched stereotypical social and cultural conventions.
We know from the decreased accuracy with Mandarin-accented voices that these
voices are more challenging to recall, and we further reason that Chinese names
are harder for listeners without Mandarin language experience to associate with
an unfamiliar accent. In cases where individuals have both English and Chinese
names, English names are used more often by non-Chinese-speaking friends
(Heffernan, 2010); this may suggest that individuals without experience speaking
Mandarin are less familiar pairing voices with ethnic names. In the reverse, those
with Mandarin experience may have more experience using both English names
and Chinese names, so they are able to use them interchangeably while
no-experience friends may only default to the English names and thus are less
familiar with non-English names.
The chosen names in this study naturally differ on a number of dimensions. For
example, in contrast to the multisyllabicity of some of the English names, the
Chinese names were all single characters. Generally, Chinese full names consist
of a one-character family surname followed by a two-character personal name
(Tan, 2001), although single-character personal names are also possible and
increasingly more frequent (Edwards, 2006). While there is usually a limited pool
from which surnames are drawn, personal names are more numerous. Unlike in
English, any character or morpheme is an acceptable Chinese given names
(Edwards, 2006; Tan, 2001). English naming practices seem to follow more
conventions (though consider contemporary celebrities' children's names, e.g.,
Apple, Blue Ivy, and transparent meaning-based names like Grace, Hope, Rose,
etc.). Given this freer naming culture, Chinese naming practices make it difficult
to select a list of "standard" Romanized Chinese first names akin to the English
names selected. Moreover, as the surname is always written first, the Chinese
surname is sometimes used as the English "first name" when Romanized. Given
these practices, our chosen Romanized Chinese names could also be considered
surnames.
In Experiment 2 we included an accentedness rating task to test whether lower
talker recognition performance may be due to names affecting how the perceivable accent in the voices. Listeners' ratings of perceived accentedness of the
Mandarin-accented and locally accented voices were unaffected by the name
assignment. This suggests that listeners' difficulty is due to accent/name pairings
and not a name-induced shift in the parsing of a voice's phonetic content.
Perrachione (in press) compares what he terms the phonetic familiarity
hypothesis and a related linguistic processing hypothesis. The phonetic familiarity
hypothesis hinges on passive exposure to and thus implicit familiarity with the
acoustic-phonetic distributions of a language or accent, whereas the linguistic
processing hypothesis requires some degree of higher level competence (e.g.,
word recognition and comprehension skills) on top of the lower level phonetic
knowledge. While this study was not designed to adjudicate between these two
related models, understanding how social knowledge might fold into a model of
talker recognition likely relies on an association between phonetic and higher
level linguistic representations. One way in which social information could
influence talker recognition is by helping listeners anticipate the range of phonetic

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1141

variability that is likely to be germane to the task. A listener's linguistic
knowledge, that is, their knowledge of words, sounds, and the combinations of
sounds that compose said words in a language, provides listeners with an
anticipated distribution of phonetic parameters. In this way, listeners may be
able to match that anticipated distribution with the experienced distribution,
thereby freeing up cognitive resources needed to associate phonetic parameters
with a talker's identity. If, however, a listener does not possess such linguistic
knowledge, they would need to do more bottom-up processing in order to
construct a phonological category and then associate the phonetic content with a
talker identity. Social expectations about a talker may function in a similar
fashion. For example, if listeners are informed that they will be hearing a native
speaker of the local variety of English, they are able to leverage their experience
with this variety of English to anticipate the distribution of phonetic parameters,
alleviating some of the cognitive load associated with "pure" bottom-up processing. Names are (nondeterministically) associated with ethnic identity and
native language, and thus names will introduce their own predictions on the
phonetic distributions of sounds associated with a variety of English. How
broad are those predictions? If a listener has experience with individuals named
Chen and Peng who do and do not speak with nonnative English accents, their
anticipated distributions may be broader, more fluid, and/or less committed
(distinctions that merit theorizing and empirical testing), but no less helpful. If,
however, a listener's only experiences with the names Chen and Peng are of
these names belonging to nonnative English speakers, their ability to usefully
anticipate phonetic distributions may be attenuated due to a lack of experience
with nonnative accents.
As actual experience with speaking and listening to Mandarin varies considerably within our groups, our categorization of those with and without Mandarin
language experience only examines a gross and more general division. This
grouping was based on their self-reported Mandarin speaking skills and lumps
native speakers of Mandarin, heritage speakers of Mandarin, and second language
(or third language) speakers of Mandarin into one group. Our decision to split
participants based upon this self-reported metric was based on wanting to most
generously model and include the student population at our university, which
includes a large number of students with highly variable Mandarin experiences.
The nonhomogenous nature of our listener group with Mandarin experience likely
masks interesting and important differences in performance within the group.
Bregman and Creel (2014), for example, found that Korean-English bilinguals
who acquired English before the age of 5 were more accurate at identifying English
talkers than bilinguals who learned English after this age. This suggests that early
language experiences shape our strategies for listening and identifying voices in
our native language. Our listeners without Mandarin experience are similarly a
nonhomogenous group. These listeners come from a wide range of language
backgrounds and were simply united by the lack of Mandarin speaking experience.
As this study is a first look at how social factors may influence talker recognition,
future research would benefit from a more fine-grained exploration of how
different degrees of proficiency in a language may interact with such factors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1142

Our results indicate that having a Mandarin accent in an English-dominant
society comes with a cost in terms of others' ability to recall one's name. This has
implications for professional and personal relationships. These results also indicate
that for listeners without experience with the nonnative accent, names and voices
are more challenging to pair when these unfamiliar accents are associated with
similarly unfamiliar names. In contrast, these nonnative voices are harder to
associate with stereotypically English names for those listeners who do have
experience with the nonnative accent. By no means should one extrapolate from
these results any suggestion for advocacy for particular naming practices, but
rather we wish to draw attention to the role of accents and names in talker
recognition so that we can proactively work to attenuate any negative implications.
CONCLUSION

The results of these experiments indicate that performance in a talker recognition
task can be influenced by factors extrinsic to the voices themselves, although it
should be noted that these are relatively small effects, which underscores the
robustness of listener experience with a language or accent sound patterns in the
LFE. While a voice's name did not impact the perceived accentedness of that
voice, the name assigned to a voice did influence how likely it was that the voice
was remembered and later recognized.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Alma Mater Society's Impact Fund at UBC. Thank you to
Rheanne Brownridge for help with subject running, Michelle Chan and David Kurbis for
their help with stimuli selection, Qiu Ting Liu for her help with manuscript preparation,
Ziya Wang for help with recording, our research participants for volunteering their time,
and the speakers who lent their voices.

NOTES
1. The recording procedures for the two accent groups differed because the Mandarin
2.

3.

4.

5.

speakers were being recorded for multiple purposes.
Variance was tested using the function pf() in R with the F statistic calculated as the
squared standard deviation of the Mandarin-accented group divided by the squared
standard deviation of the English group.
Five of the Mandarin-speaking participants did not provide an answer to the question
"At what age did you start learning Mandarin?"; of these five, two reported Mandarin
as their native language, so the actual age of Mandarin onset is likely lower.
Seven listeners in our no Mandarin experience group also reported some experience
with a non-Mandarin tone language, but the overall experience with tone languages in
this group is far lower than that of the Mandarin-English bilingual group.
Two of the Mandarin-speaking participants did not provide an answer to the question
"At what age did you start learning Mandarin?" but did report Mandarin as their
native language, so this number likely underestimates the true age of onset.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1143

REFERENCES
Anderson-Clark, T. N., Green, R. J., & Henley, T. B. (2008). The relationship between first names and
teacher expectations for achievement motivation. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
27, 94-99.
Babel, M., & Russell, J. (2015). Expectations and speech intelligibility. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 137, 2823-2833.
Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and
Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. American Economic Review, 94,
991-1013.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2017). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer [Computer program].
Version 6.0.25. Retrieved February 11, 2017, from http://www.praat.org/
Bradlow, A. R., & Alexander, J. A. (2007). Semantic and phonetic enhancements for speech-in- noise
recognition by native and non-native listeners. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
121, 2339-2349.
Bregman, M. R., & Creel, S. C. (2014). Gradient language dominance affects talker learning.
Cognition, 130, 85-95.
Devos, T., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). American = white? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88, 447-466.
Drager, K. (2010). Sociophonetic variation in speech perception. Language and Linguistics Compass,
4, 473-480.
Drager, K. (2011). Speaker age and vowel perception. Language and Speech, 54, 99-121.
Edwards, R. (2006). What's in a name? Chinese learners and the practice of adopting
"English" names. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 19, 90-103.
Ganong, W. F. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory word perception. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 6, 110.
Garwood, S. G., Cox, L., Kaplan, V., Wasserman, N., & Sulzer, J. L. (1980). Beauty is only "name"
deep: The effect of first name on ratings of physical attraction. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 10, 431-435.
Goggin, J. P., Thompson, C. P., Strube, G., & Simental, L. R. (1991). The role of language familiarity
in voice identification. Memory & Cognition, 19, 448-458.
Hall, K. C., Allen, B., Fry, M., Mackie, S., & McAuliffe, M. (2016. Phonological CorpusTools,
Version 1.2. [Computer program]. Retrieved from https://github.com/PhonologicalCorpusTools/CorpusTools/releases
Hay, J., Warren, P., & Drager, K. (2006). Factors influencing speech perception in the context of a
merger-in-progress. Journal of Phonetics, 34, 458-484.
Heffernan, K. (2010). English name use by East Asians in Canada: Linguistic pragmatics or cultural
identity? Names, 58, 24-36.
Johnson, E. K., Westrek, E., Nazzi, T., & Cutler, A. (2011). Infant ability to tell voices apart rests on
language experience. Developmental Science, 14, 1002-1011.
Johnson, K., Strand, E. A., & D'Imperio, M. (1999). Auditory-visual integration of talker gender in
vowel perception. Journal of Phonetics, 27, 359-384.
Kang, O., & Rubin, D. L. (2009). Reverse linguistic stereotyping: Measuring the effect of listener
expectations on speech evaluation. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 28, 441-456.
Kreiman, J., & Papcun, G. (1991). Comparing discrimination and recognition of unfamiliar voices.
Speech Communication, 10, 265-275.
Laham, S. M., Koval, P., & Alter, A. L. (2012). The name-pronunciation effect: Why people like
Mr. Smith more than Mr. Colquhoun. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
752-756.
Leirer, V. O., Hamilton, D. L., & Carpenter, S. (1982). Common first names as cues for inferences
about personality. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 8, 712-718.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1144

Mehrabian, A. (2001). Characteristics attributed to individuals on the basis of their first names.
Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 127, 59-88.
Munson, B., Jefferson, S. V., & McDonald, E. C. (2006). The influence of perceived sexual orientation on
fricative identification. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119, 2427-2437.
Niedzielski, N. (1999). The effect of social information on the perception of sociolinguistic variables.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 18, 62-85.
Orchard, T. L., & Yarmey, A. D. (1995). The effects of whispers, voicesample duration, and voice
distinctiveness on criminal speaker identification. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 249-260.
Orena, A. J., Theodore, R. M., & Polka, L. (2015). Language exposure facilitates talker learning prior
to language comprehension, even in adults. Cognition, 143, 36-40.
Papcun, G., Kreiman, J., & Davis, A. (1989). Longterm memory for unfamiliar voices. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 85, 913-925.
Perrachione, T. K. (in press) Speaker recognition across languages. In S. Fruhholz & P. Belin (Eds.),
The Oxford handbook of voice perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perrachione, T. K., Del Tufo, S. N., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2011). Human voice recognition depends on
language ability. Science, 333, 595.
Perrachione, T. K., & Wong, P. C. (2007). Learning to recognize speakers of a non-native language:
Implications for the functional organization of human auditory cortex. Neuropsychologia, 45,
1899-1910.
Pitt, M. A., & McQueen, J. M. (1998). Is compensation for coarticulation mediated by the lexicon?
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 347-370.
Pitt, M. A., & Szostak, C. M. (2012). A lexically biased attentional set compensates for variable
speech quality caused by pronunciation variation. Language and Cognitive Processes, 27,
1225-1239.
Psychology Software Tools, Inc. [E-Prime 2.0]. 2012. Retrieved from http://www.pstnet.com
Rubin, D. L. (1992). Nonlanguage factors affecting undergraduates' judgments of nonnative Englishspeaking teaching assistants. Research in Higher Education, 33, 511-531.
Samuel, A. G. (2001). Knowing a word affects the fundamental perception of the sounds within it.
Psychological Science, 12, 348-351.
Sprietsma, M. (2013). Discrimination in grading: Experimental evidence from primary school
teachers. Empirical Economics, 45, 523-538.
Staum Casasanto, L. (2008). Does social information influence sentence processing? Proceedings of
the Cognitive Science Society, 30, 799-804.
Stevenage, S. V., Clarke, G., & McNeill, A. (2012). The "other-accent" effect in voice recognition.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 24, 647-653.
Strand, E., & Johnson, K. (1996). Gradient and visual speaker normalization in the perception of
fricatives. In D. Gibbon (Ed.), Natural language processing and speech technology: Results of
the 3rd KONVENS Conference, Bielfelt, October, 1996 (pp. 14-26). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Tan, P. K. W. (2001). Englishised names? English Today, 17, 45-53.
Thompson, C. P. (1987). A language effect in voice identification. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 1,
121-131.
Winters, S. J., Levi, S. V., & Pisoni, D. B. (2008). Identification and discrimination of bilingual talkers
across languages. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 123, 4524-4538.
Xie, X., & Myers, E. (2015). The impact of musical training and tone language experience on talker
identification. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 137, 419-432.
Yarmey, A. D. (1991). Descriptions of distinctive and non-distinctive voices over time. Journal of the
Forensic Science Society, 31, 421-428.
Yi, H. G., Phelps, J. E., Smiljanic, R., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2013). Reduced efficiency of
audiovisual integration for nonnative speech. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
134, EL387-EL393.

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1145

APPENDIX A
High-predictability sentences

Low-predictability sentences

People wear shoes on their feet.
A wristwatch is used to tell the time.
The color of a lemon is yellow.
The good boy is helping his mother and father.
A book tells a story.

We pointed at the bird.
She looked at the clock.
This is her favorite week.
She talked about the leaves.
Mom talked about the pie.

APPENDIX B
LANGUAGE BACKGROUND QUESTIONNAIRE
Please answer the questions below to the best of your ability. Please ask the experimenter if you have
any questions or concerns.
1. Are you a native speaker of English? In this case, "native" refers to your first

language. Yes / No
2. If English is not your native language, is it your dominant language? Yes / No
3. If English is not your native language, what is/are your native language(s)?
4. Regardless of whether English is your native or dominant language, what variety of

English do you speak? Please specify a dialect (e.g., Newfoundland English,
Southern US English, etc.) if you would like.___ American English___ Australian
English___ British English___ Canadian English___ Indian English___ Irish
English___ Hong Kong English___ Jamaican English___ New Zealand English___
Scottish English___ Singaporean English___ South African English___ Other.
Please, specify:
5. What gender do you identify as? ______________
6. What is your racial or ethnic heritage? Check all that apply___ First
Nations___ Asian___ Pacific Islander___ Black___ White___ Hispanic___
South Asian___ Other (Please specify): ________
7. What is your age? _____
8. Are
you
right-handed
or
left-handed?
_______________________________________
9. What cities or towns have you lived in? Beginning with the place where you were
born, please list each town or city (and country, if appropriate) you have lived in for
6 months or more.
10. What is your proficiency in English?(1) not at all, (2) poorly, (3) fairly well, (4)
fluently.Reading ___Writing ____Speaking ___Listening ___
11. At what age did you start learning English? _____
12. Do you have knowledge of any languages other than English? This can include
both languages you speak natively and ones you have learned in educational
settings. Yes / No
13. What is your proficiency in Mandarin? If you do not have any knowledge of this
language, please skip this question.(1) not at all, (2) poorly, (3) fairly well, (4)
fluently.Reading ___Writing ____Speaking ___Listening ___
14. At what age did you start learning Mandarin? _____

Applied Psycholinguistics 39:6
Senior et al.: Name influence on voice recall

1146

15. What other languages do you have knowledge of? Please include both languages

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

you speak natively and ones you have learned in educational settings. When did
you start learning this language? How would you rate your proficiency in reading,
writing, speaking, and understanding it? (1) not at all, (2) poorly, (3) fairly well, (4)
fluently.
Which language(s) do you most commonly speak:At home?At work?At school?
With friends?With parents?With grandparents?
Do you have any speech or hearing disorders? If "yes," please specify:
Where were your caretakers born and raised?
What are your caretakers' first languages?
What is the highest educational degree you have earned (or are in the process of
earning)?
What did you think the experiment was about? (optional)

