J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936-017-9550-7

Do Children Understand Iconic Gestures About Events
as Early as Iconic Gestures About Entities?
Melissa L. Glasser1
Seyda Ozcaliskan1

* Rebecca A. Williamson1 *

Published online: 5 January 2018
(c) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018

Abstract Children can understand iconic co-speech gestures that characterize entities by
age 3 (Stanfield et al. in J Child Lang 40(2):1-10, 2014; e.g., "I'm drinking" + tilting hand in
C-shape to mouth as if holding a glass). In this study, we ask whether children understand cospeech gestures that characterize events as early as they do so for entities, and if so, whether
their understanding is influenced by the patterns of gesture production in their native language.
We examined this question by studying native English speaking 3- to 4 year-old children and
adults as they completed an iconic co-speech gesture comprehension task involving motion
events across two studies. Our results showed that children understood iconic co-speech
gestures about events at age 4, marking comprehension of gestures about events one year
later than gestures about entities. Our findings also showed that native gesture production
patterns influenced children's comprehension of gestures characterizing such events, with
better comprehension for gestures that follow language-specific patterns compared to the
ones that do not follow such patterns--particularly for manner of motion. Overall, these
results highlight early emerging abilities in gesture comprehension about motion events.
Keywords Gesture comprehension * Motion events * Language development * Child gesture

Introduction
Gestures often convey unique information not found in the accompanying speech (McNeill
1992). Speakers, including children in the early stages of language learning, rely on these cospeech gestures for unpacking communications addressed to them (Goldin-Meadow 2003).
Previous work showed that children begin to understand deictic co-speech gestures that
identify objects around age 1 ("open" + point at box; Morford and Goldin-Meadow 1992)
and iconic co-speech gestures that characterize objects around age 3 ("open" + hold open

B
1

Melissa L. Glasser
Mhrabic1@student.gsu.edu
Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302, USA

123

742

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

palms together as if book; Stanfield et al. 2014). However, it remains unknown whether
young children can comprehend co-speech gestures representing events as readily as they
understand co-speech gestures representing entities (i.e., objects). In this study, we focus on
iconic co-speech gestures depicting motion events in English. We ask whether young children
understand gestures conveying motion events as early as they do so for gestures conveying
entities, and whether their understanding is influenced by the language-typical patterns of
gesture expression for such events in English.
Comprehension of gesture follows a developmental pattern similar to its production. Children first comprehend deictic gestures that indicate objects (e.g., point at ball), followed
shortly by conventional gestures that convey culturally-shared meanings with prescribed
gesture forms (e.g., nodding head for affirmation) and finally iconic gestures that convey
actions or attributes associated with objects (e.g., flapping arms to convey bird flying; holding cupped hands in air to convey shape of a ball; Bates 1976; Butterworth 2003; Behne et al.
2011; Iverson et al. 1994; Namy et al. 2004; Ozcaliskan et al. 2014; Stanfield et al. 2014;
Woodward and Guajardo 2002). Children also understand co-speech gestures that convey
additional information not found in speech around the time they begin to produce such gestures on their own. When presented with a deictic co-speech gesture that provides unique
information not found in speech (e.g., "open" + point at bag), 15-month-olds successfully
act on an object that was uniquely identified in the gesture, as do 20-month-olds when presented with a conventional gesture that requests an object ("ball" + GIVE gesture; Morford
and Goldin-Meadow 1992). Similarly, when presented with an iconic co-speech gesture that
conveys object information not found in speech (e.g., "I am eating" + tilt empty cupped
hands in parallel next to mouth as if holding a sandwich), 3-year-olds can correctly choose
the picture of the referent expressed uniquely in gesture (Stanfield et al. 2014).
Compared to iconic co-speech gestures conveying information about entities, less is known
about children's comprehension of iconic co-speech gestures about events. One possibility is
that children may understand gestures about events around the same time as gestures about
entities, which previous work sets around age 3 (Stanfield et al. 2014). This would represent
an outcome of children's increased ability to interpret relational information conveyed by
iconic gestures. However, an alternate, and perhaps more likely, possibility is that children
may initially be better at understanding co-speech gestures about entities, and only later
show comprehension of co-speech gestures about events. This protracted development may
occur for two reasons. Primarily, young children's early communicative experiences revolve
mostly around concrete objects, making gesturing about entities a more common feature of
not only their own communications but also the communications that are addressed to them
(Bates 1976; Acredolo and Goodwyn 1985). Second, gestures about events show languagespecific patterns (Kita and Ozyurek 2003; Ozcaliskan et al. 2016a, b), which, in turn, might
impose additional demands on young children, resulting in a more extended timeline for their
comprehension.
In this study we focus on the comprehension of iconic gestures of a particular event type,
namely motion events, a key aspect of human experience. Motion events also provide a
unique case on which to examine the influence of language on children's comprehension
of iconic co-speech gestures, particularly with respect to the expression of two key components of motion, namely manner that details the way in which something moves, and
path that depicts the direction in which something moves (Talmy 1985, 2000). Speakers
of English, show a conflated pattern in their speech about motion, expressing manner in
the verb and path in a particle associated with the verb within a single clause (e.g., "she
RUNS into the house")--a pattern that contrasts with other languages (e.g., Spanish, Turkish), which use a separated pattern in speech, expressing path in the verb and manner in an

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

743

additional subordinate clause ("Eve GIRER kosarak = she ENTERS the house by running";
Ozcaliskan and Slobin 1999). More important, the patterns in co-speech iconic gestures
follow the patterns in speech: adult English speakers use the same conflated pattern in gesture, conflating manner and path components into a single gesture (e.g., wiggle index and
middle fingers while moving hand from right to left to convey running right to left), a pattern that contrasts with co-speech gestures produced by adult speakers in other languages.
Instead, speakers of languages, such as Turkish, follow the same separated pattern in their
speech, producing one gesture for path (trace a line from left to right to convey left to
right trajectory) and one for manner (e.g., wiggle fingers in the same place to convey running; Kita and Ozyurek 2003; Ozcaliskan et al. 2016a, b). The developmental beginnings
of language-specific patterns in co-speech gesture production remains inconclusive, with
some studies suggesting early attunement to the conflated gesture patterns (Ozcaliskan et al.
2014), while others suggesting a more protracted timeline for the production of languagespecific gestures, extending beyond the preschool years (Ozyurek et al. 2008) among children
learning English. There is no work that examines how early children learning English
show attunement to language-specific patterns in their comprehension of gestures about
events.
In this study, we focus on young children's comprehension of iconic co-speech gestures
about events, in which the gesture provides unique information not found in the accompanying
speech. Across two studies, we first ask (Study 1) whether comprehension of gestures about
events emerges around the same time or later, compared to the comprehension of gestures
about entities, documented in earlier work (Stanfield et al. 2014). We next ask (Study 2)
whether comprehension of events is affected by the language-specific patterns of gesture
production in English, with better comprehension of conflated gestures (e.g., wiggle fingers
leftward as if running leftward; tested in Study 1) that follow the language-specific pattern
than separated gestures (e.g., wiggle fingers in place to convey running; trace a line leftward
to convey leftward trajectory; tested in Study 2) that do not follow the language-specific
pattern in English.

Study 1
In Study 1, we focus on gestures that follow language-specific patterns in English (i.e.,
manner + path conflated gestures). We first ask whether children show comprehension of
iconic gestures about events as early as they show comprehension of iconic gestures about
entities, documented in earlier work (Stanfield et al. 2014). We next ask whether children
rely on both manner and path cues (typical English pattern) or on only-manner or only-path
cues in their comprehension of gestures about motion events. Participants were presented
with co-speech gesture demonstrations depicting conflated manner + path information and
were then tested in one of three conditions: manner + path contrast condition (i.e., choose
between two animated videos of figure moving with the same manner and path vs. figure
moving with different manner and path), path-contrast condition (i.e., choose between
figure moving with the same vs. different path, while manner remains constant) and mannercontrast condition (i.e., choose between figure moving with the same vs. different manner,
while path remains constant). We predicted that, across conditions, participants would show
comprehension of gestures about events either at the same age (age 3) or later (age 4) than
they show comprehension of gestures about entities, reported in previous work (Stanfield
et al. 2014). We also predicted that children will show better comprehension of gestures

123

744

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

in the manner + path contrast condition compared to the other two conditions (manner
contrast, path contrast), because the manner + path contrast condition affords participants
the opportunity to identify the correct animation using either path or manner cues, as the
incorrect choice varies on both dimensions. In contrast, in the path- and manner-contrast
conditions, participants are forced to rely on only one dimension of motion--a task that
might be particularly difficult for younger children as they have to analyze the conflated
manner + path gesture into its constituent parts to correctly identify the animation matching
the observed gesture.

Methods
Participants
Participants included 3-year-olds (n = 42; M = 3; 1, range = 2;11-3;8; 19 males), 4-yearolds (n = 42; M = 4; 2; range = 4;0-4;11, 21 males), and adults (n = 42; M = 20; 11, range
= 18;0-40;0; 5 males). Most children came from middle- to upper-middle-class families and
were predominantly Caucasian (68%), African American (13%), or of mixed races (12%).
The adults were college students at an urban research university and were predominantly
African American (38%), Caucasian (31%), or Asian (21%) All participants were native
English speakers.

Materials
The program E-prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA), running on a 15"
laptop, was used to display stimuli and to record responses. The stimuli included 16 demonstrations of co-speech iconic gestures conveying motion events with manner and path. The
stimuli consisted of two sets, each including the same 8 manners, but with contrasting paths
(e.g., run upward in set 1 vs. run downward in set 2; see Table 1). The gestures used in the
16 video demonstrations--all produced by the same native English speaker and all equal
in length-- were based on spontaneous gestures produced by adult English speakers in
earlier work (Ozcaliskan et al. 2016a, b). Prior to the study, we videotaped each gesture
demonstration by providing the gesturer with explicit instructions (e.g., wiggle your right
index and middle fingers leftward while saying `he is moving'). All videos were matched
for time to control for length across the different demonstrations. All gestures that involved
leftward path were produced with the right hand and all gestures that involved rightward
path were produced with the left hand. Gestures depicting upward and downward direction were produced half of the time with the right hand, and half of the time with the left
hand.
Each gesture demonstration was followed by a pair of animated clips (developed by the
first author with Pivot Stickfigure Animator) that served as choices for the participants'
responses. Each clip showed a stick figure moving with a particular manner and path, which
either matched or mismatched the manner and/or path shown in the gesture demonstration
video. The choice to use stick figures, instead of human actors, was based on the relatively
young age of our participants. Stick figure animations provide a simple but yet attentiongrabbing tool to highlight the different motion components for young children. Each clip
pair continued to loop until participants made their choice.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

745

Table 1 The two sets of gestures used in video demonstrations
Video

Manner

Path

Gestural description

1.

Run

Leftward

Rapidly alternate downward-pointing index and
middle fingers in leftward trajectory

2.

Fly

Upward

Slowly flap downward-facing palm with fingers
spread out in upward trajectory

3.

Flip

Rightward

Quickly turn upward-pointing index and middle
fingers in rightward trajectory

4.

Roll

Downward

Rapidly draw circles with sideways-pointing index
finger in downward trajectory

5.

Crawl

Leftward

Slowly alternate sideways-pointing knuckles of
index and middle fingers in leftward trajectory

6.

Climb

Upward

Slowly alternate upward-pointing knuckles of index
and middle fingers in upward trajectory

7.

Dance

Leftward

Repeatedly twist and straighten upward-pointing
index and middle fingers in leftward trajectory

8.

Tumble

Downward

Rapidly draw circles with downward-facing palm
with fingers closed in downward trajectory

9.

Run

Rightward

Rapidly alternate downward-pointing index and
middle fingers in rightward trajectory

10.

Fly

Downward

Slowly flap downward-facing palm with fingers
spread out in downward trajectory

11.

Flip

Leftward

Quickly turn upward-pointing index and middle
fingers in leftward trajectory

12.

Roll

Upward

Rapidly draw circles with sideways-pointing index
finger in upward trajectory

13.

Crawl

Rightward

Slowly alternate sideways-pointing knuckles of
index and middle fingers in rightward trajectory

14.

Climb

Downward

Slowly alternate upward-pointing knuckles of index
and middle fingers in downward trajectory

15.

Dance

Rightward

Repeatedly twist and straighten upward-pointing
index and middle fingers in rightward trajectory

16.

Tumble

Upward

Rapidly draw circles with downward-facing palm
with fingers closed in upward trajectory

Set 1

Set 2

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a laboratory space. Each participant was assigned to
one of three between-subjects conditions (manner + path contrast, path-contrast, mannercontrast), with 14 participants per age and condition. The procedure included two training
trials followed by eight test trials (set 1 or set 2), each consisting of a co-speech gesture
demonstration (via video; e.g., wiggling fingers left to right as if running in leftward trajectory). Each test trial was succeeded by a forced-choice response between two animated
clips. The number of trials was chosen to respect the limitations of the youngest children's
attention to the task.

123

746

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

Training Trials
To ensure that participants (particularly children) understood the procedure, they saw two
co-speech gestures in succession, each of which included an iconic gesture for an animal
(e.g., "Look it's a bunny" + bouncing index and middle fingers in upward-pointing V-shape
to represent a bunny hopping). They were then presented with a forced-choice response
between pictures of two animals (e.g., rabbit vs. duck) side-by-side on the computer screen,
with only one picture being the correct match, and were asked to make a choice ("Which one
was that?").

Test Trials
Each participant was presented with a video demonstration of an actress displaying a gesture
that conveyed both path and manner information accompanied by a neutral verbal description
("Look, he's moving" + wiggle fingers left to right as if running in rightward trajectory; see
Fig. 1a). After each gesture demonstration, participants were presented with two side-by-side
animations playing simultaneously on the computer screen, each showing an animated stick
figure moving across space (e.g., rightward, leftward) with a particular manner (e.g., running,
dancing). The video pairs looped continuously until the participant made a selection from the
forced choice options. Participants were asked to choose the stick figure whose movement
matched the initial gesture demonstration (e.g., "Which one is he?"). One animation, the correct choice, always showed a figure moving with the same manner and path as demonstrated
in the gesture (e.g., running left to right; (Fig. 1b1). The other animation, the incorrect choice,
varied as a function of condition, and contrasted with the demonstrated gesture in terms of
(1) both manner and path (manner + path contrast; e.g., dancing right to left), (2) only path
(path contrast; e.g., running right to left), or (3) only manner (manner contrast; e.g., dancing
left to right); see Fig. 1b2. In each condition, the same four manner pairs were contrasted
with one another: running/dancing, flying/tumbling, crawling/flipping and rolling/climbing
across two path pairs (leftward/rightward; upward/downward). Prior to the study, all video
demonstrations were also tested with a separate group of adult English speakers (n = 8),
who all performed at ceiling levels.
We developed two sets of gesture demonstrations for the test trials that depicted the same
8 manners, but with opposite paths in each set (e.g., running leftward in set 1 vs. running
rightward in set 2). Half of the participants in each age group saw the first set of the gesture
demonstrations and the other half saw the second set, each with 8 items. The side on which
the correct animation video was shown (left vs. right of the participant) was counterbalanced
across trials for each participant.

Scoring and Analysis
The adult participants recorded their own responses into the computer with a mouse click.
Child participants identified the correct animation by pointing to it, and the experimenter
inputted their response. An independent coder, who was blind to condition, participant age,
and hypotheses of the study, re-scored from video the selections of a randomly chosen 25% of
the children. Agreement between the experimenter at the time of the study and the coder was
100%. Each response was scored as correct (1) or incorrect (0), yielding a score of correct
responses that ranged from 0-8 for the test trials for each individual participant. Differences
between age groups and conditions were analyzed with a two-way ANOVA with age (3year-olds, 4-year-olds, adults) and condition (path + manner contrast, manner-only contrast,

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

747

(a) Conflated Manner+Path demonstration (Run rightward)

(b1) Correct animation choice (Run rightward)

(b2) Incorrect animation choices
Manner+Path Contrast
(Dance leftward)

Manner Contrast
(Dance rightward)

Path Contrast
(Run leftward)

Fig. 1 Trial progression for "run left to right" gesture, including still images from video demonstration (a),
and from test animations for the correct (b1) and incorrect (b2) choices for each condition

path-only contrast) as between subject factors. Differences from chance performance (score
of 4 out of 8) were analyzed with planned one sample t-tests. One-tailed values are reported
for the t-tests in accordance with the a priori hypothesis that participants' performance would
not be significantly lower than chance, based on earlier work that showed comprehension of
iconic co-speech gestures by age 3 (Stanfield et al. 2014).

Results
Performance on the training trials indicated that all participants understood the demands of
the task, correctly choosing the pictures (rabbit or duck) that matched the gesture demonstra-

123

748

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

Fig. 2 Mean correct responses (of 8; SE) provided by 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and adults in manner + path
(a), manner (b) and path (c) contrast conditions. Asterisk indicates scores significantly above chance

tions (90, 95, and 100% mean percent correct for the 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds, and adults,
respectively). Participant responses also showed no effect of participants' sex, order of presentation in the test trials, or directionality of path (i.e., leftward/downward versus up/down);
therefore all subsequent analyses combined the scores across males and females, different
presentation orders, and path directionality.
The ability to identify the correct referent of a conflated manner + path gesture improved
over time, showing a main effect of age, F(2, 124) = 99.43, p < .001, 2p = .63, but
no main effect of condition, F(2, 124) = .2, p = .82, or Age x Condition interaction,
F(4, 122) = 1.05, p = .39; see Fig. 2. Across groups, adults performed significantly
better than the 4-year-olds, who, in turn, performed significantly better than the 3-year-olds
(Bonferroni, ps < .01; Fig. 1c). Planned comparisons to chance (a score of 4 out of 8) for
each age per condition also revealed that both adults ( ps <.001) and 4-year-olds, ( ps < .05)
provided correct choices significantly above-chance, while 3-year-olds performed at chance
levels ( ps > .15 in all conditions).1

Discussion
Study 1 revealed that, by age 4, English-speaking children can identify events conveyed
through English-typical conflated gestures, a year later than they were reported to understand iconic co-speech gestures depicting entities (Stanfield et al. 2014). This suggests that
co-speech gestures depicting events might be more difficult for young children to unpack.
Notably, the 4-year-olds were not only able to identify this information when the incorrect
choice varied by manner and path, but were also able to identify the event depicted by the
gesture even when the correct and incorrect animation choices varied on only one dimension
of motion: path or manner. This suggests that 4-year-olds are capable of using either path
or manner cues to identify the referent of a manner + path conflated gesture. In contrast,
1 Adults performed significantly above chance in all three conditions: manner + path contrast, t (13) = 17.24,

p < .001, d = 9.56; manner contrast, t (13) = 14.89, p < .001, d = 8.26; and path contrast, formal statistics
could not be conducted due to 100% correct, with no variance. This pattern remained the same for 4-year-olds:
manner + path, t (13) = 2.88, p < .05, d = 1.6; manner contrast, t (13) = 2.78, p < .05, d = 1.54; path
contrast, t (13) = 1.81, p < .05, d = 1. On the other hand, 3-year-olds were at chance in all three conditions:
manner + path = t (13) = 1.0, p = .17; manner contrast t (13) = 0.51, p = .31; path contrast t (13) = 0,
p = .5.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

749

3-year-olds failed to comprehend such conflated gestures, even when the incorrect choice
contrasted with the demonstrated gesture on both path and manner cues, further marking age
4 as the earliest age in understanding co-speech gestures about events. At the same time, the
gestures in the stimulus videos followed language-specific patterns in English (i.e., manner
and path expressed simultaneously within a conflated gesture), which might have facilitated
children's comprehension. To test this possibility, we next asked whether language-specific
patterns in iconic gesture production have an effect on children's comprehension of iconic
co-speech gestures in depicting motion events.

Study 2
In Study 2, we focus on young children's comprehension of gestures that do not follow
language-specific patterns in English, namely separated gestures that convey only manner
(e.g., wiggle fingers in place to convey running) or only path (e.g., tracing a downward
path with finger to convey downward trajectory). Participants were presented with co-speech
gesture demonstrations depicting either only manner (separated manner condition) or only
path (separated path condition). They were then tested for their ability to identify variations
in manner in the separated manner condition (i.e., choosing between a figure moving with
the same vs. different manner as demonstration, while path remains the same), or variations
in path in the separated path condition (i.e., choosing between a figure moving with the
same vs. different path as demonstration, while manner remains the same). We expected
children's responses to follow one of two patterns. If gesture comprehension is affected by
the language-specific patterns of gesture production in English, then children would show
lower levels of gesture comprehension when presented with separated gestures that do not
follow language-specific patterns (Study 2) compared to conflated gestures that do follow the
gesture production pattern in English (Study 1). If, on the other hand, comprehension is not
affected by language-specificity of the gestures, then we would expect children to perform
equally well when presented with either separated or conflated gestures, showing similar
performance across the two studies.

Methods
Participants
Participants were 3-year-olds (n = 28; M = 36; 2, range = 2;11-3;9; 15 males), 4-year-olds
(n = 28; M = 4; 2, range = 4;0-4;10; 14 males), and adults (n = 28; M = 21; 1, range =
18;0-36;0; 6 males), none of whom participated in Study 1. Most children came from middleto upper-middle-class families and were predominantly Caucasian (64%), African American (29%), or of mixed races (4%). The adults were college students at an urban research
university and were predominantly African American (57%), Asian (18%), or Caucasian
(11%).

Procedure
Each participant first completed two training trials that were identical to those used in Study 1.
They then completed eight test trials following the same procedure as in Study 1, with one key
difference: the gesture video demonstrations showed only one component of motion, either
path or manner, instead of both components. More specifically, the gesture demonstrations

123

750

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

(a1) Separated Manner Demonstration

(a2) Separated Path Demonstration

(Run)

(Rightward)

(b1) Correct Animation (Run rightward)

(b2) Incorrect Animations
Separated Manner
(Dance rightward)

Separated Path
(Run leftward)

Fig. 3 Trial progression for "run left to right" gesture, including still images from video demonstration in
each condition (a), and from test animations for the correct (b1) and incorrect (b2) choices for each condition

were comprised of a neutral verbal description accompanied by an iconic gesture conveying
either manner information without any path cues (separated manner condition; e.g., "Look,
he's moving" + wiggle index and middle fingers rapidly in the same location; Fig. 3a1)
or only path information without any manner (separated path condition; e.g., "Look, he's
moving" + trace finger left to right to convey leftward trajectory, (Fig. 3a2). Half of the
gestures presented in either condition were produced with the right hand, and the other half
were produced with the left hand.
Participants then were asked to match the gesture demonstration to one of two animations.
In the separated manner condition, the two animations moved in the same path (e.g., to the
right) but with different manners (e.g., running versus dancing), making manner the cue
necessary for the identification of the correct choice (Fig. 3, b1 vs. b2: manner contrast).
Conversely, in the separated path condition, the stick figure in the two animations moved
with the same manner (e.g., running) but in different paths (e.g., to the right versus the left);
thereby making path the cue necessary for the identification of the correct choice (Fig. 3, b1
vs. b2: path contrast). These test choices were identical to the choices in the path contrast and
manner contrast conditions in Study 1. Half of the participants in each age group (n = 14
per age) participated in the separated manner condition, and the other half in the separated
path condition. Finally, an independent coder scored from video the selections of a randomlychosen 25% of the children. Agreement between the original experimenter and the later coder
was 100%.
Each response was scored as correct (1) or incorrect (0), yielding a score of correct
responses that ranged from 0-8 for the test trials for each individual participant, following
the scoring procedures outlined in Study 1. Differences between ages and conditions were
analyzed with 2-way ANOVAs, with both age (3-year-olds, 4-year-olds, adults) and condition (manner-only contrast, path-only contrast) as between subject factors. Differences from
chance performance were analyzed with a set of one-tailed t-tests.

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

751

Fig. 4 Mean correct responses
(of 8; SE) provide by
3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and
adults in separated manner (a)
and separated path (b) conditions.
Asterisk indicates scores
significantly above chance

Results
Performance on the training trials indicated that all participants understood the demands of
the task, correctly choosing the picture that matched the gesture demonstrations (90, 96,
and 100% mean percent correct for the 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds, and adults, respectively).
Preliminary analyses also showed no effect of participant's sex, presentation order of test
trials on the choice score, or directionality of path (i.e., moving rightward/leftward versus
up/down); therefore all subsequent analyses were collapsed across sexes, presentation orders,
and directionality.
Similar to Study 1, the ability to glean information from separated manner (e.g., wiggling
fingers) or separated path (e.g., trajectory left to right) gestures improved with age: participant
responses showed a main effect of age F(2, 82) = 47.14, p < .001, 2p = .55, but no
main effect of condition, F(1, 83) = 1.2, p = .28, or an Age x Condition interaction,
F(2, 70) = .64, p = .53; see Fig. 4. Planned comparisons to chance performance revealed,
for both conditions, that adults performed at levels above chance, in both conditions: separated
manner (t (13) = 7.6; p < .001, d = 4.2) and separated path (t (13) = 9.02, p < .001,
d = 5.0), while 3-year-olds showed no difference from chance on either condition, (separated
manner, t (13) = 0.20, p = .42; separated path, t (13) = 0.29, p = .39). Interestingly,
the performance of the 4-year-olds differed between the two conditions. While 4-year-olds
performed at levels above chance in the separated path condition, t (13) = 2.22, p < .05;
d = 1.2, their performance was at chance in the separated manner condition, t (13) = 0.37,
p = .36, suggesting better comprehension of separated path than separated manner gestures
at age 4.

Discussion
Study 2 examined the comprehension of co-speech iconic gestures that did not follow
language-speech gesture patterns in English (i.e., separated manner, separated path). Children showed comprehension of separated gestures, but only for gestures conveying path of
motion. Similar to Study 1, adults were able to identify either the path or manner information
that was uniquely conveyed through an iconic gesture, while 3-year-olds performance did not
differ from chance. However, the 4-year-olds' performance was more nuanced; they showed
above-chance performance when matching separated path gestures with the depicted event,
but demonstrated no evidence of correctly identifying the event match for a separated manner
gesture. Taken together, these findings suggest that children show greater difficulty in their

123

752

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

comprehension for gestures that do not follow language-specific patterns, particularly if the
gesture conveys manner of motion.

General Discussion
In this paper, across two studies, we examined whether children understand iconic co-speech
gestures conveying motion events as early as they understand iconic gestures conveying
entities, and whether this understanding is influenced by the language-specific patterns of
gesture expression for events in their native language. In Study 1, participants were presented
with manner + path conflated gestures, which follow frequently observed language-specific
patterns in English (Ozcaliskan et al. 2016a, b). By age 4, participants identified both the path
and manner information conveyed by the conflated iconic co-speech gestures at levels reliably
above-chance. Study 2 tested the comprehension of co-speech gestures that do not follow
language-specific patterns in English, presenting only one motion cue: path or manner. At
age 4, children were able to match a path gesture to its referent, but were unable to do so when
presented with a gesture conveying manner information alone. These findings suggest that
children understand iconic co-speech gestures depicting events later than the ones depicting
entities, and language-specific patterns of event expression in gesture might have an effect
on their comprehension.
Why do children understand iconic co-speech gestures conveying events later than the
ones depicting entities? One possibility for this protracted development stems from children's
production of gestures and words identifying entities and events. The majority of children's
early verbal one-on-one interactions with caregivers center on objects, rather than events.
Not surprisingly, children produce gestures and words identifying objects earlier than the
ones identifying events (e.g., Iverson and Goldin-Meadow 2005; Gentner 1982; Ozcaliskan
et al. 2014). Moreover, the gestures that depict events, such as motion, also show crosslinguistic variability, requiring more extended time frame for children to master the native
ways of expressing such events in both speech and gesture. The additional demands associated
with children's production of iconic gestures about events, might in turn, influence their
comprehension, resulting in later comprehension of gestures about events.
Even though children showed slightly later comprehension of gestures conveying motion
events, they performed equally well when presented with both manner and path, or with
manner or path cues to identify the referent of a conflated manner + path gesture. One possible explanation for this is that growing up in an English-speaking environment, children
have extensive opportunities to observe such conflated gestures, which, in turn, might have
enhanced their comprehension of such conflated gestures both as a whole and in terms of
their constituent parts. A further possibility for this success is that children's own experience producing conflated gestures may aid in their comprehension. There is some evidence
(Ozcaliskan et al. 2014) that suggests that English-speaking children from early in development produce manner + path conflated gestures, thus rendering it possible that their
production aids in the comprehension of gestures conveying manner and path components
simultaneously. It is important to note here that, our study focused on native speakers of
English only, a language for which the preferred gesture pattern was conflated, and found
evidence of relatively early comprehension for such gestures. However, it is possible that
children learning a language with separated gesture patterns might show better comprehension of separated gestures. Future studies examining languages for which the preferred
gesture pattern is separated (e.g., Spanish, Turkish) are thus needed to shed further light on

123

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

753

the extent of language influence on gesture comprehension for the different components of
motion events.
Our results also showed some evidence of early comprehension even when the gestures
did not follow language-specific patterns in English. Four-year-olds understood separated
gestures that encoded only path--but not manner--at levels reliably above chance. What
might underlie this difference? One possibility could be the centrality of path information
to a motion event. Path of motion has been argued to be a core component of a motion
event regardless of language (Talmy 2000), and is also argued to be a conceptual precursor,
already present in the infants' representational system at the pre-linguistic stage (Mandler
1991). Further support for early saliency of path comes from past research with infants 10-13
months that shows that infants are better able to identify variations in path than in manner
(Pruden et al. 2004). Furthermore, research with deaf American and Chinese homesigners
who have never been exposed to conventional signed or spoken language input, shows that
their earliest motion gestures convey path, but not manner, of motion (Zheng and GoldinMeadow 2002).
An alternate possibility for this pattern of findings involves the iconicity of the demonstrated gestures. Specifically, when participants saw a separated path gesture, they saw only
a pointed finger tracing a path. In this case, it was unnecessary for them to focus on the
intended referent of the motion; they needed to recognize only that something was moving in
a particular direction to successfully identify the referent. In contrast, participants presented
with separated manner gestures first had to identify the hand as a representation of a person,
and then infer the sort of manner with which the person was moving. Thus, it is probable that
although manner is typically emphasized more than path for English speakers, these 4-yearolds may have struggled with the iconic mapping necessary to link the separated manner
gesture to its intended referent. Our decision to include different handshapes in the separated
path vs. separated manner conditions was based on earlier work that showed use of such
distinct handshapes in the spontaneous gestures produced by adult English speakers when
depicting manner vs. path components of motion (Ozcaliskan et al. 2016a, b). Future studies
that keep the handshape form of the gesture constant in the separated path and separated
manner conditions (e.g., tracing a line with index finger for path vs. wiggling index finger
in place for manner) can shed further light on the possible effect handshape could have on
children's comprehension of gestures conveying path or manner.
In sum, the current study marks the preschool years as an important period for the comprehension of iconic gestures conveying motion events. It is not until age 4 that English-speaking
children are able to interpret gestures about events, roughly one year later than they are able
to do so for gestures about objects. Importantly, comprehension of such gestures about events
show some influence of the language-specific gesture patterns in the language, with earlier
comprehension of conflated gestures, particularly compared to separated gestures conveying
only manner information.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References
Acredolo, L. P., & Goodwyn, S. W. (1985). Symbolic gesturing in language development. Human Development,
28(1), 40-49.

123

754

J Psycholinguist Res (2018) 47:741-754

Bates, J. E. (1976). Effects of children's nonverbal behavior upon adults. Child Development, 47(4), 1079-
1088.
Behne, T., Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Twelve-month-olds' comprehension and
production of pointing. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 30(1), 359-375.
Butterworth, G. (2003). Pointing is the royal road to language for babies. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where
language, culture, and cognition meet (pp. 9-33). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativity versus naturalportioning portioning. In S. Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development. Language, thought, and culture (Vol. 2, pp. 301-334).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). The resilience of language. New York: Psychology Press.
Iverson, J. M., Capirci, O., & Caselli, M. C. (1994). From communication to language in two modalities.
Cognitive Development, 9(1), 23-43.
Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way for language development. Psychological
Science, 16(5), 367-371.
Kita, S., & Ozyurek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic variation in semantic coordination of speech and
gesture reveal? Evidence for an interface representation of spatial thinking and speaking. Journal of
Memory and Language, 48(1), 16-32.
Mandler, J. M. (1991). Prelinguistic primitives. In Proceedings of the seventeenth annual meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society: General session and parasession on the grammar of event structure (Vol.
17, pp. 414-425).
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand in mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Morford, M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1992). Comprehension and production of gesture in combination with
speech in one-word speakers. Journal of Child Language, 19(3), 559-580.
Namy, L. L., Campbell, A. L., & Tomasello, M. (2004). The changing role of iconicity in non- verbal symbol learning: A U-shaped trajectory in the acquisition of arbitrary gestures. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 5(1), 37-57.
Ozcaliskan, S., Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2014). Do iconic gestures pave the way for children's
early verbs? Applied Psycholinguistics, 35(6), 1143-1162.
Ozcaliskan, S., Lucero, C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2016a). Does language shape silent gesture? Cognition,
148(1), 10-18.
Ozcaliskan S., Lucero, C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2016b). Is seeing gesture necessary to gesture like a native
speaker? Psychological Science, 27(5), 737-747.
Ozcaliskan, S., & Slobin, D. I. (1999). Learning how to search for the frog: Expression of manner of motion
in English, Spanish and Turkish. In A. Greenhill, H. Littlefield & C. Tano (Eds.), Proceedings of the
23rd Boston University conference on language development (pp. 541-552). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Ozyurek, A., Kita, S., Allen, S., Brown, A., Furman, R., & Ishizuka, T. (2008). Development of cross-linguistic
variation in speech and gesture: Motion events in English and Turkish. Developmental Psychology, 44(4),
1040-1054.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Maguire, M. J., & Meyer, M. A. (2004). Foundations of verb learning:
Infants categorize path and manner in motion events. In A. Brugos, L. Micciulla & C. E. Smith (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 28th annual Boston University conference on language development (pp. 461-472).
Boston, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Stanfield, C., Williamson, R., & Ozcaliskan, S. (2014). How early do children understand gesture-speech
combinations with iconic gestures? Journal of Child Language, 40(2), 1-10.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description. Grammatical categories and the lexicon (Vol. III, pp. 57-149). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Woodward, A. L., & Guajardo, J. J. (2002). Infants' understanding of the point gesture as an object-directed
action. Cognitive Development, 17(1), 1061-1084.
Zheng, M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2002). Thought before language: How deaf and hearing children express
motion events across cultures. Cognition, 85(2), 145-175.

123

