C Cambridge University Press 2016 doi:10.1017/S1366728916001140
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 21 (4), 2018, 674-693 

The development of gender in
simultaneous and successive
bilingual acquisition of French
- Evidence for AOA and input
effects

J O NA S G R A N F E L D T
Centre for Languages and Literature, Lund University

(Received: September 24, 2015; final revision received: September 20, 2016; accepted: September 30, 2016; first published online 2 November 2016)

This study investigates the effects of Age of Onset of Acquisition (AOA) and the quality and quantity of input on the
longitudinal development of gender in the acquisition of French by simultaneous (2L1) and successive bilinguals (cL2).
Three aspects of French gender are studied: the abstract GENDER feature, gender assignment and gender concord. The
findings show that amount and quality of input correlate significantly with the rate of development of gender assignment.
Group-level analyses on gender concord show that there is no significant difference between the L1 and the 2L1 groups and
that error patterns are different in the 2L1 and cL2 groups. We conclude that while it is clear from the data that the
development of gender assignment is primarily dependent on input conditions the question is more open with respect to
gender concord. For concord a combination of AOA, the L1 acquisitional timetable, and input are important factors.
Keywords: French, gender, age of onset of acquisition, input, simultaneous bilinguals, successive bilinguals

1. Introduction
Current research in the field of bilingual language development identifies Age of Onset of Acquisition (AOA) and
the quantity and quality of input as main factors in the
search for understanding the route and rate of bilingual
acquisition of different target structures (Tsimpli, 2014;
Unsworth, Argyri, Cornips, Hulk, Sorace & Tsimpli,
2014). In this cross-linguistic research agenda, gender is
one of the most frequently studied linguistic features.
Several earlier studies have suggested, somewhat
simplified, that gender assignment and gender concord
in a gendered language such as French are just as easy
for the young monolingual child (L1) or the simultaneous
bilingual child (2L1) as they are difficult for the adult L2
learner (cf. on (2)L1 studies by Carroll, 1989; Clark, 1985;


I owe a lot to my colleagues Anita Thomas and Malin Agren at the
Centre for Languages and Literature in Lund. The input profile score
that I am using in this paper was really their idea to begin with, while I
am solely responsible for the empirical analysis in this work. Some of
the results on gender assignment are based on student work by Azize
Gunes who is hereby acknowledged. A previous version of this paper
was presented at the Language Learning Seminar at Lund University
and at EuroSLA 25 in Aix-en-Provence. I thank the audiences present.
I also acknowledge the comments from three BLC reviewers and from
Tanja Kupisch who helped to considerably improve the manuscript.
All remaining errors are mine. The study was funded by a grant
from the Swedish Research Council, grant number 2008-2086, to the
project Age of Onset of Acquisition and Linguistic Development in
French.

Granfeldt, 2003, 2005; Karmiloff-Smith, 1979; Muller,
1994; cf. on adult L2 studies by Bartning, 2000; Carroll,
1989, 1999; Dewaele & Veronique, 2001; Granfeldt,
2003, 2005; Harley, 1979; Hawkins & Franceschina,
2004). Depending on the authors, the proposed accounts
for explaining this L1-L2 difference have been couched
within L1 transfer and the impossibility of acquiring
functional features anew in adult L2 acquisition (Hawkins
& Franceschina, 2004), within maturational accounts
(Meisel, 2008; Mohring, 2001) or within different
processing accounts, either of the input (e.g., adult L2ignorance of some relevant properties in the input as in
Carroll, 1999) or of the output (e.g., adult L2-impossibility
of producing surface level morphology as in Gruter, LewWilliams & Fernald, 2012). Even though these accounts
differ in their theoretical approaches and the proposed
exact locus of the L1-adult L2 difference, they share a
reference to AOA effects in some way or another.
An AOA effect is perhaps most clearly argued for in
the maturational account of Meisel (2008). Meisel argued
on the basis of both behavioural and neurophysiological
data for a cut-off point for L1 acquisition between
ages 3 and 4 years. If AOA occurs before age 4, the
language will develop as in simultaneous bilinguals (2L1)
and be virtually indistinguishable from L1 monolingual
development. If AOA occurs after 4 years but before
8 years we will be dealing with an instance of child
L2 acquisition with some features (bound morphology)
developing as in adult L2 acquisition and others (syntax)
as in L1 acquisition.

Address for correspondence:
Prof. Jonas Granfeldt, Lund University, Centre for Languages and Literature, Box 201, 221 00 Lund, Sweden,
jonas.granfeldt@rom.lu.se

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French
More recent studies on gender marking have generally
confirmed previous empirical findings for adult L2
learners of French (Lindstrom, 2013), whereas results
in particular from 2L1 acquisition of gender point
to differences between gender assignment and gender
concord (or agreement) (Kupisch, Akpinar & Stohr,
2013). Importantly, some of these recent studies have
pointed out that gender systems (and grammatical features
in general) are not equally difficult to acquire, some
systems and features being more transparent and others
more opaque (Agren, Granfeldt & Thomas, 2014; Rodina
& Westergaard, 2013; Unsworth, Argyri, Cornips, Hulk,
Sorace & Tsimpli, 2011). In turn these findings have
opened up for a discussion of the influence of quantity
and quality of input on the development of gender
(Nicoladis & Marchak, 2011; Unsworth, 2013, among
others), which has emerged as a competing explanation
to AOA and transfer accounts in order to explain
gender difficulties in bilingual development. By now
there is an emerging consensus in this field of research
that the quantity and quality of input is particularly
important in bilingual acquisition of `late', `harder' or
`more opaque' grammatical structures (Gathercole, 2007;
Chondrogianni & Marinis, 2011; Unsworth et al., 2014),
structures typically involving interface relationships
of some kind (e.g., lexicon-syntax, syntax-semantics,
syntax-pragmatics) (Sorace, 2005, Tsimpli, 2014). In a
language like French, the development of gender will
simultaneously have effects on different linguistic levels,
including an abstract system level, the lexical level and
the syntactic level. This makes gender a particularly
interesting structure to study in bilingual development
since, with previous research in mind, different aspects of
gender can be predicted to be more or less sensitive to, for
example, input effects.
Therefore, I examine in this study the development
of three aspects of gender in French (see below) in a
longitudinal multiple case study including successive (L2)
Swedish-French bilingual children (n = 4), simultaneous
(2L1) Swedish-French bilingual children (n = 4) and
monolingual French children (n = 4). The age span
covered in the study ranges from 3;5 to 10 years, but
no child was followed for more than three years. Two of
the L2 children have an AOA below 4 years and two of
them have an AOA above 4 years (cf. Meisel, 2008). All
children attend the same French-speaking school, Lycee
francais St Louis de Stockholm, in Sweden.
There are comparatively few longitudinal studies in
the recent literature on gender marking, especially on L2
children with different AOAs, and one of the specific
contributions of the present study is the longitudinal
study of a small set of children in different modes
of acquisition over a long period of time. Moreover,
the linguistic development of other structures has been
studied in the same children (e.g., Agren et al., 2014;

675

Granfeldt, 2012) allowing for comparisons between
gender development and other morphosyntactic features
in French. Another important feature of the present study
is the operationalization of the INPUT factor. In many
studies input is either only roughly estimated or defined
as the equivalent to Length of Exposure (see Unsworth,
2013 for criticism). In this study input conditions within
school were similar for all included children since they
all attended one and the same French-speaking school.
Moreover, input outside school was measured for each
bilingual child individually through the establishment of
a detailed INPUT PROFILE (see details below and in Agren
et al., 2014).
The paper is organised in the following way: section 2
presents three aspects of gender in French and Swedish.
Section 3 then contains an overview of previous research
on the acquisition of gender marking, with an emphasis
on French. Section 4 presents the method and the
establishment of input profiles. The results are presented
in section 5 and discussed in section 6. The conclusion is
presented in section 7.
2. GENDER, attribution and concord - three facets
of a single feature
Following previous research (Carroll, 1989), I will assume
that gender in French is present at three different linguistic
levels: a) as an abstract GENDER property of French nouns,
b) as a binary feature [+/- masculine] in lexical entries for
individual French nouns, and c) at the level of syntax as an
agreement feature resulting in gender concord within the
DP which is morphologically marked on some adjectives.1
The abstract GENDER feature can be thought of as a
`macroparameter' (cf. Tsimpli, 2014), a system-internal
abstract and global feature.
In all learning contexts, the attribution of a particular
gender [MASC] or [FEM] to a particular noun is of course
learned by exposure to input. Since gender in French is
only predictable in part of the inventory of nouns (cf.
Corbett, 1991 and below), this selection must be more
inductive (i.e., more local) than the activation or selection
of the abstract GENDER feature itself. In terms of input
strings the difference is easily understood. All strings
involving any gender marking are potentially relevant to
the child and the L2 learner when activating or selecting
the GENDER feature itself, but only strings involving
relevant properties for a particular noun, say maison, are
useful for acquiring the knowledge that maison is [- masc].
1

I use the annotation [+/- masculine] because masculine can be
considered as a default. The masculine singular stem form is
masculine and the feminine is formed by adding a feminine marker.
The masculine plural form is unmarked for gender meaning that Les
Suedois (the Swedes) can include individuals of both genders. This
section is based on Granfeldt (2005).

676

Jonas Granfeldt

Previous research has found that in both (2)L1 and L2
acquisition a word like maison can be assigned gender
both `locally' from determiner-noun pairings and through
inductive generalisation to a subclass of nouns, triggered
in particular by formal morpho-phonological properties
of the noun class (Carroll, 1989; Karmiloff-Smith, 1979;
Kupisch et al., 2013; Muller, 1994).
Features of lexical entries project and depend on syntactic Functional Categories (FCs) for checking, deletion
and ultimately for interpretation (Chomsky, 1995). For
gender concord a specific proposal was put forward by
Carstens (2000) within this general framework.2
In summary, gender is present at three different levels
in French: first as an abstract GENDER eature (Carroll,
1989) with the characteristics of a `macroparameter' as in
Tsimpli (2014), second as a binary lexical feature of nouns
and third, in syntax, as a grammatical feature triggering
concord between constituents.
2.1 Gender in French and Swedish
Both Swedish and French have binary grammatical gender
systems. Modern-day Swedish distinguishes COMMON
from NEUTER gender (1a and 1b), whereas French has
a FEMININE vs. MASCULINE distinction (2a and 2b).3
(1)

a.
b.

(2)

a.
b.

en
gammal
old.S ING.COMM
a.INDEF.COMM.
ett
gammal-t
a.INDEF.NEUTER old- S ING. NEUTER
bil
car:S ING.COMM.
paraply
umbrella.S ING.NEUTER
une
vielle
a.INDEF.FEM.
old.S ING.FEM
un
vieux
a.INDEF.MASC old.S ING.MASC
voiture
car.S ING.FEM
parapluie
umbrella.S ING.MASC

In both languages, the two genders are unequally
distributed in the lexicon. About 60% of all French
2

3

For reasons of space Carsten's model is not presented here since
the details are not important for the analysis of gender concord in the
child data. Throughout I use the term concord (rather than agreement).
Although the necessary syntactic configurations might be the same,
agreement relations involve additional assignment of case, which
concord does not.
There are of course many other differences between the two systems.
For instance, common refers to the gender which combines the earlier
masculine and feminine distinction. Other differences relate to the
basis of classification (see Corbett, 1991, pp. 57-61 on French and
Andersson, 1992, pp. 35-39 on Swedish). The reader is referred to
Josefsson (2006) for more details on gender in Swedish.

nouns are MASCULINE (Tucker, Lambert & Rigault,
1977) and approximately 70-75% of all Swedish
nouns have COMMON gender (Andersson, 1992). These
biased distributions will probably produce an overlap of
MASCULINE French nouns and COMMON Swedish nouns,
but apart from this frequency effect there seem to be
no simple correspondences between the two lexicons,
although such a correlation cannot be excluded.
French has an intricate gender system which is
considered to be opaque (Corbett, 1991) or even arbitrary
(Riegel, Pellat & Rioul, 1994). Whereas the semantic
gender system is straightforward and contains few
exceptions, the grammatical gender system is highly
complex. Probabilistic formal and semantic gender
rules with varying degrees of coverage have been
put forward (Tucker et al., 1977; Lyster, 2006). In
particular some of the phonological tendencies have been
found to be reliable cues for children acquiring French
(Karmiloff-Smith, 1979), but successfully acquiring
French gender assignment is determined, at least initially,
on having repeatedly encountered a particular noun in
the input together with an adjacent determiner and/or an
adjective displaying gender. This is particularly true for
monosyllabic French nouns (Carroll, 1989).
As the above examples show, the gender feature
produces an overt agreement effect on both the article
and the adjective in both languages, but in Swedish the
morphological gender distinction on the adjectives is lost
when the DP is definite. In spoken French, only a third of
all adjectives are gender-marked overtly (Riegel et al.,
1994), but the distinction is made on more than half
of the adjectives in the register referred to as "Francais
fondamental" (Surridge, 1993). In both languages, the
overt gender agreement is lost in the plural, on articles
in both languages and in Swedish also on adjectives.
In French, gender information is lost on articles in the
singular if the following noun is vowel-initial (e.g., elision
as in l'ecole).
3. Previous research on the development of gender
with an emphasis on French
A common finding for L1 monolingual acquisition of
gender in French is that it develops during the first
three years of life, often with low error rates for gender
assignment and with comparatively small individual
differences (Carroll, 1989; Clark, 1985).
By and large findings on gender development in French
are the same for L1 and 2L1 children, at least up to
3 years and in the stronger language (Granfeldt, 2003;
Hulk, 2004; Muller, 1994). Granfeldt (2003, 2005) studied
the development of gender in three Swedish-French 2L1
children who were mostly balanced bilinguals and found
very few gender mistakes altogether, both in assignment
and concord (cf. also Muller, 1994). However, the fact that

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French
error rates are low does not necessarily mean that concord
is acquired and sometimes it can be hard to establish in
spontaneous production because of a lack of data. Hulk
(2004) observed that the bilingual child Anouk started out
by producing the `default' masculine form of adjectives
and it was only at 2;7 that the feminine forms of adjective
appeared in the data (cf. Granfeldt, 2003 for the same
finding).
Studies on somewhat older simultaneous bilinguals (3-
6 years) have shown that if French is clearly the weaker
language error rates can be higher (Granfeldt, Schlyter
& Kihlstedt, 2007; Kupisch, Muller & Cantone, 2002).
Higher error rates in both gender assignment and gender
concord in 2L1 French compared to age-matched L1
French data were also found by Nicoladis and Marchak
(2011) on French-English simultaneous bilinguals aged 3
to 5 years. The authors argued that the higher error rates
in the 2L1 children, compared to, for example, those in
Granfeldt (2003, 2005), could be a task effect. Nicoladis
and Marchak used a picture-naming task while other
studies have relied on spontaneous data. The feminine
forms of adjectives turned out to be particularly difficult
in this study. When looking at agreement between the
determiner and the adjective, Nicoladis and Marchak
found that adjectival agreement was particularly difficult
(in both L1 and 2L1) after a feminine determiner which
could be interpreted as an overuse of masculine forms of
adjectives (cf. Hulk, 2004). Nicoladis and Marchak argued
that reduced input and less experience with French in
the bilinguals could explain the differences between the
2L1 and L1 data. Interestingly, Unsworth (2013) found
that differences in the amount and quality of input could
explain the development of gender assignment in Dutch
bilingual children, but when assignment was controlled
for and the focus was on gender concord, the effect
of input disappeared. One possible conclusion is that it
is, in particular, the lexical aspect of gender marking,
assignment, which is affected by input properties, while
the question of the role of input for gender concord, at
least in children, seems to be more open.
Studies on child L2 acquisition are scarcer. Meisel
(2008) found that some of the German-French L2
children with an AOA of around 4 years displayed
similarities with adult L2 acquisition with respect to
gender in French, others not. The evidence was both
quantitative (error rates) and qualitative (gender mistakes
with nouns whose endings clearly predict gender). Meisel
explained the findings within a maturational account,
where neurophysiological changes take place around the
fourth year of life, resulting in a different developmental
route compared to (2)L1 acquisition (see also Mohring,
2001).
Unsurprisingly, one typically finds high error rates
at beginner and intermediate stages of adult L2 French
both in assignment and concord (Granfeldt, 2003, 2005

677

; Hawkins & Franceschina, 2004; Lindstrom, 2013). In
Bartning and Schlyter's (2004) model of morphosyntactic
development of adult French L2, gender assignment
reaches 90% correctness only at the very last stage, stage
6, which describes the highly advanced L2 learner of
French. Several studies have shown that gender concord
is more difficult than gender assignment at low and
intermediate stages of adult L2 French (Bartning, 2000;
Dewaele & Veronique, 2001; Granfeldt, 2003, 2005).4
However, studies focusing on end-state L2 learners find
that gender concord is easier than gender assignment
and that adult L2 learners can reach native-like levels
of gender concord at this stage (Bianchi, 2013, Kupisch
et al., 2013). Error patterns in assignment and concord
in adult L2 French are revealing. Both Hawkins and
Franscheschina (2004) and Granfeldt (2003, 2005) have
argued that gender errors in L2 are at least in part a result
of the overuse of a particular FORM of a determiner or of
an adjective and not the overgeneralization of a default
masculine gender. Granfeldt (2005) showed that while
some adult L2 learners overused le and une as determiners,
others overused la and un. In a similar way, Granfeldt
(2003) found that adult L2 learners at beginner and
intermediate stages might overgeneralize feminine forms
of adjectives together with masculine determiners (e.g., le
petite chien, 'the.MASC. small.FEM. dog.MASC). This
type of error seems to be a typical L2 error with respect
to gender concord.
3.1 Research question and general predictions
The main research question in this study is:
What is the effect of Age of Onset of Acquisition and quality
and quantity of input on the development of the three different
aspects of French gender in simultaneous and successive
bilingual acquisition of French where the other language is
Swedish?

If the development of some aspects of gender is
primarily influenced by input conditions, we expect to
see developmental differences, in terms of delay and/or
variability, between all three major groups L1, 2L1 and
cL2 and possibly individual differences, in particular in
the two latter groups, 2L1 and cL2, where input profiles
vary (see below). On the other hand, if the development
of gender is primarily influenced by AOA, we expect to
see no or few differences between the L1 and the 2L1
children, but more pronounced differences between the
(2)L1 and cL2 children, possibly with additional intragroup differences depending on the AOA of the L2
4

This conclusion is based on reported differences between
combinations of determiner - noun vs adjective - noun. The former is
typically considered to be tapping into assignment and the latter into
concord. See below for discussion.

678

Jonas Granfeldt
Table 1. Biographical data on the children in the study.
Mode

Child

French AOA

Age group Younger /Older

Age span

LoE 1st rec

L1
L1
L1
L1
2L1
2L1
2L1
2L1
cL2
cL2
cL2
cL2

Linda
Anne
Lorette
Lucie
Arlette
Liam
Linnea
Lars
Rachel
Fia
Valent.
Hannes

Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
3;5
3;5
6;7
6;5

Younger
Younger
Older
Older
Younger
Younger
Older
Older
Younger
Younger
Older
Older

3;10-6;0
3;8-5;9
5;0 - 6;6
5;5 - 7;11
3;3-5;9
3;8-5:11
5;9 - 9;6
5;9 - 9;6
3;9-5;8
3;3-5;9
7;2 - 10;10
7;1 - 10;10

3;10
3;8
5;0
5;5
3;3
3;8
5;9
5;9
3 months
3 months
7 months
7 months

NB: The LoE for the cL2s is based on 10 months of exposure per year. If they were exposed to French during their summer
holidays we added that time.

children (below or above 4 years) following the proposal
by Meisel (2008).
4. Method
4.1 Children and corpus
The children in this study all attend a French school in
Sweden which falls under the jurisdiction of the Agence
pour l'Enseignement Francais a l'Etranger (AEFE)
and ultimately under the French Ministry of Education
(Ministere de l'Education Nationale Francais). The
school is primarily French-speaking and accepts children
with various linguistic backgrounds. In this study, 12
children from the following groups at the school will be
included:
(i) Monolingual French-speaking children with two
French-speaking parents (L1, n=4)
(ii) Bilingual Swedish-French children with one Frenchspeaking parent (2L1, n=4)
(iii) Swedish-speaking children with two Swedishspeaking parents (cL2, n=4)
The school has a French monolingual orientation but also
explicitly states on its website and in official documents
that the aim is for L2 children to be proficient bilinguals
when entering high school.
Biographical data of the twelve children included in the
study are presented in Table 1. There are four children in
each mode of acquisition. These are further divided into a
YOUNGER and an OLDER age group. The L2 children in the
younger age group started in primary school (resulting in
an AOA = 3;5) whereas the older L2 children started

school directly without any prior exposure to French
(resulting in an AOA = 6;5). They all spend the entire day
at school and are almost exclusively exposed to French by
the teachers and their French-speaking peers. However,
none of the L2 children speak French at home. When
comparing the children studied at a group level, Table 1
demonstrates an overlap between AOA and Length of
Exposure (LoE) in the L1 and the 2L1 children. The
L2 children, in contrast, have a higher AOA, 3;5 and 6;5
respectively, and a considerably shorter LoE than the other
two groups.
4.2 The individual input profiles5
All children in the present study attend one and the
same French-speaking school (see above). This means
that AT SCHOOL the children are exposed to a very similar
amount (six hours) and type input in French during an
ordinary school day. The input addressed to the children
from the many native French-speaking teachers is highquality input, thus referring to both the variety of French
native teachers that the children meet at school and to
the experience these teachers have of teaching French to
children with varied linguistic backgrounds. Furthermore,
we define the input from the children's peers to be of mixed
quality overall. The majority of children at the school are
bilingual, which in terms of input could be thought of
resulting in language mixing and more language errors
than compared to a monolingual situation.
Since input AT SCHOOL is overall the same, THE
INDIVIDUAL INPUT PROFILE thus focuses on the main
characteristics of each child's input situation OUTSIDE
5

This section is based on Agren et al. (2014).

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French

679

Table 2. Individual input profile scores for the children in the study.

Child

FR-speak.
Parents

Proportion of
FR at home

Stays in FR-speak.
countries

Contact FR-speak.
Peers

Access
French TV

French reading
habits

Total
Score

L1children
2L1Linnea
2L1 Liam
2L1 Lars
L2 Valent.
2L1Arlette
L2 Fia
L2 Hannes
L2 Rachel

2+2
2+1
2+1
2+1
0+1
2+1
0+0
0+0
0+0

2
2
1
1
0
1
0
0
0

2
2
2
0
2
1
1
0
0

2
2
2
2
0
0
1
2
1

2
2
2
0
2
0
1
0
0

2
2
1
2
2
1
1
0
0

14
13
11
8
7
6
4
2
1

From Agren et al. (2014), table 5.

SCHOOL and aims to operationalise differences in the
quality and quantity of input in French that the children are
exposed after school has finished, during weekends and
during holidays. We developed this measure in a previous
publication (Agren et al., 2014) and the results from this
procedure are reused in this study but some new children
have been analyzed and added to the database. The input
profile score of each child (see below) was established on
the basis of interviews with the parents. For the interviews
we used a detailed questionnaire about the children's
and the families' French-language use and access to
authentic materials in French. As a complement, we also
interviewed the teachers about the language situation at
the school and talked to the children themselves about
French-speaking friends and activities outside school. In
the interviews the following quality and quantity-oriented
input variables were investigated:

r
r
r
r
r
r

Mode of acquisition of French of each PARENT (L1,
L2, no French)
Proportion of French spoken at home
Number of weeks spent in French-speaking
countries per year
Contact with other French-speaking persons
Access to French television
Reading habits in French

It is difficult to distinguish between variables tapping into
input quantity and input quality respectively. Therefore,
Paradis (2011) talks about quantity and quality-oriented
variables. The input profile presented here should be
viewed as a whole reflecting both aspects. In the input
profile each factor was quantified (scores 0, 1 or 2) in
order to obtain a global score of the quantity and quality
of input for each individual child outside school. For more
details of the scoring procedure and the reasoning behind
it, I refer to Agren et al. (2014).

Table 2 presents the results of the investigation of the
input factors in the 12 children studied. The individual
input profiles are presented in decreasing order, from the
children with the strongest to the child with the weakest
input profile.
We estimate that the L1 children have access to the
maximal amount of input, which translates into a score of
14 points. Even though variations in input situations can
also be found among L1 children (De Houwer, 2009), the
L1 children studied here have a very similar parental SES
(socioeconomic status) and they are rather homogeneous
as to the input variables focused on in this study. The
L1 children typically lead a `French-speaking life' in
Sweden and they are exposed to very little Swedish even
outside school. This is mainly due to the establishment
of a French-speaking community in Stockholm in which
francophone families from the Lycee St Louis have an
important role. Consequently the L1 children develop
very little knowledge of Swedish during their stay in the
country.
When considering the other two groups of children,
2L1 and L2, we find almost a complete overlap between
2L1 acquisition and higher input profile scores. With
the sole exception of the 2L1 child Arlette, all the 2L1
children have a higher input score than the L2 children.
This is mainly due to the fact that the 2L1 children speak
French at home with at least one of their parents. More
importantly for the present study, we can also observe
differences in input profiles within a group of children.
There is not necessarily a great difference in input profile
between the L1 children (14 p.) and the 2L1 child Linnea
(13 p.), but there is a considerable difference between
2L1 Linnea (13 p.) and 2L1 Lars (8 p.) or 2L1 Arlette
(6 p.). Similarly, the L2 child Valentine (7 p.) receives
much more French input outside school than Rachel
(1 p.) who is exposed to virtually no French outside
school.

680

Jonas Granfeldt

4.3 Data collection procedures, transcriptions and
analysis
Recordings were made in Swedish and in French on a
regular basis, approximately every 3 to 5 months. They
took place at school, in a separate room, with a native
French speaker and a native Swedish speaker as principal
interviewer in the respective settings. Only the French data
will be used in this study.
Each recording session lasted for about 30 minutes and
included two types of procedures:

r
r

Free conversations about the past, the present and
the future
Different elicitation procedures, narratives as well
as specific tests (but not focusing on gender)

The transcriptions of the recordings were carried out and
checked by students or members of the research team.
The CLAN editor was used and the transcriptions follow
the mid-CHAT transcription conventions (MacWhinney,
2000).
Data for gender assignment and gender concord in
French were pooled from all transcripts, across different
procedures. This resulted in a total of 3,978 noun tokens
which could be subjected to further analysis.
Recall the objective of this paper, which is to study
three aspects of gender in French, GENDER as an abstract
feature of the language, gender as a lexical feature (gender
assignment) and gender as a syntactic feature triggering
concord. For each of these three levels a specific empirical
analysis was carried out:
(1) The development of GENDER as an abstract feature
was assessed on the basis of a varied used of indefinite
(un vs. une) and definite articles (le vs. la), the argument
being that if children have discovered that French has
GENDER , the first context where this will be evident is in
the article system. Note that only a varied use of different
articles with different nouns within the respective domains
of definiteness was assessed, not the target-like use of
these articles.
(2) Following, among others, Dewaele and Veronique
(2001) and Kupisch et al. (2013), the development of
gender assignment was assessed on the basis of target-like
use of determiner + noun combination, including articles,
possessive pronouns (mon, ma, etc), demonstratives (ce,
cette) and some indefinite pronouns (certain, certaine).6
6

Measuring gender assignment on the basis of determiner choice is
obviously a simplification since gender is an inherent feature of the
noun (see section 2 above). Resorting to the study of determiner choice
is a practical solution to a methodological problem when working
with spontaneous data (see also below on gender concord) that several
studies have used previously. Differently from Dewaele and Veronique
(2001) and Kupisch et al. (2013) I did not in this study exclude item
pairs with inconsistent gender markings in this analysis. This means
that some nouns that are included here might not have been assigned

Gender assignment was studied longitudinally and I
report results as percentages of target-like assignments,
at both a group and an individual level. Raw numbers
of occurrences for each child and each recording are
provided in Tables 7-18 in Appendix 1. In addition to this,
I also carried out an error analysis in order to identify what
types of gender assignment that are made in the different
groups.
(3) Again following Dewaele and Veronique (2001)
and Kupisch et al. (2013), gender concord was assessed on
the basis of concord between a noun and an attributive or
predicative adjective. A well-known difficulty with gender
analysis in spontaneous production data is the possible
confusion between assignment and concord (Glahn,
Hakansson, Hammarberg & Holmen, 2001; Granfeldt,
2005). Consider a DP like  le petit maison (the.MASC
small.MASC house.FEM). Two types of analysis are
possible here. If we only consider the adjective we might
conclude that there is no concord in this case, since maison
is [-MASC] and petit is [+MASC]. But if we make the
additional hypothesis that maison has incorrectly been
assigned [-MASC] in the learner's mental lexicon (cf.
Figure 1) in this case and that the determiner is showing
this erroneous assignment, then we might say that there
is concord between the adjective and the noun. In order
to avoid underrepresenting the children's knowledge of
gender concord, I opted for the second type of analysis in
this study. For this analysis, then, gender assignment of the
head noun was decided on the basis of the co-occurring
determiner and the adjective was considered the target for
marking concord.
However, relevant data on adjectives with an audible
difference between masculine and feminine forms were
relatively scarce in the corpora (n = 200 tokens in all
groups). Therefore only group level analyses of gender
concord are presented here. Raw numbers of occurrences
for each group are provided in Table 19 in Appendix 1. In
addition to these analyses I also performed error analyses
on the non-concord patterns in order to reveal potential
similarities or differences between the groups.
Statistical analyses were performed where it was
deemed appropriate and the data allowed for it. Nonparametric statistics were used throughout since the data
was not normally distributed.
a consistent gender yet. This makes it difficult to exactly compare
f ex error rates of gender assignment across studies, but this is not
the intention either. The objective in the present study is to compare
development of gender assignment over time in different groups of
learners where the same operationalization has been used. At any rate,
previous studies on gender assignment in French 2L1 and adult L2
have shown that the frequency of inconsistent gender assignment is
rather low in spontaneous data. Granfeldt (2005, pp. 175-176) studied
the longitudinal gender assignment by 7 adult L2 learners in a corpus
with a total of 1 641 noun tokens. Only 8,2% of the nouns appeared
with inconsistent gender markings on the determiner.

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French

681

Figure 1. Gender assignment in L1, 2L1 and cL2 groups - all data points collapsed.

Table 3. Time of varied first use of articles with different gender in French.

Mode

Child

AOA

Age
group

Varied use of un/une
(rec and months of exposure)

Varied use of le/la
(rec and months of exposure)

cL2
cL2
cL2
cL2
2L1
2L1
2L1
2L1
L1
L1
L1
L1

Rachel
Fia
Valentine
Hannes
Arlette
Liam
Linnea
Lars
Linda
Yann
Lorette
Lucie

3;5
3;5
6;7
6;5
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth
Birth

Younger
Younger
Older
Older
Younger
Younger
Older
Older
Younger
Younger
Older
Older

2nd rec (6 Ms)
2nd rec (6 Ms)
1st rec (7 Ms)
1st rec (7 Ms)
1st rec (3;6)
2nd rec (4;0)
1st rec (5;9)
1st rec (5;9)
2nd rec (4;1)
1st rec (3;7)
1st rec (5;0)
1st rec (5;5)

3rd rec (7 Ms)
3rd rec (7 Ms)
1st rec (7 Ms)
1st rec (7 Ms)
1st rec (3;6)
2nd rec (4;0)
1st rec (5;9)
1st rec (5;9)
2nd rec (4;1)
1st rec (3;7)
1st rec (5;0)
1st rec (5;5)

5. Results
5.1 Development of GENDER
The focus of this analysis is on the cL2 learners, since both
the L1 and the 2L1 children were past the stage where
GENDER is discovered when data collection started.7
Table 3 shows that both the younger and the older cL2
learners have discovered GENDER after some 7 months of
exposure.8

7

8

The table shows that the 2L1 child Liam and the L1 child Linda
show signs of a varied use of gendered articles only in their second
recordings. Looking more closely at their French in their first
recordings, it can safely be decided that this is a sampling effect.
There is no doubt that they had discovered GENDER already in their
first recording and probably long before that.
Recordings started slightly later with older age group of cL2s.
Therefore, it might be that the older cL2 learners actually are faster in
discovering the GENDER feature, as evidenced by their article use.

The younger cL2 children (AOA = 3;5) first start
using gendered forms of the indefinite article (un/une)
and somewhat later the definite article (le/la). This
development is in line with previous studies on the
development of the article in 2L1 and L1 children (Muller,
1994; Granfeldt, 2003). The results also suggest that the
amount and quality of input outside school, i.e., THE INPUT
PROFILE SCORE , does not seem to affect the rate with
which the cL2 learners discover the GENDER feature. The
two children with the lowest input profile scores, Hannes
(2 p.) and Rachel (1 p.) start using different gender forms
of articles equally fast as their respective age-matched
peers with higher scores (Valentine, 7 p., and Fia, 4 p., but
see footnote vii).
5.2 Development of gender assignment
I will start by presenting the data on a group-level for
the whole data collection period, then I will present
the developmental data for each child. Figure 1 shows

682

Jonas Granfeldt

Figure 2. Development of gender assignment in L1 and 2L1 group - Younger children. The data on Arlette from Gunes
(2014).

Figure 3. Development of gender assignment in L1 and 2L1 group - Older children.

group-level means of accuracy on target-like and nontarget-like gender assignment for the whole data collection
period. Since the cL2s have had much less exposure to
French I do not expect them to perform at the same level
as the L1 and 2L1 children, but it is important to establish
their respective proficiency levels with respect to gender
assignment.
The L1 children are at ceiling with 99.6% target-like
assignment, whereas the 2L1 children reach a mean of
91.0% target-like assignment when all data points are
considered together. The difference between L1 and 2L1
is significant according to an independent samples Mann
Whitney-U test U =213, p = .000. Unsurprisingly, the cL2
children do not reach the same levels of accuracy but are
still clearly above chance level with 75.3% as an overall
mean. As could be expected, the difference between the
cL2s and the L1s is significant U =18, p = .000, as is

the difference between the cL2s and the 2L1s U =317,
p = .000. The results in Figure 1 are all expected under
the hypothesis that input conditions is the single most
important factor for development of gender assignment in
French.
Figures 2 and 3 below show the development of gender
assignment in the L1 and 2L1 children. Figure 2 presents
age-matched results for the younger group (3-5 years) and
Figure 3 presents the same results for the older children
(5-9 years).
Figures 2 and 3 show that both the younger and the
older L1 children are at ceiling with respect to gender
assignment as evidenced by the choice of an adjacent
determiner. More importantly, the figures also show that
the 2L1 children in both the younger and the older group
develop towards the French target system during the data
collection period. This is especially true for the two

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French

683

Table 4. Correlations between input profile scores and target-like gender assignment all data points collapse.

Group(s)

Observations
(N)

Correlation
coefficient ( )

Sig.
(1-tailed)

Converts to r2
(effect size)

2L1
2L1 younger
2L1 older
cL2
cL2 younger
cL2 older
2L1 + cL2

32
19
13
37
21
16
73

.501
.504
.422
.138
.023
-.346
.415

.000
.006
.049
n.s.
n.s.
.032
.000

.500
.500
.376
.045
.001
.259
.361

NB! Following Gilpin (1993) I used a conversion table to convert the tau coefficient to an r2 score.

Figure 4. Development of gender assignment in cL2 group - Younger and older children.

2L1 children in the younger group (cf. Figure 2), Liam
and Arlette, but also for the older 2L1 child Lars (cf.
Figure 3).
If we look at the effect of quality and quantity of
input as measured by the individual input profile scores
we see fairly strong positive correlations with target-like
gender assignment, both when the individual data points
are considered separately (rate of development) and when
the whole data collection period is considered together.
If we begin by looking at rate of development, we see
in Figure 2 that the 2L1 child Liam clearly develops
faster than the 2L1 child Arlette. This difference in the
rate of development correlates with their respective input
profiles. Recall that Arlette is the 2L1 child with the
weakest input profile (6 p. out of 14). Liam, on the other
hand, has a more average input profile score for 2L1
children (11 p.) according to my analysis. Differences
in input profile scores can also explain the rate difference
in the older 2L1 group (cf. Figure 3). Lars, another 2L1
child with a comparatively weak input profile (8 p.),
develops much more slowly than the 2L1 child Linnea
(13 p.).

Table 4 below presents group-level correlations
between input profile scores and means of target-like
gender assignment in percentages when the whole data
collection period is considered together.
From Table 4 we can see that there is a significant
positive correlation between input profile scores and
target-like gender assignment in the 2L1 children. This
is true both for the group as whole and when the younger
and older 2L1 children are considered separately. The
effect sizes range between .376 and .500, which should
be considered medium to strong. The results for the cL2
learners will be commented after the presentation of the
developmental data in Figure 4.
Figure 4 shows several interesting results. To begin
with, it can be observed that the older cL2 learners (with
an AOA of 6;5) develop faster initially. At 7 months of
exposure they choose the right gender form of determiners
about 70% of the time, whereas the younger cL2 learners
(with an AOA of approximately 3;5) are at chance level
after the same length of exposure.
At the same time it is difficult to find any clear
correlation between input profile scores and rate of

684

Jonas Granfeldt

Figure 5. Proportion of gender assignment errors with masculine and feminine nouns.

development of gender assignment. In fact, the cL2 learner
Hannes with the second lowest input profile score (2 p.)
outperforms the cL2 learner Valentine with the highest
input profile score of all cL2 learners (7 p.). In the younger
group there is no difference between Rachel, the child with
the lowest input profile score (1 p.), and Fia, with a higher
input profile score (4 p.).
When returning to Table 4 above we see that even
if the whole data collection period is considered and a
group-level analysis is performed there is no positive
significant correlation between quantity and quality of
input as measured by the input profile score and gender
assignment. The finding that input profile scores correlate
better with the rate of linguistic development in 2L1 than
in cL2 was also found in a previous study on these children
(Agren et al., 2014). I return to this observation in the
discussion below.

Table 5. The use of articles in 2L1 and cL2 - all data
points collapsed.

5.2.1 Error analysis of gender assignment
In the next step I will look at where gender assignment
errors occur. Since gender assignment errors are
extremely rare in the L1 children's data, this analysis
is restricted to the data from the 2L1 and cL2 groups.9
A first question is if assignment is equally difficult in
both genders for the children. Figure 5 below presents the
results.
Figure 5 shows that errors with feminine nouns are
more frequent than errors with masculine nouns. The
difference between masculine and feminine errors is
significant according to a related samples Wilcoxon
Signed Rank Test in 2L1 Z =88,5, p = .000, in
2L1 younger Z =29,5, p = .004 and in 2L1 older
Z =18,0, p = .008. The difference is also significant
within the cL2 group as a whole Z =141, p = .036

cL2 old

9

The 2L1 child Linnea was also excluded from this analysis because
of lack of data.

Produced
article

Produced
article

Group

Noun gender

le

la

un

une

2L1

MASC
FEM
MASC
FEM
MASC
FEM
MASC
FEM
MASC
FEM
MASC
FEM

361
45
275
90
183
40
178
5
79
39
196
51

16
306
47
196
12
130
4
176
31
63
16
133

215
52
271
86
202
39
162
13
83
45
188
41

43
171
59
120
35
88
8
83
17
35
42
85

cL2
2L1 younger
2L1 old
cL2 younger

Legend: Produced articles and gender of accompanying nouns. Figures in bold
face are errors.

but not when cL2 younger and older are considered
separately (cL2 younger Z =24, p = .423 and cL2
older Z =53,5, p = .054). Another way of putting it
is to say that Figure 5 seems to show that masculine
gender is overgeneralized by all children, as a default,
irrespectively of mode of acquisition. However, it is not
clear from Figure 5 if it is masculine gender per se that
is being overgeneralized or if it is the case that CERTAIN
FORMS of determiners are overgeneralized. Recall that
previous studies on adult L2 acquisition have found that
adult L2 learners of French overgeneralize individual
forms of articles (Granfeldt, 2003, 2005; Hawkins &
Franscheschina, 2004). In order to distinguish between
these two possibilities Table 5 presents a confusion matrix,

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French

685

Figure 6. Degree of overgeneralization of different articles in 2L1 and cL2.

in raw occurrences, showing how often a particular form
of an article (definite or indefinite) was produced and
what the expected target form was in each case (based
on the target gender of the noun). This analysis allows
us to see if a particular form of a definite or indefinite
article more frequently replaces another form than vice
versa. Incorrect uses of an article are signalled by bold
face in the table. With this information we can compute
a degree of overgeneralization for individual articles by
dividing the total number of incorrect uses of a particular
article with the total number of contexts for the article
(Figure 6).
From Table 5 and Figure 6 we can observe that the
article le is incorrectly replacing the article la more often
than vice versa. This is true in both 2L1 and cL2 and inline with the idea that MASC is overgeneralized, but when
the indefinite articles are considered it becomes clear that
masculine gender per se is not being overgeneralized.
The indefinite article un is not more often incorrectly
replacing une than vice versa. In the 2L1 group the
two forms of indefinite articles are overgeneralized to
an equal extent while in the cL2 group it is the article
une which is more often used incorrectly (cf. Figure 6).
When we compare the proportion of overgeneralization
of the two articles (definite and indefinite) within MASC
and FEM, we see from Figure 6 that the article une is
clearly more overgeneralized compared to la than un
compared to le. This is true for both 2L1 and cL2. One
possible interpretation is that both the 2L1s and the cL2s
are avoiding the nasal vowel in un and replacing it with
une perhaps for phonological reasons but this needs to be
investigated further. This conclusion is supported by the
fact that la is the article which is the least overgeneralized
if 2L1 and cL2 are considered separately. It is not the case
then that assignment of feminine nouns is particularly
difficult to acquire.

5.3 Gender concord
Gender concord was assessed on the basis of concord
between a noun and an attributive or predicative adjective
(200 occurrences in total). For this analysis the gender
feature of the noun was decided on the accompanying
determiner, not according to the target language. Since
there were comparatively few occurrences to analyse for
gender concord in the 2L1 and the cL2 data, only grouplevel results will be presented here. Figure 7 shows the
main results for gender concord in the three modes of
acquisition.
The results indicate that the L1 children are again at
ceiling with respect to gender concord (even though only
the younger L1 children are included here) whereas the
2L1 children reach 88.9% of correct concord. According
to a Mann Whitney-U test, the difference between the L1s
and the 2L1s is not significant U =.950, p = .400. Recall
that the same comparison between the L1s and the 2L1s
with respect to gender assignment (cf. Figure 1) showed
a significant difference. The overall mean for gender
concord in the cL2 group is 65.4% correct concord and
the difference between the 2L1s and the cL2s is significant
U =.834, p = .029.
The cL2 learners are clearly doing better on gender
assignment than on gender concord (75.3% vs 65.4%).
The difference is significant according to a one-sample ttest, t(3)=12.023, p=0.001. Three out of four cL2 learners
show this pattern in their individual data. This suggests
that gender concord is hard for the cL2 learners, a result
in line with several previous studies on beginner and
intermediate adult L2 acquisition of French (Bartning,
2000; Dewaele & Veronique, 2001; Granfeldt, 2005).
The 2L1 children perform at the same level as the
L1s on gender concord but are less good with gender
assignment.

686

Jonas Granfeldt

Figure 7. Gender concord in L1, 2L1 and cL2 groups - all data points collapsed. In L1 only the younger children are
included in the analysis.

5.3.1 Error analysis of gender concord
Figure 8 shows how often MASC forms are incorrectly
replacing FEM forms of adjectives and vice versa.10 The
analysis suggests that when there is an error in gender
concord in the 2L1 data it is because a MASC form of an
adjective (e.g.,  la petit maison) was produced instead of
a FEM form of the adjective, in line with what Nicoladis
and Marchak (2011) found for English-French 2L1s. In
the cL2 we find the opposite pattern where a FEM form of
the adjective (e.g., le petite chien) was produced instead
of the MASC form, which is a result previously found
only with adult L2 learners at low and intermediate stages
(Granfeldt, 2003). Recall that in this analysis, gender
of the head noun was decided on the determiner which
means that gender assignment was factored out and that
the observed context is the one between the determiner
and the adjective.
Finally, Table 6 shows that the tendency in cL2
to overgeneralize feminine forms of adjectives in
combination with masculine determiners is particularly
strong with the most frequent adjectives. The single most
frequent adjective with an unambiguous feminine form
is petit (small). For this particular adjective, it is about 7
times more frequent in the cL2 data that the feminine form
incorrectly replaces the masculine form than vice versa.
6. Summary and discussion
In this study the development of three aspects of gender in
French were studied in three groups of children acquiring
French, monolinguals (L1, n=4), simultaneous bilinguals
10

There were too few errors of this sort to perform statistical analyses.
Note also that there were practically no errors in the older 2L1s so
this group is not presented separately in Figure 8.

(2L1, n=4) and successive bilinguals (cL2, n=4). The cL2
learners either had an AOA below 4 years (n=2) or above
4 years (n=2). All in all 12 children from the same French
school in Sweden were followed longitudinally over a
period of nearly 3 years for some of the children. For
each bilingual child, an individual input profile measuring
input in French outside school was established on the
basis of parental interviews. The research question was
to what degree AOA and/or input quality and quantity
influenced the development of the three aspects of gender,
1) discovery of the abstract GENDER feature, 2) gender
assignment and 3) gender concord in the two groups of
bilinguals.
With respect to the first aspect the results showed that
both the younger (AOA < 4 years) and the older cL2 learners (AOA > 4 years) had discovered that French is a gendered language after 7 months of exposure. There was no
clear evidence for an effect of input scores on the rate with
which the cL2 learners discovered the GENDER feature.
There are at least three circumstances working
together that can be invoked as an explanation for these
findings. First the abstract GENDER feature resembles a
`macroparameter' (cf. Tsimpli, 2014), a system-internal
abstract and global feature with only limited semantic
effects (e.g., grammatical gender). Features of this type are
typically acquired early in L1 acquisition and insensitive
to individual input differences (Tsimpli, 2014). Second
there is massive evidence for GENDER in the French
language to the extent that also children with a low input
profile score will probably receive more than sufficient
exposure to this feature in order to discover it early. Finally,
since Swedish also has gendered determiners and these
develop before age 3 years in L1 Swedish, it is reasonable
to assume that initial determiners in cL2 French contain a
gender feature.

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French

687

Figure 8. Frequency of overgeneralization of different forms of adjectives in 2L1 and cL2.

Table 6. The use of five adjectives in 2L1 and cL2 - all data points collapsed.
cL2

2L1

Produced form
of adjective

Produced form
of adjective

Noun gender

MASC

FEM

Noun gender

MASC

FEM

MASC
FEM

21
3

22
11

MASC
FEM

6
2

1
4

MASC
FEM

11
1

4
3

MASC
FEM

4
0

0
1

MASC
FEM

1
1

0
1

MASC
FEM

1
0

0
1

MASC
FEM

2
0

0
1

MASC
FEM

MASC
FEM

4
2

0
1

MASC
FEM

petit

grand

nouveau

gros
-

vert
2
0

0
2

Legend: Produced forms of adjectives and gender of accompanying nouns. Figures in bold face are errors.

The second facet of gender in French that was studied
was the lexical gender feature, i.e., the choice of [+/-
MASCULINE] for a particular noun (assignment). Overall means and the rate of development were significantly
correlated with the 2L1 children's respective input profile.
Children with a higher score on their input profile
developed faster and vice versa. No such correlation
between input profile scores and rate of development of
gender assignment was found in the cL2 learners. The
results showed instead an initial AOA advantage in the cL2
learners in favour of the older cL2 learners (cf. Munoz,
2014). The older children with an AOA of 6;5 showed

higher levels of correctness in gender assignment after
7 months of exposure than the younger children with an
AOA of 3;5 after the same length of exposure. After 2
years of exposure, however, the younger cL2 learners had
caught up completely with the older cL2 learners.
The finding that the rate of development of gender
assignment in 2L1 French correlates significantly with
input profile scores is expected and in line with previous
studies on gender assignment in different languages by
bilingual children and bilingual adult speakers (Bianchi,
2013; Kupisch et al., 2013; Nicoladis & Marchak, 2011;
Rodina & Westergaard, 2013; Unsworth et al., 2014

688

Jonas Granfeldt

among others). More surprisingly, the input profile scores
did not correlate significantly with overall means of
correct gender assignment or with the rate of development
of gender assignment in the cL2 group. The exact same
result was found in a previous study on finiteness, object
clitics and S-V agreement in the same children as studied
here (see Agren et al., 2014 and below). Under the
assumption that the input profile scores are tapping into
relevant properties of input conditions, Agren et al. (2014)
argued that it is in sense logical that the quality and
quantity of input have different effects in 2L1 compared
to cL2. If we hypothesise that input conditions such
as the ones included in the input profile are relatively
constant over time, we would expect to see a cumulative
effect of input differences between children (cf. Unsworth,
2013). As a consequence, the magnitude of momentary
input differences between children will increase over time.
Therefore, it is in a sense natural that the effect of input
is best seen in groups of children with a longer exposure
time, such as the 2L1 group. It may be that the individual
input differences in the cL2 group will become apparent
at later stages, when these daily differences will have had
time to play out more.
The error analysis of gender assignment suggested
that both 2L1 and cL2 children made more errors with
feminine nouns than with masculine nouns which could
point to an overgeneralization of masculine gender. This
finding could be due to a frequency effect since the French
lexicon is unevenly distributed with approximately 60%
masculine nouns. However, a closer analysis of individual
articles revealed that it is not masculine gender per
se which is being overgeneralized but rather individual
articles. Interestingly enough, le is preferred over la but
un is not preferred over une and this is true for both
2L1 and cL2. The form une is particularly favoured in
the cL2 data with 33% overuse (cf. Figure 6). In this
respect, there was no difference between the younger
cL2s with an AOA below 4 years and the older cL2s
with an AOA above 4 years (cf. Table 5). This finding
echoes previous studies on adult L2 acquisition of French
in which it has been argued both for Anglophone learners
and for Swedish-speaking learners that individual forms
of articles are overgeneralized (Granfeldt, 2003, 2005;
Hawkins & Franscheschina, 2004). The fact that Swedish-
French 2L1 learners, child and adult L2 learners with
a gendered L1 (Swedish) and L2 learners with an,
in principle, non-gendered L1 (English) display similar
patterns also casts doubt on any crucial effect of the L1
with respect to the development of gender assignment.
Rather it points to a general learning problem where
learners pick an individual form of an article to express
in/definiteness with nouns for which they haven't yet
acquired the gender. Importantly for the present study,
2L1 and cL2 seem to pattern more or less alike in this
respect, with the possible exception of the cL2s preferring

the form une as a default to a greater extent. However, the
2L1s and the cL2s are not directly comparable due to
differences in exposure time.
The last facet of gender in French studied here was
gender concord. Due to a lack of adjectives, this analysis
was only performed at the group level and for the entire
data set, so interpretations with respect to individual
differences and development over time should be avoided.
As was the case with gender assignment, the group results
on gender concord showed that the L1 children performed
at ceiling for this aspect too, but that the 2L1 children did
not differ significantly from the L1s with respect to gender
concord. It was not the case, then, that gender concord was
`harder' than assignment for the 2L1 children. By contrast,
in the cL2 group the group-level performance for gender
concord was significantly below the level for gender
assignment in the same children (75.3% for assignment
vs 65.4% for concord). There was no difference between
the younger cL2 learners with an AOA below 4 years
and the older cL2 learners with an AOA above 4 years.
The finding that concord is harder than assignment is
parallel to many studies on adult L2 acquisition of gender
(Bartning, 2000; Dewaele & Veronique, 2001; Granfeldt,
2003, 2005; Lindstrom, 2013, but see Bianchi, 2013;
Kupisch et al., 2013 for different results).
Interestingly enough, error patterns for gender concord
differed in 2L1 and cL2. As in at least one previous study
on 2L1 children (Nicoladis & Marchak, 2011, but see
also Hulk, 2004), the 2L1 children had a clear tendency
to overuse masculine forms of adjectives in combination
with feminine articles. The cL2 learners displayed
the opposite pattern and overused feminine forms of
adjectives with masculine determiners, something that
has not been documented, to my knowledge, in 2L1
acquisition of French. Again, the two groups are not
directly comparable since input conditions and total
amount of exposure differ, but the finding is still
interesting and might say something about qualitative
differences in the development of gender concord in 2L1
and cL2 acquisition. There were no differences between
the younger cL2 learners (AOA < 4 years) and the older
cL2 learners (AOA > 4 years) in this respect.
So why then should there be a difference between
gender assignment and gender concord in cL2
acquisition? I would like to focus here on the importance
of the developmental timetable in the L1. Rather than
posing an across-the-board sensitive period for language
acquisition, the available results suggest a more complex
picture. A combination of the order of acquisition in the
L1, the linguistic properties of the particular structure and
input conditions seems to be at play when the L2 child is
developing a particular structure of the target language.
In order to show this, I will in the following section draw
on results from two previously published studies on the
development of two other comparable morphosyntactic

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French


INV:



RAC:

6.1 Development of gender in the light of other
morphosyntactic structures in the same children



INV:

In Agren et al. (2014) we looked at subject-verb agreement
in 3rd person plural (together with two other structures) in
partly the same children that were studied here. Overt
subject-verb number agreement in spoken French can
be described as partial, heterogeneous, and lexicallyconditioned in the sense that it is not audible in all verbs
and not in all persons. In fact, according to Marty (2001)
only 9.6% of all verb types in French display an audible
difference between 3rd person singular and 3rd person
plural. A verb like prendre ('to take') is thus an exception
with the following forms: 3sg (e.g., prend /p/, `takes')
from 3pl (e.g., prennent /pn/, `take'). In L1 acquisition
of French S-V agreement in 3rd person plural develops
very late. Errors are frequent up until 7 years according to
Prevost (2009) and involve replacing the 3rd person plural
with a default form. In Agren et al. (2014) we found that all
three groups of learners, L1, 2L1 and cL2, had difficulties
in acquiring agreement in 3rd person plural and that the
rate of development was highly correlated with the input
profiles scores. One can argue that overt 3rd person S-V
agreement in spoken French is not syntactically governed
but rather lexically restricted. In this respect this feature
resembles gender assignment and it should come as no
surprise, then, that the development of both of these
structures, despite being very different, largely depends
on input conditions.
Now, compare 3rd person S-V agreement to finiteness.
Schlyter and Thomas (2012) studied the development
of finiteness, measured as the distribution of long and
short verb forms, in some of the children included in the
present study. We know from the literature that finiteness
is acquired very early in L1 French (Meisel, 1994) and
L1 Swedish (Platzack, 1992). In both languages the
acquisition can be considered to be completed before 2;5
years. We also know that finiteness develops according
to different sequences in (2)L1 and adult L2 French
(Schlyter, 2003). A diagnostic structure for identifying
adult L2 learners at initial stages is the combination of
subject clitic + non-finite verb form, e.g.,  il parler. With
respect to the L2 children Schlyter and Thomas (2012)
found that both the children with an AOA below 4 years
and the L2 children with an AOA above 4 years produced,
initially and to varying degrees, the typical adult L2
structure. Consider the following example from Schlyter
and Thomas (2012) from one of the children in the cL2
younger group (AOA < 4 years), Rachel:

(...)

INV:

structures, subject-verb agreement and finiteness, in partly
the same children as the ones studied here.

(3)
%sit:

They are looking at a picture of a girl reading
a book

689

qu' est-ce qu'elle fait la avec le livre ?
`what does she do here with the book?'
il le fait ca, il regardE.
`he does that, he look.INF'
oui, elle regarde le livre, elle le lit.
`yes she looks at the book, she reads it'
et ca s' appelle comment quand on fait ca ?
`and how do you call that when one does that'

(...)
RAC:



il [/] il lit. il lire ?
`he reads. he read.INF?'

INV:
oui.
`yes'
In this example Rachel produces combinations of
subject clitics and non-finite verb forms (il regardE and
il lire) which are diagnostic of an L2 developmental
sequence of finiteness in French. If we compare this to the
findings of the present study on gender concord in the cL2
learners, a plausible conclusion is that the development of
gender concord patterns more with finiteness than with 3rd
person S-V agreement. The data here are a bit scarce but
the cL2 learners with an AOA before age 4 were equally
good (or bad) on gender concord as the cL2 learners with
an AOA of 6 years. Moreover, the error patterns were
the same in both cL2 groups also with very frequent
adjectives like petit and, most importantly, different from
the error pattern found in the 2L1 data, but comparable
to what have been found in previous studies on adult
L2 acquisition of gender concord (Granfeldt, 2003). We
know from the literature that gender concord develops
early in both L1 Swedish and L1 French, and gender
concord is well-established before the AOA of the younger
cL2s studied here. The data presented here suggest that
one consequence is a developmental sequence for gender
concord which is closer to what is known for adult L2
learners than to (2)L1 acquisition, even for cL2 learners
with an AOA as low as 3;5.
7. Conclusion
This study investigates three aspects of a single feature in
French, gender, and asks the question if the development
of each of these is more or less dependent on AOA or input
conditions. The results show that cL2 learners discover the
macro-parameter GENDER equally fast independently of
AOA and input conditions. It is also quite clear from
the results that cL2 learners, independently of AOA, and
2L1 learners pattern mostly alike with respect to the
development of gender assignment. The route and the
rate of development of this lexical aspect of gender are to
a high degree dependent on input conditions. Lastly, the
results for development of gender concord, the syntactic
aspect of gender, show that the cL2 learners might take a
different route of development than the 2L1 children. This

690

Jonas Granfeldt

leads to the conclusion that a combination of AOA, the L1
acquisitional timetable for a particular structure, linguistic
properties of the target structure and input conditions
are all crucial aspects for a complete understanding of
linguistic development in bilingual children.
Appendix 1 - Individual data

Table 10. Gender assignment in the child Lorette (L1).
Child
rec
Lorette 1
Lorette 2
Lorette 3
Lorette 4
Total

Age
5;0
5;2
5;6
5;8

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

34
67
33
17
151

34
67
32
17
150

100%
100%
97%
100%
99,3%

Table 7. Gender assignment in the child Linda (L1).
Child
rec
Linda 2
Linda 3
Linda 4
Linda 5
Linda 6
Linda 7
Linda 8
Linda 9
Linda 10
Total

Age
4;1
4;5
4;6
4;9
4;11
5;4
5;6
5;10
6;1

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

121
12
30
36
49
22
20
15
25
330

121
12
30
36
49
22
20
15
25
330

100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

Table 8. Gender assignment in the child Yann (L1).
Child
rec
Yann 1
Yann 2
Yann 3
Yann 4
Yann 5
Yann 6
Yann 7
Yann 8
Yann 9
Total

Age
3;7
4;0
4;1
4;4
4;6
4;11
5;1
5;5
5;8

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

87
38
21
17
35
25
24
36
37
320

85
37
21
17
35
25
24
36
37
317

97,7%
97,4%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
99,5%

Table 9. Gender assignment in the child Lucie (L1).
Child
rec
Lucie 1
Lucie 2
Lucie 3
Lucie 4
Lucie 5
Total

Age
5;5
7;0
7;1
7;7
7;11

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

41
36
17
15
21
130

41
36
17
15
21
130

100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

Table 11. Gender assignment in the child Liam (2L1).
Child
rec

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

Liam 1
Liam 2
Liam 3
Liam 4
Liam 5
Liam 6
Liam 7
Liam 8
Liam 9
Liam 10
Liam 11
Total

18
47
91
39
26
11
31
37
13
45
42
400

13
34
62
37
25
11
31
37
13
45
40
348

72,2%
72,3%
68,1%
94,9%
96,2%
100,0%
100,0%
100,0%
100,0%
100,0%
95,2%
90,8%

Table 12. Gender assignment in the child Arlette (2L1).
Child
rec

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

Arlette 1
Arlette 2
Arlette 3
Arlette 4
Arlette 5
Arlette 6
Arlette 7
Arlette 8
Arlette 9
Arlette 10
Total

3
5
69
19
30
71
72
17
87
96
469

3
5
56
11
19
49
53
12
67
83
358

100,0%
100,0%
80,9%
57,9%
63,3%
69,0%
73,6%
72,2%
77,0%
86,5%
78,0%



Data from Gunes (2014)

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French
Table 13. Gender assignment in the child Lars (2L1).
Child
rec
Lars 1
Lars 2
Lars 3
Lars 4
Lars 5
Lars 6
Lars 7
Lars 8
Total

Age
5;9
6;9
7;6
7;9
7;11
8;4
8;6
8;9

Det-N
tokens #
37
16
15
18
27
29
24
20
186

Target
Det #
31
13
13
14
27
27
23
20
168

Target-like
assignment
83,8%
81,3%
86,7%
77,8%
100,0%
93,1%
95,8%
100,0%
89,8%

Table 16. Gender assignment in the child Fia (cL2).
Exposure in months.
Child
rec
Fia 2
Fia 3
Fia 5
Fia 6
Fia 7
Fia 8
Fia 10
Fia 11
Total

Exposure

Age

7
10
14
18
20
22
28
30

3;7
3;10
4;3
4;7
4;9
5;1
5;6
5;9

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

37
82
58
84
42
30
23
26
405

17
50
35
49
30
24
14
17
251

45,9%
61,0%
60,3%
58,3%
71,4%
80,0%
60,9%
65,4%
61,8%

Table 14. Gender assignment in the child Linnea (2L1).

Table 17. Gender assignment in the child Valentine
(cL2). Exposure in months.

Child
rec

Age

Linnea 1
Linnea 2
Linnea 3
Linnea 4
Linnea 5
Linnea 6
Linnea 7
Total

5;9
6;9
7;0
7;5
7;6
8;0
8;4

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

Child
rec

38
26
8
6
43
47
53
221

38
24
8
6
43
46
53
218

100,0%
92,3%
100,0%
100,0%
100,0%
97,9%
100,0%
98,6%

Valent. 1
Valent. 2
Valent. 3
Valent. 4+5
Valent. 6
Valent. 7
Valent. 8
Valent. 9
Valent. 10
Valent. 11
Valent. 12
Total

Table 15. Gender assignment in the child Rachel (cL2)
Exposure in months.
Child
rec
Rachel 2
Rachel 3
Rachel 4
Rachel 5
Rachel 6
Rachel 7
Rachel 8
Rachel 9
Total

Exposure

Age

7
10
13
14
17
20
22
24

4;2
4;3
4;8
4;9
4;11
5;2
5;6
5;8

691

Exposure Age
7
14
17
24
25
28
31
33
35
38
44

7;2
7;10
8;1
8;9
8;10
9;1
9;4
9;8
9;10
10;1
10;9

Det-N
Target Target-like
tokens # Det # assignment
76
27
79
78
36
51
37
59
47
49
59
618

52
21
48
63
26
34
25
54
45
46
57
489

68,4%
77,8%
60,8%
80,8%
72,2%
66,7%
67,6%
91,5%
95,7%
93,9%
96,6%
80,2%

Det-N
tokens #

Target
Det #

Target-like
assignment

Table 18. Gender assignment in the child Hannes (cL2).
Exposure in months.

22
36
35
30
59
31
29
29
271

11
24
18
20
29
27
14
22
165

50,0%
67,0%
51,4%
66,7%
49,2%
87,1%
48,3%
75,9%
62,0%

Child
rec
Hannes 1
Hannes 2
Hannes 4
Hannes 5
Hannes 6
Hannes 7
Hannes 8
Hannes 9
Hannes 10
Total

Exposure Age
7
14
20
23
24
27
30
32
34

7;1
7;10
8;4
8;9
8;10
9;1
9;4
9;8
9;10

Det-N
Target Target-like
tokens # Det # assignment
55
40
80
22
33
53
59
67
67
477

39
35
71
22
28
52
50
64
64
429

70,9%
87,5%
88,8%
100,0%
84,8%
98,1%
84,7%
95,5%
95,5%
91,0%

692

Jonas Granfeldt

Table 19. Gender concord in L1, 2L1 and cL2 .

#Concord
#NoConcord
%Concord


L1

2L1

cL2

56
0
100,0%

32
4
88,9%

74
34
68,5%

Only data from the younger L1 children are included

References
Agren, M., Granfeldt, J., & Thomas, A. (2014). Combined
effects of age of onset and input on the development of
different grammatical structures: A study of simultaneous
and successive bilingual acquisition of French. Linguistic
Approaches to Bilingualism, 4, 461-492.
Andersson, A-B. (1992). Second language learners' acquisition
of grammatical gender in Swedish. PhD dissertation,
Department of Linguistics, University of Goteborg.
Bartning, I. (2000). Gender agreement in L2 French: Preadvanced vs. advanced learners. Studia Linguistica, 54,
224-237.
Bartning, I., & Schlyter, S. (2004). Itineraires acquisitionnels et
stades de developpement en francais L2. Journal of French
Language Studies, 14, 281-299.
Bianchi, G. (2013). Gender in Italian-German bilinguals:
A comparison with German L2 learners of Italian.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16, 538-557.
Carroll, S. (1989). Second language acquisition and the
computational paradigm. Language Learning, 39, 535-
594.
Carroll, S. (1999). Input and SLA: Adults' sensitivity to different
sorts of cues to French gender. Language Learning, 49, 37-
92.
Carstens, V. (2000). Concord in minimalist theory. Linguistic
Inquiry, 31, 319-55.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Chondrogianni, V., & Marinis, T. (2011). Differential effects
of internal and external factors on the development
of vocabulary, tense morphology and morpho-syntax in
successive bilingual children. Linguistic Approaches to
Bilingualism, 1, 318-345.
Clark, E. (1985). The acquisition of Romance with special
reference to French. In D. Slobin (ed.), The Crosslinguistic
Study of Language Acquisition, Vol. 1, pp. 687-782.
Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
De Houwer, A. (2009). Bilingual first language acquisition.
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Dewaele, J-M., & Veronique, D. (2001). Gender assignment
and gender agreement in advanced French interlanguage:
A cross-sectional study. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition 4, 275-297.
Gathercole, V. C. M. (2007). Miami and North Wales, so far and
yet so near: A constructivist account of morpho-syntactic
development in bilingual children. International Journal of
Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 10, 224-247.

Gilpin, A. R. (1993). Table for conversion of Kendall's Tau
to Spearman's Rho within the context of measures of
magnitude of effect for meta-analysis. Educational and
psychological measurement, 53, 87-92.
Glahn, E., Hakansson, G., Hammarberg, B., & Holmen, A.
(2001). Processability in Scandinavian second language
acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,23,
389-416.
Granfeldt, J. (2003). L'acquisition des Categories Fonctionnelles: Etude comparative du developpement du DP
francais chez des enfants et des apprenants adultes. These
pour le doctorat. Etudes romanes de Lund 67. Institut
d'Etudes Romanes de Lund: Universite de Lund.
Granfeldt, J. (2005). The development of gender assignment
in bilingual first and second language French. In
J.M. Dewaele (ed.), Focus on French a Foreign Language:
multidisciplinary approaches, pp. 164-190. Clevdon:
Multilingual Matters.
Granfeldt, J. (2012). Development of object clitics in child
L2 French: A comparison of developmental sequences in
different modes of acquisition. Languages, Interaction and
Acquisition, 3, 140-162.
Granfeldt, J., Schlyter, S., & Kilhstedt, M. (2007). French as
cL2, 2L1 and L2 in pre-school children. In J. Granfeldt
(ed.), Studies in Romance Bilingual Acquisition - Age of
Onset and Development of French and Spanish, pp. 6-
41. PERLES No. 24. Centre for Languages and Literature:
University of Lund.
Gruter, T., Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2012). Grammatical
gender in L2: A production or a real-time processing
problem? Second Language Research, 28, 191-215.
Gunes, A. (2014). Le developpement du genre grammatical
en francais. Etude longitudinale et comparative sur
l'attribution du genre chez deux enfants bilingues
successifs et un enfant bilingue simultane ages de 4 a 6 ans.
Memoire de maitrise, Centre des langues et de litterature:
Universite de Lund.
Harley, B. (1979). French gender rules in the speech of Englishdominant French-dominant and monolingual Frenchspeaking children. Working Papers in Bilingualism 19, 129-
156.
Hawkins, R., & Franceschina, F. (2004). Explaining the
acquisition of and non-acquisition of determiner-noun
gender concord in French and Spanish. In P. Prevost &
J. Paradis (eds.), The acquisition of French in different
contexts: Focus on functional categories, pp. 175-205.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Hulk, A. (2004). The acquisition of the French DP in a bilingual
context. In P. Prevost & J. Paradis (eds.), The acquisition of
French in different contexts: Focus on functional categories,
pp 243-275. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1979). A Functional Approach to Child
Language: A Study of Determiners and Reference.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kupisch, T., Muller, N., & Cantone, K. (2002). Gender
in monolingual and bilingual first language acquisition:
Comparing Italian and French. Lingue e Linguaggio, 1,
107-149.
Kupisch, T., Akpinar, D., & Stohr, A. (2013). Gender assignment
and gender agreement in adult bilingual and second

The development of gender in bilingual acquisition of French
language speakers of French. Linguistic Approaches to
Bilingualism, 3, 150-179.
Lindstrom, E. (2013) L'acquisition du genre en francais L2 -
developpement et variation. PhD dissertation, Stockholm
University.
Lyster, R. (2006). Predictability in French gender attribution: A
corpus analysis. Journal of French Language Studies, 16,
69-92.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
Analyzing Talk. 3rd edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Marty, F. (2001). Les signaux morphologiques du francais parle.
Le francais moderne, LXIX, 211-240.
Meisel, J.M. (1994). Getting FAT: Finiteness, agreement and
tense in early grammars. In J. M. Meisel (ed.), Bilingual
First Language Acquisition, pp. 89-129. Amsterdam /
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Meisel, J. M. (2008). Child second language acquisition or
successive first language acquisition? In B. Haznedar
& E. Gavruseva (eds.), Current trends in child second
language acquisition: A generative perspective, pp. 55-80.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Mohring, A. (2001). The acquisition of French by German
pre-school children: An empirical investigation of gender
assignment and gender agreement. In S. Foster-Cohen &
A. Nizegorodcew (eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook, pp. 171-
194. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Muller, N. (1994). Gender and number agreement within DP.
In J. M. Meisel (ed.), Bilingual first language acquisition:
French and German grammatical development, pp. 53-89.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Nicoladis, E., & Marchak, K. (2011). Le carte blanc or
la carte blanche? Bilingual children's acquisition of
French adjective agreement. Language Learning, 61, 734-
758.
Munoz, C. (2014). Contrasting Effects of Starting Age and Input
on the Oral Performance of Foreign Language Learners.
Applied Linguistics, 35, 463-482.
Paradis, J. (2011). Individual differences in child English second
language acquisition: Comparing child-internal and childexternal factors. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1,
213-237.
Platzack, C. (1992). Functional categories and early Swedish.
In J. M. Meisel (ed.), The acquisition of verb placement:
Functional categories and V2 phenomena in language
acquisition, pp. 63-82. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Prevost, P. (2009). The acquisition of French: The development
of inflectional morphology and syntax in L1 acquisition,

693

bilingualism, and L2 acquisition. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Riegel, M., Pellat, J-C., & Rioul, R. (1994). Grammaire
Methodique du Francais. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
Rodina, Y., & Westergaard, M. (2013). The acquisition of
gender and declension class in a non-transparent system:
monolinguals and bilinguals. Studia Linguistica, 67, 47-67.
Schlyter, S. (2003). Development of verb morphology
and finiteness in children and adults. In C. Dimroth
& M. Starren (eds.), Information structure and
the dynamics of language acquisition, pp. 15-44.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Schlyter, S., & Thomas, A. (2012). L1 or L2 acquisition?
Finiteness in child second language learners (cL2),
compared to adult L2 learners (aL2) and young bilingual
children (2L1). In M. Watorek, S. Benazzo & M. Hickmann
(eds.), Comparative Perspectives to Language Acquisition:
A tribute to Clive Perdue, pp. 282-302. Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Sorace, A. (2005). Syntactic optionality at interfaces. In
L. Cornips, & K. Corrigan (eds.), Syntax and Variation:
Reconciling the biological and the social, pp. 46-111.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Surridge, M. E. (1993). Gender assignment in French: The
hierarchy of rules and the chronology of acquisition.
International Review of Applied Linguistics, 31, 77-96.
Tsimpli, I. M. (2014). Early, late or very late? Timing acquisition
and bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 4,
283-313.
Tucker, G. A., Lambert, W.E., & Rigault, A. (1977). The French
Speaker's Skill with Grammatical Gender: An example of
rule-governed behavior. The Hague: Mouton.
Unsworth, S. (2013). Assessing the role of current and
cumulative exposure in simultaneous bilingual acquisition:
The case of Dutch gender. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 16, 86-110.
Unsworth, S., Argyri, F., Cornips, L., Hulk, A., Sorace, A.,
& Tsimpli, I. (2011). Bilingual acquisition of Greek
voice morphology and Dutch gender: What do they
have in common? In N. Danis, K. Mesh, & H. Sung
(eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, pp. 590-602.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla.
Unsworth, S., Argyri, F., Cornips, L., Hulk, A., Sorace, A., &
Tsimpli, I.M. (2014). On the role of age of onset and input
in early child bilingualism in Greek and Dutch. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 35, 765-805.

