710048

research-article2017

LAS0010.1177/0023830917710048Language and SpeechHayes-Harb et al.

Language
and Speech

Article

Orthographic Input and the
Acquisition of German Final
Devoicing by Native Speakers of
English

Language and Speech
2018, Vol. 61(4) 547-564
(c) The Author(s) 2017
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830917710048
DOI: 10.1177/0023830917710048
journals.sagepub.com/home/las

Rachel Hayes-Harb
University of Utah, USA

Kelsey Brown

University of Utah, USA

Bruce L. Smith
University of Utah, USA

Abstract
We present an artificial lexicon study designed to test the hypothesis that native English speakers
experience interference from written input when acquiring surface voicing in German words.
Native English speakers were exposed to German-like words (e.g., /tit/ and /tid/, both
pronounced [tit]) along with pictured meanings, and in some cases, their written forms (e.g.,
<Steit> and <Steid>). At test, participants whose input included the written forms were more
likely to produce final voiced obstruents when naming the pictures, indicating that access to
the written forms in the input interfered with their acquisition of target-like surface forms. In
a separate experiment, we attempted to moderate this negative impact of the written input by
explicitly telling participants about the misleading nature of the words' written forms, with no
beneficial effect on their pronunciation accuracy. Together these findings indicate a powerful
influence of orthographic input on second language lexical-phonological development that is not
readily overcome by a simple intervention.
Keywords
Orthography, word learning, second language phonology, German, final devoicing

Corresponding author:
Rachel Hayes-Harb, Department of Linguistics, University of Utah, 255 S Central Campus Dr Rm 2300, Salt Lake City,
Utah, 84112-0492, USA.
Email: r.hayes-harb@utah.edu

548

1

Language and Speech 61(4)

Introduction

During the past several years, researchers have shown increased interest in the role that orthographic input plays in second language (L2) phonological and lexical development (e.g., Bassetti,
2008; Bassetti, Escudero & Hayes-Harb, 2015). A question of particular focus has been whether
learners benefit from exposure to a systematic graphemic contrast when learning to distinguish L2
lexical items involving a corresponding novel phonological contrast. Findings with respect to the
influence of orthographic input have been somewhat mixed, with orthographic input sometimes
powerfully enhancing L2 lexical encoding of novel contrasts (e.g., Escudero, Hayes-Harb &
Mitterer, 2008; Escudero, Simon, & Mulak, 2014; Escudero & Wanrooij, 2010; Showalter &
Hayes-Harb, 2013), but in other cases having no effect at all (e.g., Simon, Chambless, & Alves,
2010). In a departure from this focus on L2 phonological contrast acquisition, the present work
focuses instead on the role of orthographic input in the acquisition of the surface realization of an
L2 phonological process, that of German final devoicing, by native English speakers. In German,
final obstruents are devoiced such that underlying voicing contrasts are (mostly) neutralized (e.g.,
/d/ and /t/, spelled <Rad> and <Rat>, are both pronounced [t]). Previous researchers have
suggested that written input may interfere with native English speakers' acquisition of German
final devoicing (e.g., Young-Scholten, 2002, 2004; Young-Scholten & Langer, 2015). In the present study we tested this hypothesis by means of an artificial lexicon study. We are further interested in the impact that explicitly telling participants about the misleading nature of the written
input may have on native English speakers' acquisition of German surface voicing.

2

Background

2.1 Written Input and the Acquisition of Novel Phonological Contrasts
Over the past decade or so, an increasing number of studies have explored the influence of written
input on phonological and lexical acquisition by L2 learners. Much of this work has investigated
the effect of written input on the acquisition of novel phonological contrasts. For example, Escudero
et al. (2008) taught native Dutch speakers a set of auditory English nonwords containing the vowels /ae/ and // (a difficult novel contrast), along with visual referents (i.e., pictured "meanings"), in
two conditions: one group of participants also saw the words' written forms and the other did not.
At test, participants who had access to written forms during word learning exhibited a pattern of
lexical activation that indicated that they had encoded the /ae/-// in their lexical representations for
the new words, while participants who had not seen written forms during word learning did not.
Escudero et al. (2008) concluded that the graphemic contrast between the letters <a> and <e> supported the native Dutch participants' ability to encode the phonological contrast between /ae/ and
// in their lexical representations.
Showalter and Hayes-Harb (2013) provided further evidence of a beneficial effect of written
input in discriminating novel phonological contrasts in newly learned words. They taught native
English speakers a set of Mandarin nonwords minimally contrasted by lexical tone, along with
visual referents, in two word learning conditions: one group saw Pinyin (i.e., Romanized) written
forms with diacritic tone marks (e.g., <fin> for [fian(high-level tone)]), and the other group saw
Pinyin without tone marks (e.g., <fian>). At test, the group that saw tone marks during word learning was more accurate at matching the nonwords and visual referents when the items required
sensitivity to the lexical tone contrast. Showalter and Hayes-Harb (2013) interpreted this result as
indicating that even unfamiliar diacritics in the written input can support the acquisition of a novel
phonological contrast. Escudero et al. (2014) also reported a positive effect of written input on L2

Hayes-Harb et al.

549

learners. They taught native speakers of Spanish a set of Dutch nonwords along with visual referents either with or without written forms. Some words were "congruent" in that the corresponding
written forms were associated with a phonological contrast in both Spanish and Dutch (e.g., Dutch
<i> - <uu> = // - /y/ and Spanish <i> - <u> = /i/ - /u/), while others were "incongruent" in that
the orthographic forms were associated with a phonological contrast in Dutch but not Spanish (e.g.,
Dutch: <u> - <uu> = // - /y/; Spanish: <u> = /u/). Their participants benefitted from access to the
written input, but more so for the congruent words. Escudero (2015) demonstrated a beneficial
effect of orthographic input for some but not all difficult novel contrasts. Specifically, she found
that the benefit associated with orthographic input may be moderated by the difficulty of the novel
phonological contrast, with orthographic input helpful only in cases of novel contrasts that were
already relatively perceptible to learners.
A number of other studies have not found evidence of a benefit associated with written input.
Showalter and Hayes-Harb (2015), for example, taught native English speakers a set of Arabic
nonwords involving the /k/ - /q/ (voiceless uvular stop) contrast along with visual referents, under
a variety of written input conditions. In one condition, participants saw written forms in Arabic
script, where the graphemes <> and <> corresponded to /k/ and /q/, respectively. In another
condition, the words were spelled via Romanization, with the graphemes <k> and <q> corresponding to /k/ and /q/. Neither of these written input conditions led to improved test performance relative to that of participants who did not see written forms during word learning. Hayes-Harb and
Hacking (2015) similarly did not find a beneficial effect of lexical stress marks in the input to
native English speakers learning Russian nonwords. Further studies reporting no beneficial effect
of written input include Simon et al. (2010; native English speakers learning French), Pytlyk (2011;
native English speakers learning Mandarin), and Mathieu (2016; native English speakers learning
Arabic). Together, these studies demonstrate that even when graphemic contrasts systematically
represent novel phonological contrasts, learners are not always able to exploit the graphemic contrasts to distinguish words differentiated by the contrasts.

2.2

Interference Effects Associated with L2 Written Input

Several studies have provided evidence that access to written input may in fact negatively impact
developing L2 phonological representations when the written input provides learners with misleading information about the phonology of the L2. For example, Bassetti (2006) examined native
English speakers' phonological representations for Mandarin syllables. The learners had been
exposed to Pinyin, in which the rimes [uei], [iou], and [uen] are spelled differently depending on
where they occur in a word. When word initial, the rimes are spelled <wei>, <you>, and <wen>,
respectively; however, when preceded by a consonant, they are spelled <ui>, <iu>, and <un>.
Bassetti (2006) asked learners in their first year of Chinese study to perform tasks that involved
counting the number of "sounds" contained in Chinese syllables. For words whose Pinyin spellings
include the main vowels, the learners treated the syllables as containing more individual sounds
than they did for words whose Pinyin spellings do not contain the main vowels. Bassetti (2006)
concluded that the learners' Pinyin input influenced their phonological representations for these
words, with learners inappropriately treating words spelled without the main vowel letter as lacking that segment phonologically.
Hayes-Harb, Nicol, and Barker (2010) investigated the effect of incongruencies between native
and L2 grapheme-phoneme correspondences (GPCs) on L2 word learning. They taught three
groups of native English speakers a set of English nonwords along with visual referents. During
word learning, the control group saw <XXXXX> below each picture, the `congruent' group saw
spelled forms consistent with English GPCs (e.g., <fasha> for the auditory word [f]), and the

550

Language and Speech 61(4)

`incongruent' group saw spelled forms that were inconsistent with English GPCs (e.g., <faza> for
[f]). At test, participants in the `incongruent' group were more likely than participants in the
other two groups to accept mispronunciations of the words (e.g., [fz]) as correct labels for the
visual referents. Hayes-Harb and Cheng (2016) produced similar results with native English speakers learning Mandarin nonwords via Pinyin, which involves some GPCs that are incongruent with
those of English.
The studies reviewed thus far have focused on the influence of written input on the acquisition
of L2 phonological and lexical representations, and we have seen that when learning new words,
learners' representations are powerfully (if not always) affected by written forms. Of interest in the
present study is whether such influence extends to the acquisition of neutralized surface forms
whose spellings preserve an underlying contrast. German final devoicing provides an ecologically
valid opportunity to explore this question, as final devoicing is notoriously difficult for native
English speakers to acquire, and written input is often implicated as a contributing factor (see, e.g.,
Young-Scholten, 2002, 2004; Young-Scholten & Langer, 2015).

2.3

German Final Devoicing

In this section we provide a brief introduction to the phenomenon of German final devoicing and
its acquisition by native English speakers. German has underlying voicing contrasts for obstruents
(e.g., /p-b, t-d, k-g/), and due to a final devoicing process, underlying voiced obstruents surface as
their voiceless counterparts in final position (e.g., /d/ `wheel' and /t/ `advice' are pronounced
[t]). The status of final devoicing in German has been subject to debate in the literature with
many reporting evidence that the neutralization is in fact incomplete (see, e.g., Fourakis & Iverson,
1984; Piroth & Janker, 2004; Port & O'Dell, 1985). Nonetheless, native English speakers exhibit
well-documented difficulty acquiring surface voicing patterns in German (e.g., Smith & Peterson,
2012; Young-Scholten, 2002, 2004; Young-Scholten & Langer, 2015; as well as in other languages,
including Russian: Dmitrieva, Jongman, & Sereno, 2010). It is worth noting that native speakers
of final devoicing languages similarly experience difficulty acquiring surface voicing patterns in
L2s that maintain final voicing contrasts (e.g., Catalan-English: Cebrian, 2000; Dutch-English:
Broersma, 2005; Simon, 2010).
To the extent that (target-like) spoken German input evidences only voiceless obstruents in final
position, and given that English allows voiceless consonants in final position, we might expect
native English speakers to readily perceive surface obstruents as voiceless in German and thus easily learn the surface pattern with respect to final obstruent voicing. That they do not appear to do
so has inspired studies of German language learners, notably by Young-Scholten (2002, 2004;
Young-Scholten & Langer, 2015). Young-Scholten (2002) investigated the production of final
devoicing by three adolescents involved in a study abroad program in German via a longitudinal
production study. She found that even by the eleventh month of data collection, the participants
failed to produce the voicing alternation in German word pairs like [t:k] <Tag> `day' and [tg]
<Tage> `days'. She hypothesized that the spelled forms of German words, which represent the
underlying voicing value of the obstruents (e.g., /d/ `wheel' and /t/ `advice' are spelled <Rad>
and <Rat>, respectively), may interfere with the acquisition of final devoicing. Young-Scholten
additionally asked participants to report their level of participation in various German language
activities. She found that the participant who reported the highest amount of reading and writing
activities in German was the one who showed the least improvement with respect to final devoicing; in contrast, the participant who reported the least amount of reading and writing activities in
German improved the most with respect to final devoicing. Young-Scholten concluded that native
English speakers' transfer of their native final voicing contrast into German as a L2 is reinforced

Hayes-Harb et al.

551

Figure 1. Showalter and Hayes-Harb's (2015) figure showing the information provided to their subjects
concerning the directionality of the Arabic script.

by the way the contrast is represented orthographically in German (Young-Scholten, 2002, p. 276).
While the Young-Scholten (2002) study revealed a negative correlation between amount of orthographic exposure (via reading/writing activities) and acquisition of final devoicing, we do not yet
know whether this relationship is causal, that is, whether access to written input prevented the
participants from acquiring German final devoicing. The first goal of the present study is to experimentally test the hypothesis that access to written input can interfere with native English speakers'
acquisition of target-like surface voicing of German final obstruents.

2.4

Moderating the Influence of Written Input with an Explicit Intervention

A rich and varied literature explores the effectiveness of various interventions in the domain of pronunciation (e.g., Aliaga-Garcia & Mora, 2009; Bradlow, Pisoni, Akahane-Yamada, & Tohkura,
1997; Hardison, 2003; Kissling, 2013; Wang, Jongman, & Sereno, 2003). However, we know of
only two studies that have attempted to moderate the influence of written input on L2 pronunciation
by means of an explicit intervention (i.e., Jackson, 2016; Showalter & Hayes-Harb, 2015). These
two studies, in contrast to the pronunciation training studies mentioned above, involved a very brief
intervention lasting less than one hour. The researchers' aim in both studies was to draw native
English speakers' attention to the informative nature of written input with respect to the Arabic /k/
- /q/ contrast. Showalter and Hayes-Harb (2015) attempted to enhance their participants' ability to
distinguish between words beginning with /k/ <> and /q/ <> by telling them that the letters representing the first sounds in words appear on the right-hand side of the words (Arabic is written
right-to-left) and contrasting this convention with that of English (see Figure 1).

552

Language and Speech 61(4)

Participants who received this intervention performed no differently at test than those who received
the same input but without the intervention. Jackson (2016) examined the effect of a more substantial
intervention on the ability of native English speakers to learn this same set of Arabic nonwords under
additional written input conditions, viz., he compared the effect of written input that represented the
contrast by means of a diacritic mark (i.e., <k> for /k/ and <> for /q/) versus an entirely novel grapheme (i.e., <k> for /k/ and < > for /q/). Jackson (2016) told subjects that the words they would learn
contained a "sound that you may not be familiar with that is similar to English k", played examples
of words beginning with /k/ and /q/, and further told them: "While these sounds may sound similar to
you, they are importantly different in this new language. The written forms of the words may help you
learn the difference. One sound is written with k, while the other is written differently." Participants
then heard examples of words beginning with /k/ and /q/, this time presented along with their written
forms. Relative to participants who did not receive this intervention, Jackson (2016) found a significant beneficial effect of the intervention when the written input involved the diacritic mark, but no
effect in the novel grapheme condition; however, participants in the diacritic group with instruction
still performed less accurately than did those in either of the novel grapheme groups. At a minimum,
Jackson's (2016) findings indicate that an explicit intervention has the potential to impact the way in
which L2 learners use written input to inform their developing lexical representations. The second
goal of the present research is to investigate whether an explicit intervention drawing participants'
attention to the misleading nature of German written input can serve to moderate any negative impact
it might have on native English speakers' acquisition of German surface voicing.

3

Research Questions

Corresponding to the first main goal of the present research, our first research question is: Does access
to written input interfere with native English speakers' acquisition of German final obstruent devoicing? Experiment 1 addresses this question by means of an artificial lexicon study wherein native
English speakers learn German nonwords exemplifying the final voicing contrast in two input conditions: with or without access to the words' written forms. Our second research question corresponds to
our second goal and concerns the influence of explicit instruction: Can explicit instruction concerning
the misleading nature of German written input serve to moderate any negative impact it might have on
native English speakers' acquisition of German final obstruent devoicing? Experiment 2 is designed to
address this question, replicating Experiment 1 with the addition of a second variable: the presence of
an explicit intervention providing information about German spelling.

4

Experiment 1

4.1 Participants
Twenty-six native speakers of English (9 male, 17 female; mean = 22.9 years; range = 18-31 years)
with no experience learning German or any other final obstruent devoicing language were recruited
from undergraduate linguistics courses at the University of Utah; they earned course credit for their
participation. No participants reported having a hearing, language processing, speech, or neurological disorder. They were randomly assigned to one of two word learning conditions: the Spell
group and the NoSpell group.

4.2

Materials

We created 12 German-like words consisting of six minimal pairs contrasting in the underlying
voicing of the word-final stop consonant (e.g., <Krd> versus <Krt>), with two pairs each ending

553

Hayes-Harb et al.
Table 1. All auditory and visual stimuli used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Written form

Underlying form

Neutralized
surface form

Trob-Trop

/trob/- /trop/

[trop]

Kreib-Kreip

/krib/ - /krip/

[krip]

Krad-Krat

/krd/ - /krt/

[krt]

Steid-Steit

/tid/ - /tit/

[tit]

Trieg-Triek

/trig/ - /trik/

[trik]

Krag-Krak

/krg/ - /krk/

[krk]

Visual referents
(Spell and NoSpell versions)

TrobTrop

KreibKreip

KradKrat

SteidSteit

TriegTriek

Krag
Krak

in /p-b/, /t-d/, and /k-g/. One male and one female native speaker of German were recorded reading
each of the words; two tokens of each word from each talker were selected for presentation in the
experiment, for a total of four auditory tokens of each word. The words were given meanings via
randomly assigned visual referents (line drawings of nonobjects). Participants in the Spell group
additionally saw the written forms of the words immediately below the line drawings. See Table 1
for information about the auditory and visual stimuli.

4.3 Procedure
The experiment was conducted with the participant seated in a sound-attenuated booth. Auditory
stimuli were played at a comfortable listening level over headphones while visual stimuli were
presented on a computer screen.The visual and auditory stimuli were presented using DMDX
experiment presentation software (Forster & Forster, 2003).
4.3.1 Word Learning Phase. During the word learning phase participants were exposed to the set
of auditory words, their visual referents, and their spelled forms (Spell group only). The twelve
words were presented four times each per block (with two tokens of each word produced by each
of the two talkers) in a different random order for each participant, and the entire block was presented four times, with participant-controlled breaks between blocks. During this phase, no
response was required of participants; they were only instructed to "learn the new words and their
meanings as well as possible". In each word learning trial, the visual stimuli were displayed for
2000 milliseconds, and the auditory stimuli began playing at the same time as the visual stimuli
appeared on the screen.

554

Language and Speech 61(4)

4.3.2 Criterion Test Phase. Immediately following the word learning phase, participants completed
a two-way forced-choice auditory word-picture matching test. In this test, each word was presented
twice: once with its matched (i.e., trained) visual referent, and once with a mismatched visual referent, for a total of 24 trials. The mismatched visual referent was always of an entirely different word
(e.g., for the auditory form /tit/, the picture of the /krip/ was presented rather than the picture of
the /tid/). In this way we were able to determine whether participants had broadly learned the
words before moving on to the final picture naming test. Participants repeated the word learning
and criterion test phases until they reached the 90% accuracy criterion.
4.3.3 Picture Naming Test. Immediately upon passing the criterion test, participants continued to
the final picture naming test. Here they were presented with the 12 visual referents twice each (no
spelled forms) and were asked to "say the word associated with the picture", for a total of 24 test
items. We audio-recorded their productions for later coding. In each trial, the visual referent
remained on the screen for seven seconds before continuing to the next trial.
4.3.4 Coding. To determine whether participants produced voiced or voiceless final obstruents in
the picture naming test, we asked fourteen new participants (meeting the same inclusionary/exclusionary criteria described above) to identify the final consonant in each production; these participants will be referred to as "coders". To prepare the data for coding, the researchers first isolated
each production and selected only "globally correct" tokens for coding; these are productions that
did not differ by more than one phoneme from the target word and where the final consonant
matched the target in both place and manner of articulation. For example, for the word [trik], the
productions [trik] or [trig] would be selected, as would the forms [krik] or [krig], but [trit] or [trid]
would not. This selection procedure resulted in 393 globally correct tokens, with an average of 15.9
(out of 24 elicitations) globally correct for the Spell group (66%) and 13.6 (57%) for the NoSpell
group. The number of globally correct words remembered by individual participants did not differ
significantly between the two groups, t(24) = -1.365, p = 0.185. The coders were instructed to listen
to each token, presented in a different random order to each coder, and to identify the final consonant
as voiced or voiceless. The coders registered their responses by pressing keyboard buttons corresponding to letters presented on the screen. For example, when hearing [tri:k] or [tri:g], they were
given the response options <g> and <k>. Each token was presented once to each coder. We were
then able to calculate a proportion voiceless productions score for each subject.

4.4 Results
We first analyzed the number of word learning-criterion test cycles required by subjects in the two
word learning conditions to determine whether the two groups of subjects received different
amounts of exposure to the new words. The Spell group (mean = 1.92) and the NoSpell group
(mean = 1.54) did not differ in the number of cycles required to pass the criterion test, t(24) =
1.508, p = 0.145. This indicates that differences in performance on the test are the result of the
quality, and not the quantity, of their exposure to the new words.
Figure 2 presents the mean proportion voiceless productions scores by spelling group and word
type. The proportion voiceless data were submitted to a three-way, mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA) with spelling group (two levels: Spell and NoSpell) as a between group variable,
word type as a within-subjects factor (two levels: underlyingly voiced and underlyingly voiceless),
and proportion voiceless productions as the dependent measure. There was a significant word type,
F(1, 24) = 36.151, p < 0.001, partial 2 = 0.091, with underlyingly voiceless words produced with
voiceless final consonants more often than underlyingly voiced words, and no main effect of word

Hayes-Harb et al.

555

Figure 2. Mean proportion voiceless productions by spelling group and word type; whiskers indicate the
95% confidence interval.

learning condition, F(1, 24) = 32.413, p = 0.113, partial 2 = 0.091. The interaction of word learning condition and word type was significant, F(1, 24) = 14.842, p = 0.001, partial 2 = 0.382.
Following up on the significant interaction, the effect of word type was found to be significant for
the Spell group, F(1, 12) = 32.839, p < 0.001, partial 2 = 0.732, but only marginally significant in
the the NoSpell group, F(1, 12) = 4.502, p = 0.055, partial 2 = 0.273.
We now turn to the issue of the marginally significant effect of word type for the NoSpell group.
Given that this difference is in the direction predicted by the underlying voicing of the final consonants, yet these participants did not have access to written forms, we now explore the question of
whether the auditory stimuli presented during the word learning phase in fact preserved the underlying
voicing contrast to some extent. As mentioned above, the phenomenon of German final obstruent
devoicing has received a great deal of attention from phoneticians and phonologists seeking to determine whether the voicing neutralization pattern is complete or incomplete. It is worth noting that a
number of studies of the production and perception of languages with so-called final devoicing processes have provided evidence that underlying voicing contrasts are preserved to some extent in surface forms (German: Kleber, John & Harrington, 2010; Piroth & Janker, 2004; Port & O'Dell, 1985;
Roettger, Winter, Grawunder, Kirby, & Grice, 2014; Smith, Hayes-Harb, Bruss, & Harker, 2009;
Dutch: Warner, Jongman, Sereno, & Kemps, 2004; Russian: Dmitrieva et al., 2010; Polish: Slowiaszek
& Dinnsen, 1985). To determine whether this marginal effect of underlying voicing among NoSpell
group participants might result from those participants detecting a voicing contrast in the auditory
stimuli, we first conducted an investigation of the acoustic properties of the stimuli (see Table 2).
To the extent that participants were sensitive to acoustic cues to the underlying voicing contrasts
that may have been present in the auditory stimuli, we might expect NoSpell participants to have
been more likely to distinguish voicing in their production of a word pair like Krag-Krak than
Steid-Steit. That is, Krag-Krak appears to have exhibited relatively robust cues to the voicing
contrast (with vowels preceding /g/ in Krag on average 19 milliseconds longer than those preceding /k/ in Krak and bursts following /g/ 36 milliseconds shorter than those following /k/), while
Steid-Steit appears to have exhibited less robust (and less consistent) cues to the voicing contrast.
However, the difference in proportion voiceless production scores for Krag and Krak was 0.05, and

556

Language and Speech 61(4)

Table 2. Mean preceding vowel duration, closure duration, closure voicing duration, and burst duration
for each target word, organized by minimal pair (+voi refers to the member of the pair with an underlying
voiced final obstruent, -voi refers to the member of the pair with an underlying voiceless final obstruent).
Difference values were calculated for each pair for each acoustic dimension by subtracting the voiceless
value from the voiced value. Expected difference values are as follows: preceding vowel duration--positive;
closure duration--negative; closure voicing--positive; and burst duration--negative. Shading indicates
minimal pairs and acoustic dimensions where the differences between the voiced and voiceless values were
opposite the expected direction.
Preceding vowel duration Closure duration
+voi

-voi

diff. +voi

Kreib-Kreip

207 (6)

210 (13) -3

Trob-Trop

163 (17) 161 (24)

2

Krad-Krat

225 (13) 214 (9)

11

85 (44)

Steid-Steit

209 (15) 211 (14) -2

Krag-Krak

212 (5)

Trieg-Triek

144 (12) 153 (30) -9

193 (13) 19

-voi

Closure voicing
diff.

93 (13) 103 (1)

+voi

-voi

Burst duration
diff. +voi

-10 17 (5) 21 (10) -4

104 (13) 109 (15)

-voi

diff.

100 (93) 111 (93) -11

-5 16 (3) 14 (3)

2

112 (64)

91 (54)

21

95 (33) -10 13 (14) 8 (5)

5

100 (61)

86 (59)

14

105 (31)

86 (40)

3

117 (62) 107 (59)

10

105 (29)

98 (34)

7

9 (4)

3 (3)

6

79 (73) 115 (79) -36

82 (5)

84 (32)

-2

4 (4)

5 (6) -1

124 (72) 134 (36) -10

19 14 (2) 11 (2)

Table 3. Difference in proportion voiceless production scores, by word pair and word learning
condition. Difference scores were calculated by subtracting the score for the underlyingly voiceless target
from that for the underlyingly voiced target (negative values indicate a higher proportion of voiceless
productions for underlyingly voiceless than voiced targets). Shading indicates where the difference scores
were opposite the expected direction.

Kreib-Kreip
Trob-Trop
Krad-Krat
Steid-Steit
Krag-Krak
Trieg-Triek

NoSpell

Spell

-0.07
0.09
-0.22
0.02
0.04
-0.10

-0.26
-0.18
-0.55
-0.09
-0.40
-0.48

in the opposite of the predicted direction, with Krag being produced as voiceless more often than
Krak. The difference in proportion voiceless scores for Steid and Steit was 0.03, also in the opposite of the expected direction. For completeness, Table 3 provides the difference in proportion
voiceless production scores for each word pair.
On the basis of the acoustic data presented in Table 2 and the difference in proportion voiceless production scores presented in Table 3, it appears that there is no obvious connection between the robustness of the acoustic differences between the underlyingly final voiced and voiceless auditory stimuli and
participants' proportion voiceless productions at test. To explore the possibility that participants were
sensitive to acoustic cues to final voicing in the auditory stimuli that may not have been detected by the
acoustic analysis, we also conducted a follow-up consonant identification task, described next.

4.5 Incomplete Neutralization Follow-Up Experiment
The rationale for this experiment was that if the nearly significant effect of word type observed in
Experiment 1 for the NoSpell group resulted from incomplete neutralization in the auditory stimuli

Hayes-Harb et al.

557

and our participants detected a surface voicing contrast, then a new group of participants from the
same population with the same exposure to the German nonwords should exhibit differential identification of the surface voicing values of the words' underlyingly voiced and underlyingly voiceless final consonants. We recruited 11 new participants using the same inclusionary and exclusionary
criteria described previously (5 male, 6 female; mean age = 21.5 years; age range 18-29 years). For
the purpose of maximizing the similarity of their experience to that of participants in the original
experiment, these new participants were first exposed to the NoSpell word learning phase and
criterion test from Experiment 1. Upon reaching the 90% criterion, instead of the picture naming
test, they performed a final consonant identification task (structured similarly to that of the coders
in Experiment 1), identifying the final consonants in the original nonword stimuli produced by the
native speakers of German. We found no difference in the proportion of final consonants judged to
be voiceless between those that were underlyingly voiced (mean = 0.82) and those that were underlyingly voiceless (mean = 0.82; t(20) = -.036, p = 0.972). Thus, native English speakers perceive
the auditory German nonword stimuli used in the present study as containing voiceless final consonants >80% of the time, and did not differ in their voicing judgments for underlyingly voiced
versus underlyingly voiceless stimuli.

4.6 Discussion
The significant interaction of word learning condition and word type suggests a differential effect
of underlying final consonant voicing on the two groups of participants that may be attributed to
the presence/absence of written forms in the input to participants. That the Spell group exhibited a
significant effect of word type, with more voiced final consonant productions associated with
words spelled with voiced final letters, suggests that their memory for the phonological forms of
these newly learned words was influenced by the words' written forms. In addition, the results of
the acoustic analysis and the follow-up experiment indicate that the marginally significant effect of
underlying voicing for NoSpell participants is unlikely to have arisen from their sensitivity to any
residual voicing contrast in the auditory stimuli. Our present findings are thus consistent with those
of Young-Scholten (2002) in that access to written input appears to interfere with native English
speakers' acquisition of target-like surface forms with respect to German final devoicing.

5

Experiment 2

The purpose of Experiment 2 was to investigate whether a simple intervention could serve to moderate the negative impact that the misleading nature of German written input might have on native
English speakers' acquisition of German final devoicing. To this end, we replicated Experiment 1,
with the addition of a second word learning variable: the availability of an intervention.

5.1 Participants
Forty-eight participants with the same inclusionary/exclusionary criteria as above (16 male, 32
female; mean = 23.9 years; range = 18-40 years) were randomly assigned to one of four word
learning groups (see Table 4).

5.2 Materials and Procedure
The materials and procedures were identical to those in Experiment 1, except that participants in
the Spell-Intervention and the NoSpell-Intervention conditions received additional instructions at

558

Language and Speech 61(4)

Table 4. The four word learning conditions; n = 12 in each.
Spelling
Intervention

Spell-Intervention
Spell-NoIntervention

NoSpell-Intervention
NoSpell-NoIntervention

Figure 3. Mean proportion voiceless productions by spelling condition, intervention condition and word
type; whiskers indicate the 95% confidence interval.

the beginning of the word learning phase. The following was presented to them on the screen: In
German, sometimes the final letter of a word is not spelled the way it sounds. A "b" will be pronounced "p", a "g" will be pronounced "k" and a "d" will be pronounced "t" when at the end of
the word. Please try to remember this as you learn the new words. This text remained on the screen
until participants pressed a button indicating that they were ready to continue.
5.2.1 Coding. Following the same procedure as in Experiment 1, we isolated 784 "globally correct"
tokens, with an average of 12.1 (out of 24 elicitations) "globally correct" for the NoSpell-NoIntervention group (50.3%), 13.1 (54.4%) for the NoSpell-Instruction group, 11.9 (49.7%) for the
Spell-NoIntervention group, and 15.2 (63.3%) for the Spell-Instruction group. There was not a
significant difference among the groups in the number of usable tokens, F(3, 44) = 1.86, p = 0.15,
partial 2 = 0.113. Nine new coders performed the coding task with these tokens.

5.3 Results
The mean number of word learning-criterion test cycles needed to reach criterion was 1.8 for
participants in the NoSpell-NoIntervention group, 1.8 for the NoSpell-Intervention group, 1.4 for
the Spell-NoIntervention group, and 2 for the Spell-Intervention group. There was not a significant difference among groups for the number of word learning cycles needed to reach criterion,
F(3, 44) = 1.57, p = 0.21, partial 2 = 0.09.
Figure 3 presents the mean proportion voiceless productions scores by spelling condition, intervention condition, and word type. The data were submitted to a three-way, mixed design ANOVA

Hayes-Harb et al.

559

with spelling condition (two levels: Spell and NoSpell) and intervention condition (two levels:
Intervention and NoIntervention) as between-subject variables, word type as a within-subjects variable (two levels: underlyingly voiced and underlyingly voiceless), and proportion voiceless productions as the dependent measure. The main effect of word type was significant, F(1, 44) = 38.882, p
< 0.001, partial 2 = 0.469, as was the main effect of spelling condition, F(1, 44) = 5.294, p = 0.026,
partial 2 = 0.107, and the interaction of the two, F(1, 44) = 20.398, p < 0.001, partial 2 = 0.317.
However, the main effect of intervention condition was not significant, (F(1, 44) = 0.032, p = 0.859,
partial 2 = 0.001, nor were any of the two-way interactions involving this variable or the three-way
interaction (all p > 0.5). Following up on the significant interaction of spelling condition and word
type, we performed pairwise analyses of word type for each of the four participant groups separately. The simple effect of word type was not significant for either the NoSpell-NoIntervention
group, F(1, 11) = 0.347, p = 0.568, partial 2 = 0.031, or the NoSpell-Intervention group, F(1, 11)
= 2.442, p = 0.146, partial 2 = 0.182. However, the effect of word type was significant for both
groups that saw written forms: Spell-NoIntervention, F(1, 11) = 15.648, p = 0.002, partial 2 =
0.587, and Spell-Intervention, F(1, 11) = 28.775, p < 0.0005, partial 2 = 0.723.

5.4 Discussion
In Experiment 2 we replicated the significant interaction of spelling condition and word type found
in Experiment 1, in addition to the significant effect of word type for only those participants who
were exposed to written forms during the word learning phase. It is worth noting that the effect of
word type did not approach significance for participants in either of the NoSpell conditions (with
or without intervention) in this experiment, providing further evidence that our native English
speaking participants did not detect incomplete neutralization in the auditory stimuli. We further
found no evidence for an effect of the intervention, with no significant main effect or interactions
involving this variable.

6

General Discussion

Recent research in L2 acquisition has provided evidence that learners can use orthographic input to
infer the phonological forms of new words. Indeed, this propensity by literate adult learners to rely
on orthographic information when it is available appears to be so robust that they make inferences
about words' phonological forms from orthographic input even when it conflicts with the auditory
input and leads them to misremember words' phonological forms (e.g., Hayes-Harb et al., 2010). In
the present work we investigated whether the availability of written forms in German word learning
would interfere with native English speakers' acquisition of the surface voicing of final obstruents.
We found that native English speaking participants who had access to the spelled forms of novel
German(-like) words during an exposure phase were more likely than those who did not to later
produce the words with voiced final obstruents, an effect that was not moderated by explicitly telling participants that the German written forms may be misleading. This finding is consistent with
that of Young-Scholten (Young-Scholten, 2002, 2004; Young-Scholten & Langer, 2015), and further
suggests a causal link between knowledge about words' spelled forms and non-target-like production of final obstruent voicing in German L2 acquisition by native speakers of English.
That native English speakers should exhibit difficulty acquiring German surface voicing in final
position may be unexpected in light of the observation that learners often exhibit unmarked phonology during L2 development, even when the unmarked phonology is not in evidence in either the
first language or the L2 (see, e.g., Hayes-Harb, Smith, Bent, & Bradlow, 2008). This observation
is formalized in the Markedness Differential Hypothesis (MDH; Eckman, 1977). Given the

560

Language and Speech 61(4)

cross-linguistic and developmental prevalence of final devoicing processes (e.g., Smith, 1979),
according to the MDH, final voicelessness should be relatively easy for L2 learners to acquire. In
fact, English exhibits final obstruent devoicing to some extent (see, e.g., Dmitrieva, 2014; Smith,
1979; see also Hillenbrand, Ingrisano, Smith, & Flege, 1984), and it might be argued that English
speakers should readily transfer this process into L2 German. However, native English speakers
speaking English maintain more robust acoustic cues to underlying final voicing contrasts than do
native German speakers speaking German (see, e.g., Smith et al., 2009), indicating that the two
languages differ in the degree to which final obstruents are devoiced. Indeed, devoicing in English
and German are often characterized as qualitatively different types of processes, with devoicing in
English referred to as a phonetic process and in German as a phonological process (e.g., Smith &
Peterson, 2012). Thus native speakers of English may be faced with the challenge of navigating a
quantitatively and qualitatively different manifestation of final devoicing when acquiring German
surface forms, which appears to be made more difficult by German spelling.

6.1 Orthographic Effects on First Language (L1) Production and Perception
The influence of written forms on the production of final obstruents may not be unique to L2 learners. Some researchers have suggested that findings of incomplete neutralization by native speakers
of final devoicing languages may in fact be attributable to an effect of orthography. As Warner et al.
observed, greater acoustic differences between underlyingly voiced and voiceless final obstruents
have generally been found for languages where the underlying contrast is represented in the orthography (Warner et al., 2004, p. 253)--this may not be surprising given that knowledge about words'
orthographic forms has been shown to influence word processing in purely auditory tasks (e.g.,
Chereau, Gaskell, & Dumay, 2007; Ziegler & Ferrand, 1998). However, it has also been argued
that the apparent effect of orthography in studies of final devoicing may be a consequence of the
tasks used (e.g., Kharlamov, 2014). Many of the studies reporting incomplete neutralization have
involved reading tasks, potentially eliciting "a form of hypercorrection or spelling pronunciation"
(Roettger et al., 2014, p. 13). Researchers have attempted to minimize possible task-induced orthographic effects by, for example, eliciting verb conjugations with oral prompts (Fourakis & Iverson,
1984) or eliciting productions of the singular forms of pseudowords following an oral stimulus
containing the pseudowords' plural forms (Roettger et al., 2014), with mixed results. As noted in
the introduction to this article, the question of whether final devoicing--and other neutralization
processes--are complete or incomplete, remains a matter of debate. The question of whether
knowledge about orthographic forms plays a role in cases where incomplete neutralization is
observed is similarly debated in the literature on the production and perception of languages with
final devoicing.

6.2 Methodological Considerations
It is important to stress that we have not in fact directly investigated the acquisition of the process of
final obstruent devoicing in German, but rather the acquisition of surface voicing associated with
individual German (non)words. As Young-Scholten pointed out, "an examination of voiceless stops
just in word-final position will not reveal whether final devoicing has actually been acquired. Only
learners' production of alternating pairs in which underlying voiced obstruents surface as voiced
word-medially and as voiceless word-finally will enable us to conclude learners have acquired final
devoicing" (Young-Scholten, 2004, p. 69). We have nonetheless demonstrated in this study how
written input may interfere with such learning--by complicating the task of determining the underlying representations of German words from the input (Young-Scholten, 2002, p. 271).

Hayes-Harb et al.

561

An additional methodological consideration is whether the experimental paradigm used in the
present study (and other studies like it) artificially inflates the effect of orthographic incongruence.
As an example, the inclusion of (underlying) minimal pairs in the present study, which were effectively produced as homophones yet paired with different pictures, may have encouraged a strategy
among participants in the Spell conditions to rely more heavily on the written input than they would
have in the absence of homophones (in this case, underlying minimal pairs). Whether or not participants employed such a strategy, and if so, whether it had the effect of exacerbating the interfering
effect of the incongruent final letters, is unknown. However, it is worth noting that other artificial
lexicon studies showing similarly robust orthographic interference effects have not involved minimal pairs (e.g., L1 English-L2 artificial language: Hayes-Harb et al., 2010; L1 English-L2
Mandarin/Pinyin: Hayes-Harb & Cheng, 2016), suggesting minimally that robust interfering effects
of orthographic input do not depend on the presence of minimal pairs in the input.

6.3 Implications for L2 German Acquisition
Veivo and Jarvikivi note that a "consequence of many L2 learners being literate is that the teaching
and the learning of L2 are often based on written language to a significant degree", and that "orthographic forms of new words are ...often acquired together with the phonological forms, if not
before them" (Veivo & Jarvikivi, 2013, p. 866). While we have seen mounting evidence that written input may support the acquisition of novel phonological contrasts (e.g., Escudero et al., 2008,
2014; Showalter & Hayes-Harb, 2013), it appears to interfere with learning in cases of incongruencies between the L1 and L2 spelling systems (e.g., Hayes-Harb et al., 2010; Experiments 1 and 2),
and this negative impact is not readily overcome by a simple intervention (Experiment 2). Together,
these findings may indicate the need for a judicious use of written input in instructed L2 settings,
coupled with strategies designed to help learners avoid the pitfalls associated with orthographic
incongruencies between the L1 and L2. To this end, further empirical work is needed both concerning the factors that influence the beneficial/harmful effects of written input and the role that instruction may play in moderating learners' use of written L2 input. In particular, further exploration
involving actual learners in instructed and uninstructed settings might shed light on the time course
of overcoming these effects, in addition to the relevant input and instructional variables.

7

Conclusion

German final devoicing poses a complication for native English-speaking learners of German in
that the written and auditory input often provide contradictory information concerning the voicing
value of final obstruents. Via an artificial lexicon study involving naive native English speakers
learning German(-like) words, we have demonstrated a causal relationship between the availability
of written forms and non-target-like pronunciation of German words involving final obstruent
devoicing. In a second study we found that this interfering effect of written input was not readily
overcome by a simple intervention. We have thus provided further evidence for the influence of
written input on L2 phonological acquisition, with implications for its use in German as a L2
instruction.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the two native speakers of German who produced the speech stimuli, the study participants,
and to the members of the Speech Science Laboratory and the Speech Acquisition Laboratory for their contributions to this work. Study materials are available in the Instruments for Research into Second Languages
Digital Repository: www.iris-database.org

562

Language and Speech 61(4)

Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors.

References
Aliaga-Garcia, C., & Mora, J. C. (2009). Assessing the effects of phonetic training on L2 sound perception
and production. In M. A. Watkins, A. S. Rauber, & B. O. Baptista (Eds.), Recent research in second language phonetics/phonology: Perception and production (pp. 2-31). Newcastle upon Tyn, UK:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Bassetti, B. (2006). Orthographic input and phonological representations in learners of Chinese as a foreign
language. Written Language and Literacy, 9(1), 95-114.
Bassetti, B. (2008). Orthographic input and second language phonology. In T. Piske and M. Young-Scholten
(Eds.), Input Matters in SLA (pp. 191-206). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Bassetti, B., Escudero, P., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2015). Second language phonology at the interface between
acoustic and orthographic input. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36(1), 1-6.
Bradlow, A. R., Pisoni, D. B., Akahane-Yamada, R., & Tohkura, Y. (1997). Training Japanese listeners to
identify English /r/ and /l/: IV. Some effects of perceptual learning on speech production. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 101(4), 2299-2310.
Broersma, M. (2005). Perception of familiar contrasts in unfamiliar positions. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 117(6), 3890-3901.
Cebrian, J. (2000). Transferbility and productivity of L1 rules in Catalan-English interlanguage. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 22(1), 1-26.
Chereau, C., Gaskell, M. G., & Dumay, N. (2007). Reading spoken words: Orthographic effects in auditory
priming. Cognition, 102(3), 341-360.
Dmitrieva, O. (2014). Final voicing and devoicing in American English. Poster presented at the 168th Meeting
of the Acoustical Society of America, Indianapolis, IN. October 2014.
Dmitrieva, O., Jongman, A., & Sereno, J. (2010). Phonological neutralization by native and non-native speakers: The case of Russian final devoicing. Journal of Phonetics, 38(3), 483-492.
Eckman, F. R. (1977). Markedness and the contrastive analysis hypothesis. Language Learning, 27(2),
315-330.
Escudero, P. (2015). Orthography plays a limited role when learning the phonological forms of new
words: The case of Spanish and English learners of novel Dutch words. Applied Psycholinguistics,
36(1), 7-22.
Escudero, P., & Wanrooij, K. (2010). The effect of L1 orthography on non-native vowel perception. Language
and Speech, 53(3), 343-365.
Escudero, P., Hayes-Harb, R., & Mitterer, H. (2008). Novel second-language words and asymmetric lexical
access. Journal of Phonetics, 36(2), 345-360.
Escudero, P., Simon, E., & Mulak, K. (2014). Learning words in a new language: Orthography doesn't always
help. Bilingualism, Language and Cognition, 17(2), 384-395.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows display program with millisecond accuracy.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1), 116-124.
Fourakis, M., & Iverson, G. (1984). On the `incomplete neutralization' of German final obstruents. Phonetica,
41(3), 140-149.
Hardison, D. M. (2003). Acquisition of second-language speech: Effects of visual cues, context, and talker
variability. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24(4), 495-522.
Hayes-Harb, R., & Cheng, H.-w. (2016). The influence of the Pinyin and Zhuyin writing systems on the acquisition of Mandarin word forms by native English speakers. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00785.
Hayes-Harb, R. & Hacking, J. F. (2015). The influence of written stress marks on native English speakers' acquisition of Russian lexical stress contrasts. Slavic and East European Journal, 59(1), 91-109.

Hayes-Harb et al.

563

Hayes-Harb, R., Nicol, J., & Barker, J. (2010). Learning the phonological forms of new words: Effects of
orthographic and auditory input. Language and Speech, 53(3), 367-381.
Hayes-Harb, R., Smith, B. L., Bent, T., & Bradlow, A. R. (2008). The interlanguage speech intelligibility benefit for native speakers of Mandarin: Production and perception of English word-final voicing contrasts.
Journal of Phonetics, 36(4), 664-679.
Hillenbrand, J., Ingrisano, D. R., Smith, B. L., & Flege, J. E. (1984). Perception of the voiced-voiceless contrast in syllable-final stops. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 76(1), 18-26.
Jackson, J. (2016). The effects of novel orthographic input and phonetic instruction in second language phonological acquisition. MA Thesis. University of Utah.
Kharlamov, V. (2014). Incomplete neutralization of the voicing contrast in word-final obstruents in Russian:
Phonological, lexical, and methodological influences. Journal of Phonetics, 43(1), 47-56.
Kissling, E. M. (2013). Teaching pronunciation: Is explicit phonetics instruction beneficial for FL learners?
The Modern Language Journal, 97(3), 720-744.
Kleber, F., John, T., & Harrington, J. (2010). The implications for speech perception of incomplete neutralization of final devoicing in German. Journal of Phonetics, 38(2), 185-196.
Mathieu, L. (2016). The influence of foreign scripts on the acquisition of a second language phonological
contrast. Second Language Research, 32(2), 145-170.
Piroth, H. G., & Janker, P. M. (2004). Speaker-dependent differences in voicing and devoicing of German
obstruents. Journal of Phonetics, 32(1), 81-109.
Port, R., & O'Dell, M. (1985). Neutralization of syllable-final voicing in German. Journal of Phonetics,
13(4), 455-471.
Pytlyk, C. (2011). Shared orthography: Do shared written symbols influence the perception of L2 sounds?
Modern Language Journal, 95(4), 541-557.
Roettger, T. B., Winter, B., Grawunder, S., Kirby, J., & Grice, M. (2014). Assessing incomplete neutralization
of final devoicing in German. Journal of Phonetics, 43(2), 11-25.
Showalter, C. E., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2013). Unfamiliar orthographic information and second language word
learning: A novel lexicon study. Second Language Research, 29(2), 185-200.
Showalter, C. E., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2015). Native English speakers learning Arabic: The influence of novel
orthographic information on second language phonological acquisition. Applied Psycholinguistics,
36(1), 23-42.
Simon, E. (2010). Phonological transfer of voicing and devoicing rules: Evidence from L1 Dutch and L2
English conversational speech. Language Sciences, 32(1), 63-86.
Simon, E., Chambless, D., & Alves, U. K. (2010). Understanding the role of orthography in the acquisition of
a non-native vowel contrast. Language Sciences, 32(3), 380-394.
Slowiaczek, L., & Dinnsen, D. (1985). On the neutralizing status of Polish word-final devoicing. Journal of
Phonetics, 13(3), 325-341.
Smith, B. L. (1979). A phonetic analysis of consonantal devoicing in children's speech. Journal of Child
Langauge, 6(1), 19-28.
Smith, B. L., Hayes-Harb, R., Bruss, M., & Harker, A. (2009). Production and perception of voicing and
devoicing in similar German and English word pairs by native speakers of German. Journal of Phonetics,
37(3), 257-275.
Smith, B.L., & Peterson, E.A. (2012). Native English speakers learning German as a second language:
Devoicing of final voiced stop targets. Journal of Phonetics, 40(1), 129-140.
Veivo, O., & Jarvikivi, J. (2013). Proficiency modulates early orthographic and phonological processing in L2
spoken word recognition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(4), 864-883.
Wang, Y., Jongman, A., & Sereno, J. (2003). Acoustic and perceptual evaluation of Mandarin tone productions before and after perceptual training. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 113(2),
1033-1043.
Warner, N., Jongman, A., Sereno, J., & Kemps, R. (2004). Incomplete neutralization and other sub-phonemic
durational differences in production and perception: Evidence from Dutch. Journal of Phonetics, 32(2),
251-276.

564

Language and Speech 61(4)

Young-Scholten, M. (2002). Orthographic input in L2 phonological development. In P. Burmeister, T. Piske,
& A. Rohde (Eds.), An integrated view of language development: Papers in honour of Henning Wode
(pp. 263-279). Trier, Germany: Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier.
Young-Scholten, M. (2004). Prosodic constraints on allophonic distribution in adult L2 acquisition.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 8(1), 67-77.
Young-Scholten, M., & Langer, M. (2015). The role of orthographic input in second language German:
Evidence from naturalistic adult learners' production. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36(1), 93-114.
Ziegler, J. C., & Ferrand, L. (1998). Orthography shapes the perception of speech: The consistency effect in
auditory word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5(4), 683-689.

