Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: 2327-3798 (Print) 2327-3801 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Agreement or no agreement. ERP correlates of verb
agreement violation in German Sign Language
Jana Hosemann, Annika Herrmann, Holger Sennhenn-Reulen, Matthias
Schlesewsky & Markus Steinbach
To cite this article: Jana Hosemann, Annika Herrmann, Holger Sennhenn-Reulen, Matthias
Schlesewsky & Markus Steinbach (2018) Agreement or no agreement. ERP correlates of verb
agreement violation in German Sign Language, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 33:9,
1107-1127, DOI: 10.1080/23273798.2018.1465986
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1465986

View supplementary material

Published online: 24 Apr 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 410

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE
2018, VOL. 33, NO. 9, 1107-1127
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1465986

REGULAR ARTICLE

Agreement or no agreement. ERP correlates of verb agreement violation in
German Sign Language
Jana Hosemanna, Annika Herrmanna,b, Holger Sennhenn-Reulenc,d, Matthias Schlesewskye,f and
Markus Steinbacha
a

Department of German Philology, Georg-August-University Gottingen, Gottingen, Germany; bInstitute for German Sign Language and
Communication of the Deaf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany; cCognitive Ethology Laboratory, German Primate Center, LeibnizInstitute for Primate Research, Gottingen, Germany; dLeibniz ScienceCampus "Primate Cognition", German Primate Center, Leibniz-Institute for
Primate Research, Gottingen, Germany; eDepartment of English and Linguistics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany; fSchool
of Psychology, Social Work and Social Policy, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Previous studies on agreement violation in sign languages report neurophysiological responses
similar to those observed for spoken languages. In contrast, the two current event-related
potential studies (ERP) on agreement violations in German Sign Language sentences present
results that allow for an alternative explanation. In experiment A, we investigated the processing
of agreement verbs ending in an unspecified location different to the location associated with
the referent. Incorrect agreement verbs engendered a posterior positivity effect (220-570 ms
post nonmanual cues) and a left anterior effect (300-600 ms post the subsequent sign onset). In
experiment B, we investigated a violation of morphologically modified plain verbs. Incorrect
plain verbs, articulated to express third person object agreement, engendered a broadly
distributed positivity effect (420-730 ms post mismatch onset). We discuss the results under the
perspective of enhanced costs for context updating, and argue that sign language agreement is
based on phonological and pragmatic principles.

Received 17 August 2017
Accepted 4 April 2018
KEYWORDS

Sign language; agreement;
event-related potentials;
P600; late positivity

1. Introduction

1.1. Sign language agreement

Whether or not the phenomenon that is called "agreement" 1 in sign languages follows the same grammatical
principles as agreement between the verb and its argument(s) in spoken languages, is a deeply discussed
question (cf. Lillo-Martin & Meier, 2011). Besides the linguistic discussion, little is known about the dependency
relations of agreement in sign languages from a neurocognitive perspective. The neurophysiological level of
processing sign language agreement violations has
only been investigated by two previous studies with
distinct violation parameters (Capek et al., 2009;
Hanel-Faulhaber et al., 2014). As sign language agreement is expressed via spatial locations associated with
referents in a three-dimensional signing space, agreement violations in sign languages might be more than
a mere morpho-syntactic violation of feature checking/sharing. In the two present studies, we look in
more detail into the complex linguistic aspects of sign
language agreement and its electrophysiological
correlates.

Verb agreement in sign languages is mainly expressed by
a location overlap in the signing space between the
beginning or the end point of a verb's path movement
and the location that is associated with the verb's arguments, i.e. subject and/or indirect object (cf. Steinbach
& Onea, 2016). Moreover, sign language agreement can
also be conveyed by directing the hand orientation
towards the location of the respective referent. For
example, in the sentence IX 1 GRANDMA IX 3a 1 HELP 3a
("I help grandma")2 in German Sign Language (Deutsche
Gebardensprache, DGS), the verb's path movement
directs from the signer's chest towards the location
associated with the third person object, which is the
referential locus or "R-locus" labelled with "3a" (Aronoff,
Meir, & Sandler, 2005; Lillo-Martin & Klima, 1990). For
third person referents, this is typically an area on the ipsilateral or contralateral side of the signing space. The
direction of the verb changes accordingly when
grandma becomes the subject/agent and the signer
the object. Then the movement starts at location 3a

CONTACT Jana Hosemann
jana.hosemann@phil.uni-goettingen.de
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1465986
(c) 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

1108

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

and ends at the chest of the signer, as in the sentence
GRANDMA IX 3a 3aHELP 1 ("Grandma helps me"). The two
forms of HELP are depicted in Figure 1.
Verb agreement in sign languages has modality independent as well as modality-specific characteristics,
which leave its linguistic status as well as the neurocognitive aspects of its processing not yet established (LilloMartin & Meier, 2011 and the commentaries on this
target article). On the one hand, sign language agreement can be observed in all sign languages investigated
so far (Mathur & Rathmann, 2012), and analogous to
spoken language agreement, it marks the grammatical
features person and number (Lillo-Martin & Meier, 2011;
Rathmann & Mathur, 2002, 2008). In addition, it shows
similar tendencies of grammaticalization as agreement
in spoken languages (Pfau & Steinbach, 2011; Steinbach,
2011). On the other hand, agreement in sign languages is
restricted to only a subset of verbs (namely to agreement
verbs and not to plain verbs), which may change path
movement and/or hand orientation depending on the
verbs' arguments. Furthermore, the actual location
associated with subject and/or object can depend on
the physical position of the referent. This latter aspect
brings in a discourse specific gestural component,
which queries the mere syntactic nature of sign language
agreement (Liddell, 1995, 2011). With regard to the
crucial role of these modality-specific aspects for the
present studies, we will discuss them in a little more
detail before reporting previous neurophysiological
experiments on sign language agreement.

Figure 1. Pictures of the sign HELP . Left: from the signer to a 3rd
person referent as in 1HELP 3a (`I help him/her'). Right: from a 3rd
person referent to the signer as in 3aHELP 1 (`he/she helps me').

Figure 2. Pictures of the DGS plain verbs

LIKE , BUY ,

and

PLAY

In most documented sign languages, a difference
between verbs that agree and verbs that do not agree
has been confirmed so far (Mathur & Rathmann, 2012).
The basic distinction between plain verbs and agreement
verbs is found in the specification for directionality: Plain
verbs constitute a separate verb class as they are lexically
specified and cannot undergo a phonological change of
their path movement and/or orientation features. For
example, the transitive verb LIKE in DGS has a lexically
specified downward movement on the signers' chest.
Plain verbs do not necessarily have to be body-anchored,
as there are plain verbs articulated in neutral signing
space such as BUY and PLAY in DGS. See Figure 2 for pictures of these plain verbs.
In contrast to plain verbs, agreement verbs have an
underspecified path movement and/or hand orientation
features that are only specified within the sentence in
order to express agreement with subject and/or indirect
object. While the manner of the movement is lexically
specified (i.e. circular, straight or arc movement, etc.),
the initial and the final position of the movement are
determined by the referential indexes, manifested in
the referential loci of the arguments. Thus, agreement
verbs move from the location of the subject towards
the location of the object (double agreement) or from a
lexically specified location towards the location of the
object (single agreement).3
The second modality-specific characteristic of sign
language agreement regards the potential unambiguity
of referential loci (R-loci). Outside of a specific discourse,
a pronoun like he in English or like IX 3a in DGS is per se
ambiguous, because it is referentially "empty". It is
unclear as to what a pronoun refers to, until it is anaphorically linked to a discourse referent. Unlike spoken
language agreement, sign language agreement is
realised through the use of a three-dimensional signing
space in front of the signer. Once a discourse is set and
the referents are introduced, sign languages seem to
be less ambiguous with respect to pronoun resolution
because discourse referents are associated with distinct
R-loci in the signing space. Hence, pronouns can unambiguously identify a discourse referent by pointing

(from left to right) that display a lexically specified movement.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

towards the corresponding R-locus, as demonstrated
in (1).
(1) a. The doctor and the scientist play tennis. He likes the game.
b. DOCTOR IX 3a SCIENTIST IX 3b TENNIS-PLAY. IX 3a/IX 3b GAME LIKE.

(DGS)

The pronoun he in the English example (1a) is ambiguous as it can, in principle, take both noun phrases as its
antecedent. In contrast, in the DGS sentence (1b), the
two referents are assigned to two different R-loci in
the signing space, locus 3a and locus 3b, respectively.
The pronoun in the second sentence has an unambiguous
phonological form in directing at one of the two loci. By
that, it unambiguously refers back to either of the two
referents. In this sense, the link between a specific Rlocus and a particular referent within a discourse is less
ambiguous than the link between a pronoun and its antecedent in spoken languages.4 This aspect of a less ambiguous pronominal system might be explained by the
assumption that sign language agreement systems have
a gestural origin (Liddell, 1995; Pfau & Steinbach, 2006,
2011; Steinbach & Pfau, 2007).
Based on the distinction between plain and agreement verbs, we investigate agreement violation with
both verb types. In our first study (experiment A), we
aimed to replicate Capek et al. (2009)'s design and test
agreement verbs that incorrectly end in an unspecified
R-locus where no discourse referent has been assigned
to. In contrast to Capek et al., we analyse two trigger positions time-locked to crucial phonological changes in the
continuous signing stream. Thus, we are able to analyse
the ongoing processing of natural DGS sentences in
more detail. In our second study (experiment B), we
test agreement violation with plain verbs. As mentioned
above, plain verbs are lexically specified for path movement and hand orientation, and cannot inflect for
subject and/or object agreement. Hence, an agreement
violation with plain verbs seems to be a clear violation
of morpho-syntactic specifications. To our knowledge,
there are no studies investigating the case of agreement
violation with plain verbs so far.

1.2. Neurocognitive studies on sign language
agreement
Neurocognitive investigations of sign language agreement provide a different perspective on the sign
language agreement puzzle. The investigation of
morpho-syntactic agreement violation in electrophysiological studies has - ever since Kutas and Hillyard
(1983) - a long tradition in spoken language research
(Molinaro, Barber, & Carreiras, 2011). Many of these
studies investigated number agreement violations
between a full subject NP and a verb, as in "The

1109

elected officials hopes* to succeed" (Osterhout &
Mobley, 1995), or between a pronominal subject and a
verb, as in "Every Monday, he mow* the lawn"
(Coulson, King, & Kutas, 1998). These agreement mismatches typically evoke a biphasic ERP pattern with a
left anterior negativity (LAN) between 300 and 400 ms
and a late positivity (P600/SPS) after 500 ms in spoken
languages. In order to investigate agreement violations
in sentences of American Sign Language (ASL), Capek
et al. (2009) conducted an ERP study examining two
types of agreement violations: "reversed verb agreement
violation" and "unspecified verb agreement violation".
Similar to spoken languages, the authors report a biphasic ERP effect with an early anterior negativity followed
by a late posterior positivity (P600) for these sign
language agreement violations. However, Capek and colleagues reveal a difference between both types of agreement violation, in that the anterior negativity was larger
over the right lateral frontal site in the unspecified agreement condition compared to the reversed agreement
condition.
A second study on agreement violation during sign
language sentence processing was conducted by
Hanel-Faulhaber et al. (2014) in DGS. In contrast to
Capek et al. (2009), they presented a different type of
verb agreement violation, in which the verb incorrectly
moved from an unspecified neutral location towards
the signer, instead of from right to left, where subject
and object were located. Measured EEG responses to
incorrectly inflected verbs showed a negative potential
with a left lateralised frontal distribution (LAN) and a
late positivity with a posterior distribution (P600).
Hence, Hanel-Faulhaber et al. (2014) similarly report a
biphasic pattern for sentences with incorrect verb agreement. Both studies argue for agreement in sign
languages to be a morpho-syntactic process similar to
agreement in spoken languages.
What becomes apparent from both studies is that the
neurophysiological response to processing agreement
violations in sign languages is modulated by the type
of agreement violation presented. This leads to the
assumption that different types of agreement violations
elicit different ERP responses. Furthermore, and this is
new in the present study, it has not yet been investigated
how the dependency relation between the subject/
agent and the object/undergoer is realised in the processing of transitive plain verbs.

1.3. The two present studies
Experiment A on agreement violation with agreement
verbs had the following objectives: The first aim was to
test unspecified agreement violation for DGS and to

1110

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

replicate Capek et al.'s (2009) findings. A second aim was
to investigate the time course of processing agreement
violation in real time sentence processing in more
detail. Therefore, we time-locked ERPs to different information sources available during the ongoing signing
stream of the transition phase between the preceding
sign and the critical verb sign. For the purpose of the
first experiment, we defined "agreement violation" as
incorrect object agreement. We presented videos of
deaf native signers consisting of two consecutive sentences: The first sentence introduced two discourse referents, the 1st person signer and a 3rd person referent,
which was unambiguously assigned to the right (i.e. ipsilateral) area of the signer at locus 3a. The second sentence continued the discourse topic and ended with
the critical agreement verb. In the match condition, the
verb agreed with the subject and object and thus
moved from the R-locus of the signer (locus 1) to the
R-locus associated with the 3rd person referent (locus
3a). In the mismatch condition, the verb did not correctly
agree with the object associated with 3a, but moved
from the location of the signer (locus 1) towards an
unspecified R-locus on the left (i.e. contralateral) side of
the signer (locus 3b). Example (2) shows representative
stimulus sentences with corresponding video stills of
the final hold of the critical verb (Figure 3).
(2) a. Match condition (agreement verbs):
MY FATHER IX 3a SOCCER FAN. NEXT MATCH DATE 1INFORM 3a. (DGS)

"My father is a soccer fan. I will inform him about the date of the next
match."
b. Mismatch condition (agreement verbs):
MY FATHER IX 3a SOCCER FAN. NEXT MATCH DATE 1INFORM 3b. (DGS)

"My father is a soccer fan. I will inform xxx about the date of the next
match."

Note that this kind of agreement violation does not
involve a phonologically incorrect form of the verb as it
can correctly appear in sentences with a referent associated to R-locus 3b. If sign language agreement indeed
constitutes a morpho-syntactic process of marking the
features person and number of subject and object on
the initial and final hold of the verb, we expect a

similar ERP response as the well-investigated biphasic
pattern of LAN and P600 for spoken language agreement
violation. On the contrary, if the phenomenon of directionality in agreement verbs is rather a contextual (pragmatic) discourse phenomenon, e.g. a linking process of a
previously introduced discourse referent to the subsequent proposition, we would expect to find a different
ERP pattern compared to spoken language agreement
violations.
Other than agreement verbs, plain verbs have a lexically specified path movement, that is, they cannot
undergo a phonological change in order to mark
subject and/or object agreement. Nevertheless, in experiment B we investigated a violation of this non-agreeing
lexical specification of plain verbs. We transferred the
agreement principle to plain verbs and manipulated
them in the way to behave similar to agreement verbs,
i.e. their final hold ended at locus 3a, in order to
"agree" with a 3rd person referent. Hence, in the match
condition, sentences comprised a subject, a 3rd person
object, and a sentence final plain verb in its lexical
form. In the mismatch condition, the plain verbs path
movement was modified and directed at the R-locus 3a
associated with the 3rd person referent. In any other
respect, sentences were identical to their controls. Representative stimulus sentences with a correct (a) and an
incorrect plain verb (b) are presented in example (3)
and the corresponding video stills in Figure 4.
(3) a.

Match condition (plain verbs):
IX 1 LAPTOP BUY. (DGS)

"I buy a laptop."
b. Mismatch condition (plain verbs):
IX 1 LAPTOP BUY 3a. (DGS)

"I *buy a laptop."

In contrast to previous ERP studies on agreement violation in sign languages, this experiment is the first to
investigate agreement violation with plain verbs. If the
artificial path movement towards the object is indeed
processed as a form of agreement, we expect a left
anterior negativity to reflect the violation of expectancy
and a late positivity for some kind of mapping or

Figure 3. Original video stills of the final hold of the critical verb INFORM : (a) in the match condition, agreeing with the 3rd person
referent (1INFORM 3a); and (b) in the mismatch condition, ending at an unspecified R-locus on the contralateral side of the signer
(1INFORM 3b).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1111

Figure 4. Original video stills of the critical plain verb BUY : (a) in the match condition; and (b) in the mismatch condition with the modified path movement directing towards locus 3a, in order to mark agreement with the 3rd person object.

integrating processes on the sentence level. Regarding
neurophysiologic responses to agreement violations in
sign languages, this experiment breaks new ground.
The data of experiment A and experiment B have each
been recorded together with a separate experiment
that addressed an unrelated question and has been published elsewhere.

2. Experiment A: agreement violation with
agreement verbs
2.1. Experiment A: materials and methods
2.1.1. Participants
In this experiment, a total of 20 congenitally deaf native
signers of DGS (mean age: 36, range: 18-51) participated
as paid volunteers (8 f, 12 m). All signers were born deaf,
had deaf parents or DGS input before the age of three,
and described DGS as their native language. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, were
right-handed and had no history of neurological disorders. Due to excessive eye movement artefacts, two
participants had to be excluded from the final data
analysis.
2.1.2. Materials
The materials were created and recorded together with
two deaf DGS informants (one male, one female) and
checked for grammatical and semantic correctness, frequency and possible dialectical variation. We used 40
sentences for each of the critical conditions (match
versus mismatch) as illustrated in example (2) and (3) in
Section 1.3. The 40 sentences per condition were constructed using 10 verbs, thus resulting in 4 repetitions
of each individual verb per condition; crucially, sentence
contexts differed across repetitions. The verbs were frequent regular agreement verbs like HELP, ASK, VISIT , or
GIVE , and selected for two animate arguments (subject
and object).5 The corresponding sentences in both conditions were identical, except for the critical final verb.

Critical agreement verbs in the match condition started
at the R-locus of the signer (i.e. the subject) and ended
at R-locus 3a previously associated with the object referent on the ipsilateral (i.e. right) side of the signer. In contrast, critical agreement verbs in the mismatch condition
also started at the R-locus of the signer, but ended on the
contralateral (i.e. left) side of the signer at the unassigned
R-locus 3b. Thompson, Emmorey, and Kluender (2006,
2009) report for ASL that object agreement is also
marked nonmanually by eye gaze towards the location
of the object. Hosemann (2011) found similar results
for DGS. Hence, we instructed our informants to
produce manual agreement in co-occurrence with the
nonmanual markers eye gaze and head tilt towards the
direction of the final location (i.e. locus 3a for matching
verbs and locus 3b for mismatching verbs, respectively).
In any other respect, nonmanual action like facial
expressions or brow raise was kept to a minimum
within the prospects of natural signing. A comprehensive
list of stimulus sentences is provided in Appendix A.
The material was recorded on video with a HDR-XR
550E full-HD camera (25 frames per second) and processed with Adobe Premiere Pro. In total, videos had an
average length of 8.27 s (sd 0.66). At the beginning
and the end of each video, the signer was seen motionless for approximately 2000ms before and after he/she
signed the sentence in a natural manner. To ensure
maximal naturalness of the signed sentences and the
processing of it, videos were not cross-spliced, length
adapted, or modified in any way. The 80 critical sentences resulting from this design were combined with
80 filler sentences, which were part of an unrelated separate experimental design. Altogether, the 160 sentences
were presented in two different pseudo-randomized
ordered lists, which were counterbalanced across participants. To familiarise participants with the procedure of
the experiment, an additional set of 10 sentences were
recorded in the same manner and presented twice as
practice before the actual experiment started. These sentences were not part of the critical stimuli.

1112

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

2.1.3. Procedure
After giving written informed consent, participants were
seated approximately 1 m in front of a 17 inch computer
screen in a comfortable chair located in a dimly lit cabin.
Participants watched an introductory video that
explained the procedure in DGS at the beginning of
the experimental session. Remaining questions were
answered by the experimenter in DGS. Participants
started with a short practice session. The following
experimental session was subdivided into 4 blocks of
40 sentences each. Between blocks, participants had
the opportunity to take short breaks. In each trial, participants had to perform two tasks after watching the critical
sentence: an acceptability judgment of the sentence (Is
the sentence correct? - answers: yes, no), and an evaluation judgment of their own decision (How sure are
you? - answers: very sure, sure, not sure, not sure at
all). The cue for the acceptability judgment task was a
question mark in white Arial font (size 60) on a black
screen, followed by a blank screen for 500 ms. Subsequently, the evaluation judgment task was cued by a
short question in German ("wie sicher?", "how sure?") In
the same font. Maximal reaction times for the two
tasks were 2000 and 3000 ms, respectively. The next
trial began after an interval of 2500 ms with the next critical video. The experiment lasted for about 45 min.
2.1.4. EEG recording
We recorded the EEG data by means of 32 active electrodes placed according to the international 10-20 system
(ActiCAP 32, Easycap GmbH, Herrsching, Germany). With
a sampling rate of 500 Hz, the data was amplified by a
BrainAmp amplifier (Brain Products GmbH, Gilching,
Germany). Average impedances were kept below 10
k. EEG recordings were referenced online to the right
mastoid, and re-referenced to linked mastoids, whereas
electrode AFz served as the ground electrode. In order
to monitor the electrooculogram (EOG) for each participant, we placed electrodes above and below the right
eye for the vertical EOG, and for the horizontal EOG at
the outer canthi of each eye.
2.1.5. EEG data preprocessing and statistical
analysis
Before analysis, the raw EEG was filtered with a 0.3-20 Hz
band-pass filter in order to eliminate slow signal drifts.
Epochs of the EEG corresponding from -200 to
1000 ms relative to two different trigger points (see
below) were calculated per condition and electrode in
the single subject ERP averages. Subsequently, grand
averages were computed over all participants. The rejection threshold for trials with artefacts was 40 V.

Artefacts and EOGs were excluded from the averaging
procedure.
Following the objective to investigate the processing
of verb agreement in a natural sentential environment,
trial videos were presented in an unsliced manner.
Thus, trigger points for the analysis of the EEG signal
were time-locked to two crucial points within the
video: the moment of nonmanual changes and the subsequent sign onset of the critical verb. We thereby took
into consideration that the processing of a target sign
already begins during the preceding transition phase
between the previous sign and the target sign (Hosemann, Herrmann, Steinbach, Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, &
Schlesewsky, 2013). Each trigger point was identified
individually for each video by two linguists with a high
expertise in DGS. Conflicting classifications never differed by more than a single frame (40 ms) and were
resolved by discussion. The critical moments for trigger
setting were the following:
(1) Nonmanual cues (nmc). Verb agreement was
additionally marked by the nonmanual components
of eye gaze and head tilt towards the final R-locus of
the verb. This trigger point was defined as the first
frame in which eye gaze towards the respective Rlocus was clearly identifiable and/or in which the
head left its neutral position. If eye gaze and head
tilt did not change in the same frame, the first
frame with a nonmanual deviation (either eye gaze
change or head tilt change) was picked. On
average, the nmc-trigger occurred 202 ms (sd
128 ms) prior to the sign onset trigger.
(2) Sign onset (so). The sign onset was defined as the first
frame of the initial hold for the critical verb, when the
target hand configuration reached the target
location at body contact with the signer (in case of
body anchored agreement verbs) or at the locus
just in front of the signer (in case of non-body
anchored agreement verbs). The average duration
from sign onset to sign offset was 429 ms (sd 168)
for matching agreement verbs and 461 ms (sd 174)
for mismatching agreement verbs.
For the statistical analysis of the ERP data, four lateral
topographical regions of interests (ROI) were computed:
left-anterior (F3, F7, FC1, FC5, C3), right-anterior (F4, F8,
FC2, FC6, C4), left-posterior (CP1, CP5, P3, P7, O1), and
right-posterior (CP2, CP6, P4, P8, O2). The midline electrodes, FZ, CZ, CPZ, PZ, and OZ were each analysed as individual ROIs. The statistical analyses were conducted
using R (Team, 2012) and the ez package (Lawrence,
2012) and carried out in a hierarchical manner. Repeated
measures analysis of variance (ANOVAs) were calculated

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

with the factor CONDITION (match vs. mismatch) and
topographical region of interest (ROI). Only significant
interactions (p < 0.05) were resolved. Probability values
were Huynh-Feldt corrected when appropriate (Huynh
& Feldt, 1970).

2.2. Experiment A: results
2.2.1. Behavioural data
The statistical analysis of the behavioural data was calculated with a Bayesian regression model using the brms
R-package (Burkner, n.d.), in which individuals were
included as random intercept. Responses to the acceptability judgment were evaluated with a binary regression
model with logit link, whereas responses to the evaluation judgment were evaluated with an ordered logit
model. Empirical probabilities for the acceptability judgment were as follows: sentences with correct agreement
verbs (i.e. match): 92.9% acceptability; sentences with
incorrect agreement verbs (i.e. mismatch): 44.7% acceptability. The estimated probability for accepting sentences
in the match condition was 94.4% (with a 99% credible
interval between 89.4% and 97.6%). The estimated probability for accepting sentences in the mismatch condition was 40.3% (with a 99% credible interval between
16.3% and 0.5%); Bayesian p-value: p < 0.001. The estimate probabilities for the evaluation judgment are illustrated in Table 1 (95% credible interval shown in
percentage in square brackets).
2.2.2. ERP data
Grand averages for sentences with agreement verb violation and for their matching control sentences are displayed in Figure 5, correlated to the preceding trigger
nonmanual cues, and in Figure 6, correlated to the following trigger sign onset. As can be seen in both figures,
agreement verbs ending at an unspecified locus different
to the one associated with the introduced referent,
engender two effects: A first right posterior effect that is
most pronounced between 220 and 570 ms at trigger
nonmanual cues, which appears at the right posterior
electrodes P8, P4, CP6, and O2 (compare Figure 5); and
a second following left anterior effect that appears at
left lateralised anterior electrodes F7, F3, FC5, FC1, and
the central electrode C3 between 300 and 600 ms relative to the later trigger sign onset (compare Figure 6).
The earlier right posterior effect is a more positive
deflection for mismatching agreement verbs ending at

1113

an unspecified locus compared to matching agreement
verbs. Statistical analyses were conducted relative to
the nonmanual cue trigger for the time window 220-
570 ms post trigger onset. These resulted in a CONDITION to ROI interaction: F(1,17) = 18.28, p < 0.000001,
and in a condition effect for the right-posterior ROI: F
(1,17) = 15.99, p < 0.001 for lateral electrodes. For
midline electrodes the CONDITION to ROI interaction (F
(1,17) = 5.94, p < 0.001) lead to significant effects at electrode Pz: F(1,17) = 6.41, p < 0.05, and electrode Oz: F
(1,17) = 16.84, p < 0.001. Thus, this identifies as the right
posterior effect. By contrast, the later left anterior effect
is evident between 300 and 600 ms relative to the sign
onset trigger, which occurred on average 202 ms after
the nonmanual cue trigger. The effect appears at left
lateralised anterior electrodes F7, F3, FC5, FC1, and the
central electrode C3 and displays a more negativegoing wave for mismatching verbs (ending at locus 3b
instead of 3a) compared to their matching controls
(ending at 3a, i.e. the locus associated with the referent).
The statistical analysis was conducted for the time
window 300-600 ms relative to trigger sign onset and
resulted in a CONDITION to ROI interaction: F(1,17) =
13.16, p < 0.001, and in a condition effect for the leftanterior ROI: F(1,17) = 16.38, p < 0.001 for lateral electrodes. Midline electrodes did not become significant after
Huynh-Feldt correction (ps > 0.08).
In summary, agreement verbs ending in an unspecified R-locus 3b in contrast to agreement verbs ending
in the R-locus 3a associated with a previously assigned
referent engendered two ERP effects: a right posterior
effect followed by a left anterior effect. Interestingly,
the right posterior effect was related most prominently
to the first visual indication of a nonmanual deviation,
i.e. either a change in eye gaze and/or in head tilt. The
second, left anterior effect was elicited at the moment
of sign onset, which followed the moment of nonmanual
cue change by a mean of 202 ms. This indicates that both
effects seem to be unrelated and do not reflect a biphasic pattern of LAN and P600. The polarity of both effects
and their functional interpretation remains uncertain at
first sight. Whereas the right posterior effect is a more
positive deflection for mismatching verbs, the left
anterior effect seems to be a more negative deflection
for mismatching verbs. However, both effects also
allow for an alternative interpretation, in which the
effect is engendered by the match condition. A possible
interpretation of the results as a reflection of a violation

Table 1. Estimate probabilities for the evaluation judgment in Experiment A.
Cond. match
Cond. mismatch

"not sure at all"

"not sure"

"sure"

"very sure"

23.6% [2.5, 66.5]
20.5% [2.9, 54.7]

3.1% [4.5, 25.1]
17.1% [7.1, 29.9]

21.8% [5.4, 45.6]
28.6% [7.4, 52.5]

41.5% [9.5, 75.0]
33.8% [7.3, 68.1]

1114

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

Figure 5. Grand average ERPs for matching (blue line) and mismatching (red line) agreement verbs, showing a right posterior effect
time-locked to the trigger nonmanual cues. Negativity plotted upwards.

2.3. Experiment A: discussion

anterior effect evolved at left lateral sites. This indicates
that both effects are not causally related and should
thus be interpreted separately. Note that at this point
of investigation, none of the interpretations can be
favoured.

The earlier study by Capek et al. (2009), who investigated
unspecified verb agreement violation - i.e. an agreement
verb ending in an unspecified locus 3a - reports an
anterior negativity distributed most prominently over
the right hemisphere followed by a broadly distributed
P600 over posterior sites. In contrast, in Experiment A
we observed two ERP effects for the same type of agreement violation that seem to be unrelated to one another:
First, a right-posterior effect, which is most pronounced
in a time window of 220-570 ms relative to the preceding trigger nonmanual cues; second, a left-anterior effect
that appears 300-600 ms post trigger sign onset. Since
the moment of sign onset was time-locked on average
202 ms (sd 128 ms) after the nonmanual cue trigger, it
appears that the posterior effect at right lateral sites temporally evolved approximately 200-300 ms before the

2.3.1. Interpretation of the right-posterior effect
The polarity of the effect displays a more positive-going
waveform for the mismatch condition (red line) relative
to the control condition (blue line). Since the number
of ERP studies with unspecified verb agreement violation
in sign languages is limited, three theoretical approaches
based on ERP studies with spoken languages set the
frame in which this effect can be explained.
The first approach assumes the right-posterior effect
to reflect extra costs for discourse updating as reported
by Baumann and Schumacher (2011) and Hung and
Schumacher (2012, 2014). Baumann and Schumacher
(2011) presented German monolinguals auditory sentences that varied with respect to information status of
an entity (given versus new) and prosodic realisation

of well-formedness or as a process of context updating, is
presented in the following discussion.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1115

Figure 6. Grand average ERPs for matching (blue line) and mismatching (red line) agreement verbs, showing a left anterior effect timelocked to the trigger sign onset. Negativity plotted upwards.

(accented versus deaccented). In the critical sentence,
the information status of the 3rd person target NP
("the winegrower") was varied by the previously set
context sentence. The target NP was given, when it has
already been introduced in the preceding context sentence. In contrast, the target NP was new, when it was
not mentioned in the preceding context sentence
(cf. Baumann & Schumacher, 2011, pp. 366-367). ERPs
time-locked to the noun elicited a biphasic N400 - late
positivity pattern for new information compared to
given information. The authors argue that the N400
reflects enhanced costs for linking new information to
the previous discourse, and that the late positivity is
caused by the listener's effort to update their discourse
model. These effects were independent of an appropriate or inappropriate prosody and occurred for accented
as well as deaccented nouns. Hung and Schumacher
(2012, 2014) also found a biphasic N400 - late positivity
pattern for a topic shift in sentence-medial and sentencefinal position in Mandarin Chinese. Thus, a new topic in
sentence-final position in the answer of a question-

answer pair elicited a late positivity for context updating
processes. With regard to the present study, the posterior
positivity effect could have been caused by additional
processing costs for context updating. Agreement
verbs do not only anaphorically agree with the location
of a previously introduced referent, they can also mark
the location of a new referent that is cataphorically introduced later in the discourse. Thus, in the mismatch condition, a discourse referent X was introduced and
associated with locus 3a in sentence one. However, in
sentence two, the agreement verb ended at an unspecified locus 3b, thereby introducing a new discourse referent Y that would need to be explicated in a continuing
context. Sentence two thus introduced a topic shift
from referent X to a potential new referent Y. The
example of an incorrect sentence in experiment A,
such as MY FATHER IX 3a SOCCER FAN. NEXT MATCH DATE
1INFORM 3b, could lead to an alternative interpretation.
The incorrect agreement verb could be (re-)interpreted
in the sense that the signer will inform another person
(that needs to be specified) about the date of the next

1116

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

match. In contrast to plain verbs, agreement verbs in
incorrect forms can have an alternative interpretation
and the posterior positivity could thus reflect enhanced
processing costs for updating the situation model.
A second explanation of the posterior positivity
assumes that the kind of agreement violation is in fact
a case of presupposition violation. The agreement verb
ending at locus 3b presupposes a discourse referent
that the verb can be linked with (cf. Steinbach & Onea,
2016). The failure of this linking process in the mismatch
condition caused the enhanced processing costs. ERP
studies on spoken language pronoun resolution typically
show a widely distributed negative deflection for ambiguous referents (Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2008; van
Berkum, Brown, & Hagoort, 1999a, 1999b; van Berkum,
Koornneef, Otten, & Nieuwland, 2007) and a P600 for
no available referent. Sentences with unambiguous and
ambiguous pronouns such as the following were
tested: (a) "David shot at Linda as he jumped over the
fence" versus (b) "David shot at John as he jumped over
the fence" versus (c) "Anna shot at Linda as he jumped
over the fence". For referentially ambiguous nouns or
pronouns as in sentences (b) compared to (a), van
Berkum et al. (1999a, 1999b) and van Berkum, Zwitserlood, Bastiaansen, Brown, and Hagoort (2004) found a
widely distributed negative deflection, emerging at
about 300 ms after noun/pronoun onset, dubbed the
"Nref effect". However, for sentences like (c) with no available referent of the correct gender, van Berkum et al.
(2004) found no Nref effect but rather a P600. Although
the agreement violation in our experiment A is not a violation of gender, it can be compared to van Berkum
et al.'s (2004) findings. Like in many spoken languages,
pronouns and verb agreement in sign languages are
two related phenomena (Pfau & Steinbach, 2006, 2011).
Both are expressed by a location overlap with a R-locus
assigned to the corresponding discourse referent. A
verb ending at an unspecified R-locus (like 3b in our mismatch condition) presupposes a referent that has not
been introduced in the discourse model. Thus, the reference of the verb ending is "empty" because there is no
adequate referent available. In this third frame of explanation, this violation led to the posterior positivity
effect in our results. Furthermore, van Berkum, Brown,
Hagoort, and Zwitserlood (2003) showed for pronouns
during sentence processing that subjects check their situation model already at a very early stage whether an adequate referent is available or not (see also van Berkum
et al., 2007). This could explain the early latency of the
posterior positivity effect at 220-570 ms relative to the
trigger nonmanual cues prior to the sign onset. As has
been argued in Hosemann et al. (2013), the verification
of top down expectations and bottom up information

already takes place during the relatively long transition
phases prior to the onset of a lexical sign. Thus, in the
current study, the expectation on the agreement verb
was a direction towards R-locus 3a in accordance with
the location of the object. The very early nonmanual
cues of eye gaze and head tilt either confirmed this
expectation in the match condition or violated it in the
mismatch condition, when gaze and head tilt were
directed towards the R-locus 3b.
A third approach could explain the right-posterior
effect in terms of violating a more general well-formedness. Following the extended Argument Dependency
Model (eADM) by Bornkessel and Schlesewsky (2006) of
comprehending core constituents (i.e. verbs and their
required arguments), the incremental comprehension
processes follow three phases: In phase one, the currently processed item is identified as verb or noun
phrase argument. In phase two, the prominence of an
NP is computed (as actor or undergoer) according to
morphological information, and further agreement information is assigned. If the computed item is a verb, its
logical structure and agreement information are established and it is linked to arguments that have already
been established. In phase three, core relations and
noncore relations are mapped, and the NP/verb-structure is evaluated in terms of well-formedness or for possible repair processes (under the consideration of world
knowledge, plausibility, and prosodic information of
pitch accents, stress patterns, etc.) (cf., Bornkessel &
Schlesewsky, 2006, pp. 789-790). The concept of wellformedness focusses on the evaluation of the overall construction. It is a mechanism that gradually appraises the
acceptability of an item in relation to its sentential and
contextual environment. In this rather global perspective
of the eADM, the interpretation of the effect would be as
follows: In experiment A, we presented sentences like MY
FATHER IX 3a SOCCER FAN. NEXT MATCH DATE 1INFORM 3b, in
which the final agreement verb does not end at the Rlocus associated with the object, but at an unspecified
R-locus. A well-formed expression of verb agreement
would be a verb ending at the same R-locus as the one
associated with the object. But as Quer (2011) points
out, the one referent to one R-locus ascription is not as
straightforward in everyday sign language use as it is
in theoretical terms. Quer (2011) refers to observations
in Catalan Sign Language, in which, within a connected
discourse, one referent can be referred to by the use of
different R-loci, probably restricted by pragmatic principles of accessibility. Hence, an agreement verb not
ending at the R-locus associated with the referent but
at a different R-locus could not be interpreted as a grammatical mistake but rather as a violation of pragmatic
well-formedness.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

However, the posterior positivity was not broadly distributed as it is characteristic for late positivity effects.
This could be the result of an interference with the left
anterior effect evolving approximately 200-300 ms
after the right posterior effect.

2.3.2. Interpretation of the left anterior effect
The polarity of the left anterior effect - seen in Figure 6 -
is unexpected in the sense that the match condition
(blue line) is relatively distinct compared to the mismatch
condition (red line) and is thus interpreted as a positivity
effect for correct verb agreement. According to visual
inspection, the left anterior effect displays a maximum
positive peak for the match condition compared to the
mismatch condition at electrode F3, approximately
400-450 ms relative to trigger sign onset. A possible
explanation for the effect is that it was not caused by
verb or agreement processing, but is rather task-related
and thus falls into the P300 family. In a series of ERP
studies with hearing participants, researchers investigated a positive deflection, typically peaking around
300 ms post stimulus onset, that is related to the given
task and is not primarily caused by language processing
costs (Kok, 2001; Polich, 2007; Squires, Squires, & Hillyard,
1975; Sutton, Braren, Zubin, & John, 1965). Whether or
not the P300 composes a family of effects or comprises
a solitary effect is still under debate. However, in the literature, two distinct effects have been classified: P3a and
P3b (Polich, 2007; Squires et al., 1975). The P3a has a peak
latency between 220 and 280 ms post stimulus onset
and can be clearly differentiate from the P3b by its topographic distribution. While the P3a has a fronto-central
distribution, the P3b originates from temporal-parietal
activity and has a rather posterior distribution. The P3b
is also a positive deflection with a peak amplitude at
about 300 ms post stimulus onset. The P3b can be elicited by the awaiting of the target stimulus (Verleger,
1988, 1998). In an experiment where participants had
to recall words from a list of several words, Karis,
Fabiani, and Donchin (1984) observed a larger P300 component for recalled items. Thus, they argue that fundamental memory processes affect the P300 amplitude
(see also Donchin, 1981). If we interpret the left anterior
effect as a positivity for correct agreement verbs that
match in their final location with the R-locus of the
related object referent, we could assume the effect to
be a task-related effect from the P300 family, with
regard to memory processes. The first sentence introduced and located a referent within the signing space.
This raises an expectation in the second sentence on
the final verb to agree with the object and thus with
the R-locus 3a, respectively. In the correct condition
this expectation is affirmed. The positivity effect for the

1117

correct condition could thus reflect a confirmation of
topic continuity or fundamental memory processes
associated with the referent assigned to the corresponding R-locus. However, the positivity effect observed here,
with a left-frontal distribution, certainly does not
coincide with the classic observation of a posterior distributed P3b. Up to now, there are no reported ERP
studies investigating the causes and the topographic distribution of a P300 during sign language processing. But,
in studies observing N400 effects it is well documented
that the topography of the effect can vary depending
on the input modality (Domalski, Smith, & Halgren,
1991; Wolff, Schlesewsky, Hirotani, & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, 2008). Hence, the interpretation of the leftanterior effect here can only be speculative until
further research is conducted.
In summary, unspecified agreement violation in continuous sentence processing, as we have investigated
here, did not elicit a biphasic pattern of LAN and P600 as
typically found for morpho-syntactic agreement violation
in spoken languages (cf. Molinaro et al., 2011) or as has
been reported by Capek et al. (2009) and Hanel-Faulhaber
et al. (2014) in sign languages. Instead, we observed a posterior positivity effect for the mismatch condition related
to nonmanual cues prior to the actual sign onset. Subsequently, a left anterior effect emerged in relation to
the sign onset that can be interpreted as a positivity for
the correct condition, reflecting affirmation of topic continuity. From a neurolinguistic perspective, sign language
agreement is not a mere morpho-syntactic phenomenon,
but also has pragmatic facets. This might also explain the
relatively high acceptance rate of incorrect sentences
recorded in the behavioural data. The estimate probability
for accepting sentences with mismatch agreement verbs
was 40.3% (compared to 94.4% for accepting sentences
in the match condition). One explanation for these
results could be that participants did not interpret these
sentences as grammatically or semantically incorrect,
but rather as infelicitous; either because these sentences
were pragmatically not well-formed, or because the incorrect agreement verb could be reinterpreted in the sense
that another referent is introduced into the context.
Another explanation comes from the fact that DGS is a
social minority language with a high variability and no
standardised form, which has not been used or taught
at schools for the Deaf. Deaf signers, even native signers,
are therefore not trained to evaluate their language on a
meta level and they have a high tolerance for signs deviating from the signs they usually use. Hence, the high
acceptability rates may come from a very tolerant attitude
towards their native language.
In the following section, we discuss experiment B,
where we aimed to examine a more far-reaching case

1118

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

of agreement violation by conducting an experiment on
agreement violation with plain verbs that - against their
lexically specified nature - "agreed" with a 3rd person
object.

3. Experiment B: agreement violation with
plain verbs
As described in Section 1.1, plain verbs are lexically specified verbs with a certain path movement and a specified
initial and final hold. In contrast to agreement verbs, they
do not inflect for person or number features of the verbs'
arguments. In order to create a morpho-syntactic violation, we simulated object agreement with plain verbs
in experiment B. We transferred the sign language agreement principle and manipulated the path movement of
plain verbs so that they inflect for a 3rd person object.

3.1. Experiment B: materials and methods
3.1.1. Participants
For experiment B, we evaluated the data of 14 deaf
native DGS signers (3 female, 11 male; mean age: 29,
range 16-52). Equivalent to experiment A, all signers
had deaf parents or DGS input before the age of three
and reported DGS to be their native language. They
met the same requirements on normal or corrected-tonormal vision as in the previous experiment, were
right-handed, and reported no history of neurological
disorders. In total, 18 deaf native DGS signers participated in the experiment as paid volunteers. However,
two participants had to be excluded from the final data
analysis due to experimenter fault, whereas a further
two participants had to be excluded due to excessive
eye movement artefacts.
3.1.2. Materials
For the production of the stimulus material for experiment B, we worked with the same deaf informants
and followed the same design as in experiment
A. Thus, the materials also comprised 40 sentences for
each critical condition (match versus mismatch), as illustrated in example (3) in Section 1.3. Critical sentences
consisted of three signs: a 1st person pronoun, a 3rd
person referent, and a frequent plain verb, which was
either a body anchored verb such as LIKE and KNOW in
DGS or a non-body anchored verb such as PLAY and
BUY in DGS. (A comprehensive list of stimulus sentences
is provided in the Appendix.) The corresponding
correct and incorrect sentences between conditions
were identical, except for the critical plain verb in sentence final position. In the match condition, plain verbs
were performed in their lexically specified manner,

comprising a hold-movement-hold syllable structure
(HMH). In the mismatch condition, plain verbs began in
their lexically specified manner, but the path movement
of the verb was manipulated so that it extended towards
the R-locus 3a on the ipsilateral side of the signer. We did
not violate the HMH syllable structure by adding an
additional but separate movement. Instead, we
instructed our informants to stretch the lexically specified movement into a deviant path towards the R-locus
3a. In light of the experimental manipulation, note that
these constructed plain verbs do not exist in this phonological form. They have been created according to the
agreement rule deduced from agreement verbs: A
location overlap between the final-hold of the verb and
the R-locus associated with a referent marks agreement
with the object of the sentence.
Based on Hosemann (2011)'s findings and parallel to
experiment A, informants were asked to express the
manual "agreement" additionally with the nonmanual
components eye gaze and head tilt. Hence, we instructed
our informants to gaze towards the locus 3a with plain
verbs in the mismatch condition. In the match condition,
gaze was continuously directed towards the camera. In
this type of violation, the initial hold and the beginning
of the path movement were identical for verbs of both
conditions, whereas the moment of mismatch appeared
in the middle of those verbs with agreement marking.
The moment of mismatch was indicated during the
movement path by a change in hand orientation, path
direction, and eye gaze towards the locus 3a. Figure 4
in Section 1.3 shows the two different path movements
of a lexically specified plain verb (a) and the manipulated
plain verb that agrees with the locus 3a.
The production of the materials with respect to recording and technical preparation was identical to experiment
A, described in Section 2.1.2. In total, the videos had an
average length of 5.26 s (sd 0.38). A further 10 sentences
were constructed in the same way to function as practice
sentences. These contained correct sentences with plain
verbs and were not part of the actual experiment.

3.1.3. Procedure
The experimental procedure was identical to that in
experiment A, as described in Section 2.1.3.
3.1.4. EEG recording
The EEG recoding set up was identical to the one in
experiment A, as described in Section 2.1.4.
3.1.5. EEG data preprocessing and statistical
analysis
The EEG data preprocessing was identical to experiment
A. Videos were presented in an unsliced manner and ERP

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

averages were calculated relative to three different
trigger points: first the sign onset, then the moment of
nonmanual cues, followed by the manual mismatch
onset. Since the moment of sign onset was identical for
match versus mismatch verbs and the definition of the
trigger was the same as in experiment A, we only
define the two other trigger positions here:
(1) Nonmanual cues (nmc). Since for the mismatch condition, eye gaze and head tilt towards the location
3a was not always time aligned with the change in
the manual movement path, we decided to set two
different trigger positions. This nonmanual cue
trigger was defined as the first frame in which eye
gaze (or head tilt) towards the respective R-locus
3a was clearly identifiable. On average, this trigger
occurred 374 ms (sd 272 ms) after the sign onset.
(2) Mismatch onset (mmo). This trigger was placed at the
first frame during the manual movement path of the
verb in which the hand orientation left its lexically
specified path and directed towards the R-locus 3a.
On average, this trigger occurred 457 ms (sd
207 ms) after the sign onset and 82 ms (sd 173 ms)
after the moment of nonmanual cues.
Note that the triggers nonmanual cues and mismatch
onset were defined according to criteria that apply only
to mismatching verbs, since correct plain verbs have
no movement in gaze or a deviation in the movement
path. In the matching verb counterparts, these triggers
were time-locked to correlating moments during the
path movement, where no deviation appeared.
Average durations from sign onset to sign offset were
596 ms (sd 240 ms) for matching plain verbs and
787 ms (sd 168 ms) for mismatching plain verbs. The
difference in sign length between conditions is based
on the longer movement path for mismatching plain
verbs.
The statistical analysis of the ERP data of experiment B
was carried out similarly to experiment A in a hierarchical
manner, using R (Team, 2012) and the ez package (Lawrence, 2012). Thus, repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVAs) were calculated with the factor
CONDITION (match vs. mismatch) and topographical
region of interest (ROI). Lateral ROIs were defined as:
left-anterior (F3, F7, FC1, FC5, C3), right-anterior (F4, F8,
FC2, FC6, C4), left-posterior (CP1, CP5, P3, P7, O1), and

1119

right-posterior (CP2, CP6, P4, P8, O2). The midline electrodes, FZ, CZ, CPZ, PZ, and OZ were each treated as individual ROIs.

3.2. Experiment B: results
3.2.1. Behavioural data
The statistical analyses of the behavioural data in experiment B were conducted identically to those in experiment A, described in Section 2.2.1. Empirical
probabilities for the acceptability judgment in experiment B were as follows: sentences with correct plain
verbs (i.e. match): 91.9% acceptability; sentences with
incorrect plain verbs (i.e. mismatch): 52.3% acceptability.
The estimated probability for accepting sentences in the
match condition was 94.7% (with a 99% credible interval
between 87.0% and 98.8%). The estimated probability for
accepting sentences in the mismatch condition was
54.1% (with a 99% credible interval between 24.0%
and 82.4%); Bayesian p-value: p = 0.0015. The estimate
probabilities for the evaluation judgment in experiment
B are illustrated in Table 2 (95% credible interval
shown in percentage in square brackets).
3.2.2. ERP data
In Figures 7-9, we present grand averages for DGS sentences with agreement violation on plain verbs in comparison to correct control sentences with lexically
specified plain verbs. In Figure 8, these are time-locked
to the first moment of mismatch during the path movement of the critical verb indicated by an eye gaze change
towards the R-locus 3a (trigger nonmanual cues). In contrast, in Figure 9, ERPs are time-locked to the following
moment of mismatch indicated by a manual deviation
in the orientation of the hand (trigger mismatch onset).
Furthermore, Figure 7 displays grand averages for
match and mismatch sentences, time-locked to the
sign onset of the plain verbs.
As is apparent from Figure 7, ERP waves relative to the
sign onset do not differ in the time window of about 0-
700 ms. Since the mismatch between conditions started
approximately 374 ms (trigger nonmanual cues) and,
respectively, 457 ms (trigger mismatch onset) into the
sign, the ERP effect undergoes a latency shift and is
thus correlated to trigger nmc or mmo instead of to
the sign onset. Hence, at both triggers - nonmanual
cues and mismatch onset - appears a broadly distributed

Table 2. Estimate probabilities for the evaluation judgment in Experiment B.
Cond. match
Cond. mismatch

"not sure at all"

"not sure"

"sure"

"very sure"

29.4% [3.2, 76.8]
17.3% [3.1, 47.2]

10.5% [2.3, 24.0]
19.7% [6.4, 40.0]

18.2% [4.3, 34.1]
27.1% [2.5, 59.3]

42.0% [10.1, 70.7]
35.9% [6.2, 69.5]

1120

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

Figure 7. Grand average ERPs for matching (blue line) and mismatching (red line) plain verbs, time-locked to the trigger sign onset.
Negativity plotted upwards.

positive deflection for mismatching plain verbs compared to matching plain verbs. At the trigger nmc, the
positivity occurs in the time window 470-820 ms, while
it occurs in the time window 420-730 ms for trigger
mmo.
This descriptive impression was confirmed by the statistical analysis. For the 470-820 ms time window at
trigger nonmanual cues, lateral electrodes show an
over-all main effect for CONDITION: F(1,13) = 17.00, p <
0.01; while midline electrodes show a CONDTION to
ROI interaction (F(1,13) = 4.19, p < 0.05), with the following significance for the electrodes Fz: F(1,13) = 8.04, p <
0.05; Cz: F(1,13) = 36.32, p < 0.0001; CPz: F(1,13) = 53.97,
p < 0.00001; Pz: F(1,13) = 56.77, p < 0.00001; POz: F
(1,13) = 12.70, p < 0.01; and Oz: F(1,13) = 8.56, p < 0.05.
For the 420-730 ms time window at trigger mismatch
onset, lateral electrodes also show an over-all main
effect for CONDITION: F(1,13) = 24.65, p < 0.001.
Additionally, midline electrodes show a CONDTION to
ROI interaction (F(1,13) = 4.79, p < 0.05), with the following significance for the electrodes Fz: F(1,13) = 9.48, p <

0.01; Cz: F(1,13) = 32.65, p < 0.0001; CPz: F(1,13) = 47.16,
p < 0.0001; Pz: F(1,13) = 42.63, p < 0.0001; POz: F(1,13) =
21.82, p < 0.001; and Oz: F(1,13) = 14.68, p < 0.01. According to visual inspection of the trigger mismatch onset,
there is an early negativity effect in the time window
40-190 ms post trigger onset, which was not significant
(F(1,13) = 3.24, p > 0.09).

3.3. Experiment B: discussion
In contrast to the results of experiment A, artificial agreement violation with plain verbs elicited a broadly distributed positivity effect in the time window of
approximately 470-820 ms after the trigger nonmanual
cues, i.e. the first cue of the nonmanual mismatch. The
effect also appeared relative to the manual mismatch,
420-730 ms post trigger mismatch onset. Interestingly,
artificially manipulated plain verbs did not elicit an
N400 effect and thus were not interpreted as semantically incongruent. We therefore conclude that participants understood the semantics of the mismatch plain

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1121

Figure 8. Grand average ERPs for matching (blue line) and mismatching (red linie) plain verbs, time-locked to the trigger eye gaze onset.
Negativity plotted upwards.

verbs. In addition, this type of violation did not elicit a
classic biphasic pattern of LAN and P600, as no left
anterior negativity was engendered. However, the elicited broadly distributed late positivity can be an
instance of a P600. Parallel to the interpretation of the
effects described in experiment A, the results of experiment B can be interpreted in the framework of different
theoretical approaches. The late positivity elicited by
incorrect plain verbs may indicate either a violation of
well-formedness in the sense of the extended Argument
Dependency Model (eADM) by Bornkessel and Schlesewsky (2006) or it could reflect additional costs in the
sense of context updating as proposed by work from
Schumacher (e.g. Baumann & Schumacher, 2011), both
approaches already discussed in Section 2.3.1.
In light of the eADM, the late positivity effect could be
explained as caused by an evaluation process during the
third phase of constituent comprehension. Note that we
instructed our informants to sign the verb with a lengthened path movement directing towards the locus 3a in
the signing space. Thus, we did not violate the HMH

syllable structure of plain verbs. The modified path
movement could be interpreted as an inaccurate or infelicitous production of the sign. Mismatching plain verbs
would hence not be interpreted as morpho-syntactically
incorrect but rather as less acceptable and not wellformed, i.e. a violation of the verb's phonological specification. In a different explanation in the sense of
Baumann and Schumacher (2011) and Hung and Schumacher (2012, 2014), the positivity effect could also
reflect the need to update the situation model. Similarly
to agreement verbs, which can assign R-loci to new referents prior to their explicit introduction, the ending of the
plain verbs at the locus 3a could indicate that the sentence is not completed and a further proposition needs
to follow. This would require enhanced processing
costs for updating the context. After evaluating the ERP
data, we conducted an informal post-experimental
behavioural feedback task to get further insight into
the possible functional interpretations of the effect. We
asked nine deaf and two hard of hearing members of
the Deaf community around Gottingen (5 female, 6

1122

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

Figure 9. Grand average ERPs for matching (blue line) and mismatching (red linie) plain verbs, time-locked to the trigger mismatch
onset. Negativity plotted upwards.

male) about their intuition on the stimulus sentences
with incorrect plain verbs (e.g. I GRANDMA WAIT 3a or I
LAPTOP BUY 3a). If their first intuitive feedback was in the
sense of "what is coming next?" or "what is happening
then?", this would indicate that the sentences were not
completed and that participants would expect a further
proposition to fulfil the sentence. This kind of response
would emphasise the explanation that context updating
caused the late positivity effect. In contrast, if the first
feedback of signers was in the sense of "this is strange"
or "this is wrong", it would support the idea that
signers interpreted the sentences as not felicitous and
not well-formed. Furthermore, if signers' first feedback
was in the sense of "I wait for grandma" or "I buy the
laptop there", it would highly indicate that the extended
path movement of the plain verbs towards the locus 3a
in fact refers to the object of the sentence. As a result, the
signers general first reaction was that these sentences
are strange and do not exist in DGS. None of the
signers asked how the sentences proceed. The behavioural feedback in this informal post-test suggests that

the extended movement path in agreeing plain verbs
is rather a violation of well-formedness than an indication for further context information. Hence, incorrect
plain verbs as presented here were not judged as possible agreeing verbs.6 This observation could also
explain the behavioural results of the acceptability judgment, which participants performed during the experiment. Although an estimate probability of 54.1% for
accepting mismatch sentences is near chance level, we
can exclude that participants were uncertain about
their assignment, because the acceptance rate for sentences with correct plain verbs was 94.7%. Hence, we
assume a similar explanation as already discussed for
experiment A in Section 2.3. Note that it is uncertain
with what type of spoken language phenomenon the
"inflected" plain verbs in experiment B can be compared
to. Apart from this first study, agreement violation with
plain verbs has not yet been investigated with online
measuring methods. It is necessary to conduct further
experiments on this topic, in order to shed enough
light on the correlation between the underlying linguistic

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1123

principle and the perhaps modality-specific ERP components. Thus, a definitive interpretation of the results
is not possible at this stage.

of agreement violation entails a possibly different
alternative interpretation. We want to exemplify this on
an original example from Capek et al. (2009) in
example (4).7

4. General discussion and conclusion

(4)

In the two experiments, we investigated incorrect forms
of agreement verbs and plain verbs in sentential contexts of natural signing. In contrast to morpho-syntactic
agreement violation studies in spoken languages (cf.
Molinaro et al., 2011) and in contrast to previous agreement violation studies in sign languages (Capek et al.,
2009; Hanel-Faulhaber et al., 2014), incorrect agreement
verbs and incorrect plain verbs in the present studies did
not elicit a biphasic pattern of LAN and P600. Instead, in
experiment A, unspecified agreement verbs elicited two
rather independent effects: first, a right posterior effect,
followed by a left anterior effect, which seem to reflect
separate cognitive processes. In experiment B, artificially
inflected plain verbs elicited a broadly distributed positive deflection. One of the main differences between
incorrect agreement verbs and incorrect plain verbs is
that incorrect agreement verbs involve a contextually
inappropriate or unexpected path movement and/or
hand orientation, which can be appropriate in a different
context. In contrast, the path movement as well as the
initial- and final-hold of plain verbs is lexically specified,
so the incorrect form - as constructed in the present
experiment - is not appropriate in any context.
Comparing the results of experiment A and experiment B with the two previous studies on agreement violation in sign languages (i.e. Capek et al., 2009; HanelFaulhaber et al., 2014), we can observe different forms
of agreement violation. In Table 3, we list the different
types of agreement violation with agreement verbs
and with plain verbs, allocated to the studies they
appeared in and the ERP effects they elicited. The
"setting" provides information about the referents of
the sentences (abbreviated with "R") and the respective
loci they were associated with. Further, we contrast the
correct verb form with the incorrect verb form that was
used.
As can be seen in Table 3, verb agreement -
expressed by the path movement of the verb from
subject location to object location - can be violated in
structurally different ways: by means of a reverse path
movement (violation 2 and 3), by a movement from
correct subject location to an unspecified object location
(violation 1), by a movement from the object location
towards an unspecified neutral location (violation 4), or
by a movement from an unspecified location towards
the location of the signer who was neither the subject
nor the object of the sentence (violation 5). Each type

BOY IX 3a, GIRL IX 3b TWO-OF-THEM PLAY++
BOY _________ GIRL IX 3b, WRONG IX 3b FALL 3b

(ASL)

"There was a boy and a girl and they were playing. The boy chased the
girl, but oops, she fell."
Correct: 3aCHASE 3b
Reversed: *3bCHASE 3a
Unspecified: *3aCHASE 1

The referent BOY is associated with the R-locus 3a on
the right (ipsilateral) side of the signer, while the referent
GIRL is associated with the locus 3b on the left (contralateral) side of the signer. In the correct sentence, the verb
CHASE moves from 3a to 3b, meaning that the boy chases
the girl. Since in ASL the verb is articulated preceding the
object, the sentence BOY 3bCHASE 3a GIRL ... with a
reversed verb movement might also be interpreted as
a topic construction with a subordinate clause,
meaning "the boy, the girl chases him, ... ". Note that
topic constructions in ASL are typically produced with
raised eyebrows (Aarons, 1994; Wilbur, 2012) and we
assume this was not the case in the present example.
However, we would like to claim that this could be a
possible interpretation at the moment of processing
the verb 3bCHASE 3a. A notable incongruence, indicated
by a missing verb of the matrix clause would appear
only afterwards. Furthermore, in the incorrect sentence
BOY 3aCHASE 1 GIRL ... used by Capek et al. (2009) for
unspecified verb agreement, the verb ends at the
location of the signer, which may lead to the relative
clause interpretation "the boy, (who) he-chases-me,
... ". This example shows that different forms of "incorrect" verb agreement can lead to different possible
(but in this context not salient) reinterpretations. Accordingly, the ERP responses that were found in each study
could be caused by different cognitive processes and
should thus not be interpreted as the result of a single
morpho-syntactic agreement violation. We therefore
question, whether participants actually interpret these
agreement violations as syntactic anomalies, as proposed by Capek et al. (2009, p. 8787): "The distribution
of the P600 effects for processing ASL syntactic violations
is similar to that reported in studies of written and
spoken language processing." Within their design,
Capek and colleagues combined different kinds of agreement violation under one category (e.g. unspecified
agreement violation) and further used different types
of verbs: typical agreement verbs like CHASE , verbs that
do not necessarily take two animate arguments (and
are thus not agreement verbs according to Rathman &
Marthurs', 2002 definition) like WASH in CAR ... I MUST
1WASH 3a, and backwards verbs like COPY . Thus, these

1124

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

Table 3. List of different types of agreement violations, (R = referent; L = locus; nmc = trigger nonmanual cues; so = trigger sign onset).
used in ...

Viol.
(1)

.
.

setting

Capek et al. (2009)
(unspecified agr.)
Experiment A

R1 = signer (L.1),
R2 = 3rd person (L.3a)

corr.

incorr.

1VERB 3a

1VERB 3b

ERP effect
.
.

Capek: early anterior negativity (200-360 ms, right hemispheric), late
positivity (425-1200 ms);
Experiment A: a preceding right posterior positivity (220-570 ms, nmc),
a following left anterior effect (300-600 ms, so), probably unrelated to
each other.

(2)

.

Capek et al. (2009)
(reverse agr.)

R1 = signer (L.1),
R2 = 3rd person (L.3a)

1VERB 3a

3aVERB 1

early anterior negativity (140-200 ms, left hemispheric), late positivity
(475-1200 ms);

(3)

.

Capek et al. (2009)
(reverse agr.)

R1 = 3rd person (L.3a),
R2 = 3rd person (L.3b)

3aVERB 3b

3bVERB 3a

not analysed separately but together with (2)

(4)

.

Capek et al. (2009)
(unspecified agr.)

R1 = 3rd person (L.3a),
R2 = 3rd person (L.3b)

3aVERB 3b

3bVERB N

not analysed separately but together with (1)

3aVERB 3b

NVERB 1

left anterior negativity (400-600 ms)
late posterior positivity (1000-1300 ms)

VERB

VERB 3a

broadly distributed positivity (420-730 ms, nmc)

(5)

.

Hanel-Faulhaber et al.
(2014)

R1 = 3rd person (L.3a),
R2 = 3rd person (L.3b)

(6)

.

Experiment B

R1 = 3rd person
(default L.3a)

(neut.)

(no agr.)

different types of verbs and the corresponding different
types of incorrect forms could have evoked different
neurophysiological responses. Capek et al. (2009) themselves discuss that verbs in reverse agreement form
can also be semantically incongruent: The sentence CAR
CL 3a ... I MUST 3aWASH 1 with reverse verb agreement can
mean "I must car-washes-me." Which describes also a
semantic violation. However, they claim that participants
interpreted this as a syntactic anomaly, because the neurophysiologic response to reverse agreement violation
was a P600 instead of an N400 effect. In our sense, this
conclusion seems to be drawn too quickly, regarding
that the one-to-one mapping of language related ERPs
and linguistic domains is questionable. As discussed in
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky (2008), an
increasing number of studies report "semantic P600"
effects. We therefore doubt that the late positivity
effects found for sign language agreement violation
(with agreement verbs) merely result from a syntactic
violation.
The study by Hanel-Faulhaber et al. (2014) investigates
a completely different type of agreement violation. In a
first sentence, two 3rd person referents were associated
on the ipsi- and contralateral side of the signer (i.e. locus
3a and 3b). However, incorrect agreement verbs moved
from a neutral location opposite the signer (locus 3c)
towards the location of the signer (locus 1). Thereby, the
incorrect verb form marked an unspecified referent as
the subject (at the neutral location) and the signer as
the object, two contextually unassociated or less accessible loci. Although the neutral location opposite the
signer could be interpreted as marking the addressee
(and thereby the participant of the experiment), the

incorrect verb form, e.g. 3cNEEDLE 1, can hardly be reinterpreted with the two previously introduced referents: BOY
POINT 3a GIRL POINT 3b 3cNEEDLE 1 [...] (Hanel-Faulhaber et al.,
2014, p. 7). Since DGS is an SOV language, the incongruence between subject and object position and the incorrect agreement verb at the end of the sentence is more
difficult to reinterpret compared to the agreement violations presented in Capek et al. (2009) or in our current
experiment A. Although this type of agreement violation
comes closer to a morpho-syntactic agreement violation
in a spoken language, the referential loci in signing
space cannot be disentangled from a semantic and pragmatic component.
The status of sign language agreement is evidently
distinct from agreement in spoken languages. That is
to say, the agreement system in one spoken language
compared to that of another spoken language shares
more core principles than the agreement systems of a
spoken language and a sign language. In addition to
the obvious modality-specific aspects of agreement in
sign languages - the gestural origin, the use of the
signing space, and the fact that only a subset of verbs
can agree in sign languages -, neurophysiological correlates to agreement violation in sign languages also
emphasise the modality-specific status of the phenomenon. The two present ERP studies on agreement violation in DGS show that verb agreement in sign
languages is diverse and some of the agreement patterns cannot be equated with morpho-syntactic verb
agreement in spoken languages. Agreement violation
of agreement verbs can be realised in several different
forms that imply different alternative interpretations. In
contrast, agreement violation with plain verbs is a

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

violation of the verbs lexical specification. Different kinds
of agreement violation seem to evoke different ERP
responses due to processing costs of either updating
the situation context or evaluating the processed item
as not well-formed.

Notes
1. Several terms have been used to label the phenomenon
described here. To highlight the modality-specific
aspects, the term "directionality" has been commonly
used. This points to the fact that verbs (and also pronouns) change their direction in order to refer to distinct
referents located in the signing space. The term "agreement" rather emphasises the modality-independent
aspects. We will use both terms synonymously, depending on which aspect we want to focus on.
2. By convention, signs are glossed in small caps. IX represents an INDEX sign, used for referentially locating a
referent. IX is directed towards the location indicated
by the subscript number. 1 marks the signer, 3a marks
a location on the ipsilateral side, whereas 3b marks a
location on the contralateral side of the signer.
3. Spatial verbs are realised in a topographic use of space
and agree with locative arguments. They are prototypically verbs of action and location (LAY, STAND, GO, SIT,
BE-AT , etc.) and did not occur in the two present
studies. For a detailed description on spatial verbs, the
reader is referred to Padden (1983) and Sandler and
Lillo-Martin (2006).
4. For a discussion on the potential ambiguity of sign
language pronouns and the issue of the one referent to
one R-locus ascription, see Quer (2011) and Barbera Altimira (2015).
5. Although so-called backwards verbs (like PICK-UP or INVITE
in DGS) also take two animate arguments and also agree
with subject and object, they were not used as critical
verbs in this experiment, because they move from the
location of the object (or source) to the location of the
subject (or goal) (Brentari, 1988; Meir, 1998, 2002).
6. This stands in contrast to deaf children learning a sign
language as native language, who overgeneralise the
agreement principle and produce plain verbs in agreeing
forms (Bellugi, Poizner, & Klima, 1993; Hanel, 2005;
Newport & Meier, 1985); or in contrast to plain verbs
going through a grammaticalization process and becoming agreeing verbs (Meir, 2016). We thank an anonymous
reviewer for pointing out this difference.
7. In the original example, locations were identified with
letters "e" and "c", and index signs were indicated by
PRO . For reasons of uniformity, we replaced the letters
with subscript "3a" and "3b" and changed PRO into IX .
"++" marks a reduplication of the verb.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully thank our deaf informants Daniela Happ and
Roland Metz for a productive cooperation in discussing, developing and recording the DGS stimuli. We thank Anika Jodike for
vital assistance in data acquisition. Mostly, we are very grateful
to all deaf participants, who supported our research.

1125

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
The research reported here was funded by the internal university research funding programme "Forderstufe 1" of the University of Mainz.

References
Aarons, D. (1994). Aspects of the syntax of ASL (Phd Dissertation).
Boston University.
Aronoff, M., Meir, I., & Sandler, W. (2005). The paradox of sign
language morphology. Language, 81, 301-344.
Barbera Altimira, G. (2015). The meaning of space in sign
language. Reference, specificity and structure in Catalan Sign
Language discourse. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Baumann, S., & Schumacher, P. B. (2011). (De-)Accentuation and
the processing of information status: Evidence from eventrelated brain potentials. Language and Speech, 55(3), 361-
381. doi:10.1177/0023830911422184
Bellugi, U., Poizner, H., & Klima, E. S. (1993). Language, modality
and the brain. In M. H. Johnson (Ed.), Brain development and
cognition (pp. 403-423). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publisher.
Bornkessel, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2006). The extended argument dependency model: A neurocognitive approach to
sentence comprehension across languages. Psychological
Review, 113(4), 787-821. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.113.4.787
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2008). An
alternative perspective on "semantic P600" effects in
language comprehension. Brain Research Reviews, 59(1),
55-73. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2008.05.003
Brentari, D. (1988). Backwards verbs in ASL: Agreement reopened. In Proceedings from the Chicago linguistic society
24 (Vol. 2, pp. 16-27). Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Burkner, P.-C. (2017). Brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan. Journal of Statistical Software, 80,
1-27.
Capek, C. M., Grossi, G., Newman, A. J., McBurney, S. L., Corina,
D., Roeder, B., & Neville, H. J. (2009). Brain systems mediating
semantic and syntactic processing in deaf native signers:
Biological invariance and modality specificity. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(21), 8784-8789.
Coulson, S., King, J. W., & Kutas, M. (1998). ERPs and domain
specificity: Beating a straw horse. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 13, 653-672.
Domalski, P., Smith, M. E., & Halgren, E. (1991). Cross-modal repetition effects on the N4. Psychological Science, 2(3), 173-178.
Donchin, E. (1981). Surprise!...Surprise? Psychophysiology, 18(5),
493-513.
Hanel, B. (2005). Der Erwerb der Deutschen Gebardensprache als
Erstsprache. Tubingen: Narr.
Hanel-Faulhaber, B., Skotara, N., Kugow, M., Salden, U., Bottari,
D., & Roder, B. (2014). ERP correlates of German Sign
Language processing in deaf native signers. BMC
Neuroscience, 15(62), 1-11. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-15-62
Hosemann, J. (2011). Eye gaze and verb agreement in German
sign language. A first glance. In A. Herrmann, & M. Steinbach
(Eds.), Nonmanuals in sign languages. Special issue of sign

1126

J. HOSEMANN ET AL.

language & linguistics (Vol. 14, pp. 76-93). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Hosemann, J., Herrmann, A., Steinbach, M., BornkesselSchlesewsky, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2013). Lexical prediction
via forward models: N400 evidence from German Sign
Language. Neuropsychologia, 51(11), 2224-2237.
Hung, Y.-C., & Schumacher, P. B. (2012). Topicality matters:
Position-specific demands on Chinese discourse processing.
Neuroscience Letters, 511(2), 59-64. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2012.
01.013
Hung, Y.-C., & Schumacher, P. B. (2014). Animacy matters: ERP
evidence for the multi-dimensionality of topic-worthiness
in Chinese. Brain Research, 1555, 36-47.
Huynh, H., & Feldt, L. S. (1970). Conditions under which the
mean-square ratios in repeated measurement designs have
exact F-distributions. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 65, 1582-1589.
Karis, D., Fabiani, M., & Donchin, E. (1984). "P300" and memory:
Individual differences in the von Restorff effect. Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 177-216.
Kok, A. (2001). On the utility of P3 amplitude as a measure of
processing capacity. Psychophysiology, 38, 557-577.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1983). Event-related brain potentials
to grammatical errors and semantic anomalies. Memory &
Cognition, 11(5), 539-550. doi:10.3758/BF03196991
Lawrence, M. A. (2012). ez: Easy analysis and visualization of factorial experiments.
Liddell, S. (1995). Real, surrogate, and soken space: Grammatical
consequences in ASL. In K. Emmorey & J. Reilly (Eds.),
Language, gesture, and space (pp. 19-42). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Liddell, S. (2011). Agreement disagreements. Theoretical
Linguistics, 37(3-4), 161-172.
Lillo-Martin, D., & Klima, E. (1990). Pointing out differences: ASL
pronouns in syntactic theory. In S. Fischer & P. Siple (Eds.),
Theoretical issues in sign language research, Vol.1: Linguistics
(pp. 191-210). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lillo-Martin, D., & Meier, R. P. (2011). On the linguistic status of
"agreement" in sign languages. Theoretical Linguistics, 37(3-
4), 95-142. doi:10.1515/thli.2011.009
Mathur, G., & Rathmann, C. (2012). Verb agreement. In R. Pfau,
M. Steinbach, & B. Woll (Eds.), Sign language. An international
handbook (HSK) (pp. 136-157). Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Meir, I. (1998). Syntactic-semantic interaction in Israeli Sign
Language verbs: The case of backwards verbs. Sign
Language & Linguistics, 1(1), 3-37. doi:10.1075/sll.1.1.03mei
Meir, I. (2002). A cross-modality perspective on verb agreement.
Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 20, 413-450.
Meir, Irit. (2016). Grammaticalization is not the full story: A nongrammaticalization account of the ermergence of sign
language agreement morphemes. Proceedings of the
Mediterranean Morphology Meetings (MMM), 10, 112-124.
Molinaro, N., Barber, H. A., & Carreiras, M. (2011). Grammatical
agreement processing in reading: ERP findings and future
directions. Cortex, 47(8), 908-930. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2011.
02.019
Newport, E. L., & Meier, R. P. (1985). The acquisition of American
Sign Language. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The cross-linguistic study of
language acquisition, Vol. 1: The data (pp. 881-893). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). The neurocognition of referential ambiguity in language comprehension.

Language and Linguistics Compass, 2(4), 603-630. doi:10.
1111/j.1749-818X.2008.00070.x
Osterhout, L., & Mobley, L. (1995). Event-related brain potentials
elicited by failure to agree. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 739-773.
Padden, C. (1983). Interaction of morphology and syntax in
American Sign Language. San Diego: University of California.
Pfau, R., & Steinbach, M. (2006). Modality-independent and
modality-specific aspects of grammaticalization in sign
languages. Linguistics in Potsdam, 24, 5-98.
Pfau, R., & Steinbach, M. (2011). Grammaticalization in sign
languages. In B. Heine, & H. Narrog (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of grammaticalization (pp. 681-693). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a
and P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118(10), 2128-2148.
doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2007.04.019
Quer, J. (2011). When agreeing to disagree is not enough:
Further arguments for the linguistic status of sign language
agreement. Theoretical Linguistics, 4, 189-196.
Rathmann, C., & Mathur, G. (2002). Is verb agreement the same
cross-modally? In R. Meier, K. Cormier, & D. Quinto-Pozos
(Eds.), Modality and structure in signed and spoken languages
(pp. 370-404). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rathmann, C., & Mathur, G. (2008). Verb agreement as a linguistic innovation in signed languages. In J. Quer (Ed.), Signs of
the time: Selected papers from TISLR 2004 (pp. 191-216).
Hamburg: Signum.
Sandler, W., & Lillo-Martin, D. (2006). Sign language and linguistic
universals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Squires, N. K., Squires, K. C., & Hillyard, S. A. (1975). Two varieties
of long-latency positive waves evoked by unpredictable
auditory stimuli in man. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 38(4), 387-401. doi:10.1016/0013-4694
(75)90263-1
Steinbach, M. (2011). What do agreement auxiliaries reveal
about the grammar of sign language agreement?
Theoretical Linguistics, 37(3-4), 209-221. doi:10.1515/thli.
2011.016
Steinbach, M., & Onea, E. (2016). A DRT analysis of discourse
referents and anaphora resolution in sign language.
Journal of Semantics, 33(3), 409-448. doi:10.1093/jos/ffv002
Steinbach, M., & Pfau, R. (2007). Grammaticalization of auxiliaries in sign languages. In P. Perniss, R. Pfau, &
M. Steinbach (Eds.), Trends in linguistics: Visible variation.
Comparative studies on sign language structure (pp. 303-
339). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sutton, S., Braren, M., Zubin, J., & John, E. (1965). Evoked potential correlates of stimulus uncertainty. Science, 150, 1187-
1188.
Team, R. D. C. (2012). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna,Austria: R Foundation for Statistical
Computing.
Thompson, R., Emmorey, K., & Kluender, R. (2006). The relationship between eye gaze and verb agreement in American
Sign Language: An eye-tracking study. Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory, 24(2), 571-604. doi:10.1007/s11049-0051829-y
Thompson, R. L., Emmorey, K., & Kluender, R. (2009). Learning to
look: The acquisition of eye gaze agreement during the production of ASL verbs. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
12(4), 393-409. doi:10.1017/S1366728909990277

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1999a). Early
referential context effects in sentence processing: Evidence
from event-related brain potentials. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 147-182.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1999b). When
does gender constrain parsing? Evidence from ERPs. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 28(5), 555-566.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., Hagoort, P., & Zwitserlood, P.
(2003). Event-related brain potentials reflect discourse-referential ambiguity in spoken language comprehension.
Psychophysiology, 40(2), 235-248. doi:10.1111/1469-8986.
00025
van Berkum, J. J. A., Koornneef, A. W., Otten, M., & Nieuwland, M.
S. (2007). Establishing reference in language comprehension:
An electrophysiological perspective. Brain Research, 1146,
158-171. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.06.091
van Berkum, J. J. A., Zwitserlood, P., Bastiaansen, M. C. M.,
Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (2004). So who's "he" anyway?
Differential ERP and ERSP effects of referential success,

1127

ambiguity and failure during spoken language comprehension.
Annual meeting of the cognitive neuroscience society (CNS2004), San Francisco, April 18-20.
Verleger, R. (1988). Event-related potentials and cognition: A critique of the context updating hypothesis and an alternative
interpretation of P3. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11, 343-
427.
Verleger, R. (1998). Toward an integration of P3 research with
cognitive neuroscience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21,
150-152.
Wilbur, R. (2012). Comunicative interaction. In R. Pfau, M.
Steinbach, & B. Woll (Eds.), Sign Language. An international
handbook (HSK) (pp. 462-489). Berlin, Boston: De Gryter
Mouton.
Wolff, S., Schlesewsky, M., Hirotani, M., & BornkesselSchlesewsky, I. (2008). The neural mechanisms of word
order processing revisited: Electrophysiological evidence
from Japanese. Brain and Language, 107(2), 133-157.
doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2008.06.003

