706983

research-article2017

JLSXXX10.1177/0261927X17706983Journal of Language and Social PsychologyPan et al.

Article

What You Say Is What You
Get: How Self-Disclosure
in Support Seeking Affects
Language Use in Support
Provision in Online Support
Forums

Journal of Language and Social Psychology
2018, Vol. 37(1) 3-27
(c) The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X17706983
journals.sagepub.com/home/jlsp

Wenjing Pan1, Bo Feng1, and V. Skye Wingate1

Abstract
This experimental study examined how depth of self-disclosure (baseline, peripheral,
core) in support-seeking posts influenced forum viewers' interaction involvement
and reciprocal self-disclosure in their responses. A series of competing hypotheses
derived from several theoretical frameworks were tested. Results obtained from
computerized text analyses showed that self-concept self-disclosure was associated
with higher levels of interaction involvement and reciprocal self-disclosure in viewers'
response messages. Implications of the findings and directions for future research are
discussed.
Keywords
online support forums, support seeking, support provision, self-disclosure, interaction
involvement, reciprocal self-disclosure, computerized text analysis, emotion words,
cognitive words, message length
A substantial amount of research has demonstrated that quality social support offered
in times of stress and difficulty can have significant positive impact on individuals'
physical, emotional, and social well-being (e.g., Rains, Peterson, & Wright, 2015;
Thoits, 2011; for reviews, see Goldsmith & Albrecht, 2011; MacGeorge, Feng, &

1University

of California, Davis, CA, USA

Corresponding Author:
Wenjing Pan, Department of Communication, University of California Davis, 352 Kerr Hall, One Shields
Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
Email: wjpan@ucdavis.edu

4

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Burleson, 2011). With the rapid development of new technologies, people are turning
to the cyberspace to seek social support in various domains, ranging from daily hassles
such as having conflicts with relational partners to more serious issues such as battling
a life-threatening illness (e.g., Griffiths, Calear, & Banfield, 2009; Yoo et al., 2014).
Yahoo!Answers (answers.yahoo.com), for example, has more than 200 million users
worldwide, with 15 million users visiting daily (Shah, 2011). Eight percent of Internet
users have used online support groups or forums to post questions or share their own
experiences about health issues during the year of 2012 (Fox & Duggan, 2013).
Scholars have attributed the use of online support groups or forums to their unique
features such as anonymity, asynchronicity, and ease of access to a large audience
(Barak, Boniel-Nissim, & Suler, 2008; Coursaris & Liu, 2009; Tanis, 2008).
Previous research on online support groups and forums has focused largely on
descriptions of user characteristics and motivations (Houston, Cooper, & Ford, 2002;
Wright, Rains, & Banas, 2010), the typologies and features of support messages
(Barney, Griffiths, & Banfield, 2011; Shaw, Hawkins, McTavish, Pingree, & Gustafson,
2006), or the outcomes of participation in online support groups (Fogel, Albert,
Schabel, Ditkoff, & Neugut, 2002; Rains & Young, 2009). Some recent research on
online social support has examined the connection between support seeking and support provision in online forums (Feng, Li, & Li, 2016; Li & Feng, 2015). For example,
Li and Feng (2015) examined the influence of others' responses and support-seekers'
replies on the quality of subsequent support-providers' messages. In the current study,
we focus on how self-disclosure, the core feature of online support-seeking messages,
may affect the quality of support-provision messages. We also try to explore the underlying mechanisms that may give rise to any observed effect.
Self-disclosure, broadly defined, refers to the voluntary sharing of information
about oneself (Cozby, 1973). When communicating with others interpersonally, individuals often establish trust and mutual understanding by making themselves vulnerable with the information they choose to share with others (Mesch & Beker, 2010).
The vulnerability can be expressed by disclosing information about oneself on various
topics and with varying depth (Altman & Taylor, 1973, Attrill & Jalil, 2011; Tidwell &
Walther, 2002). When seeking support from unknown others in virtual communities
such as online support forums, people describe their problem in the hope that others
will understand their situation and will provide them with the support they need.
A well-established theoretical framework for understanding and studying self-disclosure in social interactions is social penetration theory (Altman & Taylor, 1973;
Derlega & Berg, 1987). This theory describes the social penetration process analogously as the process of peeling an onion: Penetration proceeds along the breadth of
topics and the depth of information disclosed, revealing various aspects and layers of
one's personality. Breadth refers to the number of topics on which self-disclosure takes
place, whereas depth refers to the intimacy level of self-disclosure in a particular
domain. According to the theory, interpersonal intimacy is primarily developed through
reciprocal and in-depth self-disclosure (Altman & Taylor, 1973). The key research
question that the current study aims to address is: In the context of support seeking in
online support forums that are characterized with anonymous participation and lack of

Pan et al.

5

personal identity cues, how would the depth of support seekers' self-disclosure influence viewers' evaluations and responses to the support-seeking message?
Past research has identified several dimensions (e.g., verbal-person-centeredness,
politeness) for evaluating the quality of support messages (e.g., Bodie & Burleson,
2008; Li & Feng, 2015). Burleson (1982), for example, developed a nine-level hierarchy to assess the person-centeredness of support messages. Although coding measures
like this may provide a relatively comprehensive and accurate assessment of the quality of support messages, it can be quite time- and resource-consuming for multiple
coders to content analyze a large quantity of messages (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010).
Recent development and improvement of computerized text analysis programs such as
LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count; Pennebaker, Booth, & Francis, 2007) and
ConText (Connections and Texts, 2013; http://context.lis.illinois.edu/) provide
researchers with more efficient and reliable ways to gauge the textual features of support messages. In this study, we examine linguistic markers in support messages that
reflect viewers' involvement and reciprocal self-disclosure when responding to support-seeking posts.

Interaction Involvement in Support-Provision Messages
Past research shows that a key factor that can facilitate effective interaction is the communicators' involvement in the interaction (Cegala, 1984; Perse, 1990). Interaction
involvement (sometimes referred to as conversational involvement) can be defined as
the extent to which an individual engages with a counterpart in an interaction (Cegala,
1984). High levels of interaction involvement reflect interaction partners' enhanced
attention and engagement in the interaction, as well as strong personal and psychological connections between the parties (Levy & Windahl, 1985; Perse, 1990). Individuals
who are highly involved in an interaction tend to integrate their feelings, thoughts, and
experiences with the ongoing interaction, while individuals who are less involved in
an interaction tend to remove themselves from the ongoing interaction (Cegala,
Savage, Brunner, & Conrad, 1982).
Past research has identified cognitive and affective dimensions representing the
extent of interaction involvement (Cegala, 1984; Daly, Vangelisti, & Daughton,
1987). At the cognitive level, interaction involvement is associated with intense cognitive activity that requires central processing (Cegala, 1984; Petty & Cacioppo,
1986), including greater attention to messages, more intensive encoding of information, and relating to prior knowledge (Cegala et al., 1982; Perse, 1990). At the affective level, interaction involvement is associated with greater intensity of emotions
(Cappella, 1983).

Reciprocal Self-Disclosure in Support-Provision Messages
In the process of interpersonal communication, individuals often respond to others'
self-disclosure by disclosing information about themselves (Collins & Miller, 1994;
Cozby, 1972). The "dyadic effect" of self-disclosure reflects "the process of mutual

6

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

exposure by communicating partners" (Barak & Gluck-Ofri, 2007, p. 408). In dyadic
interactions, individuals adjust their self-disclosure to their partner's self-disclosure
because their partners cued them to the appropriate norm of self-disclosure (Collins &
Miller, 1994; Dindia, 1997). For example, previous studies have found that individuals
who receive intimate self-disclosure feel pressured and obligated to respond with
equally intimate self-disclosure (Cozby, 1972; Sprecher, Treger, & Wondra, 2013).
Self-disclosure reciprocity can thus be defined as the process by which (a) one
person's self-disclosure elicits another person's self-disclosure (e.g., Joinson, 2001a,
2001b; Jourard, 1971; Sprecher et al., 2013), or (b) one person's self-disclosure elicits
equivalent self-disclosure from another person (e.g., in terms of topic, breadth, depth,
frequency; Ma, Hancock, & Naaman, 2016; Moon, 2000). The first form of reciprocal
self-disclosure can be considered as more general, "responsive" self-disclosure while
the latter form of reciprocal self-disclosure can be understood as `matching" self-disclosure. In the current study, we are focusing on the more general type of reciprocal
self-disclosure, that is, without taking into consideration the specific content or features of self-disclosure.
Although research findings concerning the comparative roles of online versus faceto-face communication in facilitating (or inhibiting) self-disclosure have been somewhat mixed (see, J. Kim & Dindia, 2011), there seems to be more consistent evidence
showing that text-based computer-mediated communication (CMC) tends to promote
self-disclosure during initial interactions (e.g., Antheunis, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2007;
Joinson, 2001b; McKenna & Bargh, 2000; Tidwell & Walther, 2002). Similarly, compared with face-to-face situations, individuals communicating through text-based
CMC media tend to engage in more intimate reciprocal self-disclosure and tend to
perceive others' disclosures to be more intimate (Jiang, Bazarova, & Hancock, 2013).

Self-Disclosure in Support-Seeking Post and Viewers'
Interaction Involvement
As noted earlier, self-disclosure plays a vital role in relational communication (e.g.,
Laurenceau, Barrett, & Pietromonaco, 1998; Wheeless, 1976). In particular, self-disclosure serves to increase mutual understanding and trust in dyadic communication
(Laurenceau et al., 1998; Rubin, 1975). Social penetration theory (Altman & Taylor,
1973) identifies three layers within the depth of self-disclosure: peripheral layer (e.g.,
biographical data such as name, age, and gender), intermediate layer (e.g., attitudes,
values, and opinions), and core layer (e.g., beliefs, needs and fears; Altman & Taylor,
1973). Other researchers have made similar distinctions between self-disclosure of
varying depth by differentiating descriptive self-disclosure from evaluative self-disclosure (Morton, 1978; Reis & Shaver, 1988). Descriptive self-disclosure refers to the
disclosing of personal facts and demographic information, whereas evaluative selfdisclosure typically involves revealing of one's private feelings, opinions, and judgments. Descriptive self-disclosure is usually factual and evaluative self-disclosure is
typically emotional and personal (Laurenceau et al., 1998; Li, Feng, Li, & Tan, 2015).

Pan et al.

7

Evaluative self-disclosure is typically considered as more intimate and personal compared to descriptive self-disclosure (Laurenceau et al., 1998; Reis & Shaver, 1988).
Information about one's self-concept representing core self-disclosure is often
viewed as substantially more private than information about one's demographics representing peripheral self-disclosure (Rubin & Shenker, 1978; Tidwell & Walther,
2002). High levels of trust have been found to be positively associated with more
intended self-disclosure in terms of both depth and breadth (MacDonald, Kessel, &
Fuller, 1972; Steel, 1991; Wheeless & Grotz, 1977). Past theorizing and research on
self-disclosure in personal relationships leads to the predication that support-seeking
posts containing core self-disclosure will elicit greater interaction involvement (in the
form of longer replies, using more emotion and cognitive processing words) compared
with support-seeking posts containing peripheral self-disclosure. Accordingly, we proposed the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1a: Compared with support-seeking posts that contain peripheral selfdisclosure and baseline self-disclosure, support-seeking posts containing core selfdisclosure will elicit greater viewers' interaction involvement with the post.
However, a competing prediction can be derived from theorizing and research on
text-based CMC, especially CMC that occurs among strangers. Anonymity, which can
be defined as a state where a person is not identifiable (Marx, 1999), is a concept that
has been associated with personal identity cues in text-based CMC among strangers
(Qian & Scott, 2007).1 Compared with face-to-face communication, text-based CMC
is characterized by a lack of personal identity cues (Bordia, 1997; Walther & Parks,
2002). The social presence theory (Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976) and the cuelessness model (Rutter & Stephenson, 1979) both suggest that the quality of interpersonal
communication would be impaired when few identity cues are available in anonymous, text-based CMC. The lack of social context cues in text-based CMC may lead
to a dehumanization perception of the communicating partners (Douglas & McGarty,
2002). The reduced awareness and greater level of uncertainty caused by lack of identity cues can result in negative outcomes such as poor quality of information, deception, and even flaming (Douglas & McGarty, 2002; Herring, 2002).
When personal identity cues are present, they tend to elicit enhanced awareness and
positive perceptions of the other (Tanis & Postmes, 2007). In an online community
where anonymity is the norm, personal identity cues can promote individuals' participation in online discussions (Donath, 1998). A recent study by Feng et al. (2016)
investigated how support-seekers' profile features might influence viewers' perceptions of the support-seeker and thereby the quality of support messages that they provide. Their study found that support-seeking posts accompanied with a user profile
containing more personal identity cues (user ID containing first name and portrait
picture) elicited support responses with higher levels of person-centeredness than support-seeking posts whose user profile contained fewer personal identity cues (no profile picture, nonname ID).

8

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Peripheral self-disclosure including information such as one's name, occupation, and geographical location contains personal identity cues (whether or not
those cues are objectively anonymous may be irrelevant). Although a support-seeker's disclosure of peripheral information containing demographic information may
potentially make the person more vulnerable to intrusion or threat to his or her
privacy, it may also facilitate viewers' positive impressions (e.g., perceptions of
credibility and trustworthiness) of the support-seeker and encourage prosocial
responses. On the other hand, while core self-disclosure containing self-concept
may reveal highly private aspects of oneself, to the extent that the individual is
perceived to be anonymous by others, it may hinder formation of positive impressions and responses from viewers.
The anonymous feature of most online forums can thus work as a double-edged
sword, having both positive and negative effects on self-disclosure in cyberspace. On
one hand, the anonymous feature of online support groups affords members an
enhanced sense of security and can alleviate support-seekers' concerns over possible
embarrassment or stigmatization (Tanis, 2008). This disinhibition effect (Suler, 2004)
can facilitate self-disclosure by both support-seekers and support-providers, making
it easier for them to open up in the virtual world (Barak et al., 2008). On the other
hand, due to privacy concerns, individuals often refrain from disclosing identity
information in order to maintain their anonymity online (Joinson, Reips, Buchanan,
& Schofield, 2010). For example, disclosing sexual fantasies are more common than
disclosing one's real name or other personal information in anonymous forums
(Christopherson, 2007).
Taken together, the "cues-filtered-out" perspectives on text-based CMC (Walther &
Parks, 2002) and recent research on supportive communication in online forums suggest that, compared to core self-disclosure, peripheral self-disclosure including personal identity cues embedded in the support-seeking posts may elicit responses
representing greater viewer involvement with the post. Hence, we proposed the following competing hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1b: Compared with support-seeking posts that contain core self-disclosure and baseline self-disclosure, support-seeking posts containing peripheral selfdisclosure will elicit greater viewer involvement with the post.

Reciprocal Self-Disclosure
In online support forums, when support-seekers disclose information about themselves, the viewers are likely to reciprocate by also disclosing information about themselves. Disclosing core information about oneself is viewed as private and intimate.
Individuals will perceive their relationship partners as more trustworthy if they disclosed core information. In turn, the recipient of core-disclosure will reciprocate by
disclosing more information about himself or herself. From the perspective of social
penetration theory (Altman & Taylor, 1973), support-seeking posts containing core
self-disclosure may elicit more reciprocal self-disclosure from viewers compared to

Pan et al.

9

support-seeking posts containing peripheral self-disclosure. Accordingly, we proposed
the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2a: Compared with support-seeking posts that contain peripheral selfdisclosure and baseline self-disclosure, support-seeking posts containing core selfdisclosure will elicit more self-disclosure from the viewers.
On the other hand, the opposite hypothesis regarding reciprocal self-disclosure can
be derived from the cues-filtered-out perspective on text-based CMC. The lack of cue
systems and social presence in text-based CMC can make users feel less warmth and
less involved (Short et al., 1976). In online forums, the reduced social presence and
social context cues can lead to increased uncertainty and a dehumanization perception
about the communication partner (Douglas & McGarty, 2002; Taylor, 2011). When
personal identity cues are present, they can enhance the social presence and positive
perceptions of the other (Tanis & Postmes, 2007).
As discussed previously, individuals often refrain from disclosing identity information to protect their identity and privacy online (Joinson et al., 2010). Disclosing personal identity cues poses greater threat to individuals' privacy and exposes individuals
to greater danger compared to disclosing one's feelings and opinions. In online support forums, support-seeking posts containing personal identity cues may thus promote reciprocal self-disclosure from viewers. Therefore, we proposed the following
competing hypothesis against Hypothesis 2a:
Hypothesis 2b: Compared with support-seeking posts that contain core self-disclosure and baseline self-disclosure, support-seeking posts containing peripheral selfdisclosure will elicit more self-disclosure from the viewers.

The Mediating Role of Perceived Trustworthiness
Trust is a key factor that facilitates social interactions and serves as the basis for the
development and maintenance of personal relationships. Trust plays an even more
crucial role in online communication when individuals do not share an offline relationship (Kanawattanachai & Yoo, 2002; Walther & Bunz, 2005). In this study, we conceptualize trustworthiness as "a cognitive process associated with one's confidence in
another's goals or purposes, and the perceived sincerity of another's word" (Tanis &
Postmes, 2005, p. 413), as opposed to trust of people in general. In online forums
where anonymity is the norm, interactions with unknown others are characterized with
high levels of uncertainty (Berger, 1986), which may provide a less firm basis for trust
(Tanis & Postmes, 2005). Uncertainty reduction theory (Berger, 1986) posits that
interpersonal relationships develop as individuals reduce uncertainty about each other.
By engaging in self-disclosure, communication partners reduce uncertainty and build
trust among themselves. The reduced uncertainty and increased trust will lead them to
form positive impressions of each other and facilitate more engaged interactions
(Derlega, Metts, Petronio, & Margulis, 1993).

10

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

It has been well documented that there tends to be a reciprocal relationship between
trust and self-disclosure (Henderson & Gilding, 2004; Joinson et al., 2010). Research
shows that soliciting self-disclosure through probing questions can reduce uncertainty
and form interpersonal trust online (Tidwell & Walther, 2002). Given that increased
trust can lead to a greater amount of self-disclosure and vice versa (e.g., Henderson &
Gilding, 2004; Jarvenpaa & Leidner, 1998; Wheeless & Grotz, 1977), we expect that
potential support providers who have more trust in an unknown support-seeker in a
support forum would engage in more self-disclosure in their responses. Accordingly,
we proposed the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 3: Viewers' perceived trustworthiness of support-seeker will be positively associated with (a) their involvement with the support-seeking posts and (b)
their reciprocal self-disclosure.
Hypothesis 4: Viewers' perceived trustworthiness of support-seeker will mediate
the impact of support-seeking self-disclosure on viewers' (a) involvement with the
posts and (b) reciprocal self-disclosure.

Method
Participants
A total of 813 (69% female) undergraduate students from a large West Coast university
in the United States participated in this study. Participants were offered a small amount
of extra credit for their participation. The majority of the participants were Asian
(50.3%, n = 409) and Caucasian (24.7%, n = 201), but the sample also included participants who identified themselves as Hispanic (14.8%, n = 120) or African American
(2.3%, n = 19).

Experimental Design
This study employed a 3 (self-disclosure: peripheral self-disclosure vs. core self-disclosure vs. baseline self-disclosure) x 2 (problem type: job vs. major) factorial design.2
In the context of online supportive communication, it may not be ecologically valid for
a support-seeking post to contain purely demographic and/or core self-disclosure. The
mere description of the support-seeker's problematic situation will constitute selfdisclosure that is likely of moderate depth. Accordingly, a baseline self-disclosure condition that contains description of the problem was included in the experimental design
(see Figure 1). In the peripheral self-disclosure condition, demographic information
(geographic location, major, occupation) was revealed in the support-seeking posts
(see Figure 2). In the core self-disclosure condition, information about the supportseeker's self-concept (values, beliefs, fears)3 was included in the support-seeking
posts (see Figure 3). Within each of the two topics, the number of words used and the
pieces of self-disclosure information were kept equal across conditions. Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the six conditions.

Pan et al.

11

Figure 1. Example of manipulation of support-seeking posts containing baseline selfdisclosure.

All six support-seeking forum posts were pretested to assess if the support-seeking
posts containing core self-disclosure is perceived as more private and intimate compared to the posts containing peripheral self-disclosure. A sample of 113 students,
none of whom was involved in the official experiment, participated in the pretest.
Perceived privacy was measured by two items (e.g., "How private do you think the
message is," "How likely would you share information similar to what is disclosed in
the message") on an 11-point scale (e.g., 1 = not private at all; 10 = extremely private).
Support-seeking posts containing core self-disclosure (M = 5.25, SD = 3.36) were
rated as more private compared to the support-seeking posts containing peripheral
self-disclosure (M = 4.04, SD = 2.93), t(112) = 5.59, p < .001.

Procedure
On arrival at the research lab, each participant was escorted by a research assistant to a
cubicle with a computer. In order to simulate real online support-provision experience
for the participants, a virtual forum ("Students Forum") that resembles the appearance

12

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Figure 2. Example of manipulation of support-seeking posts containing peripheral selfdisclosure.

and function of a real online forum was designed for the experiment.4 The computer
screen already displayed a prerandomly-selected webpage of a support-seeking post on
the forum. Participants were then instructed to create a username and provide a response
after reading the support-seeking post. After clicking the button "post a reply," the participant's response would appear immediately underneath the original post. Each participant was only able to view his or her own response. After submitting their response,
participants were directed to an online survey system to complete a questionnaire on
their perceptions of the support-seeker and the post. On completion of the questionnaire, participants were thanked and debriefed.

Measures
Interaction Involvement. Behaviorally, interaction involvement can be enacted verbally
and/or nonverbally (Burgoon, Newton, Walther, & Baesler, 1989; Coker & Burgoon,
1987). In this study, we focus on individuals' choices of words and linguistic style as

Pan et al.

13

Figure 3. Example of manipulation of support-seeking posts containing core self-disclosure.

markers of interaction involvement (Perse, 1990). Studies have shown that the level of
individuals' interaction involvement is reflected in the words they use (Tausczik &
Pennebaker, 2010). In the computerized text analysis literature, many studies have
adopted message length (word count), emotion words, and cognitive processing words
as indexes of individuals' affective and cognitive involvement (for a detailed review,
see Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010).
Word count can serve as "a proxy for amount of communication" (Tausczik &
Pennebaker, 2010) and it has been adopted by several studies as a measure for involvement and engagement (e.g., Leshed, Hancock, Cosley, McLeod, & Gay, 2007; Sexton
& Helmreich, 2000). For example, during small group interaction, teammates who
produced more words were also rated as more involved and more focused (Leshed
et al., 2007). Word count has also been used an effective measurement for the breadth
or amount of self-disclosure in CMC (Joinson, 2001a; Joinson & Paine, 2007).
How people express emotions and the extent to which they express emotions indicate how they experience the world (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). For example,
researchers have found that emotion words can reflect individual differences in their
self-presentational and relational concerns in their Facebook status updates, wall

14

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

posts, and private messages (Bazarova, Taft, Choi, & Cosley, 2013). Of particular
relevance to the current study was research showing that the use of emotion words was
an indicator of degree of immersion (Holmes et al., 2007; Tausczik & Pennebaker,
2010). For example, in their study examining the writing of victims of intimate partner
violence, Holmes et al. (2007) found that the use of positive and negative emotion
words indicated how immersed the victims were with the traumatic experience, which
led to increased physical pain. Words in the "emotional or affective processing" category are words that reflect use of positive emotions, including positive feelings and
optimism (e.g., happy, joy, love), and negative emotions, including anxiety, anger, and
sadness (e.g., hate, worthless, afraid, cry).
Use of cognitive processing words has also been used as a measure of the depth and
complexity of thinking (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). For example, the use of inclusion words (e.g., but, without) and conjunctions (e.g., and, also) can reflect individuals' cognitive complexity because they are either used to make a distinction or join
multiple thought together (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). The use of causal words
(e.g., because, hence) and insight words (e.g., know, consider) also reflect individual's
active reappraisal process (Pena & Pan, 2016).
Cognitive processing words are the words that people use to connect their thoughts
and they reflect people's depth and complexity of thinking (Boals & Klein, 2005;
Owen, Yarbrough, Vaga, & Tucker, 2003; Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). Words in the
"cognitive processing" category are words that reflect thinking of causation (e.g.,
because, effect, hence), insight (e.g., think, know, consider), discrepancy (e.g., should,
would, could), inhibition (e.g., block, constrain), tentativeness (e.g., maybe, perhaps,
guess), and certainty (e.g., always, never).
Each participant's response message was processed by LIWC (Pennebaker et al.,
2007), which is a thesaurus-based\software that matches individual words in textual
messages with predefined categories (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). In recent years,
LIWC has been widely used to content analyze various sorts of texts (e.g., Cohn,
Mehl, & Pennebaker, 2004; Slatcher, Vazire, & Pennebaker, 2008). The percentage
and number of words used in each predefined category were calculated. As a result,
each participant had scores in his or her emotional content word usage, cognitive processing word usage, and the length (word count) of his or her response messages.
Reciprocal Self-Disclosure. When people want to draw others' attention to themselves,
they tend to use more first-person singular pronouns such as "I," "my," "me," and
"mine" (Gunsch, Brownlow, Haynes, & Mabe, 2000). First-person singular pronouns
have been used in several studies as parameters of self-disclosure in both offline (Derlega & Berg, 1987) and online settings (Barak & Gluck-Ofri, 2007). In this study, we
also adopt first-person singular usage in support-provision messages as a marker of
reciprocal self-disclosure.
In line with previous research, the first-person pronouns ("I," "me," "mine," and
"my") were employed as a linguistic marker representing reciprocal self-disclosure
(Barak & Gluck-Ofri, 2007). Accordingly, the percentage and number of first-person
pronouns were employed as measures of degree of reciprocal self-disclosure.

15

Pan et al.
Table 1. Differences Between the Three Experimental Conditions.
Demographic
disclosure
Variables
Message length (word count)
Emotion words
Cognitive processing words
First-person pronouns
Perceived trustworthiness

Self-concept
disclosure

Baseline disclosure

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

101.84
4.80a
20.12
2.59a
6.61

60.87
2.80
5.76
2.44
0.99

108.59a
5.83b
21.02
2.99b
6.69

59.55
2.89
4.69
2.48
0.95

93.49b
5.03b
20.69
2.50a
6.68

59.07
2.84
5.00
2.34
1.11

Note. Within each row, numbers with different superscripts significantly differ from one another (p < .05).

Perceived Trustworthiness. Five items on a 9-point scale (1 = completely disagree, 9 =
completely agree) were used to measure participants' perceived trustworthiness toward
the support-seeker (e.g., "I felt the poster is trustworthy," "I felt the poster is honest in
describing the problem," "What the poster wrote is believable"). The five items were
drawn from two existing scales of credibility and perceived trust (Rempel, Holmes, &
Zanna, 1985; Wheeless & Grotz, 1977) and were modified for this study. The five
items showed good internal consistency (M = 6.66, SD = 1.36,  = .81).

Results
Hypotheses 1a and 1b were concerned with the effect of self-disclosure in supportseeking posts on viewer involvement reflected in their responses. The two competing
hypotheses were tested with a series of analyses of variance (ANOVAs).5 The analyses
detected a significant main effect for depth of self-disclosure on participants' use of
emotional content words after controlling for the number of emotional content words
in the support-seeking messages, F(2, 809) = 7.40, p < .001, 2 = 0.03. Planned contrast analysis showed that participants who read the support-seeking posts containing
core self-disclosure used more emotional content words (M = 5.83, SD = 2.89) compared to those who read the support-seeking posts containing peripheral self-disclosure (M = 4.80, SD = 2.80), t(524) = 4.13, p < .001, Cohen's d = .36, or baseline
self-disclosure (M = 5.03, SD = 2.84), t(535) = 3.25, p < .001, Cohen's d = .28. The
latter two conditions did not differ in the number of emotional content words, t(561) =
.94, p = .35, ns (see Table 1). Follow-up analyses were conducted to see if the experimental conditions differed in terms of the use of positive and negative emotion words
in participants' responses. After controlling for the number of positive emotion words
in the support-seeking messages, no significant effect was observed with regard to the
use of positive emotion words, F(2, 809) = 0.32, p = 0.23, ns. However, after controlling for the number of negative emotion words in the support-seeking messages, there
was a significant main effect of support-seeker self-disclosure on participants' use of
negative emotion words, F(2, 809) = 14.99, p < .001, 2 = 0.04. Participants who read
the support-seeking posts containing core self-disclosure (M = 1.67, SD = 1.68) used

16

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

more negative emotion words compared to those who read the posts containing demographic disclosure (M = 1.02, SD = 1.28), t(524) = 5.00, p < .001, Cohen's d = .44, and
compared to those who read the posts containing baseline disclosure (M = 1.18, SD =
1.49), t(535) = 3.63, p < .001, Cohen's d = .31.
The ANOVA analyses did not detect a significant main effect for depth of self-disclosure on participants' use of cognitive processing words after controlling for the
number of cognitive processing words in the support-seeking messages, F (2, 809) =
3.12, p = 0.13, ns. After controlling for the length of the support-seeking messages, a
significant main effect for depth of self-disclosure on participants' length of responses
was observed, F(2, 809) = 6.68, p < .001, 2 = .02. Decomposition of the main effect
revealed that participants who read the support-seeking posts containing core selfdisclosure (M = 108.59, SD = 59.55) wrote longer responses compared to those who
read the baseline self-disclosure posts (M = 93.49, SD = 59.07), t(535) = 2.97, p < .05,
Cohen's d = .25, and compared to those who read support-seeking posts containing
peripheral self-disclosure (M = 101.84, SD = 60.87), t(524) = 1.28, p < .05, Cohen's d
= .11. Overall, the above results indicate that Hypothesis 1a was partially supported
and Hypothesis 1b was not supported.
Hypotheses 2a and 2b were concerned with whether different depth of supportseeker self-disclosure would elicit different levels of reciprocal self-disclosure in participants' responses. The ANOVA detected a significant main effect for depth of
self-disclosure on participants' use of first-person pronouns after controlling for the
number of first-person pronouns in the support-seeking messages, F(2, 809) = 7.03, p
< .001, 2 = 0.03. Planned contrast analysis showed that participants who read the
support-seeking posts containing core self-disclosure used more first-person pronouns
(M = 2.99, SD = 2.48) compared with those who read the support-seeking posts containing peripheral self-disclosure (M = 2.59, SD = 2.44), t(524) = 3.80, p < .05, Cohen's
d = .16 or baseline self-disclosure (M = 2.50, SD = 2.34), t(535) = 2.35, p < .05, Cohen's
d = .20. The latter two conditions did not differ in use of first-person pronouns, t(561)
= .45, p = .65, ns. Therefore, Hypothesis 2a was supported while Hypothesis 2b was not
supported.
Hypothesis 3a predicted a positive association between participants' perceived
trustworthiness of support-seekers and their involvement with the support-seeking
posts. Pearson-product correlation showed that participants' perceived trustworthiness
of support-seekers (M = 6.66, SD = 1.02) was not associated with their use of emotional content words (M = 5.20, SD = 2.87), r(813) = -.01, p = .96, ns, or use of cognitive processing words (M = 20.60, SD = 5.19), r(813) = -.06, p = .12, ns. However,
participants' perceived trustworthiness of support-seekers was positively associated
with the length of their responses (M = 100.97, SD = 59.07), r(813) = .18, p < .001.
Therefore, Hypothesis 3a was partially supported.
Hypothesis 3b predicted a positive association between participants' perceived
trustworthiness of support-seekers and the reciprocal self-disclosure in their responses.
Pearson-product correlation showed that participants' perceived trustworthiness of
support-seekers was not associated with their use of first-person singular pronouns,
r(813) = .096, p = .07, ns. Therefore, Hypothesis 3b was not supported.

Pan et al.

17

Hypothesis 4a was concerned with the mediation effect of perceived trustworthiness of the support-seekers in the link between depth of self-disclosure and viewer
involvement with the support-seeking posts. The "self-disclosure of support seeker-
perceived trustworthiness-interaction involvement" link was tested with PROCESS
(Hayes, 2013). The indirect effect of self-disclosure on participants' use of emotional
content words was not significant (b = .00, SE = 0.01, 95% confidence interval [CI] =
[-0.0168, 0.0086]) after bootstrapping with 5,000 resamples. The indirect effect of
self-disclosure on participants' use of cognitive processing words was not further
tested due to the lack of total effect. The indirect effect of self-disclosure on participants' message length was not significant (b = .40, SE = 0.47, 95% CI = [-0.5013,
1.4020]). Hypothesis 4a was not supported.
Hypothesis 4b was concerned with the mediation role of perceived trustworthiness
of the support-seekers in the link between depth of self-disclosure and reciprocal selfdisclosure in participants' responses. The indirect effect of self-disclosure on participants' reciprocal self-disclosure was not significant (b = .01, SE = 0.01, 95% CI =
[-0.0045, 0.0341]). Hypothesis 4b was not supported.6

Discussion
This study tested the effect of self-disclosure in support-seeking posts on the interaction involvement and reciprocal self-disclosure in support provision in online support
forums. Although various aspects of online support seeking (e.g., problem type, personal experience, linguistic features and politeness of support-seeking messages) may
influence viewers' likelihood of responding as well as the content of their responses,
the current study focused on how a core component of online support-seeking--selfdisclosure--may influence the involvement and reciprocal self-disclosure from viewers. We identified message length, emotion words, and cognitive processing words as
linguistic parameters reflecting interaction involvement and first-person singular pronouns as parameters reflecting reciprocal self-disclosure. We also explored the potential role of perceived trustworthiness of the support-seeker in explaining the effect of
support-seeker's self-disclosure on viewers' responses.
Overall, our results revealed that participants who read support-seeking posts containing core self-disclosure, compared to peripheral self-disclosure, exhibited higher
levels of emotional involvement (reflected in greater use of emotion words) and higher
degrees of disclosure reciprocity in their responses. These findings are more congruent
with social penetration theory (Altman & Taylor, 1973), as well as past research on
self-disclosure in relational communication (Bargh & McKenna, 2004; Tichon &
Shapiro, 2003). These results indicate that the norms that people follow to establish
relational intimacy and build interpersonal relationships may also apply to communication with unknown others in virtual environment.
Our findings did not appear to support the competing predictions derived from the
"cues-filtered out" perspective (Walther & Parks, 2002). These findings were also
somewhat inconsistent with the results of recent research on supportive communication that examined the influence of personal identity cues on support provision. The

18

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

discrepancy with previous research may be understood in light of the specific experimental design employed in the current study and that in previous studies. In the current
study, personal identity cues of the support-seekers were manipulated through different forms of self-disclosure in the support-seeking posts. In previous research, however, personal identity cues were manipulated through the presence and absence of
profile pictures or user IDs (Feng et al., 2016; Tanis & Postmes, 2007). In those studies, it was found that perceptions of others, such as perceived social presence (Feng
et al., 2016) and trustworthiness, could be enhanced by inclusion of profile pictures
(Tanis & Postmes, 2005). It is possible that personal identity cues contained in textual
messages have a less salient impact on viewers' perceptions of unknown others in the
virtual environment than personal identity cues contained in nontextual features such
as pictures.
In addition, in the current study, the demographic information (e.g., location, occupation) disclosed in the support-seeking post was relatively public. Although results of
our study showed that the peripheral self-disclosure was viewed by participants as less
private than the core self-disclosure,7 recent theorizing and empirical assessment of
disclosure intimacy (Jiang et al., 2013; Mitchell et al., 2008) suggest that disclosure of
various types of information can vary in intimacy level. In other words, not all factual
or peripheral disclosures are "peripheral" (least intimate) and not all core self-disclosures are "core" (most intimate). For example, revealing ostensibly superficial demographic information such as one's real name and ethnicity, especially a stigmatized
one, on a public forum may be considered as a highly private disclosure. Future
research should conduct more nuanced investigation of the roles of peripheral disclosure and core self-disclosure in online support-seeking by taking into account the
varying intimacy levels within each disclosure type.
Another explanation for the failure of peripheral self-disclosure to elicit enhanced
involvement and reciprocal self-disclosure is that, under certain circumstances, the
inclusion of personal identity cues in the support-seeking posts may trigger negative
appraisals from viewers and thus "backfire." After all, personal identity cues are not
inherently positive and there is the likelihood that viewers may form negative impressions of an unknown support-seeker based on the revealed personal identity cues. In
other words, the specific content and valence of disclosure matter. In their study investigating the language style of pro-anorexic online forum conversations, Chang and
Bazarova (2016) found that forum users' initial disclosure containing stigma-related
emotion words was associated with negatively valenced responses. In this study, the
peripheral self-disclosure revealed the support-seeker as a college graduate working at
a retail store. Participants in this study, who were all college students at a large West
Coast university, might have made a somewhat negative attribution of the supportseeker (e.g., an unsuccessful professional), which resulted in less "warm" responses to
the post. Future research should pursue more nuanced investigation of the conditions
under which peripheral self-disclosure (and personal identity cues) may or may not
have an impact (as well as the direction of the impact) on perceptions and behaviors in
interactions among strangers in online environments. In particular, it is worthwhile to
investigate how type of self-disclosure (e.g., self-concept vs. demographic) may

Pan et al.

19

combine and interact with the content and valence of disclosure (positive vs. negative)
to influence viewer perceptions and responses.
We did not observe any evidence showing the mediating role of perceived trustworthiness. One possible explanation is that participants' perceptions of the trustworthiness of the support-seeker were largely influenced by other individual, relational, and
situational factors (Feng et al., 2016; Sheldon, 2009). For example, trust tends to be
greatly influenced by perceived similarity and liking (Anderson & Emmers-Sommer,
2006). Participants' perceived trust of the support-seeker could also be influenced by
the credibility of the post content or the topics that have been discussed (Feng et al.,
2016). Participants in our study might have generally perceived high levels of similarity and identification with the support-seeker, partly due to the "ingroup" nature of the
forum. Group identity, perceived similarity, and liking8 might have all contributed to
the average perceived trustworthiness of the support-seeker (average trust rating
across all conditions was 6.66 on a 9-point scale). It is also possible that perceived
trustworthiness of the support-seeker was not reflected in the involvement or the reciprocity of self-disclosure but in some other aspects of the support-provision messages
not examined in this study, such as politeness and person-centeredness (Feng et al.,
2016). Future research should investigate these possibilities.
Theoretical frameworks such as the social identity model of deindividuation effects
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986) and social information processing theory (Walther, 1992) also
suggest alternative mechanisms that may explain the observed advantage of core selfdisclosure over peripheral self-disclosure in promoting involvement and reciprocal
disclosure from viewers. Both theories suggest that anonymity and lack of individual
identity cues can lead to overattribution of similarities and thus "hyperpersonal" communication (Walther & Parks, 2002). Future research should explore this alternative
mechanism.
In summary, although findings from our study appear to be more consistent with
predictions derived from social penetration theory than those derived from the cuesfiltered-out perspective, they should not be taken as conclusive. As with the case of
most experimental research in social science, these findings should be interpreted in
light of the specific features of the research design as well as characteristics of the
participant sample. More research is needed to better understand the complex processes of communication in online communities. Therefore, caution should be exercised when applying these findings to practices in specific settings.

Limitations and Future Research
Several limitations exist in the current study. First, for the purpose of assessing supportseeking outcomes such as reciprocal self-disclosure in viewer responses, we required
each participant to provide a response after reading the support-seeking post. In reallife situations, however, many support forum users are lurkers who rarely contribute
content to online forums (White & Dorman, 2001; Zhu, 2006). It will be interesting to
investigate whether and how self-disclosure in support seeking may influence viewers'
motivation or intention to respond to a support-seeking post from an unknown other.

20

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Second, although computerized text analysis has proven to be a reliable and efficient method for content analyzing large quantities of verbal messages, it has its constraints. For example, computerized text analysis programs ignore context, sarcasm,
and idioms (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). For instance, one participant wrote in the
response message, "I would suggest you weigh out what is most important to you."
Here the expression "weigh out" means to measure or determine the relative value of
things. Based on LIWC's internal dictionary, however, the word "weigh" belongs to
the category of biological words and words related to ingestion. In this specific case,
LIWC failed to detect the meaning of the idiom "weigh out."
Relatedly, due to the exclusive reliance on words recorded in the analytical software's dictionaries, the assessment of the outcomes of interest can be somewhat rigid
or even biased. For example, despite the common use of the first-person pronouns as
a linguistic marker of self-disclosure (Barak & Gluck-Ofri, 2007), they are neither the
only nor necessary indicators of self-disclosure. A person can engage in self-disclosure
without using any first-person pronouns, especially when the person shares opinion
(e.g., "Studying abroad is absolutely a valuable learning experience") or when the
conversational context clearly indicates that the information the person is sharing is
self-disclosure (e.g., stating "All employees at the company receive at least 2K bonus
each year" after saying "I work at X company").
Finally, given the lack of computerized text analysis's ability to produce more
nuanced, contextualized coding, we were only able to assess general ("responsive")
form of reciprocal self-disclosure rather than equivalent ("matching") form of reciprocal self-disclosure. In the context of supportive communication, reciprocating equivalent self-disclosure, especially in terms of topic (e.g., sharing similar problems or
experiences), may be particularly helpful (Doherty & MacGeorge, 2013; W. Kim,
Kreps, & Shin, 2015). Future research should thus try to triangulate the analyses of
viewer responses by combining automated linguistic analyses with contextualized,
content analyses that are conducted via manual coding.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their comments and
guidance on the revisions of this article.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

Notes
1.

Scholars have distinguished between visual anonymity and discursive anonymity, with
the former referring to the situation where the physical presence of certain message

Pan et al.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

21

source cannot be traced and the latter referring to the situation where verbal communication cannot be traced to a source (Qian & Scott, 2007). Anonymity can also be categorized into objective anonymity and perceived anonymity. Using a pseudonym, for
example, has high objective anonymity but its perceived anonymity may vary. Likewise,
although using a real name has low objective anonymity, it may elicit varying perceptions of anonymity. Although the existing literature on the anonymity feature of textbased CMC used among strangers seems to imply both forms of anonymity, perceived
anonymity should have more proximal impact on individuals' perceptions and responses
than objective anonymity.
In the larger project, profile pictures showing different ethnicities (Caucasian vs. Asian)
and sex (female vs. male) were also included in the design to assess a different and independent set of research questions. Preliminary analyses showed that manipulations of profile picture did not interact with self-disclosure. Therefore, those factors were not included
in the analyses reported in this study.
As defined by Rubin and Shenker (1978), self-concept disclosure is not confined to disclosure of one's beliefs and values. It has been used as a type of self-disclosure, including
one's feelings, thoughts, worries, and even fears.
Much of past experimental research on CMC has relied on the use of mock-up web pages
as experimental stimuli (e.g., Walther, Van Der Heide, Kim, Westerman, & Tong, 2008).
In order to approximate online interactions, this study employs an experimental design
embedded in a real online support forum which enables participants to view, click, and
post their responses onto the forum. This methodology has been successfully employed in
several recent experimental studies on online supportive communication (Feng et al., 2016;
Li & Feng, 2015). It allows us to (a) examine online supportive communication in a much
more ecologically appropriate manner and (b) manipulate our central variables of interest
(i.e., support-seeker's self-disclosure) while at the same time controlling for factors that
are not the focus of examination in this study but can potentially influence online support
provision (e.g., number of the support-seeker's old posts, profile features).
Preliminary ANOVA analyses were conducted to examine if problem type had any moderating effect on the link between depth of self-disclosure and the outcome measures. None
of the interaction terms was significant. Detailed results are available on request. To simplify the report of our key findings, problem type was not examined further in the subsequent hypotheses tests.
Furthermore, in order to access if the induced effect was indeed due to the manipulation
of the depth of self-disclosure in the support-seeking messages rather than the valence
of the support-seeking messages, a follow-up study was conducted. The follow-up study
employed a 2 (topics: problem with the boss vs. changing major) x 3 (depth of self-disclosure: baseline vs. peripheral vs. core) between-subjects design. A new sample of 176
college students participated in the follow-up study. The valence of the messages was measured with the following items on a 7-point scale: (a) the information disclosed in the post
is extremely negative/extremely positive, (b) the post presents a positive image about the
support-seeker: strongly disagree/strongly agree, and (c) the post offers positive information about the support-seeker: strongly disagree/strongly agree. The results showed that
depth of self-disclosure (baseline, peripheral, core) in support-seeking posts did not affect
participants' evaluations of the valence of the posts, F(1, 173) = 2.066, ns.
In the experiment, we also measured the perceived anonymity of the support-seekers with 10
items (e.g., "The poster's identify is unidentified," "I could identify cues that could be used to
locate the poster's true identity") on a 9-point scale (1 = completely disagree; 9 = completely
agree). The support-seeker disclosing self-concept information (M = 5.00, SD = 1.20) was

22

8.

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)
perceived as more anonymous compared to support-seeker disclosing demographic information (M = 4.68, SD = 1.23), t(524) = 2.47, p < .05.
In the experiment, we also measured participants' liking toward the support seeker
with three items (e.g., "The person comes across as a likeable person") on a 9-point scale
(1 = completely disagree; 9 = completely agree). Participants who read the support-seeking
post containing core self-disclosure (M = 6.23, SD = 1.03) did not differ from those in the
demographic disclosure condition (M = 6.00, SD = 1.23) in terms of their liking of the
support-seeker, t(524) = 1.99, ns.

References
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. A. (1973). Social penetration: The development of interpersonal relationships. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Anderson, T. L., & Emmers-Sommer, T. M. (2006). Predictors of relationship satisfaction in
online romantic relationships. Communication Studies, 57, 153-172.
Antheunis, M., Valkenburg, P., & Peter, J. (2007). Computer-mediated communication
and interpersonal attraction: An experimental test of three explanatory hypotheses.
CyberPsychology and Behavior, 10, 831-835.
Attrill, A., & Jalil, R. (2011). Revealing only the superficial me: Exploring categorical selfdisclosure online. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 1634-1642.
Barak, A., Boniel-Nissim, M., & Suler, J. (2008). Fostering empowerment in online support
groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 1867-1883.
Barak, A., & Gluck-Ofri, O. (2007). Degree and reciprocity of self-disclosure in online forums.
CyberPsychology and Behavior, 10, 407-417.
Bargh, J. A., & McKenna, K. Y. A. (2004). The Internet and social life. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 573-590.
Barney, L. J., Griffiths, K. M., & Banfield, M. A. (2011). Explicit and implicit information
needs of people with depression: A qualitative investigation of problems reported on an
online depression support forum. BMC Psychiatry, 11, 88-94.
Bazarova, N. N., Taft, J. G., Choi, Y. H., & Cosley, D. (2013). Managing impressions and
relationships on Facebook: Self-presentational and relational concerns revealed through
the analysis of language style. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 32, 121-141.
Berger, C. R. (1986). Uncertain outcome values in predicted relationships uncertainty reduction
theory then and now. Human Communication Research, 13, 34-38.
Boals, A., & Klein, K. (2005). Word use in emotional narratives about failed romantic relationships and subsequent mental health. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 24,
252-268.
Bodie, G. D., & Burleson, B. R. (2008). Explaining variations in the effects of supportive messages: A dual-process framework. In C. Beck (Ed.), Communication yearbook (Vol. 32, pp.
355-398). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bordia, P. (1997). Face-to-face versus computer-mediated communication: A synthesis of the
experimental literature. Journal of Business Communication, 34, 99-118.
Burgoon, J. K., Newton, D. A., Walther, J. B., & Baesler, E. J. (1989). Nonverbal expectancy
violations and conversational involvement. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 13, 97-119.
Burleson, B. R. (1982). The development of comforting communication skills in childhood and
adolescence. Child Development, 53, 1578-1588.
Cegala, D. J. (1984). Affective and cognitive manifestations of interaction involvement during
unstructured and competitive interactions. Communication Monographs, 51, 320-338.

Pan et al.

23

Cegala, D. J., Savage, G. T., Brunner, C. C., & Conrad, A. B. (1982). An elaboration of the
meaning of interaction involvement: Toward the development of a theoretical concept.
Communication Monographs, 49, 229-248.
Cappella, J. N. (1983). Conversational involvement: Approaching and avoiding others. In J.
M. Wiemann & R. P. Harrison (Eds.), Nonverbal interaction (pp. 113-148). Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Chang, P. F., & Bazarova, N. N. (2016). Managing stigma: Exploring disclosure-response communication patterns in pro-anorexic websites. Health Communication, 31, 217-229.
Christopherson, K. M. (2007). The positive and negative implications of anonymity in Internet
social interactions: "On the Internet, Nobody Knows You're a Dog". Computers in Human
Behavior, 23, 3038-3056.
Cohn, M. A., Mehl, M. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Linguistic markers of psychological
change surrounding September 11, 2001. Psychological Science, 15, 687-693.
Coker, D. A., & Burgoon, J. (1987). The nature of conversational involvement and nonverbal
encoding patterns. Human Communication Research, 13, 463-494.
Collins, N. L., & Miller, L. C. (1994). Self-disclosure and liking: A meta-analytic review.
Psychological Bulletin, 116, 457-475.
Coursaris, C. K., & Liu, M. (2009). An analysis of social support exchanges in online HIV/
AIDS self-help groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 911-918.
Cozby, P. C. (1972). Self-disclosure, reciprocity and liking. Sociometry, 35, 151-160.
Cozby, P. C. (1973). Self-disclosure: A literature review. Psychological Bulletin, 79, 73-91.
Daly, J. A., Vangelisti, A. L., & Daughton, S. M. (1987). The nature and correlates of conversational sensitivity. Human Communication Research, 14, 167-202.
Derlega, V. J., & Berg, J. H. (1987). Self-disclosure: Theory, research, and therapy. New York,
NY: Plenum.
Derlega, V. J., Metts, S., Petronio, S., & Margulis, S. T. (1993). Self-disclosure. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Dindia, K. (1997). Self-disclosure, self-identity, and relationship development: A transactional/
dialectical perspective. In S. Duck (Ed.), Handbook of personal relationships: Theory,
research and interventions (pp. 411-426). New York, NY: Wiley.
Doherty, E. F., & MacGeorge, E. L. (2013). Perceptions of supportive behavior by young adults
with bipolar disorder. Qualitative Health Research, 23, 361-374.
Donath, J. S. (1998). Identity and deception in the virtual community. In M. Smith & P. Kollock
(Eds.), Communities in cyberspace (pp. 29-59). London, England: Routledge.
Douglas, K. M., & McGarty, C. (2002). Internet identifiability and beyond: A model of the
effects of identifiability on communicative behavior. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research,
and Practice, 6, 17-26.
Feng, B., Li, S., & Li, N. (2016). Is a profile worth a thousand words? How online support-seeker's profile features may influence the quality of received support messages. Communication
Research, 43, 253-276.
Fogel, J., Albert, S. M., Schnabel, F., Ditkoff, B. A., & Neugut, A. I. (2002). Internet use and
social support in women with breast cancer. Health Psychology, 21, 398-404.
Fox, S., & Duggan, M. (2013, January 15). Health Online 2013. Pew Internet and
American Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/15/healthonline-2013/
Goldsmith, D. J., & Albrecht, T. L. (2011). Social support, social networks, and health. In T. L.
Thompson, R. Parrott & J. F. Nussbaum (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of health communication (pp. 335-348). New York, NY: Routledge.

24

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Griffiths, K. M., Calear, A. L., & Banfield, M. (2009). Systematic review on internet support
groups (ISGs) and depression: Do ISGs reduce depressive symptoms? Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 11, 1-20.
Gunsch, M. A., Brownlow, S., Haynes, S. E., & Mabe, Z. (2000). Differential linguistic content
of various forms of political advertising. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media,
44, 27-42.
Hayes, A. F. (2013). An introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression-based approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Henderson, S., & Gilding, M. (2004). "I've never clicked this much with anyone in my life": Trust
and hyperpersonal communication in online friendships. New Media and Society, 6, 487-506.
Herring, S. C. (2002). Computer-mediated communication on the Internet. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 36, 109-168.
Holmes, D., Alpers, G. W., Ismailji, T., Classen, C., Wales, T., Cheasty, V., . . .Koopman, C.
(2007). Cognitive and emotional processing in narratives of women abused by intimate
partners. Violence Against Women, 13, 1192-1205.
Houston, T. K., Cooper, L. A., & Ford, D. E. (2002). Internet support groups for depression: A
1-year prospective cohort study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 2062-2068.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Leidner, D. E. (1998). Communication and trust in global virtual teams.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3, 1-29.
Jiang, L., Bazarova, N. N., & Hancock, J. T. (2013). From perception to behavior: Disclosure
reciprocity and the intensification of intimacy in computer-mediated communication.
Communication Research, 40, 125-143.
Joinson, A. N. (2001a). Knowing me, knowing you: Reciprocal self-disclosure in Internet-based
surveys. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 4, 587-591.
Joinson, A. N. (2001b). Self-disclosure in computer-mediated communication: The role of selfawareness and visual anonymity. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31, 177-192.
Joinson, A. N., & Paine, C. B. (2007). Self-disclosure, privacy and the internet. In A. N. Joinson,
K. Y. A. McKenna, T. Postmes & U. Reips (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of Internet psychology (pp. 237-252). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Joinson, A. N., Reips, U. D., Buchanan, T., & Schofield, C. B. P. (2010). Privacy, trust, and
self-disclosure online. Human-Computer Interaction, 25, 1-24.
Jourard, S. M. (1971). Self-disclosure: An experimental analysis of the transparent self. New
York, NY: Wiley.
Kanawattanachai, P., & Yoo, Y. (2002). Dynamic nature of trust in virtual teams. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 11, 187-213.
Kim, J., & Dindia, K. (2011). Online self-disclosure: A review of research. In K. B. Wright &
L. M. Webb (Eds.), Computer-mediated communication in personal relationships (pp. 156180). New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Kim, W., Kreps, G. L., & Shin, C.-N. (2015). The role of social support and social networks
in health information-seeking behavior among Korean Americans: A qualitative study.
International Journal for Equity in Health, 14, 40-50.
Laurenceau, J. P., Barrett, L. F., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (1998). Intimacy as an interpersonal process: The importance of self-disclosure, partner disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in interpersonal exchanges. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74,
1238-1251.
Leshed, G., Hancock, J. T., Cosley, D., McLeod, P. L., & Gay, G. (2007). Feedback for guiding reflection on teamwork practices. In Proceedings of the GROUP'07 Conference on
Supporting Group Work (pp. 217-220). New York, NY: ACM.

Pan et al.

25

Levy, M. R., & Windahl, S. (1985). The concept of audience activity. In K. E. Rosengren, L.
A. Wenner & P. Palmgreen (Eds.), Media gratifications research: Current perspectives
(pp. 109-122). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Li, S., & Feng, B. (2015). What to say to an online support-seeker? The influence of others'
responses and support-seekers' replies. Human Communication Research, 41, 303-326.
Li, S., Feng, B., Li, N., & Tan, X. (2015). How social context cues in support seeker profile influence support provider's self-disclosure in online support forums. Communication
Quarterly, 63, 586-602.
Ma, X., Hancock, J., & Naaman, M. (2016). Anonymity, intimacy and self-disclosure in social
media. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 3857-3869). San Jose, CA: ACM.
MacDonald, A. P., Kessel, V. S., & Fuller, J. B. (1972). Self-disclosure and two kinds of trust.
Psychological Reports, 30, 143-148.
MacGeorge, E. L., Feng, B., & Burleson, B. R. (2011). Supportive communication. In M. L.
Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication (pp. 317-354).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marx, G. T. (1999). What's in a name? Some reflections on the sociology of anonymity.
Information Society, 15, 99-112.
McKenna, K. Y., & Bargh, J. A. (2000). Plan 9 from cyberspace: The implications of the Internet
for personality and social psychology. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4, 57-75.
Mesch, G. S., & Beker, G. (2010). Are norms of disclosure of online and offline personal information associated with the disclosure of personal information online? Human Communication
Research, 36, 570-592.
Mitchell, A., Castellani, A., Herrington, R., Joseph, J., Doss, B., & Snyder, D. (2008). Predictors
of intimacy in couples' discussions of relationship injuries: An observational study. Journal
of Family Psychology, 22, 21-29.
Moon, Y. (2000). Intimate exchanges: Using computers to elicit self-disclosure from consumers. Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 323-339.
Morton, T. L. (1978). Intimacy and reciprocity of exchange: A comparison of spouses and
strangers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 72-81.
Owen, J. E., Yarbrough, E. J., Vaga, A., & Tucker, D. C. (2003). Investigation of the effects of
gender and preparation on quality of communication in Internet support groups. Computers
in Human Behavior, 19, 259-275.
Pena, J., & Pan, W. (2016). Words of advice: Exposure to website model pictures and online
persuasive messages affects the linguistic content and style of women's weigh-related
social support messages. Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 208-217.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., & Francis, M. E. (2007). Linguistic inquiry and word count:
LIWC [Computer software]. Austin, TX: LIWC.net.
Perse, E. M. (1990). Involvement with local television news cognitive and emotional dimensions. Human Communication Research, 16, 556-581.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion (pp. 124). New York, NY: Springer.
Qian, H., & Scott, C. R. (2007). Anonymity and self-disclosure on weblogs. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 12, 1428-1451.
Rains, S. A., Peterson, E. B., & Wright, K. B. (2015). Communicating social support in
computer-mediated contexts: A meta-analytic review of content analyses examining
support messages shared online among individuals coping with illness. Communication
Monographs, 82, 1-28.

26

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 37(1)

Rains, S. A., & Young, V. (2009). A meta-analysis of research on formal computer-mediated support groups: Examining group characteristics and health outcomes. Human Communication
Research, 35, 309-336.
Reis, H. T., & Shaver, P. (1988). Intimacy as an interpersonal process. Handbook of Personal
Relationships, 24, 367-389.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 95-112.
Rubin, Z. (1975). Disclosing oneself to a stranger: Reciprocity and its limits. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 11, 233-260.
Rubin, Z., & Shenker, S. (1978). Friendship, proximity, and self-disclosure. Journal of
Personality, 46, 1-22.
Rutter, D. R., & Stephenson, G. M. (1979). The role of visual communications in social interactions. Current Anthropology, 20, 124-125.
Sexton, J. B., & Helmreich, R. L. (2000). Analyzing cockpit communications: The links between
language, performance, and workload. Human Performance in Extreme Environments, 5,
63-68.
Shah, C. (2011). Effectiveness and user satisfaction in Yahoo!Answers. First Monday, 16,
2-7.
Shaw, B. R., Hawkins, R., McTavish, F., Pingree, S., & Gustafson, D. H. (2006). Effects of
insightful disclosure within computer mediated support groups on women with breast cancer. Health Communication, 19, 133-142.
Sheldon, P. (2009). I'll poke you. You'll poke me! Self-disclosure, social attraction, predictability and trust as important predictors of Facebook Relationships. Cyberpsychology: Journal
of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 3, 67-75.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications.
New York, NY: Wiley.
Slatcher, R. B., Vazire, S., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2008). Am "I" more important than "we"?
Couples' word use in instant messages. Personal Relationships, 15, 407-424.
Sprecher, S., Treger, S., & Wondra, J. D. (2013). Effects of self-disclosure role on liking, closeness, and other impressions in get-acquainted interactions. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 30, 497-514.
Steel, J. L. (1991). Interpersonal correlates of trust and self-disclosure. Psychological Reports,
68, 1319-1320.
Suler, J. (2004). The online disinhibition effect. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 7, 321-326.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In
S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), The psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 7-24).
Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.
Tanis, M. (2008). Health-related on-line forums: What's the big attraction? Journal of Health
Communication, 13, 698-714.
Tanis, M., & Postmes, T. (2005). A social identity approach to trust: Interpersonal perception, group membership and trusting behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology,
35, 413-424.
Tanis, M., & Postmes, T. (2007). Two faces of anonymity: Paradoxical effects of cues to identity in CMC. Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 955-970.
Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: LIWC
and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 29,
24-54.

Pan et al.

27

Taylor, L. D. (2011). Avatars and emotional engagement in asynchronous online communication. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 207-212.
Thoits, P. A. (2011). Mechanisms linking social ties and support to physical and mental health.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 52, 145-161.
Tichon, J. G., & Shapiro, M. (2003). The process of sharing social support in cyberspace.
CyberPsychology and Behavior, 6, 161-170.
Tidwell, L. C., & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-mediated communication effects on disclosure, impressions, and interpersonal evaluations: Getting to know one another a bit at a
time. Human Communication Research, 28, 317-348.
Walther, J. B. (1992). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: A relational perspective. Communication Research, 19, 52-90.
Walther, J. B., & Bunz, U. (2005). The rules of virtual groups: Trust, liking, and performance in
computer-mediated communication. Journal of Communication, 55, 828-846.
Walther, J. B., & Parks, M. R. (2002). Cues filtered out, cues filtered in: Computer-mediated
communication and relationships. In M. L. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication (3rd ed., pp. 529-563). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S., Westerman, D., & Tong, S. T. (2008). The role of
friends' behavior on evaluations of individuals' Facebook profiles: Are we known by the
company we keep? Human Communication Research, 34, 28-49.
Wheeless, L. R. (1976). Self-disclosure and interpersonal solidarity: Measurement, validation,
and relationships. Human Communication Research, 3, 47-61.
Wheeless, L. R., & Grotz, J. (1977). The measurement of trust and its relationship to selfdisclosure. Human Communication Research, 3, 250-257.
White, M., & Dorman, S. M. (2001). Receiving social support online: Implications for health
education. Health Education Research, 16, 693-707.
Wright, K. B., Rains, S., & Banas, J. (2010). Weak-tie support network preference and perceived life stress among participants in health-related, computer-mediated support groups.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 15, 606-624.
Yoo, W., Shah, D. V., Shaw, B. R., Kim, E., Smaglik, P., Roberts, L. J., . . .Gustafson, D. H.
(2014). The role of the family environment and computer-mediated social support on breast
cancer patients' coping strategies. Journal of Health Communication, 19, 981-998.
Zhu, E. (2006). Interaction and cognitive engagement: An analysis of four asynchronous online
discussions. Instructional Science, 34, 451-480.

Author Biographies
Wenjing Pan is a PhD candidate in the Department of Communication at University of
California, Davis. Her research focuses on how people exchange social support in online
environment.
Bo Feng (PhD, Purdue University) is an associate professor in the Department of Communication
at University of California, Davis. Her research focuses on interpersonal, supportive, and intercultural communication.
V. Skye Wingate is a PhD candidate in the Department of Communication at University of
California, Davis. Her primary research interest is cyberbullying.

