Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: 2327-3798 (Print) 2327-3801 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Effects of probabilistic phonology on the perception of
words and nonwords
Claire Moore-Cantwell & Lisa Sanders
To cite this article: Claire Moore-Cantwell & Lisa Sanders (2018) Effects of probabilistic
phonology on the perception of words and nonwords, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,
33:2, 148-164, DOI: 10.1080/23273798.2017.1376101
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2017.1376101

Published online: 19 Sep 2017.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 365

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE, 2018
VOL. 33, NO. 2, 148-164
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2017.1376101

REGULAR ARTICLE

Effects of probabilistic phonology on the perception of words and nonwords
Claire Moore-Cantwella and Lisa Sandersb
a

Department of Linguistics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA; bDepartment of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Although listeners have knowledge about both categorical and probabilistic phonological patterns,
it is not clear if knowledge of probabilistic patterns affects speech processing. One such pattern in
English is that words ending in /i/ (e.g. remedy) are more likely to have antepenultimate stress than
penultimate stress (e.g. spaghetti). In the current study, participants extended this trend to ratings
of novel words (e.g. bakati). Further, ERPs revealed that real words that violate this trend elicit an
early negativity 280-380 ms after onset compared to words that observe this trend. These results
indicate that probabilistic phonology interacts with lexical access. More specifically, they suggest
that extra processing power is needed to recognise the stress pattern of trend-violating words
because of competition between the expectations of the phonological grammar and lexical
encoding of trend-violating patterns.

Received 14 September 2016
Accepted 9 August 2017

1. Introduction
The processes of perceiving and producing speech are
both strongly conditioned by the listener's experience
with language. Sounds and sequences of sounds which
do not occur in a language may be difficult or impossible
for listeners to veridically perceive (Berent, Lennertz, Smolensky, & Vaknin-Nusbaum, 2009; Breen, Kingston, &
Sanders, 2013; Dehaene-Lambertz, Dupoux, & Gout,
2000; Dupoux, Kakehi, Hirose, Pallier, & Mehler, 1999;
Moreton, 2002). Likewise, when producing novel words,
speakers avoid structures which are not part of their
language. Speakers strongly avoid structures which are
completely absent from their language, but they also
avoid structures which are rare. In general, speakers' production of rare patterns on novel forms is directly related
to the statistics of the lexicon. More rare structures are
produced less often, common structures more often,
and structures of intermediate frequency in between
(Ernestus & Baayen, 2003; Hayes, Zuraw, Siptar, & Londe,
2009; Zuraw, 2000). Statistical tendencies and categorical
patterns have been argued to be part of the same system
of phonological knowledge that speakers have about
their language - the phonological grammar (Coetzee &
Pater, 2009; Hayes & Wilson, 2008; Zuraw, 2000).
Previous work has shown that categorical phonological
patterns constrain both perceptual processing and lexical
access (Rossi, Hartmuller, Vignotto, & Obrig, 2013; Rossi
et al., 2011). Violations of such categorical patterns elicit a
late positivity in ERPs that has been associated with
CONTACT C. Moore-Cantwell

clairemoorecantwell@gmail.com

(c) 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

KEYWORDS

Speech perception; stress;
phonology; ERP; phonotactics

violations of structural expectations (Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992; Patel, Gibson, Ratner, Besson, &
Holcomb, 1998 et. seq.). In this paper we examine the
effects on processing of a probabilistic phonological
pattern in English. Because the pattern has real-word
exceptions, we can, for the first time, address the interaction of grammatical and lexical knowledge in processing.
Categorical patterns can so strongly constrain processing that ill-formed structures are perceptually
"repaired". Moreton (2002) and Breen et al. (2013)
found that English-speaking listeners report hearing
the ill-formed onset clusters "dl-" and "tl-" as wellformed "gl-" and "kl-". Berent et al. (2009) found that
English-speaking listeners repair "lb-" and "gb-" to "lb" and "gb-". In Japanese, which prohibits sequences of
consonants,1 Dupoux et al. (1999) and Dehaene-Lambertz et al. (2000) found that sequences like "igmo" are
perceptually repaired to "igumo". Massaro & Cohen
(1983) investigated the ill-formed onset "sr", finding
that while listeners did not completely repair the
sequence in perception, their categorisation of ambiguous sounds was affected. Specifically, listeners were
less likely to categorise a sound ambiguous between
"r" and "l" as "r" when it occurred after "s", than when
it occurred after "p", where both are allowed.
Breen et al. (2013) and Dehaene-Lambertz et al. (2000)
investigated the timing of perceptual repair processes
using ERPs. Dehaene-Lambertz et al. found a mismatchnegativity (MMN) to "igumo" after several presentations

Department of Linguistics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6 Canada

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

of "igmo" in French listeners, but not in Japanese listeners.
Based on this lack of MMN for Japanese listeners, they
argue that the perceptual repair process takes place very
early. Rossi et al. (2011) also argue that phonological patterns affect early processing based on finding a smaller
N400 in response to phonologically ill-formed pseudowords compared to phonologically well-formed pseudowords. The authors interpret this effect to mean that
phonological form can be used to stop lexical access
indexed by the N400 even before it begins. However,
others argue that lexical access begins well before the
N400 (e.g. Kretzschmar, Schlesewsky, & Staub, 2015;
Rayner, 1998; Reichle, Pollatsek, Fisher, & Rayner, 1998). It
is important to note that even when repair occurs early
in processing, some information about ill-formed
sequences can be maintained. Breen et al. showed that
processing of well-formed sequences (e.g. "gl-") is influenced by presentation of repaired sounds (e.g. "dl-"
repaired to "gl-" vs. actual "gl-") more than a second earlier.
Not all categorical phonological patterns result in perceptual repair. Ill-formed, unrepaired sequences elicit a
late positivity rather than earlier ERP effects. In German,
words cannot have two identical consonants where the
first is in a cluster (e.g. "schmam" and "plall") even
though the onsets and codas are attested in other contexts (e.g. "schmal" and "platt"). Listeners can accurately
report the ill-formed nonwords. However, they elicit a
positivity over posterior regions that peaks around
1200 ms after word onset. Similarly, Pitkanen (2010)
found that in Finnish speakers, unrepaired nonwords
that violate Finnish vowel harmony patterns likewise
elicit a posterior positivity, though in this study the
effect peaked around 600 ms after stimulus onset.
In this paper, we examine the effects on processing of
a probabilistic pattern, with real-word exceptions. Using
a pattern of this type allows us to investigate the interaction of lexical and grammatical knowledge. Specifically, we can investigate the processing of real words
which are phonologically ill-formed. We do not expect
probabilistic phonological generalisations to induce perceptual repairs, since listeners must be able to accurately
perceive exceptions. For the same reason, we do not
expect probabilistic phonology to constrain the lexical
access process, and therefore we do not expect it to
modulate the size of the N400 in the way that Rossi
et al. find. However, we do expect that probabilistic phonological information would be available early in processing, since categorical phonological information is.
Bocker, Bastiaansen, Vroomen, Brunia, & de Gelder
(1999) examined the processing of exceptional stress in
Dutch, and found a larger negativity around 325 ms
after word onset for phonologically ill-formed vs. phonologically well-formed stress patterns. In Dutch, initial

149

stress prevails on two syllable words (88% of two syllable
words have initial stress), so Bocker et al. compared the
perception of initial and final stress on two-syllable
words. However, the different stress patterns on the
stimuli correspond to important physical differences
such as loudness, duration, and pitch, which could also
influence processing in the 325 ms range. This confound
of stress pattern and phonological well-formedness,
together with poor data quality (requiring a 6 Hz lowpass filter) suggest that further investigation is in order.
The ideal phonological pattern to test, then, would be
one in which acoustic differences between stimuli are
largely uncorrelated with phonological well-formedness.
We examine a pattern within the English stress system. In
longer words of English (three syllables or longer), the
well-formedness of a stress pattern is modulated by
the word's final vowel. For example, words ending in
the vowel [i] tend to take antepenultimate stress, as in
cannery, recipe, enemy. Words with a final [i] and penultimate stress, like spaghetti, bikini are exceptions. However,
words ending in a schwa exhibit a trend in the opposite
direction: words like banana, vanilla are common, and
words like cinema, taffeta are exceptions. Neither the
final vowel nor the stress pattern of the word is
enough by itself to determine the word's phonological
well-formedness; it is the combination that determines
well-formedness.
The most general, and well-known, generalisation
about stress in English is that words tend to have
stress on the first syllable (Cutler & Carter, 1987). This tendency is a property of short words of English only - one
and two syllable words, which constitute 65% of the
lexicon. In longer words of English, other patterns
prevail.2 Stress tends to be penultimate when the penultimate syllable is heavy ("elective", "aroma"), and can be
antepenultimate ("cinnamon", "cardamom") when the
penultimate syllable is light (Chomsky & Halle, 1968;
Domahs, Plag, & Carroll, 2014; Moore-Cantwell, 2016).
Words with light penultimate syllables vary from word
to word, taking either antepenultimate stress or penultimate stress (Pater, 2000). It is within this zone of variation
that a word's final vowel has an effect.
We break up the effect of the final vowel into two phonological trends, a strong trend and a weak trend. Both
were discovered through a search of the CMU pronouncing dictionary (Weide, 1994) and the SUBTLEXUS
corpus (Brysbaert & New, 2009). Among words that are
long enough to take antepenultimate stress (i.e. at least
three syllables long), and are monomorphemic3 and
with all light syllables (to avoid other influences on
stress pattern), 77% (161/208) that end in /i/ have antepenultimate stress and 70% (129/184) that end in // have
penultimate stress. In addition to being numerically

150

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

stronger among this very restricted set of words, the
trend for words ending in /i/ to take antepenultimate
stress holds across a larger set of almost 2000 words
when morphological structure and syllable weight are
ignored. In contrast, the trend for //-final words to
have penultimate stress only exists over the very restrictive subset of fewer than 200 words; it disappears when
derivational morphology and syllable weight are ignored.
We examine the effects of these two complex trends
on English speakers' processing of words and nonwords.
We use a rating task to assess speakers' knowledge of the
two trends, testing whether either of them are extended
by speakers to novel words. Previous work on speakers'
ability to extend trends in their lexicon to novel words
(Ernestus & Baayen, 2003; Hayes et al., 2009) suggests
that even complex statistical trends can be extended
to pseudowords, and we expect similar effects here.
Since the trends differ in strength, we can also investigate the effect of trend strength on speakers' ability to
extend the trend to novel words.
We use event related potentials (ERPs) to examine the
effects of these two trends on processing. We do not
expect to find perceptual repair effects, since real word
exceptions exist and must be correctly perceived (spaghetti, cinema). We do expect to see an effect late in processing of these phonological trends, in the form of a late
positivity for novel words that violate either trend. Early
in processing, we examine the interaction of lexical processing with the effects of the phonological grammar.
We entertain three hypotheses: (H1) These phonological
trends do not have an effect early in processing, (H2) the
trends affect processing in a way that is independent
from the lexical access process, and (H3) the trends interact with the lexical access process.
H1 predicts that well-formed and ill-formed nonwords
should not differ early in processing, nor should wellformed and ill-formed actual words. If H2 is correct, we
should see an effect of phonological well-formedness
that is similar in real and novel words. We also expect
real and novel words to differ in their processing, but in a
way that is independent of the difference between wellforms and ill-formed items. H3 predicts that phonological
well-formedness should affect the processing of real
words differently from how it affects the processing of
novel words.

2. Experiment 1
2.1. Methods
2.1.1. Participants
Participants were 22 (14 females, 8 males) native speakers of English, between the ages of 18 and 30 years. All

were right-handed undergraduate or graduate students
at the University of Massachusetts Amherst with
normal hearing, normal or corrected to normal vision,
and no known neurological conditions. EEG data from
one participant (female) were excluded due to artefacts
caused by muscle tension and frequent blinks. Behavioral data from all 22 participants were included in
analysis.

2.1.2. Stimuli
We selected 10 English words that observe the stronger
trend (/i/-final antepenultimate stress), that violate the
stronger trend (/i/-final penultimate stress), that
observe the weaker trend (//-final penultimate stress),
and that violate the weaker trend (//-final antepenultimate stress), shown in Table 1. All had three light syllables (monophthong vowels and no coda consonants).
In addition to the 40 real English words, we constructed 80 nonwords that paralleled the structure and
stress patterns of the words. Specifically, nonwords
were constructed by changing each consonant in a real
word to another in the same sonority class (stops, fricatives, nasals, and liquids). For each real word, two nonwords were constructed, one with antepenultimate and
one with penultimate stress (e.g. araspa and araspa for
the word "alaska"). Neighborhood density was calculated
for the resulting nonwords using the Generalized Neighborhood Model4 (Bailey & Hahn, 2001). Neighborhood
density was similarly low for all nonwords (M = 0.0005);
a neighbourhood density of 1 indicates a single
neighbour.
Also included in the experiment were mis-stressed
versions of the real English words, e.g. banana. These
were included to balance the item set so that there
were in total 80 real words and 80 nonwords, and also
so that every item (real or nonword) would have a
counterpart with the opposite stress pattern. In order
to create these items, stress was moved to the antepenultimate syllable for penultimately stressed real words,
and to the penultimate syllable for antepenultimately
stressed real words.
All stimuli were transcribed into the international phonetic alphabet (IPA). A native English speaker pronounced each item in the frame "Say x again". The
stimuli were then isolated from the frame sentence. To
ensure that the acoustic cues to stress were similar
across words nonwords, we measured duration, intensity, and F0 excursion (Table 2). Along with vowel
quality these are considered to capture stress cues in
English (Beckman, 1986). Stimuli averaged 487 ms in
length (307-652 ms, sd = 71) with the onset of the
second syllable at 177 ms (70-339 ms) and the onset of
the third at 347 ms (223-500 ms).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

151

Table 1. English words used in both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. Log frequencies from SUBTLEXUS (Brysbaert & New, 2009) are
given at the bottom.
-[i]

mean (sd) log(f)

-[]

Antepenultimate

Penultimate

Antepenultimate

Penultimate

well-formed
elegy
atrophy
canopy
ebony
fallacy
cavity
colony
recipe
remedy
travesty
1.65(0.53)

ill-formed
salami
finale
graffiti
jalopy
pastrami
bikini
safari
swahili
spaghetti
zucchini
1.76(0.32)

ill-formed
cinema
africa
nebula
replica
retina
spatula
stamina
swastika
taffeta
canada
1.78(0.48)

well-formed
dilemma
eureka
lasagne
manila
sierra
sonata
vanilla
savanna
militia
alaska
1.72(0.46)

2.1.3. Procedure
On each trial participants heard one of the items and
were asked to rate how likely it was to be an actual
word of English on a 4-point scale (1 = very unlikely, 4
= very likely). Listeners were told that they would hear
actual and made-up words mixed together, but that
some of the real words were so rare that they would
not have heard them before. Two examples of very
rare actual words were given: "galea", and "tomalley"
(both trend-violating). Participants were told that when
they didn't recognise an item, they should use how it
sounds to guess how likely it was to be an English word.
Participants started each trial by pressing a button on
the response box at which time a fixation cross appeared
on a computer monitor. Participants were asked to
remain still, to avoid eye movements and blinking, and
to withhold responses while the fixation cross was
visible. One of the stimuli was presented over loudspeakers at an average of 65 dB SPL 100-1000 ms (rectangular distribution) after the onset of the fixation cross. The
fixation cross was replaced with a response screen 1500
ms after the onset of the stimulus.
The first two participants heard each word, misstressed word, and nonword 10 times each (1600
trials). To shorten the experimental session time, the subsequent 20 participants heard each item 8 times each
(1280 trials). The order of items was randomised. The
entire experiment including electrode application, completion of all trials, and short (between trials) and
Table 2. Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
acoustic measurements of stressed vowels in all items from
Experiment 1. Note that durations do not include onsonants.
Realized stress
Antepenultimate
Penultimate

Parameter

Word

Nonword

Duration (ms)
Intensity (dB)
F0 excursion (Hz)
Duration (ms)
Intensity (dB)
F0 excursion (Hz)

97 (20)
74 (3)
6.6 (4.3)
106 (24)
74 (3)
17.5 (28.1)

99 (21)
75 (3)
10.4 (13.2)
98 (25)
73 (3)
14.9 (21.1)

longer (approximately every 200 trials) breaks required
about 2.5 h.

2.1.4. EEG recording and processing
Electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded continuously
by means of a 128-electrode HydroCel Geodesic Sensor
Net (Electrical Geodesics Inc., Eugene, OR), at a sampling
rate of 250 Hz and a bandwidth of 0.01-100 Hz. For
recording, the reference electrode was placed at the
top of the head (Cz). The impedance for each electrode
was maintained below 50 k throughout the experiment. A 60 Hz notch filter was applied to the EEG
signal offline after recording. The continuous EEG was
divided into 1600 ms epochs, timelocked to (a) the
beginning of the stimulus, (b) the onset of the second
syllable, and (c) the onset of the third syllable. Relative
to each onset, the epochs began 100 ms before that
onset, and continued 1500 ms after. Because all effects
of interest appeared timelocked to the first syllable, we
do not discuss data from epochs timelocked to the
second and third syllables.
Trials containing eye blinks, eye movements, or other
artefacts were excluded automatically using ERPLAB. Eye
blinks were detected by subtracting voltages below each
eye from voltages above each eye, and eye movements
were detected by subtracting voltage to the left of the
eyes from voltage to the right of the eyes. Subjectspecific voltage thresholds were chosen for eye blink/
movement channels (between 300 and 500 V) as well
as for the whole head (between 400 and 500 V). Any
trial where the threshold was exceeded was marked as
artifactual. In all conditions, between 22% and 27% of
trials contained artefacts.
Data from the remaining trials were averaged separately for each participant, condition, and electrode.
ERPs were then re-referenced to the average of the
two mastoid recordings and baseline corrected to the
average amplitude in the 100 ms before stimulus onset.

152

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

2.1.5. Analysis
A within-subjects ANOVA was conducted with mean
ratings from individual subjects as the dependent variable.5 Factors were WordStatus (Word, Nonword), FinalV
(-[], -[i]), and Stress (antepenultimate, penultimate).
Visual inspection of grand-average ERP waveforms
motivated measuring mean amplitude at 280-380 ms
(early difference), 400-1000 ms (N400), and 1000-1500
ms (Late Positive Component, LPC) after stimulus
onset. The time windows for the N400 and LPC measurements are somewhat later than what is typically used,
but appropriate for long words in which the phonological pattern information is distributed across the entire
duration.
Electrode position was included in analysis by averaging data across 9 electrodes in 12 regions from
anterior to posterior (Anteriority) and from left to
right (LeftRight) as shown in Figure 1. These data
were then subjected to repeated-measures ANOVAs
using factors WordStatus (Word, Nonword), FinalV
(-[], -[i]), Stress (antepenultimate, penultimate), Anteriority of electrode position (anterior, anterior-central,
posterior-central, posterior), and LeftRight electrode
position (left, medial, right). In all three time windows,
an ANOVA was computed using the above five
factors and their interactions. Greenhouse-Geisser corrected degrees-of-freedom were used to account for
violations of sphericity; corrected p-values and uncorrected degrees-of-freedom are reported. In some
cases further analyses were conducted, using Bonferroni corrections to correct for family-wise error.

Figure 1. Data from 108 electrodes (black circles) were included
in analyses by averaging across 9 electrodes in 12 regions. These
regions were described as two electrode position factors:
Anterior to Posterior (4 levels) and Left to Right (3 levels).
These same regions of interest were used for both experiments.

2.2. Results
2.2.1. Ratings
As shown in Figure 3, ratings (1 = very unlikely to be an
English word, 4 = very likely to be an English word)
were higher for actual words than for nonwords (WordStatus: F(1, 21) = 1194.6, p < .001). Ratings for actual
words were nearly always 4 (M = 3.5 - 4) with the
exceptions of "jalopy" (M = 2.9) and "taffeta" (M = 2.7).
Since subjects rated these items well outside the range
of averages for the rest of the real words, they are
excluded from analysis of the behavioural data.
Mis-stressed real words (like banana) received ratings
in between those of real words and those of nonwords,
but there was a great deal of variability, both across participants and from item to item. Figure 2 illustrates this:
real words like "banana" received high ratings, clustered
very strongly at the high end of the scale. Nonwords
received low ratings, with means roughly normally distributed around 1.8. Mis-stressed real words on the
other hand, received mean ratings distributed across
the scale, but with a mean (2.8) intermediate between
real words and nonwords. Because the mis-stressed
words exhibit so much variability, and because they do
not pattern with either real words or nonwords, we
exclude them from further analyses.
An omnibus ANOVA was conducted on the mean
ratings from each participant (Table 3). In addition to a
main effect of Word Status, there were main effects of
final vowel and stress, as well as a three-way interaction
between word status, final vowel, and stress. In ANOVAs
conducted on words only, and on nonwords only, the
interaction between final vowel and stress both
reached the Bonferroni-corrected significance value of

Figure 2. Distribution of mean ratings for the three major types
of items. Each number in the histogram is the mean for one participant in one condition. For example, one point is participant 1's
mean rating for penultimately stressed i-final nonwords.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Table 3. Results of an omnibus ANOVA for behavioural data from
Experiment 1.
F value
wordStatus (1,21)
finalV (1,21)
stress (1,21)
wordStatus x finalV (1,21)
wordStatus x stress (1,21)
finalV x stress (1,21)
wordStatus x finalV x stress (1,21)


1194.6
6.4
6.3
-
3.5
-
16.0

0.1 > p > 0.05; *0.05 > p > 0.01; **p < 0.01.

0.025 (Words: F(1, 21) = 7.7, p < 0.025; Nonwords:
F(1, 21) = 8.1, p < 0.025). No main effects of final vowel
or stress were found in either words or nonwords.
Ratings are graphed in Figure 3. Within antepenultimate words, -final items were rated a small amount
(0.08) higher than i-final items, but no difference
obtains in penultimately stressed items. Within nonwords, no difference obtains in antepenultimately
stressed nonwords, but penultimately stressed -final
nonwords were rated higher (by 0.15) than penultimately
stressed i-final nonwords.

2.2.2. ERP data
Early effects. Results of an omnibus ANOVA analysing the
mean voltage in the 280-380 ms time window are shown
in Table 4. There were no main effects of word type, final
vowel, or stress, but there was a significant interaction
between final vowel and stress, as well as a three-way

Figure 3. Mean ratings for items in Experiment 1. Error bars represent standard errors based on the distribution of individual
subject means.

153

Table 4. ANOVA results for all three EEG time windows from
Experiment 1. Greenhouse-geisser corrected p-values and
uncorrected degrees of freedom are reported.
Effect
wordStatus (1,20)
finalV (1,20)
stress (1,20)
wordStatus x finalV (1,20)
wordStatus x stress (1,20)
finalV x stress (1,20)
wordStatus x finalV x stress (1,20)
LeftRight x wordStatus (2,40)
Anteriority x wordStatus (3,60)
LeftRight x finalV (2,40)
Anteriority x finalV (3,60)
LeftRight x Anteriority x wordStatus
(6,120)
LeftRight x wordStatus x finalV
(2,40)
Anteriority x stress x finalV (3,60)
Anteriority x LeftRight x stress x
finalV (3,60)
LeftRight x wordStatus x stress x
finalV (2,40)

280-380
ms

400-1000
ms

1000-1500
ms

-
-
-
-
-
18.0
12.2
2.6
-
-
-
1.9

44.3
-
-
4.9
-
17.7
3.2
33.5
9.2
-
-
3.5

3.6
-
-
9.4
-
-
3.1
4.5
14.5
-
3.2
5.9

-

2.6

-

10.6
2.1

12.6
-

6.8
-

3.3

-

2.8



0.1 > p > 0.05; *0.05 > p > 0.01; **p < 0.01.

interaction between word type, final vowel, and stress.
Two ANOVAs were conducted on real words and nonwords separately. For real words, the finalV x stress interaction remained significant: F(1, 20) = 3.2, p < 0.001.
However, for nonwords no significant interaction
obtained: F(1, 20) = 0.07, p = 0.80. From this we conclude that the wordStatus x finalV x stress interaction in
the omnibus ANOVA indicates an interaction of finalV x
stress for real words only. Figure 4 shows this interaction
in more detail: ERPs for Antepenultimate and Penultimate
stressed items are shown separately. In both cases, words
with trend violating final vowels elicited a larger negativity than words with trend-observing final vowels. For
antepenultimately stressed words, those with a final - elicited a greater negativity than those with a final -i. For
penultimately stressed words, those with a final -i elicited
a larger negativity than those with a final -. The effect was
larger for penultimately stressed items (V = 0.87 V)
than for antepenultimately stressed items (V = 0.33
V), but both differences were statistically significant
(Antepenultimate: t = 2.06, p < 0.05; Penultimate: t =
4.78, p < 0.01).
The omnibus ANOVA also showed a significant threeway interaction between Anteriority x FinalV x Stress.
Separate ANOVAs conducted on each of the four levels
of Anteriority revealed that the interaction between
FinalV x Stress remained significant in all but the
most posterior electrodes (a = 0.05/4 = 0.0125;
Anterior electrodes: F(1, 20) = 32.9, p < 0.001; Anteriorcentral electrodes: F(1, 20) = 14.5, p < 0.0125; Posteriorcentral electrodes: F(1, 20) = 12.4, p < 0.001; Posterior
electrodes: F(1, 20) = 4.0, p = 0.06). No significant

154

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

Figure 4. ERPs elicited by i-final and -final real words with antepenultimate (left) and penultimate (right) stress in Experiment 1. Only
medial non-posterior regions are shown. Onset times for each syllable are represented in the legend as boxplots. In the 280-380 ms
time window, both types of trend-violating words elicited greater negativity than their trend-observing counterparts. Antepenultimately stressed -final words violate the weak trend, and penultimately stressed i-final words violate the strong trend.

interactions with LeftRight were found in the omnibus
ANOVA, indicating that the effect is not lateralised.
N400. Results of an omnibus ANOVA analysing the
mean voltage in the 400-1000 ms time window are
shown in Table 4. There was a main effect of word
type - nonwords elicited a larger N400 effect than
words (Figure 5). Additionally, there were significant
interactions between word type and final vowel, and
between stress and final vowel, and a marginal but not
significant three way interaction between word type,
final vowel, and stress. The interaction of stress with
final vowel is illustrated in Figure 6. Motivated by the significant interactions of left-right and anteriority with
word type, as well as the interaction of Anteriority x
finalV x stress, separate ANOVAs were conducted on
each of the 12 regions of interest (Figure 1). Using a Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold of of 0.0042 to

correct for family-wise error, we found that word type
was significant in all regions of interest except for the
two posterior non-medial sites (Posterior Left and Posterior Right). Additionally, the interaction of final vowel
with stress was significant at anterior electrode sites, as
well as the anterior-medial central region. These
regions are illustrated in Figure 6.
Two separate ANOVAs were conducted on real words
and nonwords using a significance threshold of 0.025.
Final vowel did not reach significance in either model
(Words:
F(1, 20) = 4.0,
p = 0.06;
Nonwords:
F(1, 20) = 0.42, p = 0.05). The interaction between final
vowel and stress, as well as the three way interaction
between anteriority x finalV x stress, was significant for
words (F(1, 20) = 15.2, p < 0.001; F(3, 60) = 4.9, p <
0.01). Neither was significant for nonwords
(F(1, 20) = 0.95, p = 0.34; F(3, 60) = 3.28, p = 0.06).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

155

Figure 5. ERPs elicited by words and nonwords in Experiment 1. Words elicited a larger negativity at 400-1000 ms than nonwords in all
scalp regions except for Posterior Right and Posterior Left.

Late Positive Component (LPC). Results of an omnibus
ANOVA analysing the mean voltage in the 1000-1500

Figure 6. Mean amplitude in the N400 time window (400-1000
ms) from Experiment 1, averaged over all regions for which the
stress x finalV interaction is significant - anterior and medial
anterior-central regions, shown on the right. Words and nonwords are averaged together.

ms time window are shown in Table 4. There was a significant interaction of wordStatus and final vowel, as well as
significant interactions LeftRight x wordStatus, and Anteriority x wordStatus, as well as a significant three-way
interaction between LeftRight x Anteriority x wordStatus.
No significant effect of final vowel, stress, or their interaction was found, but there was a significant three-way
interaction between Anteriority x stress x finalV.
Motivated by the significant interactions of left-right
and anteriority with word type, as well as the interaction
of Anteriority x finalV x stress, separate ANOVAs were
conducted on each of the 9 regions of interest
(Figure 1). Using a Bonferroni-corrected significance
threshold of of 0.0042 to correct for family-wise error,
we found that word type was significant in just
three regions, which were not continuous: Anterior
left (F(1, 20) = 10.7, p < 0.004), Anterior right
(F(1, 20) = 27.1, p < 0.0001), and Anterior-central right
(F(1, 20) = 13.9, p < 0.004). In all three regions, words

156

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

were more positive than nonwords. Additionally, the
stress x finalV interaction was significant in just the
Anterior middle region (F(1, 20) = 12.3, p < 0.004). All
of these effects are seen over very small numbers of electrodes, and are entirely anterior - a distribution not
typical of P600 effects. Additonally, while previous
research (Domahs, Kehrein, Knaus, Wiese, & Schlesewsky,
2009; Pitkanen, 2010) shows a late positivity for phonologically ill-formed items, we do not expect a positivity for
words compared to nonwords. We do not discuss these
effects further.
Motivated by the significant interaction between
word status and final vowel, two separate ANOVAs
were conducted on words and on nonwords. However,
final vowel did not reach significance in either words
or nonwords.
Summary. In Experiment 1, participants distinguish in
their ratings between i-final and -final penultimately
stressed nonwords, preferring -final. This indicates that
they are able to productively apply the strong trend
found in the lexicon of English to novel words. Recall
that this trend was for i-final words to take antepenultimate stress rather than penultimate stress - in our
lexicon of English words, 77% of i-final words three syllables long and longer took antepenultimate stress. On the
other hand, the weak trend for -final words to take
penultimate stress was not reflected in participants'
ratings of nonwords. Recall that this trend was weaker
in that it holds only over monomorphemic words with
all light syllables, rather than over all three-syllable and
longer words like the strong i-final trend.
In the ERP data, we found three effects of note. First, in
the earliest time window, 280-380 ms, we found a significant interaction of stress and final vowel in words only,
indicating that phonologically ill-formed real words
(Penultimate i-final, Antepenultimate -final) elicited a
larger negativity in this region than phonologically
well-formed real words. Importantly, the difference
betwee ill-formed and well-formed words was observed
within a stress type, and cannot be attributed to a difference in stress pattern. Rather, the distinction is whether
that stress pattern is well- or ill-formed given the conditioning factor of the final vowel.
Second, we found a larger N400 on nonwords compared to real words, replicating many earlier results
(Rossi et al., 2013, 2011; Rugg, 1984). Finally, we found
an interaction of stress and final vowel on the size of
the N400, significant across both words and nonwords.
Within penultimately stressed items, i-final ones elicited
a larger N400 than -final items. Notably, we found no
effects of phonological well-formedness on novel
words, even though participants distinguished phonologically well- and ill-formed novel words in their ratings.

3. Experiment 2
Experiment 1 found an effect on participants' ratings of
novel words based on whether or not they followed
the strong trend in the lexicon for i-final words to
take antepenultimate stress. However, no effects were
found in the ERP measures of participants' apparent
knowledge of this trend. In particular, we found no
late positivity for trend-violators relative to trend-observers. A late positivity was expected, based on previous
ERP work studying speakers' knowledge of the phonology of their language. One possibility is that violations
of probabilistic phonology are processed differently
than violations of categorical phonology, and do not
elicit the same late positivity. However, in experiment
1, each nonword was repeated several times (twice
per block, eight times in total). Because of this, participants may not have processed the nonwords like actual
nonwords. In particular, they may have experienced
priming or adaptation across repeated instances of
the same nonword, which could lead to a reduction
in size of the late positivity, possibly rendering it
undetectable.
Experiment 2 is designed to rule out this possibility.
Instead of re-using the same nonwords in each block we
introduce new nonwords so that participants only hear
each nonword once. If the lack of an LPC that we observed
in Experiment 1 is due to the repetiton of the nonwords,
then we expect an LPC to emerge in Experiment
2. However, if no LPC obtains in Experiment 2, then we
can conclude that the strong i-final trend, while it is productively applied to nonwords, does not elicit the same
LPC as categorical phonological patterns when violated.

3.1. Methods
3.1.1. Participants
Participants were 25 (12 females, 13 males) native speakers of English, between the ages of 18 and 30 years.
Inclusion criteria were identical to those for Experiment
1 (right-handed, normal hearing, normal or corrected to
normal vision, no known neurological conditions) with
the addition that participants had not taken part in Experiment 1. EEG data from six participants (2 females, 4 males)
were excluded due to artefacts caused by frequent blinks
(n = 3), muscle tension that could not be resolved (n = 1),
and low-frequency drift related to skin potentials in a toowarm room (n = 2). Behavioral data from all 25 participants were included in analysis.
3.1.2. Procedure
The 40 real words, their mis-stressed counterparts, and
80 nonwords from Experiment 1 were also used in

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Experiment 2. However, 560 new nonwords were constructed so that each nonword was only heard once
during the experiment. Nonwords were counterbalanced for final vowel, so that each item appeared in
all four stress by vowel conditions. Each participant
saw each nonword in two stress conditions with the
same vowel, but across participants each item was presented with both vowels (e.g. one participant heard
/bamaki/ and /bamaki/, and another heard /bamaka/
and /bamaka/).
Lexical neighbourhood density was calculated for all
nonwords using the Generalized Neighborhood Model
(Bailey & Hahn, 2001). Neighborhood density was similarly low for all nonwords (M = 0.0006); a neighbourhood
density of 1 indicates a single neighbour. Additionally,
the Irvine Phonotactic Online Dictionary (Vaden &
Hickok, n.d.) was used to calculate phoneme bigram
probability (M = 0.0034), phoneme trigram probability
(M = 0.00022), and phoneme positional probability (M
= 0.055) all of which were similarly low for each
condition.
Items were recorded with the same procedure as in
Experiment 1. Table 5 shows that the stressed syllables
of all word types were comparable in duration and in
F0 excursion. For both antepenultimate and penultimate
stressed items, however, the mean intensity was significantly less by an average of 5-6 dB for nonwords than
for real or mis-stressed words.

157

of the second syllable at 164 ms (34-364 ms) and the
onset of the third at 330 ms (171-500 ms).
As before, trials containing eye blinks, eye movements, or other artefacts were excluded automatically
using ERPLAB. Participant-specific voltage thresholds
were chosen for eye blink/movement channels
(between 300 and 700 V) as well as for the whole
head (between 400 and 1000 V). Any trial where the
threshold was exceeded was marked as artifactual.
For 18 of the 19 participants included in the EEG analysis, between 4% and 30% of trials were excluded
because of artefacts. For one participant, 45% of
trials had to be excluded. Six additional participants
were excluded from analysis due to very high rates
of artefacts.

3.1.4. Analysis
All analyses were conducted as in Experiment 1, using
the same time windows for ERP measurement, and the
same statistical models.
3.2. Results
3.2.1. Ratings
The pattern of ratings (Figure 7) were very similar to that
found in Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, the words
"jalopy" and "taffeta" were excluded from the analysis,
since their mean ratings (2.9 and 3.1, respectively) were
well outside the range of mean ratings for other words

3.1.3. Procedure and EEG recording
Like in Experiment 1, participants heard 8 repetitions of
each word and mis-stressed word. They additionally
heard the 80 nonwords from Experiment 1 as well as
the 560 new nonwords, for a total of 640 nonword
trials and 640 word trials (1280 total).6 All other procedures were identical to those of Experiment 1, including measurement time windows and analyses. Stimuli
averaged 442 ms in length (266-650 ms) with the onset
Table 5. Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
acoustic measurements of stressed vowels in the items for
Experiment 2.
Realized stress
Antepenultimate
Penultimate

Parameter

Word

Nonword

Duration (ms)
Intensity (dB)
F0 excursion (Hz)
Duration (ms)
Intensity (dB)
F0 excursion (Hz)

91 (19)
75 (3)
6.1 (4.2)
107 (24)
74 (3)
17.5 (28.2)

85 (27)
69 (5)
5.0 (10.3)
105 (32)
67 (6)
12.4 (37.9)

Note: Durations do not include consonants. For some syllables, it was not
possible to get an accurate F0 measurement, so these are excluded from
the analysis (92 antepenultimately stressed items, 78 penultimately stressed
items). Note that the acoustic measures for words differ from those
reported for Experiment 1 - this is because these items were re-recorded
for Experiment 2 so that all experimental items could be recorded together.

Figure 7. Mean ratings for items in Experiment 2. Error bars represent standard errors based on the distribution of individual
subject means.

158

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

Table 6. Results of an omnibus ANOVA for behavioural data from
Experiment 2.
F value
wordStatus (1,21)
finalV (1,21)
stress (1,21)
wordStatus x finalV (1,21)
wordStatus x stress (1,21)
finalV x stress (1,21)
wordStatus x finalV x stress (1,21)


1038.7
-
7.6
6.0
18.2
-
14.8

0.1> p > 0.05; *0.05 > p > 0.01; **p < 0.01.

in the experiment (3.4-4.0). Results of an omnibus
ANOVA are shown in Table 6. Main effects of word
status and stress obtained, as well as interactions
between word status x final vowel, word status x
stress, and a three-way interaction between word
status x final vowel x stress. Motivated by these interactions, ANOVAs were also conducted on just words
and on just nonwords, with a = 0.025.
As in Experiment 1, mis-stressed real words exhibited
a great deal of variability, and had a mean rating (2.6) in
between that of real words (3.9) and that of nonwords
(1.7). As in Experiment 1, we do not include these
items in our analyses.
Within words, there was a significant interaction of
final vowel and stress (F(1, 24) = 6.8, p < 0.025). As in
Experiment 1, there was a small difference in ratings
between antepenultimately stressed items (-final
rated 0.12 higher than i-final items). Penultimately
stressed items exhibited a much smaller difference (ifinal 0.04 higher than -final). Within nonwords, there
was a main effect of stress (F(1, 24) = 20.0, p <
0.001). Antepenultimately stressed nonwords were
rated higher than penultimately stressed nonwords
by 0.1. There was also a significant interaction
between stress and final vowel (F(1, 24) = 12.8, p <
0.025). Within antepenultimately stressed words, ifinal items were rated higher by 0.08, while within
penultimately stressed words, i-final items were rated
worse by a small margin (0.03). Put differently, -final
items in both stress conditions were rated very similarly (antepenultimate stress was 0.04 higher than
penultimate stress), whereas i-final items were rated
differently in the two stress conditions (antepenultimate stress was rated 0.16 higher than penultimate
stress).

3.2.2. ERP data
Early effects. Results of an omnibus ANOVA analysing the
mean voltage in the 280-380 ms time window are shown
in Table 7. Unlike in Experiment 1, there was a main
effect of word status, with nonwords more negative
than words by an average of 0.37 V. There were also significant interactions between left-right, anteriority, and

Table 7. ANOVA results for all three EEG time windows from
Experiment 2. Greenhouse-geisser corrected p-values and
uncorrected degrees of freedom are reported.
Effect

280-380
ms

wordStatus (1,18)
12.5
finalV (1,18)
-
stress (1,18)
-
wordStatus x finalV (1,18)
9.7
wordStatus x stress (1,18)
-
finalV x stress (1,18)
-
wordStatus x finalV x stress (1,18)
-
LeftRight x wordStatus (2,36)
9.0
Anteriority x wordStatus (3,54)
18.9
LeftRight x finalV (2,36)
-
LeftRight x stress (2,36)
2.7
LeftRight x Anteriority x
2.7
wordStatus (6,108)
LeftRight x stress x finalV (2,36)
-
Anteriority x stress x finalV (3,54)
2.9

0.1 > p > 0.05; *0.05 > p>0.01; **p < 0.01.

400-1000
ms

1000-1500
ms

38.8
-
-
6.2
-
-
-
27.2
8.4
3.4
-
7.5

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2.9
5.6
3.3
-
-

2.8
-

-
-

word status. Motivated by these interactions, separate
ANOVAs were conducted on each of the 12 regions of
interest (Figure 1). Using a Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold of of 0.0042 to correct for family-wise
error, we found that word type was significant in
medial anterior and anterior-central regions, as well as
right anterior and anterior central regions. Word status
was not significant in left or posterior-central or posterior
regions.
In the omnibus ANOVA, there was also an interaction
of word status with final vowel. In two separate ANOVAs
run on words and on nonwords, final vowel only reached
significance (F(1, 18) = 9.8, p < 0.025) in words, but not
in nonwords.
In addition to the above analyses, two planned comparisons were conducted on the effect of final vowel
within penultimately stressed words and antepenultimately stressed words. Within penultimately stressed
words, i-final items elicited a larger negativity than final items (t = 3.5, p < 0.001), by a mean of 0.55 V.
Within antepenultimately stressed items, no significant
effect of final vowel was found (t = 1.2, p < 0.25)
(Figure 8).
N400. Results of an omnibus ANOVA analysing the
mean voltage in the 400-1000 ms time window are
shown in Table 7. As in Experiment 1, there was a main
effect of word type - nonwords elicited a larger N400
than words (Figure 9). Additionally, there were significant
interactions between word type and final vowel, and significant interactions between left-right and anteriority
and word status. As in Experiment 1, separate ANOVAs
were conducted on each of the 12 regions of interest
(Figure 1). Using a Bonferroni-corrected significance
threshold of of 0.0042 to correct for family-wise error,
we found that word type was significant in all regions
of interest except for the four "corner" regions of interest,

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

159

Figure 8. ERPs elicited by i-final and -final real words with antepenultimate (left) and penultimate (right) stress in Experiment 2. Only
medial non-posterior regions are shown. Onset times for each syllable are represented in the legend as boxplots. In the 280-380 ms
time window, i-final words elicited a larger negativity than -final words. The difference is larger in penultimately stressed words, and
reaches significance in a contrast, while the difference in antepenultimately stressed words does not.

as well as the right anterior-central region (Posterior Left,
Posterior Right, Anterior Left, Anterior Right, and
Anterior-central Right).
Motivated by the significant interaction between
word status and final vowel, two separate ANOVAs
were conducted on just words and on just nonwords.
No effects of final vowel reached significance in either
words or nonwords. Unlike in Experiment 1, no effects
final vowel, stress, or their interaction obtained.
Late Positive Component (LPC). Results of an
omnibus ANOVA analysing the mean voltage in the
1000-1500 ms time window are shown in Table 7.
There were no significant main effects or interactions
between the three experimental manipulations of
word status, final vowel, and stress. A significant interaction between anteriority and word status was
observed, but in ANOVAs conducted at each level of

anteriority, word status never reached significance at
a = 0.0125.

4. Discussion
4.1. Ratings
These experiments tested the psychological reality and
cognitive status of two probabilistic trends in the
English lexicon: the tendency for [i]-final words to take
antepenultimate stress, and the tendency for []-final
words to take penultimate stress. Only the strong i-final
trend was "productive" in the ratings. Nonwords that violated it ([bmki]) were rated as less likely to be an
English word than nonword observers ([bmki]). The
weak -final trend was not productive: no rating difference was observed between observers ([fmk]) and

160

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

Figure 9. N400s (400-1000 ms) for words and nonwords in Experiment 2. Nonwords are significantly more negative than words in all
regions except for: Posterior Left, Posterior Right, Anterior Left, Anterior Right, and Anterior-central Right. Onset times for each syllable
are represented in the legend as boxplots showing the distribution of onset times.

violators ([fmk]). These two trends differed in terms of
their degree of observance in the lexicon. The strong
trend is observed over a large scope of forms - about
2000 words, including morphologically complex forms
and words containing heavy syllables, and of those
forms about 90% observe the trend. The weak trend is
observed over about 200 words, which are morphologically simple words with no heavy syllables. Of those 200
words, about 70% observe the trend.
All three differences between the two trends (scope,
percent observance, morphology and weight as conditioning factors) could contribute to differences in learnability between the two trends. The higher the scope of a
trend, the more experience the learner will get with that
trend, and the higher the percentage of observers of the
trend, the more reliable the trend will be. The extra conditioning factors of syllable weight and morphological
structure make the statement of the weak trend more
complex than the statement of the strong trend ("i-

final words are antepenultimately stressed" vs. "unsuffixed -final words with a light penult are penultimately
stressed").
The addition of the "unsuffixed" condition is particularly problematic. A language learner would not be
able to reference the set of unsuffixed things until she
had acquired the relevant morphology. In this case, the
relevant morphology is derivational affixes and is
acquired fairly late. Tyler & Nagy (1989) find that fourth
graders have not completely acquired the syntactic
properties of various derivational affixes in English, and
Jarmulowicz (2002) examined seven and nine year olds'
knowledge of the stress-shifting nature of a selection
of English derivational suffixes, finding that neither
group were as good as adults at correctly judging the
stress properties of a particular affix. On the other
hand, children can and do begin learning generalisations
about the stress pattern of their language as early as 9
months of age (Jusczyk, Cutler, & Redanz, 1993).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

4.2. Early negativity
An early negativity in response to real word exceptions
to the i-final trend was observed in both experiments.
In Experiment 1, a similar early negativity was found for
exceptions to the -final trend, but this negativity was
not observed in the second experiment. We view this
failure to replicate as evidence that the negativity
observed in the first experiment was a spurious result,
and we do not analyse it further. The early negativity
observed across both experiments in response to exceptions to the i-final trend shows that this trend is active
early during the process of lexical access. This effect is
not evident for nonwords, and is early enough that information about the word's final vowel is not available. For
both of these reasons, this effect cannot be directly
related to the perception of the acoustic string that violates the i-final trend. Both the stress pattern and the
content of the final vowel are necessary information to
tell whether a string is trend-observing or trend-violating. By 280-380 ms post-stimulus-onset, subjects have
processed acoustic information about the word's stress
pattern but not about it's final vowel. This distinction
between trend-observers and trend-violators may be a
consequence of subjects accessing information in the
lexical entry of a word, either phonological information
about the final vowel (before they have actually heard
it), or direct information about whether the word has a
high- or low- probability shape. In nonwords, there is
no stored lexical representation, so subjects cannot perceive a violation of a trend before they have heard (and
processed) the entire string.
The early negative difference observed in Experiments 1 and 2 may be related to what Bocker et al.
(1999) considered the "exogenous" portion of their
N325 effect. In their study, there was some evidence
for a negativity in a similar time window in response to
weak-strong (12% of Dutch two-syllable words) compared to strong-weak (88%) words for words preceded
by two others of the same stress pattern. The effect
was far larger for weak-strong words presented after a
series of three strong-weak words and when participants
were engaged in a stress pattern discrimination task, but
these "endogenous" contributions to the effect may have
largely been driven by a mismatch response. In Bocker
et al. (1999), it was impossible to determine if the
exogenous portion of their effect was related to physical
differences in the stimuli (i.e. perhaps the effect would be
evident in anyone listening to weak-strong syllables
compared to strong-weak syllables regardless of their
language experience) or violations of the strong trend
for two-syllable Dutch words to have stress on the first
syllable. However, in our study the larger negativity

161

was observed when comparing items with the same
stress pattern (penultimate in Experiment 2, and across
antepenultimate and penultimate in Experiment 1) and
before information about the final vowel was available,
and so can definitively be linked to violations of a probabilistic trend.
Our interpretation of the early negative effect is that it
is related to identification of a word's stress pattern in
one of two ways. The first possibility is that both the
early negativity and Bocker et al.'s N325 are instances
of a component which is a manifestation of one stage
of lexical access, namely the identification of a word's
stress pattern. A greater negativity at this stage obtains
if the word's stress pattern is atypical in some way. We
will consider two possible mechanisms by which the
greater negativity could arise. The first possibility is
that the lexical encoding of stress may be different for
items which violate grammatical trends than for items
which do not. In the phonological literature, many such
mechanisms have been proposed - for English stress
specifically Becker (2009), Burzio (1994), Chomsky and
Halle (1968), Hayes (1980), Pater (2005), and Selkirk
(1984) have all proposed some kind of extra diacritic or
feature on words with exceptional stress patterns. Building on this body of work, Moore-Cantwell & Pater (2016)
propose that each word's lexical representation has
some weight and competes with grammatical constraints. A stress pattern which violates a lexical trend
would have a higher weight (be more strongly represented) so that it can overcome the pressures of the
grammar. A stress pattern which observes a lexical
trend would have a lower weight, and be less strongly
encoded. If this analysis is correct, then accessing the
stress pattern of an exceptional word would proceed differently than accessing the stress pattern of a trendobserving word. However, it is not clear that accessing
a more strongly encoded stress pattern should result in
a greater negativity - rather one might imagine that
accessing or recognising a more strongly encoded
stress pattern would be less effortful than accessing or
recognising a less strongly encoded stress pattern.
A second possible mechanism that may give rise to
the observed pattern of early negativity is competition
between the grammar and a word's lexically encoded
stress pattern. For words whose stress pattern agrees
with the probabilistic trend in the grammar, there is no
competition, as the grammar's predictions and the
lexical encoding of stress align. For trend-violating
words however, the lexically encoded stress pattern violates the grammar's expectations. Competition between
the grammar's expectations and the actual stored stress
pattern of a word makes the process of correctly recognising that stress pattern more effortful, and therefore

162

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

gives rise to a greater negativity at the stage when the
word's stress pattern is recognised. Although the first
proposal, that differences in lexical encoding of stress
give rise to the early negativity, lines up well with phonological theory, we prefer this second proposal on
grounds of neurological plausibility.

4.3. N400
The N400 was much bigger for nonwords than for words
- an effect replicating the large N400 for nonwords
found by Rugg & Nagy (1987) and many others. Although
in Experiment 1 an additional interaction of final vowel
and stress was found in words, this interaction was not
replicated in Experiment 2. We therefore treat it as a
spurious result and do not analyse it further.

4.4. LPC
Despite the fact that the strong i-final trend is productive,
it did not influence processing in the same way as categorical patterns. In particular, violations of this trend do
not elicit an LPC similar to what was reported by others
(Domahs et al., 2009; Pitkanen, 2010) in response to violations of categorical phonological patterns. The LPC has
been linked to late, evaluative processes (Gouvea,
Phillips, Kazanina, & Poeppel, 2010; Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992, et.seq.), and may not be evident for
probabilistic patterns for which the listener has readily
accessible exceptions. One example of an LPC, the
P600, has been reported for rare syntactic sentence
structures and garden-path sentences that do not actually violate grammatical rules. However, even in these
cases listeners are likely to have the online experience
that the syntactic structure they have extracted from
the stimuli is categorically wrong during processing.
With probabilistic, exceptionful patterns, the late evaluation of a pattern as deficient in some way is absent.

5. Conclusion
The strong trend for i-final words was observed in participants' ratings of nonwords, and it affected early stages of
the lexical access process in real words. The -final trend
also affected early stages of lexical access, but only in
the first experiment - the effect did not replicate. We
argue that this early negativity originates from the stage
of lexical access at which the word's stress pattern is
recognised. This recognition draws upon the acoustic
signal as well as stored information about a particular
lexical item. The size of the negativity is modulated by
the typicality of the word's stress pattern, which we
argue is due to competition between the expectations

of the phonological grammar and the actual lexical
encoding of a trend-violating stress pattern.
Previous research on how phonological generalisations affect speech processing has examined categorical patterns only, and those can be divided into two
types. Local categorical rules, such as the rule against
"tl" or "dl" at the beginnings of words in English (Breen
et al., 2013), tend to be perceptually "repaired" relatively
early in processing (Breen et al., 2013; Dehaene-Lambertz
et al., 2000; Dupoux et al., 1999; Moreton, 2002). Because
these violations are repaired early, there is no late evaluative process that would elicit an LPC. Nonlocal categorical rules, such as the "spup" constraint in German, or
vowel harmony in Finnish, do seem to elicit an LPC
(Domahs et al., 2009; Pitkanen, 2010). Because the
entire word must be evaluated in order for violations
of these rules to be observed, the early perceptual
repair processes that repair "tl/dl" are not available.
Instead, these structures are evaluated later in processing, and are found to violate the rule.
In this paper, we examined a probabilistic rule, which
was also nonlocal in nature. With any probabilistic generalisation, early perceptual repair is not an option, since
extant exceptions to the generalisation need to be veridically perceived. We might expect probabilistic rules
to behave like nonlocal generalisations, and be subject
to the same late evaluative process that yields an LPC.
However, we do not find an LPC in response to violations
of the probabilistic generalisation examined here. Rather,
the fact that real words like them exist must cause the
evaluation process to deem nonwords like "bmki"
acceptable. We do find that there is a cost to processing
violators of probabilistic rules, however. This cost stems
from the necessity of reconciling the exceptional form
against the grammatical representation of the more frequent pattern. We find the effects of this conflict in the
early stages of speech processing for a relatively detailed
pattern, which is pertinent to only a small subset of the
lexicon of English. This finding suggests that speakers'
knowledge of probabilistic patterns in the sound
pattern of their language is extremely detailed.

Notes
1. Whenever the first consonant is not nasal.
2. Consider long words such as "abracadabra", or "apotheosis". Words of this length can have a secondary stress on
the first syllable, but never a primary stress. "abracadabra" would not be a possible English word.
3. Many affixes in English affect stress placement - for
example, the affix "-ity" requires that stress be antepenultimate, as can be seen in the pair solemn solemnity.
4. Thanks to Adam Albright for sharing his implementation
of the GNM model.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

5. These mean ratings were roughly normally distributed
for the nonwords, but not for real words, whose ratings
were clustered at the high end of the scale.
6. Due to a coding error, six participants did hear some of
the nonwords exactly twice throughout the course of
the experiment.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks are due to Lyn Frazier and Joe Pater for contributions to the design of the experiment, as well as to Jason
Overfelt for recording the stimuli, and Austin Kopak, Hala
Hasan, Maggie Ugolini, Ching Tiv, Elkhansa Elguenaoui, and
Kevin Harrington for help collecting data. Thanks are also due
to members of the UMass Neurocognition and Perception lab
and Sound Seminar, audiences at the 22nd Manchester Phonology Meeting and LabPhon14, as well as two anonymous
reviewers for useful discussion and comments.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This research was supported in part by a UMass Graduate
School Dissertation Research Grant, in part by a UMass ICESL
seed grant, and in part by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship to the first author (grant
number NSF DGE-0907995).

References
Bailey, T. M., & Hahn, U. (2001). Determinants of wordlikeness:
Phonotactics or lexical neighborhoods? Journal of Memory
and Language, 44, 568-591.
Becker, M. (2009). Phonological trends in the lexicon: The role of
constraints (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Massachusetts Amherst.
Beckman, M. E. (1986). Stress and non-stress accent (Vol. 7).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Walter de Gruyter.
Berent, I., Lennertz, T., Smolensky, P., & Vaknin-Nusbaum, V.
(2009). Listeners' knowledge of phonological universals:
Evidence from nasal clusters. Phonology, 26, 75-108.
Bocker, K. B., Bastiaansen, M. C., Vroomen, J., Brunia, C. H., & B.
de Gelder (1999). An ERP correlate of metrical stress in
spoken word recognition. Psychophysiology, 36, 706-720.
Breen, M., Kingston, J., & Sanders, L. D. (2013). Perceptual representations of phonotactically illegal syllables. Attention,
Perception, and Psychophysics, 75(1), 101-120.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009, November). Moving beyond
Kuera and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved
word frequency measure for American English. Behavior
Research Methods, 41(4), 977-990.
Burzio, L (1994). Principles of English stress (Vol. 72). Melbourne,
Australia: Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N., & Halle, M (1968). The sound pattern of English.
New York: Harper and Row.

163

Coetzee, A. W., & Pater, J. (2009). The place of variation in phonological theory. In J. A. Goldsmith, J. Riggle, & A. C. Yu (Eds.),
Handbook of phonological theory (2nd ed., pp. 401-434).
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cutler, A., & Carter, D. M. (1987, September-December). The predominance of strong initial syllables in the English vocabulary. Computer Speech and Language, 2(3-4), 133-142.
Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Dupoux, E., & Gout, A. (2000).
Electrophysiological correlates of phonological processing:
A cross-linguistic study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
12(4), 635-647.
Domahs, U., Kehrein, W., Knaus, J., Wiese, R., & Schlesewsky, M.
(2009, December). Event-related potentials reflecting the
processing of phonological constraint violations. Language
and Speech, 52(4), 415-435.
Domahs, U., Plag, I., & Carroll, R. (2014). Word stress assignment
in German, English and Dutch: Quantity-sensitivity and extrametricality revisited. The Journal of Comparative Germanic
Linguistics, 17, 59-96.
Dupoux, E., Kakehi, K., Hirose, Y., Pallier, C., & Mehler, J. (1999).
Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: A perceptual illusion?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 25(6), 1568-1578.
Ernestus, M., & Baayen, R. H. (2003). Predicting the unpredictable: Interpreting neutralized segments in Dutch.
Language, 79(1), 5-38.
Gouvea, A. C., Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Poeppel, D. (2010). The
linguistic processes underlying the p600. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 25(2), 149-188.
Hayes, B., & Wilson, C. (2008). A maximum entropy model of
phonotactics and phonotactic learning. Linguistic Inquiry,
39, 379-440.
Hayes, B., Zuraw, K., Siptar, P., & Londe, Z. (2009, December).
Natural and unnatural constraints in Hungarian vowel
harmony. Language, 85(4), 822-863.
Hayes, B. P. (1980). A metrical theory of stress rules (Unpublished
doctoral
dissertation).
Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology.
Jarmulowicz, L. D. (2002). English derivational suffix frequency and
children's stress judgments. Brain and Language, 81, 192-204.
Jusczyk, P. W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N. J. (1993). Infants' preference for the predominant stress patterns of English words.
Child Development, 64(3), 675-687.
Kretzschmar, F., Schlesewsky, M., & Staub, A. (2015).
Dissociating word frequency and predictability effects in
reading: Evidence from co-registration of eye movements
and EEG. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 41(6), 1648-1662.
Massaro, D. W., & Cohen, M. M. (1983). Phonological context in
speech perception. Perception and Psychophysics, 34(4),
338-348.
Moore-Cantwell, C. (2016). The representation of probabilistic
phonological patterns: Neurological, behavioral, and computational evidence from the English stress system
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Massachusetts Amherst. Retrieved from http://www.
clairemoorecantwell.org/dissertation_CMC.pdf
Moore-Cantwell, C., & Pater, J. (2016). Gradient exceptionality in
maximum entropy grammar with lexically specific constraints. Catalan Journal of Linguistics, 15, 53-66. Retrieved
from http://revistes.uab.cat/catJL/article/view/v15-moorecantwell-pater/183-pdf-en

164

C. MOORE-CANTWELL AND L. SANDERS

Moreton, E. (2002). Structural constraints in the perception of
English stop-sonorant clusters. Cognition, 84, 55-71.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of Memory
and Language, 31, 785-806.
Patel, A. D., Gibson, E., Ratner, J., Besson, M., & Holcomb, P. J.
(1998). Processing syntactic relations in language and
music: An event related potential study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 717-733.
Pater, J. (2000). Non-uniformity in English secondary stress: The
role of ranked and lexically specific constraints. Phonology,
17(2), 237-274.
Pater, J. (2005). Learning a stratified grammar. In A. Brugos,
M. R. Clark-Cotton, and S. Ha (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th
Boston university conference on languega development
(pp. 482-492). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Pitkanen, I. (2010). Electrophysical investigations of second
language word learning, attrition, and bilingual processing
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Washington.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and information
processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124
(3), 372-422.
Reichle, E. D., Pollatsek, A., Fisher, D. L., & Rayner, K. (1998).
Toward a model of eye movement control in reading.
Psycholinguistic Review, 105, 125-157.

Rossi, S., Hartmuller, T., Vignotto, M., & Obrig, H. (2013).
Electrophysiological evidence for modulation of lexical processing after repetitive exposure to foreign phonotactic
rules. Brain and Language, 127, 404-414.
Rossi, S., Jurgenson, I. B., Hanulikova, A., Telkemeyer, S.,
Wartenburger, I., & Obrig, H. (2011). Implicit processing of
phonotactic cues: Evidence from electrophysiological and
vascular responses. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(7),
1752-1764.
Rugg, M. D. (1984). Event-related potentials and the phonological processing of words and non-words. Neuropsychologia,
22, 435-443.
Rugg, M. D., & Nagy, M. E. (1987). Lexical contribution to
nonword-repetition effects: Evidence from event related
potentials. Memory and Cognition, 15(6), 473-481.
Selkirk, E (1984). Syntax and phonology: The relation between
sound and structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tyler, A., & Nagy, W. (1989). The acquisition of English derivational morphology. Journal of Memory and Language, 28,
649-667.
Vaden, K., & Hickok, H. (n.d.). Irvine phonotactic online dictionary,
version 2.0. Retrieved from http://www.ipod.com.
Weide, R. L. (1994). CMU pronouncing dictionary. Retrieved from
http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict.
Zuraw, K. (2000). Patterned exceptions in phonology (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles.

