Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Are the effects of divided attention on memory encoding processes due to
the disruption of deep-level elaborative processes? Evidence from cued- and
free-recall tasks

T



Moshe Naveh-Benjamina, , Matthew S. Brubakerb
a
b

University of Missouri, USA
Springfield College, USA

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Memory
Divided attention
Cued and free recall
Deep-level elaborative strategies
Incidental-intentional learning

Whereas numerous studies have indicated that divided attention (DA) at encoding significantly disrupts later
memory for the studied information, the underlying mechanisms of this effect remain unclear. Following from
our recent investigation (Naveh-Benjamin, Guez, Hara, Brubaker, & Lowenschuss-Erlich, 2014) that used an item
recognition task, in the current study we further assess the degree to which deep-level semantically-elaborative
processes are affected under DA. We compared the effects of DA at encoding under incidental and intentional
learning instructions on later cued-recall and free recall tasks, which have been shown to benefit from deep-level
elaboration during encoding. The results of two experiments, in which participants studied word pairs or lists of
words under either full or divided attention, converged in systematically showing that DA at encoding reduced
cued-recall and free recall to the same degree under incidental and intentional learning. Furthermore, the
detrimental effects of DA on memory were similar regardless of the encoding strategy reported by the participants. The results do not support the suggestion that deep-level effortful elaborative processes are major ones
affected by DA and the role of other potential underlying processes is discussed.

Numerous studies have shown that compared to conditions in which
participants pay full attention to encoding the items, those in which
their attention is divided during encoding by a concurrent task lead to
poorer free recall, cued recall, and recognition memory performance
(e.g., Anderson, 2002; Baddeley, Lewis, Eldridge, & Thomson, 1984;
Craik, Eftekhari, & Binns, 2018; Craik, Govoni, Naveh-Benjamin, &
Anderson, 1996; Fernandes & Moscovitch, 2000; Murdock, 1965;
Naveh-Benjamin, Craik, Gavrilescu, & Anderson, 2000; NavehBenjamin, Craik, Guez, & Dori, 1998). Similarly, divided attention (DA)
at encoding has been shown to have similar effects on a variety of
memory features, including memory for temporal order information
(Naveh-Benjamin, 1990) and memory for spatial location (NavehBenjamin, 1987). In addition, the encoding of information causes a
reliable decrease in secondary task performance (e.g., Griffith, 1976;
Johnston, Greenberg, Fisher, & Martin, 1970; Johnston, Griffith, &
Wagstaff, 1972). These results have all been interpreted to mean that
memory encoding processes require attention.
One important aspect of current research on DA effects investigates
potential mechanisms that are interrupted during encoding under DA,
which cause subsequent memory declines. Several mechanisms have



been suggested as the locus of the interrupted encoding under DA,
though none of them have received conclusive empirical support.
According to the reduced resources/reduced processing time hypothesis, the observed decrease in memory performance under DA at encoding is caused by participants spending some of their time or attentional resources performing the concurrent secondary task, leaving less
attentional resources or time available for processing the relevant information. This suggestion has been tested in a series of studies conducted by Craik (1982) and by Naveh-Benjamin et al. (2000), with the
latter showing that the reduced memory performance as a result of DA
at encoding was only partially related to the reduced functional time
available for encoding. Similarly, using a shared time model analysis,
Craik et al. (1996) showed that the decrease in processing time during
encoding could explain only part of the deficit.
Another, and a more specific, suggestion regarding the mechanism
interrupted under DA at encoding that decreases memory performance
is related to a decrease in semantically elaborative effortful processing
(e.g., Hasher & Zacks, 1979). This suggestion assumes that participants,
who are engaged in performing the secondary task, do not have enough
resources left to use deep-level elaborative effortful processes to better

Corresponding author at: Dept. of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, 106 McAlester Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
E-mail address: NavehbenjaminM@missouri.edu (M. Naveh-Benjamin).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.02.007
Received 21 March 2018; Received in revised form 23 February 2019
Available online 13 March 2019
0749-596X/ (c) 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

tested was based on the premise that if deep-level semantically-elaborative processes were those mediating the detrimental effect on
memory of DA during encoding, then one way of reducing this DA effect
would be to provide instructions under which participants would not
need to resort to using deep-level elaborative processes. In this case, we
expected that DA would have either a reduced effect or no effect at all,
as there was no apparent reason for participants to employ effortful
elaborative processes under either full or DA conditions.
In each of the three experiments, half the participants listened to
lists of words under standard intentional learning instructions, wherein
they were instructed to try to learn the words for an upcoming memory
test. The other half listened to the words under incidental learning instructions for which a cover story suggested that we were interested in
measuring their physiological response to the words. For this purpose,
participants in both the intentional and incidental learning groups were
hooked up to electrodes. The incidental learning group did not receive
any indication of the upcoming memory test (see Block, 2009). In addition, the experiments varied the modality of presentation of the primary memory and of the concurrent secondary tasks (visual vs. auditory) during study, as well as the type of design (attention being
manipulated either between- or within-participants). Participants in
these experiments were presented with the words during encoding either under full attention (as the sole task), or under DA, where they
simultaneously performed a concurrent secondary task. At the end of
the study phase (after a short interpolated activity), all participants
received a recognition test on the words.
We expected that if DA at encoding reduced deep-elaborative effortful processing then we would observe larger effects of DA on
memory performance under intentional than under incidental learning
instructions. This is because in the latter condition participants who did
not expect the later memory task would therefore not employ elaborative effortful processes to encode the words. The results of all three
experiments, however, were not in line with this hypothesis. In particular, despite the fact that each of the experiments showed large detrimental effects of DA at encoding on later memory performance, replicating previous results, and despite the fact that all the experiments
showed a large effect of learning type, whereby intentional learning
instructions produced significantly better memory of information than
did incidental ones, each of the experiments showed statistically
equivalent declines in memory recognition performance under DA
(relative to full attention) at encoding for both learning instructions
groups. Such results are different from what one would expect if DA
interrupted only deep-level semantically-elaborative processes. These
results were generalizable as they were obtained under both immediate
and delayed recognition, with either single words or word pairs, and
with both visual and auditory secondary tasks.
Although the above results by Naveh-Benjamin et al. (2014) seem
not to support the hypothesis that DA at encoding interrupts semantically-elaborative processes, before reaching such a conclusion there is
one important factor that should be considered. In particular, the recognition test used in all 3 experiments by Naveh-Benjamin et al.
(2014) is one that is highly dependent on familiarity rather than recollection, and the former may not be affected much by DA during
encoding. Specifically, there is empirical evidence that DA at encoding
does not affect familiarity much, which makes a major contribution to
recognition memory (e.g., Jennings & Jacoby, 1993), but has a systematic effect on recollection, which is based on information the encoding of which is enhanced by deep-elaborative processing. As such, it
seems that in order to assess whether DA at encoding interrupts effortful strategic processes, there is a need to extend the memory tasks
used to those requiring more recollection-type processes. We did so in
the currently reported experiments by assessing the effects of incidental
and intentional learning under full attention and DA at encoding while
using cued recall (Experiment 1) or free recall (Experiment 2) tasks.
Such tasks are known to be affected by deep-level elaborative processes
during encoding, including the use of an associative strategy to relate

encode the relevant information. This suggestion is based on the notion
of limited attentional resources, which states that with fewer resources
available for encoding, participants cannot fully engage in semantically
elaborative effortful encoding processing (or in other types of deeplevel cognitive processing) of relevant information, resulting in poorer
memory performance. This hypothesis predicts that those aspects of
encoding that do not require deep-level semantic effortful processes
would be much less affected by DA.
This decreased deep-semantic elaboration hypothesis has received
some empirical support from several studies that have manipulated the
difficulty of the secondary task at encoding. For example, NavehBenjamin et al. (2000) manipulated the number of choices in a continuous choice reaction-time (CRT) task, showing that the difficulty of
the secondary task at encoding affects memory performance. The rationale behind these studies was that the condition with the larger
number of choices required greater attentional resources, leaving fewer
available for semantically elaborative processing of the encoded words.
In addition, Anderson and Craik (1974) showed that the difficulty of a
secondary reaction-time task (and thus the amount of processing capacity required to carry it out) is inversely related to later memory
performance.
However, the above results provide only indirect evidence for the
reduced deep-level semantically-elaborative processes hypothesis, as
they do not reflect the direct measurement or manipulation of underlying processes, but rather only assume that as attentional resources
available for encoding decline, the probability that elaborative encoding processes will later be used will likewise decline. Several other
lines of research also provide somewhat indirect evidence in support of
reduced semantically-elaborative processes as the cause of the effects of
DA at encoding on later memory performance. For example, some
studies have looked at the effects of DA at encoding on the level of
processing used by the participants. Results reported by Craik and Byrd
(1982) and Rabinowitz, Craik, and Ackerman (1982) showed that
under DA at encoding, participants use shallower and less semantic
processes to encode the information. In addition, Naveh-Benjamin et al.
(2000) reported results indicating that as emphasis shifted from the
memory task to the concurrent task, the observed recall levels departed
progressively from the values predicted by the deep levels of processing
calibration function. This provides support for the claim that DA at
encoding changes the nature of encoding such that it becomes less semantic in nature. Lastly, studies using neuroimaging techniques have
indicated that DA at encoding reduces encoding-related brain activity
in the left inferior prefrontal cortex, an area shown in other studies to
be associated with semantic processing (e.g., Anderson et al., 2000;
Kapur et al., 1994; Shallice et al., 1994).
In contrast, other studies do not support the hypothesis that DA at
encoding interrupts the deep-level elaborative processes necessary for
an adequate encoding of incoming information. For example, Craik and
Kester (2000) reported results indicating that an increase in the rated
degree of elaboration during encoding was related to an improved
memory performance. However, this happened to the same degree
under both full- and divided-attention conditions during encoding, with
memory performance for the DA condition being substantially lower
than the full attention condition at every level of elaboration. Hence,
for the same degree of deep-level semantic elaboration, fewer words
were recalled after being encoded under DA conditions. The implication
is that there is a different mechanism at play apart from or in addition
to the amount of elaboration that underlies the effects of DA at encoding on later memory performance.
In a recent article (Naveh-Benjamin, Guez, Hara, Brubaker, &
Loewenschuss-Erlich, 2014) we assessed the degree to which the detrimental effects of DA at encoding may be exclusively due to an interruption of semantically elaborative encoding processes. To do so, we
carried out three experiments in which we evaluated the degree to
which the type of instructions given to the participants modulated the
effects of DA at encoding on later memory performance. The hypothesis
109

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

reverse. The cued-recall test was given after the 4th list was presented.
The continuous auditory CRT task required responses to a random
series of three different pitches of tones. Each tone sounded for
200 msec, immediately after a response was made to the previous tone.
The sounds were played through headphones and responses were made
by pressing one of three adjacent keys on a keyboard, which were labeled "L", "M", and "H", corresponding to the low-, medium-, and highpitched tones (with respective frequencies of 200, 800, and 1000 hz)
that were equated for loudness. The goal was to carry out the task as
quickly and accurately as possible.

the words within each pair (for example via the creation of a sentence
or a mental image relating the two), which can then help in increasing
performance accuracy via recollection in a cued-recall task (e.g.,
Naveh-Benjamin, 2000). Likewise, using similar strategies to relate a
list of single words during study can then help in improving memory
accuracy in a free recall task (e.g., Tulving, 1968). If DA disrupts such
deep-elaborative processing, then one would expect that its effect (relative to performance under a full attention condition during encoding)
would be much larger under intentional than under incidental learning
instructions, as in the latter case participants would not be expecting a
memory test and would use less elaborative strategies.
In the two reported studies we employed a dual-task paradigm with
the following features. First, we used well-understood memory paradigms in which encoding and retrieval phases could be clearly separated. To avoid modality-specific interference, we presented the
memory lists via one modality (visual) while the concurrent task employed the other modality (auditory) and manual responses. As performance did not reach ceiling on either task performed alone, we
argue that each task required full attention. When performed together,
the tasks allowed for assessment of performance throughout the dualtask interval. To increase the converging validity of the results, each of
the experiments used a different test with the first one using a cuedrecall task and the second a free recall one. Finally, in both experiments
we manipulated the learning instructions (intentional vs. incidental).

Procedure
Thirty-nine and forty-three participants were randomly assigned to
the intentional and the incidental learning instructions conditions, respectively. Each of the 4 study lists contained 10 word pairs presented
visually in black font size 24 on a white background at a rate of one pair
every 6 s. The first and last pairs from each list were used as primacy
and recency buffers, respectively. To ensure a reasonable level of performance, the remaining eight word pairs in each of the lists were
presented twice in a spaced manner (for a total of 18 presentations per
list). Participants in the group tested under incidental learning instructions were told before the study phase that we were interested in
their physiological response to the words. To substantiate the story,
they were connected to four separate electrodes hooked to a monitor
that was seen only by the experimenter. Nothing was mentioned to
them about the upcoming cued-recall memory test. Participants in the
intentional learning instruction group were told, in addition, to pay
attention to the word pairs and encode them in preparation for a cuedrecall test.
Two of the lists were studied under full attention and the other two
under DA at encoding. The order of the attention conditions was
counterbalanced and the words were rotated through the four lists
across participants. During the two lists presented under full attention,
only the words appeared (visually). During the two lists presented
under the DA condition, participants performed the continuous auditory CRT task throughout the study phase simultaneously with the visual appearance of the word pairs. In the DA condition, participants
were told to pay equal attention to encoding of the word pairs and to
the CRT task. Finally, the secondary auditory task was performed alone
for 78 s twice as baseline, after the first and the third lists in order to
equate it to the DA trials in terms of practice/fatigue effects.
After the presentation of all four lists, a retention interval of 60 s
was used in which instructions regarding the upcoming test procedure
were provided before the cued-recall test began. In this test participants
were given as a cue the first word (A) of eight A-B pairs that appeared
during the study phase of each of the four lists (32 total), and instructed
to provide the appropriate B item that appeared during the study phase
with the given A item. To ensure performance was above floor, the first
two letters from each B item were also given in addition to the cue word
(A). The order of the presentation of the cues during the test was randomized.
The employed secondary task procedure allowed the calculation of
an overall measure of attentional resources devoted to encoding, assessed by the difference in performance on the secondary task when
performed during encoding and alone in the baseline condition. This
further allows an assessment of the potential differences in attentional
costs under incidental and intentional learning instructions, reflecting
the amount of effort or processing resources devoted to encoding under
different learning instructions (see Naveh-Benjamin et al., 1998; NavehBenjamin, Guez, & Sorek, 2007). Participants ended the experiment
with a post-test questionnaire about whether they had expected the
memory test. In addition, each participant was asked whether they had
used any strategies during the encoding of the lists, and if so, what
those were. The research reported in this manuscript was approved by
the Institutional Research Board of the University of Missouri.

Experiment 1
In this experiment participants encoded pairs of words presented
visually under either full attention or DA. After a short interpolated
activity, they were tested for their memory on the words using a cuedrecall test. The concurrent task was a continuous auditory choice reaction time (CRT) task reported in previous studies (Craik et al., 1996;
Naveh-Benjamin & Guez, 2000; Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2000, 1998,
2014), in which each participant's response immediately caused the
next tone to appear.
Method
Participants
The participants were 82 University of Missouri undergraduates,
who took part in the experiment for course credit. Sample size in this
experiment and in Experiment 2 was based on a similar number of
participants tested in our related 2014 manuscript (Naveh-Benjamin
et al., 2014), which used a similar design, as the variability in the
current studies was similar to the one obtained in these previous studies. This allowed for enough statistical power (0.8) to detect a medium
size interaction effect.
Design
Two independent variables were used: attention (full attention or
DA at encoding), manipulated within subjects, and learning instructions
(intentional or incidental learning), manipulated between subjects. The
dependent variable was the proportion of correct responses in the cuedrecall test.
Stimuli
The words used were one- or two-syllable concrete common English
nouns with mean word frequency for cues and targets being 1184, using
Brysbaert and New (2009) norms. Forty word pairs were randomly
assigned, 10 to each of 4 study lists. The words within each pair were
not related to each other semantically or in any other obvious way, with
mean forward and backward associative strength being virtually 0.0,
and mean Latent Semantic Analysis for the pairs (Landauer, Foltz, &
Laham, 1998), of 0.0673. The order of the study lists was counterbalanced, whereby half of the participants studied lists 1 and 2 under
full attention and lists 3 and 4 under DA, and the other half did the
110

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

Fig. 1. Proportion of correct responses (+SEs) in the cued-recall task for each attention condition, as a function of the type of learning at encoding (incidental vs.
intentional) in Experiment 1: (A) The whole sample. (B) Those participants who scored above the median performance level in each of the conditions.

Results

It should be noted that the lack of an interaction was not due to the
relatively low performance under DA conditions. In particular, the
lowest performance (M = 0.11), which was recorded under DA in the
incidental learning instructions, was still significantly higher than 0.0
(p < .05). If at all, in this incidental learning condition, the differences
between full attention and DA conditions could have been larger if
performance had been somewhat higher. This is opposite to what would
be expected based on the effortful strategic processing hypothesis, that
in this incidental learning condition, the differences between full attention and DA should have been smaller than under intentional
learning instructions. Nevertheless, to assure that low performance
under DA did not conceal a potential interaction of learning and attention conditions, we carried out an additional analysis in which we
used only those participants who scored above the median performance
level in each of the conditions (see Fig. 1B). This analysis revealed the
exact same patterns, wherein the interaction effect was not significant
[F(1,32) = 0.19, MSE = 0.02, p = .67, p2 = 0.006] (though the reduced statistical power to detect a significant interaction with the
smaller sample used should be noted), reflecting the fact that the

Memory performance
Three participants in the intentional learning instructions condition,
as well as five participants in the incidental learning instructions condition, were eliminated from the analysis due to software malfunctioning during the experiment, resulting in 36 and 38 participants
in the intentional and incidental conditions, respectively. Measures of
the proportion of correct responses were computed for each participant
and then averaged over each group (see Fig. 1A). Since an initial analysis with order of attention conditions as a variable indicated neither
an effect of order nor a triple interaction of order, attention, and instructions, all the follow-up analyses are reported collapsed across
order. A 2 x 2 (attention-full vs. divided x type of learning-intentional
vs. incidental) ANOVA indicated a significant effect of attention [F
(1,72) = 119.515, MSE = 0.025, p < .01, p2 = 0.62], with memory
performance under the full attention condition (M = 0.43) being higher
than under the DA condition (M = 0.16). The effect of type of learning
was also significant [F(1,72) = 8.87, MSE = 0.06, p < .01,
p2 = 0.11] with performance in the intentional learning condition
(M = 0.36) being higher than in the incidental learning condition
(M = 0.23). More importantly, the interaction of the two variables was
not significant [F(1,72) = 0.77, MSE = 0.025, p = .38, p2 = 0.01].
This reflects the fact that the decline in performance in the DA
(M = 0.11) relative to the full attention condition (M = 0.37) under
incidental learning was identical to the decline under intentional
learning (M = 0.21 and 0.51 for the DA and the Full attention conditions, respectively).1

(footnote continued)
causes the memory decline relative to the full attention condition. Such a
concern, according to the reviewer, could potentially undermine the logic of the
reported experiments with respect to whether divided attention hurts memory
by interfering with the pool of attentional resources required for deep-level
elaboration during encoding. To assess this issue, we ran a small-scale experiment similar to the current one, except that the word pairs were presented only
once during study. Forty participants, 20 in each of the learning instruction
conditions, were tested, with the secondary tone task appearing in the full attention condition, too, but without asking participants to respond to it under
the full attention condition. Although performance under full attention now
was somewhat lower than that under full attention in the main experiment
(potentially due to the use of only one presentation per pair without repetition),
the results of this experiment replicated the exact pattern reported in the main
experiment-that is, there was no interaction between learning instructions and
attention, with divided attention affecting cued-recall performance equally
under incidental and intentional learning instructions.

1
As pointed out by one of the reviewers, although the standard procedure for
implementing a manipulation of divided attention involves the comparison of a
full attention condition (in which only the primary memory task occurs during
encoding) to a divided attention condition (in which during encoding both the
memory and the concurrent secondary task appear), such a procedure might
raise a concern in the current context. That is, it may not be as clear whether
attending to the concurrent task in such a procedure is the cause of the reduced
memory performance, or is it just the appearance of the concurrent tones which

111

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

appeared in the post-experimental questionnaire, which asked them to
specify the strategy they had used to encode the words. For those who
responded to this question (68 of 74), we used the following coding to
assess the strategies used: "1" was assigned if no strategy use was reported. "2" was assigned if a low-shallow level strategy was reported
(for example, repetition-rehearsal, thinking about the sound of the
words, paying attention to the first letter of each word). "3" was assigned if a high-deep level elaborative strategy was reported (for example, thinking of associations to the words, creation of sentences
based on the word pairs, or the creation of interactive mental images).
A t-test comparing the mean strategy used showed a significant higherlevel strategy use in the intentional (M = 2.60, SD = 0.56) over the
incidental learning condition (M = 1.92, S.D. = 0.78), t(66) = 3.99,
p < .01. These results are consistent with the assertion that intentional
learning instructions induce the use of deep-level elaborative strategies
significantly more often than incidental learning instructions.
Because 10 of the 38 participants in the incidental learning condition indicated in the post-experimental questionnaire the use of a high
level deep strategy during the encoding of the words (potentially due to
the cover story inducing semantic processing of the words, or to the
name of the laboratory including the word "memory"), we decided to
look at whether the reported strategies by the participants were directly
related to their memory performance, and more importantly to the effects of divided attention on memory. To do so, we combined the data
for those participants who reported using no strategies with those who
reported the use of low-shallow level strategy (as the number of participants reporting the former was relatively small) and compared it
with the data of those participants who reported using deep-level elaborative strategies. The resulting 2 x 2 analysis (see Fig. 2A), which
involved assessing the effects of strategy type (shallow-low vs. deepelaborative) and attention (full attention vs. DA) on cued-recall performance, indicated a significant effect of attention [F(1,66) = 101.65,
MSE = 0.025, p < .01, p2 = 0.60], with memory performance under
the full attention condition (M = 0.44) being higher than under the DA
condition (M = 0.16). Furthermore, the effect of type of strategy was
also significant [F(1,66) = 24.07, MSE = 0.05, p < .01, p2 = 0.27]
with performance of the deep-level elaborative strategy participants
(M = 0.40) being higher than that of the low-shallow level strategy
participants (M = 0.20).

Table 1
Choice Reaction Time (CRT) in msec with standard deviations in parenthesis for
the secondary tone task under baseline and divided attention conditions, as well
as the attentional costs (divided attention minus baseline) for each of the
learning instruction conditions in Experiments 1 and 2.
Baseline

Divided attention

Attentional costs

Ex. 1 Cued recall
Incidental
Intentional

315 (97)
292 (104)

410 (159)
435 (159)

95 (105)
143 (148)

Ex. 2 Free recall
Incidental
Intentional

299 (99)
355 (124)

451 (206)
721 (286)

153 (149)
367 (226)

decline in performance in the DA (M = 0.18) relative to the full attention condition (M = 0.57) under incidental learning was identical to
the decline under intentional learning (M = 0.32 and 0.75 for the DA
and the full attention conditions, respectively). Because of the importance of this null interaction for the theoretical conclusions, a
Bayesian analysis assessing this null effect, which combined the results
of both experiments, is reported in the results section of Experiment 2.
Secondary task performance
To assess the attentional costs associated with encoding under incidental and intentional learning instructions, we measured secondary
task costs for each condition as the difference between reaction times
(RTs) for the secondary task when performed under DA minus average
RTs for the secondary task when performed alone (as a baseline) - see
Table 1 for baseline, DA, and secondary task costs. Comparison of these
attentional costs indicated significantly larger attentional costs under
intentional (M = 143 msec, SD = 108 msec) than under incidental
learning conditions (M = 95 msec, SD = 105), t(72) = 1.98, p < .05.
Interestingly, in both learning conditions the attentional costs during
encoding were significantly greater than 0 (t(35) = 7.97, and t
(37) = 5.54, both p's < .01, for intentional and incidental learning,
respectively).
Reported strategies
We used participants' responses to one of the questions that

A Experiment 1

B Experiment 2

1

1
Shallow-level
processing

0.9
0.8

Deep-level
processing

0.7
WZZZZ

WZZZZ

0.8

Deep-level
processing

0.7

Shallow-level
processing

0.9

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
Full

n

Full

DA at encoding

n

DA at encoding

Fig. 2. Proportion of correct responses (+SEs) for each attention condition, as a function of the strategy-type of processing at encoding (shallow vs. deep-elaborative)
reported by the participants: (A) In Experiment 1. (B) In Experiment 2.
112

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

cognitive resources, as there was a significant attentional cost for the
secondary CRT task for this group.
Finally, the responses to the posttest questionnaire indicated that
intentional learning instructions induce the use of effortful strategies
significantly more often than incidental learning instructions.
Furthermore, an analysis of the effects of participants' reported strategy
on memory performance showed no interaction between strategy and
attention. In particular, those participants reporting the use of deeplevel elaborative strategies were affected to the same degree by divided
attention as those participants that reported the use of shallow-level
strategies, providing further support for the hypothesis that deep-level
elaborative processing is not the one that is affected by divided attention.

More importantly, the interaction of strategy type and attention was
not significant [F(1,66) = 1.32, MSE = 0.025, p = .26, p2 = 0.02].
This reflects the fact that the decline in performance in the DA
(M = 0.25) relative to the full attention condition (M = 0.55) for participants reporting deep level elaborative strategy was similar to the
decline for those participants reporting low-shallow level strategy
(M = 0.33 and 0.08 for the DA and the full attention conditions, respectively).2
Discussion
The results of this experiment show the expected large effects of
both intention to learn enhancing and DA at encoding impairing
memory performance. The most important result was the lack of an
interaction between these two effects. Specifically, the effect of DA on
memory accuracy was as large in the incidental as in the intentional
learning condition despite the fact that in the former condition less
deep-level elaborative strategic processing was used, as participants did
not expect to be tested. If deep-level elaborative processes were the
ones mostly affected by DA at encoding, then under intentional learning
instructions participants' use of such processes to maximize their
memory performance would be disrupted by DA at encoding more than
when participants did not try to use these processes under incidental
learning instructions. We would expect that this would be the case
especially if the memory test used here - cued recall - was one that had
been shown to involve recollection processes known to be significantly
affected by effortful strategic processes during encoding. The obtained
results are in line with the suggestion that DA at encoding may affect
other types of processing, rather than only those associated with effortful strategic ones. It should be noted that the performance advantage in the full attention condition over that in the DA condition is
not due to a transfer appropriate processing notion. That is, it could be
that performance was better in the full attention condition over the DAat-encoding condition because in the former condition the same context
was reinstated during test (which was performed under full attention),
whereas in the DA-at-encoding condition it was not reinstated, because
encoding-but not the retrieval context-included a secondary task.
However, previous empirical evidence has indicated that performance
under DA at encoding is significantly lower than that under full attention, despite the context being similar at encoding and at retrieval
(e.g., Craik et al., 1996). Furthermore, such a transfer appropriate
processing notion does not provide any specific predictions regarding
the interaction effect.
Performance on the concurrent auditory CRT task indicated that
incidental and intentional learning differ with respect to the attentional
resources devoted to each (after subtracting baseline performance when
only secondary task performance is assessed). The larger attentional
costs for the secondary CRT task observed under intentional learning
instructions suggest that participants seem to summon attentional/
cognitive resources in order to encode the words for the later cuedrecall memory test, above and beyond paying attention to them in an
incidental manner. In addition, it was still the case that paying attention
to the presented words even without any intention to commit them to
memory (under an incidental learning condition) does demand

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was intended to extend the results of Experiment 1
using a free recall task that involves recollection. This task is known to
be affected by effortful strategic processes, as such processes help in
relating the presented events to each other, as well as to their original
presentation context (e.g., Dobbins, Kroll, Yonelinas, & Liu, 1998;
Tulving, 1968). As in Experiment 1, we manipulated the amount of
attention (full attention vs. DA) at encoding, as well as the type of
learning (incidental vs. intentional). We used two lists of 12 single
words each, with an auditory secondary CRT task, similar to the one
used in Experiment 1. Finally, instead of a cued-recall task used in
Experiment 1, a free recall test was used, in which participants were
asked to try to remember as many of the words that had appeared in the
two lists as possible, in any order that they wished.
Method
Participants
The participants were 85 University of Missouri undergraduates,
who took part in the experiment for course credit. None of them took
part in Experiment 1.
Design
The design was identical to the one used in Experiment 1.
Stimuli
Twenty-four single one- or two-syllable concrete common English
nouns were taken from the pool of words used in Experiment 1, with
half of them randomly assigned to each of the two study phase lists. The
words within each list were not related to each other semantically or in
any other obvious way. The order of the study lists was counterbalanced, and half of the participants studied list 1 under full attention
and list 2 under DA, whereas the other half did the reverse. The secondary task was the same CRT auditory one used in Experiment 1.
Procedure
Forty-three and forty-two participants were randomly assigned to
the intentional and incidental learning instructions conditions, respectively. Each of the two visually presented study lists of 12 words was
presented at a rate of one word every 6 s. To ensure a reasonable level
of performance, each word in each of the lists was presented twice in a
spaced manner (24 presentations per list with no primacy or recency
buffers). The learning instructions (incidental and intentional) were
similar to those used in Experiment 1. Each participant studied one list
under full attention and one list under DA at encoding (with the same
secondary CRT task used in Experiment 1), and the order of the attention conditions was counterbalanced across lists. In addition, the
secondary task was performed alone as baseline twice, once before the
first list and once after the second list. After the presentation of the
second list (and the second CRT baseline task), participants received
instructions regarding the free recall memory test in which they were

2
To assess the attentional costs associated with encoding for participants that
reported employing different strategies, we assessed secondary task costs for
each strategy level as the difference between reaction times (RTs) for the secondary task when performed under DA minus average RTs for the secondary
task when performed alone (as a baseline). Comparison of these attentional
costs indicated significantly larger attentional costs for those who reported the
use of deep level elaborative strategy (M = 167 msec, SD = 132 msec) than for
those who reported the use of low-shallow level strategy (M = 82 msec,
SD = 75), t(66) = 3.36, p < .01. For both strategy groups the attentional costs
during encoding were significantly greater than 0 (t(26) = 6.57, and t
(40) = 7.00, both p's < .01, for deep and shallow level strategy, respectively).

113

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

Fig. 3. Proportion of correct responses (+SEs) in the free recall task for each attention condition, as a function of the type of learning at encoding (incidental vs.
intentional) in Experiment 2: (A) The whole sample. (B) Those participants who scored above the median performance level in each of the conditions.

learning and attention conditions, we carried out an additional analysis,
in which we used only those participants who scored above the median
performance level in each of the conditions (see Fig. 3B). This analysis
revealed the exact same patterns, where the interaction effect was not
significant [F(1,45) = 0.08, MSE = 0.03, p = .78, p2 = 0.002], reflecting the fact that the decline in performance in the DA (M = 0.16)
relative to the full attention condition (M = 0.64) under incidental
learning was virtually identical to the decline under the intentional
learning condition (M = 0.28 and 0.75 for the DA and the full attention
conditions, respectively).
It is clear that the lack of interaction of learning instructions and
divided attention in these experiments is not due to a lack of statistical
power, as each of the experiments used a large sample of participants
(74 and 85, in Experiments 1 and 2, respectively), and in addition, the
resulting F values of the interactions in both experiments were of less
than 1.0, with negligible effects sizes.
Nevertheless, to increase the statistical power of the analyses, we
combined the results of the two experiments. The resulting analysis
replicated the two main effects (learning instructions, [F
(1,157) = 16.38, MSE = 0.06, p < .01, p2 = 0.10], and divided attention, [F(1,157) = 330.65, MSE = 0.03, p < .001, p2 = 0.67]).
Importantly, as shown in each of the 2 experiments, the effect of the
interaction for the combined sample was not significant, [F
(1,157) = 0.48, MSE = 0.03, p = .49, p2 = 0.003], with a negligible
effect size. To ensure that the null effect for the interaction is reliable,
we ran a Bayesian analysis in which we compared the main effects
model (Instructions + attention condition) to the full model with the
main effects and interaction. The analysis yielded a Bayes' factor of 4.62
(4.720e+43/1.022e+43) against the interaction effect; that is, the data
are more than 4 times more likely under the main effects model than
they are under the full model with the interaction. These Bayes' factors
use the default priors described by Rouder, Morey, Speckman, and
Province (2012).

asked to try to recall as many of the 24 words presented during the
study phase of both lists. As in Experiment 1, participants ended with a
post-test questionnaire that included questions about whether they had
expected the memory test and whether they had used any specific
strategies during the study phase.

Results
Memory performance
As in Experiment 1, measures of the proportion of correct responses
were computed for each participant and then averaged over each group
(see Fig. 3A). Since an initial analysis with order of attention conditions
as a variable indicated neither an effect of order nor a triple interaction
of order, attention, and instructions, all the follow-up analyses reported
collapse across order. A 2 x 2 (attention - full vs. divided x type of
learning - intentional vs. incidental) ANOVA indicated a significant
effect of attention [F(1,83) = 235.93, MSE = 0.03, p < .001,
p2 = 0.74], with memory performance in the full attention condition
(M = 0.57) being better than in the DA condition (M = 0.15). The effect of type of learning was also significant [F(1,83) = 7.53,
MSE = 0.049, p < .001, p2 = 0.08] with performance in the intentional learning condition (M = 0.41) being better than in the incidental
learning condition (M = 0.31). More importantly, the interaction of the
two variables was not significant [F(1,83) = 0.01, MSE = 0.03,
p = .91, p2 = 0.0001]. This reflects the fact that the decline in performance in the DA (M = 0.11) relative to the full attention condition
(M = 0.52) under incidental learning was identical to the decline under
the intentional learning condition (M = 0.20 and 0.61 for the DA and
the full attention conditions, respectively).
As in Experiment 1, it should be noted that the lack of interaction is
not due to the relatively low performance under DA conditions. In
particular, the lowest performance (M = 0.11), which was recorded
under DA in the incidental learning instructions, was still significantly
higher than 0.0 (p < .05). Also, a higher performance level could have
provided for a larger difference between the full attention and the DA
conditions in the incidental learning group. To ensure that low performance under DA did not hide a potential interaction effect of

Secondary task performance
As in Experiment 1, we assessed attentional costs for each condition
as the difference between RTs for the secondary task when performed
114

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

under DA minus the average RTs for the secondary task when performed alone (as a baseline) - see Table 1. Comparison of these attentional costs indicated significantly larger attentional costs under
intentional (M = 367 msec, SD = 226 msec) than under incidental
learning conditions (M = 153 msec, SD = 149), t(83) = 5.13, p < .01.
In addition, the mean RTs for the CRT task performance in the incidental learning condition and in the intentional learning condition
were both significantly slower than in the baseline condition, t
(41) = 6.63, and t(42) = 10.60, respectively, p < .001 in both cases.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 are in line with those reported in
Experiment 1, showing significant effects of both intention to learn and
divided attention at encoding on later free recall performance. More
importantly, the results reveal that divided attention at encoding disrupts free recall memory performance (which is mediated to a large
degree by recollection) to the same degree when encoding is done
under incidental and intentional learning. Considering the fact that
under incidental learning less effortful strategic processes are used,
these results are in line with the suggestion that divided attention at
encoding may also disrupt processes other than those involved in
strategic processing of the information.
Similar to Experiment 1, performance on the secondary CRT task
indicated that incidental and intentional learning differ with respect to
the attentional resources devoted to each. The larger attentional costs
for the secondary CRT task obtained under intentional learning instructions indicate that participants seem to mobilize attentional/cognitive resources in an effort to encode the words for the later free recall
memory test, and not only to pay attention to them in an incidental
manner. Paying attention to the presented words even without any
intention to commit them to memory (as was the case in the incidental
learning condition) also requires cognitive resources as there was a
significant attentional cost for this group.
Finally, as in Experiment 1, the responses in the posttest questionnaire regarding the strategy employed during encoding supported
the assumption that intentional learning instructions induce the use of
effortful strategies significantly more often than incidental learning
instructions. Furthermore, an analysis of the effects of participants'
reported strategy on memory performance showed, as in Experiment 1,
no interaction between strategy and attention, providing further support to the hypothesis that deep-level elaborative processing is not the
one that is affected by divided attention

Reported strategies
As in Experiment 1, we looked at participants' responses to the
question in the posttest questionnaire that asked participants to specify
the strategy they had used to encode the words. We coded these strategies in the same way as in Experiment 1, with "1" assigned if no
strategy was used, "2" if low-level strategy was used, and "3" if high
level strategy was used. A t-test comparing the mean strategy used
showed a significant higher-level strategy use in the intentional
(M = 2.39, SD = 0.54) over the incidental learning condition
(M = 1.98, S.D. = 0.72), t(83) = 3.05, p < .05. Such results are consistent with the assertion that intentional learning instructions induce
the use of effortful strategies significantly more often than incidental
learning instructions.
Because, as happened in Experiment 1, several participants (11 of
the 42) in the incidental learning condition indicated in the post-experimental questionnaire the use of a high level deep strategy during
the encoding of the words, we examined in this experiment, as well,
whether the reported strategies by the participants were directly related
to their memory performance, and to the effects of divided attention on
memory. As in Experiment 1, we combined the data for those who reported using no strategies with those who reported low-shallow level
strategy (as the number of participants reporting the former was relatively small) and compared it with the data of those who reported using
deep-level elaborative strategies). The resulting 2 x 2 analysis (see
Fig. 2B), which involved assessing the effects of strategy type (shallowlow vs. deep-elaborative) and attention (full attention vs. DA) on cuedrecall performance, indicated a significant effect of attention [F
(1,83) = 206.15, MSE = 0.03, p < .01, p2 = 0.71], with memory
performance under the full attention condition (M = 0.59) being higher
than under the DA condition (M = 0.17). Furthermore, the effect of
type of strategy was also significant [F(1,83) = 10.10, MSE = 0.05,
p < .01, p2 = 0.11] with performance of the deep-level elaborative
strategy participants (M = 0.44) being higher than that of the lowshallow level strategy participants (M = 0.32).
More importantly, replicating the results of Experiment 1, the interaction of strategy type and attention was not significant [F
(1,83) = 0.006, MSE = 0.03, p = .80, p2 = 0.001]. This reflects the
fact that the decline in performance in the DA (M = 0.23) relative to
the full attention condition (M = 0.64) for participants reporting deep
level elaborative strategy was similar (with a pattern of being even
smaller) to the decline for those participants reporting low-shallow
level strategy (M = 0.11 and 0.53 for the DA and the Full attention
conditions, respectively).3

General discussion
The experiments reported here were intended to shed further light
on the mechanisms underlying disrupted memory performance under
divided attention at encoding. In particular, previous research (i.e.,
Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2014) indicated that recognition memory performance under DA at encoding is interrupted to the same degree under
incidental and intentional learning instructions. Such results were taken
to support the claim that DA at encoding does not disrupt effortful deep
semantic processes. If this were the case we would have expected
memory performance to be interrupted more under intentional
learning, in which effortful deep semantic processes are utilized, than
under incidental learning, wherein participants do not utilize such
strategic processes. However, the memory task used in these earlier
studies, which involved a recognition procedure, may not have been
ideal for assessing the question regarding the involvement of deepelaborative processes. This may be because deep-elaborative processing
during encoding does not enhance familiarity, which is the primary
mediator of recognition memory.
Hence, in order to increase the potential role of strategic processes
during encoding, in the current experiments we used cued recall and
free recall memory tests because they reflect to a larger degree the
involvement of recollection, which is based on information at encoding
that is enhanced by deep-elaborative processing. We tested participants
with either incidental or intentional learning instructions under full
attention or under DA at encoding. The reported results replicate those
in the literature (e.g., Craik et al., 1996), showing that DA at encoding
disrupts later memory performance. In addition, the results indicate a
clear effect of the type of learning, in that intentional learning instructions led to better memory than did incidental instructions. Importantly, in both experiments, DA at encoding reduced later cued-recall and free recall performance to the same degree under both types of

3
To assess the attentional costs associated with encoding for participants that
reported employing different strategies, we assessed secondary task costs for
each strategy level as the difference between reaction times (RTs) for the secondary task when performed under DA minus average RTs for the secondary
task when performed alone (as a baseline). Comparison of these attentional
costs indicated marginally significant larger attentional costs for those who
reported the use of deep level elaborative strategy (M = 323 msec,
SD = 214 msec) than for those who reported the use of low-shallow level
strategy (M = 230 msec, SD = 217), t(83) = 1.85, p = .06. For both strategy
groups the attentional costs during encoding were significantly greater than 0 (t
(27) = 7.95, and t(56) = 8.01, both p's < .01, for deep and shallow level
strategy, respectively).

115

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

Potential mechanisms underlying the effects of DA at encoding

learning instructions, relative to full attention conditions. This pattern
of results is different from what we might have expected if DA interrupted only effortful strategic or deep semantic processes. In that case
we would have expected performance under DA to be disrupted more
under intentional learning instructions than under incidental learning
instructions, because under incidental learning most participants are
less likely to employ deep-elaborative processes as they encode the
information. Such results are in line and extend our previous results
(e.g., Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2014), which seem to suggest that DA at
encoding also affects other types of processes than those associated with
effortful strategic ones. In addition, the current results were obtained
with the use of either word pairs or single words.
One point should be made regarding the manipulation of intention
to learn employed in the current experiments. This manipulation was
intended to create conditions (i.e., incidental learning) under which
participants are less inclined to use elaborative strategies, and participants' responses in the post-test questionnaires confirmed this by
showing significantly lower level strategy use in the incidental learning
condition in both experiments. However, it should be noted that there
were still some participants in the incidental learning group in each
experiment (around 20%), who reported the use of elaborative strategies during encoding. Although such reports may potentially be due to
these participants' post-memory test realization that they were actually
supposed to study the words for the memory test, we nevertheless
wanted to assure that the performance under incidental learning was
not affected by elaborative encoding strategies used by these participants. To do so, we carried out the analyses on memory performance
excluding these participants who used elaborative encoding strategies.
The results for both experiments were identical to those reported above
for the whole sample, indicating that divided attention at encoding
affected the intentional and the incidental groups identically.
To further assess the role of strategy use in the current experiments,
we examined whether the reported strategies by the participants were
directly related to their memory performance, and more importantly to
the effects of divided attention on memory. We did so by combining in
each experiment the data for those participants who reported either no
use of strategies or the use of low-shallow level ones and compared
them with the data of those participants who reported using deep-level
elaborative strategies. We then assessed their memory performance
under full and divided attention conditions. The analysis for each of the
experiments indicated no interaction between strategy and attention. In
particular, supporting the results reported by Craik and Kester (2000),
those participants reporting the use of deep-level elaborative strategies
were affected to the same degree by divided attention as those reporting
the use of shallow-level strategies, providing further support for the
hypothesis that deep-level elaborative processing is not the one that is
affected by divided attention.
The results regarding the performance on the secondary CRT task in
both experiments seem to provide a confirmatory manipulation check
of the learning instructions given to the participants. These results indicate that incidental and intentional learning differ with respect to the
attentional resources devoted to each. In particular, the larger attentional costs required under intentional learning instructions suggest
that participants in this condition mobilize their attentional/cognitive
resources during the encoding phase in order to encode the stimuli for
the upcoming free and cued recall memory tests, above and beyond
paying attention to them in the incidental learning condition. The results of the post-test questionnaire in both experiments provide converging evidence that this mobilization of additional attentional/cognitive resources during encoding under intentional learning instructions
was associated with an increase in the use of more elaborate effortful
strategies to encode the words in comparison to the incidental learning
condition.

If strategic effortful processes are not interrupted by DA at encoding, what other potential process mechanisms may underlie the effects of DA at encoding causing a decline in memory performance? As
we have suggested elsewhere (e.g., Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2014), one
possibility is that nonstrategic automatic processes are those affected
under DA at encoding. That is, it is possible that DA affects a nonstrategic encoding component earlier in the continuum of processing.
Specifically, DA may interrupt the initial registration of the information
with DA conditions impeding the full registration of the presented event
when participants' attention is focused on the secondary task. For example, it seems reasonable that even low level phonological and lexical
processes involved in encoding of words are affected by divided attention. There is at least one set of studies from our lab (NavehBenjamin et al., 2007) that supports the idea that DA affects the initial
registration of the information. In these studies, we suggested that the
encoding process can be viewed as a multi-phase mental activity, and
investigated the temporal locus of the DA effects at encoding. This was
done by employing a differential temporal interference paradigm in
which the study phase of single words or word pairs was interrupted by
a concurrent task at different temporal segments - beginning, middle, or
end of the encoding of a given word or word pairs. In two experiments,
we used performance on both free recall and online CRT tasks to assess
whether such differential temporal interference would produce different degrees of reduction in participants' later memory performance,
as well as changes in the attentional resources required to execute each
of the encoding phases. Measures of memory and concurrent task performance in the two experiments converged on similar patterns,
showing that the initial encoding phase, which is associated with the
initial registration of information, seems especially vulnerable to interference. In addition, this initial phase of encoding was associated
with large attentional costs as measured by the concurrent task. This
suggestion is consistent with results based on ERP measures, reported
by Boehm and Sommer (2005), which indicated similar neural markers
under both intentional and incidental learning during the initial period
after face stimuli were presented with these markers potentially representing the process that may be interrupted by DA.
Another possible way in which DA at encoding may affect later
memory performance is via the interruption of non-strategic processes
later in the continuum of processing, after strategic processing is
completed. It may be that the mental operations interrupted under DA
at encoding are those consolidation processes that bind aspects of the
coherent memory trace. Although such consolidation processes have
been suggested more in physiologically oriented studies of memory
(e.g., Alvarez & Squire, 1994; McGaugh, 1966; Weingartner & Parker,
1984) than in cognitive ones (but see Kroll, Knight, Metcalfe, Wolf, &
Tulving, 1996), they may be a fitting explanation of the effects of DA at
encoding. Specifically, it could be that information encoded under DA
conditions does not support a strong memory trace, resulting in a
memory record that is susceptible to interruption (for example, by other
memory traces), with the consequence of showing more forgetting over
time relative to information encoded under full attention (see also Craik
& Kester, 2000).
To summarize, division of attention at encoding is associated with a
reduction in memory performance, as under such conditions the need to
perform the concurrent task reduces the attentional resources available
for encoding (e.g., Craik et al., 1996; Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2000,
1998). Continuing the investigation we have reported in NavehBenjamin et al. (2014), in the current experiments we explored potential mechanisms that underlie the detrimental effects of DA at encoding. Specifically, we investigated whether impaired deep elaborative strategic processing (as one type of semantically elaborate
cognitive processing) could be the sole mediating mechanism for the
effects of DA at encoding. Although this seems reasonable, and indeed
some previous results indicate that effortful strategic processes might be
116

Journal of Memory and Language 106 (2019) 108-117

M. Naveh-Benjamin and M.S. Brubaker

those that are affected by DA, the results reported in the current studies
indicate that at a minimum, deep-level elaborative semantic processes
are not the only ones affected by DA. Such a conclusion is based on our
findings of large and similar effects of DA at encoding on cued-recall
and free recall memory performance both under intentional and incidental learning instructions. This conclusion is strengthened by further analyses based on the reported strategies used by the participants,
which indicated that divided attention reduced memory performance
regardless of the level of deep-semantic elaboration reported by the
participants (though these should be followed-up by other ways to assess the effects of strategies, beyond self-reports). Such a conclusion
regarding the role of deep-level elaborative processing in the effects of
DA on memory is important because it provides a clear advancement of
our knowledge by eliminating an obvious candidate as a potential
major mechanism underlying the effects of DA on later memory. This
can direct the next steps needed in assessing other potential candidate
mechanisms. Although there is ample empirical evidence on the negative effects of DA at encoding on later memory performance, as the
current studies show, further research is needed to elucidate the cognitive processes underlying these effects, and we have outlined above
some potential candidates.

Craik, F. I. M., & Byrd, M. (1982). Aging and cognitive deficits: The role of attentional
resources. In F. I. M. Craik, & S. E. Trehub (Eds.). Aging and cognitive processes (pp.
191-211). New York: Plenum Press.
Craik, F. I. M., Eftekhari, E., & Binns, M. A. (2018). Effects of divided attention at encoding and retrieval: Further data. Memory & Cognition, 46, 1263-1277.
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Anderson, N. D. (1996). The effects of
divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 159-180.
Craik, F. I. M., & Kester, D. (2000). Divided attention and memory: Impairment of processing or consolidation? In E. Tulving (Ed.). Memory consciousness and the brain: The
Tallin conference (pp. 38-51). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Dobbins, I. G., Kroll, N. E. A., Yonelinas, A. P., & Liu, Q. (1998). Distinctiveness in recognition and free recall: The role of recollection in the rejection of the familiar.
Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 381-400.
Fernandes, M. A., & Moscovitch, M. (2000). Divided attention and memory: Evidence of
substantial interference effects at retrieval and encoding. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 129(2), 155-176.
Griffith, D. (1976). The attentional demands of mnemonic control processes. Memory and
Cognition, 4, 103-108.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful processes in human memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 356-388.
Jennings, J. M., & Jacoby, L. L. (1993). Automatic versus intentional uses of memory:
Aging, attention, and control. Psychology and Aging, 8, 283-293.
Johnston, W. A., Greenberg, S. N., Fisher, R. P., & Martin, D. W. (1970). Divided attention: A vehicle for monitoring memory processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
83, 164-171.
Johnston, W. A., Griffith, D., & Wagstaff, R. R. (1972). Speed, accuracy, and ease of recall.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 512-520.
Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M., Tulving, E., Wilson, A. A., Houle, S., & Brown, G. M. (1994).
Neuroanatomical correlates of encoding in episodic memory: Levels of processing
effect. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
91, 2008-2011.
Kroll, N. E. A., Knight, R. T., Metcalfe, J., Wolf, E. S., & Tulving, E. (1996). Cohesion
failure as a source of memory illusions. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 176-196.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.
McGaugh, J. L. (1966). Time-dependent processes in memory storage. Science, 153,
1351-1358.
Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1965). Effects of a subsidiary task on short-term memory. British
Journal of Psychology, 56, 413-419.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. (1987). Coding of spatial location information: An automatic process? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 13, 595605.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. (1990). Coding of temporal order information: An automatic process? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 16, 117126.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. (2000). Adult age differences in memory performance: Tests of an
associative deficit hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 26, 1170-1187.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Craik, F. I. M., Gavrilescu, D., & Anderson, N. (2000). Asymmetry
between encoding and retrieval processes: Evidence from a divided attention paradigm and a calibration analysis. Memory and Cognition, 28, 965-976.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Craik, F. I. M., Guez, J., & Dori, H. (1998). Effects of divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory: Further support for an
asymmetry. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24,
1091-1104.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Guez, Y. (2000). The effects of divided attention on encoding and
retrieval processes: Assessment of attentional costs and a componential analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 14611482.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Guez, J., Hara, Y., Brubaker, M. S., & Loewenschuss-Erlich, I.
(2014). The effects of divided attention on encoding processes under incidental and
intentional learning instructions: Underlying mechanisms? Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 67, 1682-1696.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Guez, J., & Sorek, S. (2007). The effects of divided attention on
encoding processes in memory: Mapping the locus of interference. Canadian Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 61, 1-12.
Rabinowitz, J. C., Craik, F. I. M., & Ackerman, B. P. (1982). A processing resource account
of age differences in recall. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 325-344.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Speckman, P. L., & Province, J. M. (2012). Default Bayes
factors for ANOVA designs. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56(5), 356-374.
Shallice, T., Fletcher, P. C., Frith, C. D., Grasby, P. M., Frackowiak, R. S., & Dulan, R. J.
(1994). Brain systems associated with acquisition and retrieval of verbal episodic
memory. Nature, 368, 633-635.
Tulving, E. (1968). Theoretical issues in free recall. In T. R. Dixon, & D. L. Horton (Eds.).
Verbal behavior and general behavior theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Weingartner, H., & Parker, E. S. (1984). Memory consolidation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Cortney Howard, Alexis Lawrence,
Kelsey Reid, Haley Von Holst, and especially Reed Decker for their help
in testing participants and in the analysis, as well as Fergus Craik,
James Neely, Stephanie Crocco, and an anonymous reviewer for their
useful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. The research
was partially funded by a University of Missouri Research Council
grant.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.02.007.
References
Alvarez, P., & Squire, L. R. (1994). Memory consolidation and the medial temporal lobe: A
simple network model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 91, 7041-7045.
Anderson, N. D. (2002). The attentional demands and attentional control of encoding and
retrieval. In M. Naveh-Benjamin, M. Moscovitch, & H. L. Roediger III (Eds.).
Perspectives on human memory and cognitive aging: Essays in Honour of Fergus Craik (pp.
208-225). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Anderson, C. M. B., & Craik, F. I. M. (1974). The effect of a concurrent task on recall from
primary memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 107-113.
Anderson, N. D., Iidaka, T., Cabeza, R., Kapur, S., McIntosh, A. R., & Craik, F. I. M. (2000).
The effects of divided attention on encoding -and retrieval-related brain activity: A
PET study of younger and older adults. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 775-792.
Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V., Eldridge, M., & Thomson, N. (1984). Attention and retrieval
from long term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 13, 518-540.
Block, R. A. (2009). Intent to remember briefly presented human faces and other pictorial
information enhances recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 37, 667-678.
Boehm, S. G., & Sommer, W. (2005). Neural correlates of intentional and incidental recognition of famous faces. Cognitive Brain Research, 23, 153-163.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kucera and Francis: A critical evaluation
of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word
frequency measure for American English. Behavior Research Methods, 41, 977-990.
Craik, F. I. M. (1982). Selective changes in encoding as a function of reduced processing
capacity. In F. Klix, J. Hoffman, & E. Van der Meer (Eds.). Cognitive research in psychology (pp. 152161). Berlin: DVW.

117

