Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936-019-09684-5

Distinct Benefits Given Large Versus Small Grain
Orthographic Instruction for EnglishSpeaking Adults
Learning to Read Russian Cyrillic
Christine Brennan1

* Jennifer Kiskin1

Published online: 23 December 2019
(c) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Initial instruction emphasizing large grain units (i.e., words) showed distinct advantages over small grain instruction for English-speaking adults learning to read an artificial orthography (Brennan and Booth in Read Writ 28(7):917-938, 2015. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11145-015-9555-2). The current study extends this research by training 34
English-speaking adults to read Russian Cyrillic given initial instruction emphasizing
either large or small units (words or letters). Results reveal no differences on word learning, but higher accuracy on letter-phoneme matching given letter-based instruction and
higher accuracy on rime-rhyme matching given word-based instruction. Differences in
phonological awareness (PA) skill showed that higher PA skill resulted in higher accuracy
and slower reaction times only for the adults given the instruction with the word emphasis,
suggesting that adults with high PA skill given word-based instruction may engage in time
intensive small grain analyses (e.g., grapheme-phoneme correspondence) even when their
attention is directed to larger grain units. Overall, these results extend previous findings
and reveal that word and letter-based instruction each have distinct advantages for facilitating increased sensitivity to either letters/phonemes or rimes/rhymes when adults are learning a natural second (L2) consistent alphabetic orthography.
Keywords Reading instruction * Phonological awareness * Orthography * Second language
learning * Second orthographic learning

Introduction
Acquiring a second language (L2) is a valuable skill in a hyper-connected global community, but for an adult to achieve L2 proficiently, literacy in the L2 orthography must
accompany spoken language skills. Reading in an alphabetic first language (L1) is a complex process involving lower-level (e.g., letter and word recognition) and higher-level (e.g.,
contextual understanding to support comprehension of written words) processes. Unlike
* Christine Brennan
Christine.Brennan@colorado.edu
1

Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, 2501
Kittredge Loop Drive, 409 UCB, Boulder, CO 308090409, USA

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

916

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

spoken language which develops during early childhood given adequate exposure, learning
to read requires explicit instruction (Adams 1994). L1 literacy is often taught during childhood after oral language is established, but for L2 learners, L2 literacy training may not
begin until adolescence or later. Adolescents and adults often learn an L2 through foreign
language classes and use L2 reading to expand L2 oral language skills (e.g., reading passages expands vocabulary knowledge). While establishing L2 decoding and visual word
recognition skills early can benefit L2 oral language acquisition, L2 instruction generally
places an emphasis on spoken language rather than orthographic training. A comparison of
two L2 orthographic instruction methods revealed advantages for instruction that emphasized whole word versus letter training (Brennan and Booth 2015). This previous study
trained English-speaking adults to read an artificial transparent alphabetic orthography
and found that large grain instruction resulted in higher accuracy for rime-rhyme matching and faster reaction times for reading tasks (note, "rime" refers to written rhymes, e.g.,
"sing" and "bring" which share the rime "-ing"). For some orthographies, such as English,
rime recognition facilitates faster and more accurate decoding and word recognition. It is
unclear if these previous results would extend to outcomes when training a natural orthography, especially one that is inconsistent. The current study aimed to address this question
by comparing initial instruction emphasizing large or small grain size units (i.e., words or
letters) provided to typical English-speaking adults learning to read Russian, Cyrillic, a
natural L2 alphabetic orthography.
Learning to read an inconsistent alphabetic L2 orthography potentially requires learning unfamiliar graphemes (letters), new ortho-graphemic rules, and how to manage inconsistent grapheme-phoneme (letter-sound) mappings. Familiarity and adoption of L1 orthographemic rules to the L2 may help or hinder learning of the L2 rules, depending on the
similarities and differences between the two orthographies. L2 conflicts can include unfamiliar graphemes that do not exist in the L1, graphemes that have a different phonological
mapping compared to the L1, regular and irregular spellings, graphemes with more than
one phonological mapping, and exceptions to established rules (Hirshorn and Fiez 2014).
Orthographic depth (shallow/transparent versus deep/inconsistent) plays a critical role
in L2 learning. Transparent orthographies have transparent phoneme-grapheme correspondences, with one phoneme (a single unit of speech sound) consistently mapping to
a single grapheme (a single letter). In contrast, inconsistent orthographies have inconsistent phoneme-grapheme correspondences. English has an inconsistent orthography and
has multiple letter patterns for the same phoneme(s) and multiple phonemes for the same
letter(s). For example, the grapheme string "ough" is pronounced differently in the words
"through" (/u/), "thorough" (/o/), and "rough" (/f/) and the phoneme//can be spelled "sh"
("shoe) "ti" ("nation"), "ch" (machine), and "ci" (special). The orthographic depth hypothesis posits that transparent orthographies more easily support word recognition due to the
predictable phonological system and inconsistent orthographies more easily support the
morphology of spoken language (Katz and Frost 1992). Given this dichotomy of processes
supported by different orthographic types, instruction tailored to influence sensitivity to
grapheme-phoneme mapping or to larger segments of words (rimes/word families, common spelling patterns, morphology, and syntax) would highly benefit L2 learning of either
transparent or inconsistent orthographies.
Instruction for an alphabetic orthography, either for children learning their L1 or adults
learning their second (or L2) orthography, often includes explicit instruction with a smallgrain focus (i.e., letters); however, there is no universally accepted method for teaching
reading across writing systems. For example, in the United States, literacy instruction
commonly involves learning the alphabetic principle (the concept that speech sounds map

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

917

to letters) and learning letter names followed by the associated phonemes; however, in
Spain, early reading instruction focuses on syllables rather than letters (Hirshorn and Fiez
2014). Learning the alphabetic principle, as is done in the U.S., requires development of
explicit letter-sound correspondences (Ziegler and Goswami 2005, 2006). Learning such
correspondences requires manipulation of the smallest grain size units of both the written
(graphemes) and oral language (phonemes). This is one aspect of phonological awareness
(PA), or the ability to perceive, segment, and blend phonemes. PA is the most significant
predictor of future reading development for children learning to read their L1 regardless
of language (Ziegler and Goswami 2005, 2006). For adults learning to read a natural L2,
L1 PA skill was found to influence L2 orthographic learning outcomes (Abu-Rabia 2001;
Goodwin et al. 2015; Durgunoglu et al. 1993). When instruction emphasized either small
versus large grain sizes, PA skill modulated learning outcomes when the L2 was artificial,
alphabetic, and transparent (Brennan and Booth 2015). It is unclear if PA skill modulates
learning outcomes when instruction that emphasizes either small versus large grain sizes
when adults are learning a natural transparent alphabetic orthography. Based on results
from the previous studies of natural and artificial orthographies (Abu-Rabia 2001; Brennan and Booth 2015; Goodwin et al. 2015; Durgunoglu et al. 1993), we predicted that high
PA skill would correlate with L2 learning outcomes and would modulated L2 learning
outcomes.
Orthographic instruction can focus on smaller grain size units (i.e., letters) or larger
grain size units, (i.e., syllables, rimes, and/or whole words). Phonological (or phonemic)
decoding is a small grain strategy focused on analysis of letter-sound correspondence. Phonological decoding works well as a strategy for transparent orthographies because phoneme-grapheme correspondence is systematic, but additional strategies must be used in
order to become literate in inconsistent orthographies (Ziegler and Goswami 2006). The
psycholinguistic grain size theory (Ziegler and Goswami 2005) argues that the consistency
of an orthography triggers the development of sensitivity to and representation of different
grain sizes as basic psycholinguistic units. Children learning to read orthographically transparent languages tend to create orthographic representations at the smallest grain size, but
children learning to read less transparent orthographies develop small as well as large grain
size representations (Goswami et al. 2003). For learners of the English orthography, reading requires the use of small and large grain strategies so that a reader can switch between
them to most efficiently recognition of larger grain patterns such as syllables, rimes, and
whole words (Goswami et al. 2003).
Previous comparisons of orthographic instruction methods for adult L2 learning
revealed that learning outcomes were influenced by the type of instruction, specifically if
large or small grain size units were emphasized (Bitan and Booth 2012; Bitan and Karni
2003, 2004; Bitan et al. 2005; Brennan and Booth 2015; Ettlinger et al. 2016). Instruction for an L2 that emphasized small grain units (i.e., grapheme-phoneme correspondence)
resulted in better outcomes for reading trained words, generalizing to untrained words, and
retaining decoding abilities up to 6 months after the initial instruction (Bitan and Karni
2004). In contrast, the instruction that emphasized large grain units (i.e., whole words)
without explicit instruction of grapheme-phoneme correspondence resulted in implicit
learning of rules for decoding based on whole-word knowledge (Bitan and Karni 2004).
The authors conclude that a focus only on large grain units was detrimental for generalization and retention of knowledge of the new orthography being learned (Bitan and Karni
2004). Another study trained an artificial L2 to adults and compared accuracy and processing speed outcomes for letter and rime recognition tasks following large versus small grain
instruction (Brennan and Booth 2015). Compared to the small grain instruction, large grain

13

918

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

instruction resulted in higher accuracy for rime recognition and faster reaction times compared to the small grain instruction. The use of artificial orthographies in these previous
studies confirm differences in learning outcomes given different instruction that emphasizes large versus small grain units (e.g., Bitan and Booth 2012; Bitan and Karni 2003,
2004; Bitan et al. 2005; Brennan and Booth 2015), but such findings may not generalize to
learning of natural L2 orthographies. This limitation may be more pronounced when natural orthographies are less transparent than the artificial orthographies utilized in these previous studies. It is unknown if the outcomes reported by previous studies (Bitan and Booth
2012, Bitan and Karni 2003, 2004; Brennan and Booth 2015) would be observed when L2
learners are faced with a true natural orthography. In order to test directly the effects of
large versus small grain instruction on a natural L2 orthography, the current study trained
Russian Cyrillic to literate, English-speaking adults using instruction emphasizing either
large or small grain.
Instruction for second languages often includes initial orthographic training with letters (small grain) taught individually and paired with a demonstration of the corresponding
phoneme (or phonemes). Generally, after this brief introduction, the focus shifts to comprehension and word learning (Nassaji 2011) even when a new orthography is particularly
challenging. When a new orthography is highly unfamiliar to a learner (i.e., many letters
are unknown or the letter-sound correspondences conflict with the L1), mastery of the L2
orthography can be very challenging. Russian Cyrillic, in particular, can be challenging
for English-speaking adult L2 learners because the alphabet is highly unfamiliar. It is notable that while Russian Cyrillic is considered transparent it is still challenging for Englishspeakers. This difficulty is likely due to the number of letters that conflict or are novel
compared to English and the differences in orthographic depth. These differences between
Russian Cyrillic and English provide motivation for its use in this study.
English and Russian are both considered alphabetic systems, but they differ in terms
of orthographic depth. English uses the Roman alphabet, which has 26 letters combined
into around 200 graphemes which are mapped onto the 45 phonemes. Because phonemes
can be represented with multiple different graphemes, the relationship between these two
features is highly inconsistent, making English an inconsistent orthography. In contrast,
Russian uses the Cyrillic alphabet, which has 31 letters, which map consistently to 39 phonemes. Although there are some context-dependent changes to letter-phoneme mapping
with exceptions to the rule exist (Boulware-Gooden et al. 2015), Russian Cyrillic is considered significantly more transparent than English in its phoneme-grapheme correspondence. According to the tenets of the orthographic depth hypothesis, exceptions and predictable environmental changes increase the complexity of the script, but do not globally affect
consistency or completeness of the Russian orthography (Schmalz et al. 2016). Therefore,
although the Russian writing system demonstrates a few features of lesser uniformity, it
presents globally as a transparent orthography. While the previous studies (Bitan and Karni
2003, 2004; Brennan and Booth 2015) compared instruction methods for an artificial transparent orthography, the current study compared instruction methods for Russian Cyrillic, a
natural transparent L2 orthography.
Another motivation for using Russian Cyrillic in this study is the mix of similarities and
differences between English and Cyrillic graphemes. These two orthographies share some
similar-looking and/or similar-sounding graphemes (see "Appendix" for the graphemes in
the Russian Cyrillic alphabet and the corresponding IPA transcriptions). Fifteen Cyrillic
graphemes are similar to English graphemes (E, A, , , B, , O, X, P, H, , M, , C, T);
however, only six share corresponding phonemes:/k/,/t/,/m/,/a/,/o/, and/s/. The presence of
these graphemes which create conflicts for L2 learners resulted in slower reaction times in

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

919

bi-alphabetical readers of the Roman and Cyrillic alphabets (Lukatela and Turvey 1998). In
a study done by (Marian and Kaushanskaya 2004), the researchers tested Russian-English
bilinguals and found that when two orthographies share graphemes, mutual graphemes are
recognized visually but not necessarily attributed to a particular script right away. Unlike
previous studies which trained artificial orthographies, training Cyrillic to English-speakers may better mirror the realistic experience of an L2 learner, and thus provide added
insight of the outcomes given large versus small grain instruction.
Because L2 orthographic learning is influenced not only by instruction, but also by
transfer from L1, Russian Cyrillic is also well suited for study. Adults learning an L2 may
experience challenges resulting from limited L2 linguistic knowledge but they can also
experience cross-linguistic interference stemming from prior L1 reading experience (Akamatsu 1999). While some overlap between the first and second orthographies may benefit learning (such as general features available to learners regardless of the L1, including
understanding the alphabetic principle), language-specific elements may differ so much
that development of literacy in L2 is not simply an additive feature, and that both positive and negative transfer can occur. For example, Spanish-speaking learners of English
have been shown to transfer Spanish phonological skills (small grain) and morphological
awareness (large grain) to support word reading in English (Goodwin et al. 2015). Adult
Russian-English bilinguals showed transfer of L1 Russian phonological and pseudoword
reading skills to English (L2) word recognition, but transfer was not observed for other
orthographic skills, such as recognizing legal versus illegal letter combinations (Abu-Rabia
2001). A comparison of Persian, Japanese, and Chinese adults learning English revealed
that Persian readers were less influenced by case alteration than the other two groups.
Because only the Persian readers had alphabetic experience, their knowledge of alphabetic
rules (including case alteration) facilitated learning the English orthography. In contrast,
logographic (Chinese) or syllabic (Japanese) experience resulted in limited transfer to English (Akamatsu 1999). The transfer of some linguistic skills but limited orthographic skills
indicates that orthographic skills are language-specific. Knowledge and skill with phonotactics of the L1 can also transfer to or interfere with L2 learning. For example, compared
to English, the Russian orthography has more complex syllabic phonotactics, with up to
four consonants per syllable. This more complex phonotactic system can lead to difficulty
for English-speaking adult L2 learners of Russian Cyrillic (Boulware-Gooden et al. 2015);
however, the presence of many similarities between the two orthographies (including similar stress patterns, uppercase vs. lowercase letters, representation of both consonants and
vowels, and text direction) can transfer even if unfamiliar phonotactics interfere on other
levels (Schwartz et al. 2014).

Current Study
Because previous studies have used artificial orthographies and idealistic contexts for L2
orthography learning, this study trains typical adults on Russian Cyrillic. Use of a natural orthography in this study provides greater ecological validity to findings from previous studies that trained artificial orthographies. Specifically, we aimed to determine if the
advantages given large grain instruction are maintained when adults learned a natural L2
orthography, in this case, Russian Cyrillic. We specifically aimed to determine if different methods of instruction result in differences on measures of (1) letter-sound matching
accuracy and (2) rime-rhyme matching accuracy. We also aimed to determine if large grain

13

920

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

instruction promoted a faster processing speed (RT) as compared to small grain instruction
(as reported by Brennan and Booth 2015). Finally, we were also interested in determining if PA skill modulated learning outcomes given the different instruction methods (also
reported by Brennan and Booth 2015).

Design
Two separate forms of initial instruction for Russian Cyrillic were given to English-speaking adults as the between-subjects variable. One form of instruction emphasized large grain
size units (words) and the other emphasized small grain size units (letters). We compared
learning outcomes following initial instruction on trained words, rimes, and letters. We
measured accuracy and RT (for correct trials) on a word matching task following training on two separate days (Day 1 and Day 2) (within-subjects variable). We also measured
accuracy and RT (for correct trials) on matching tasks for two different orthographic grain
sizes (i.e., smaller: letters-phonemes, and larger: rimes-rhymes) on the second day of training (Day 2) only (within-subjects variable). Finally, we examined whether the relationship
between PA skill and accuracy on cross-modal word matching depended on method of
instruction and day of training (i.e., Day 1 and Day 2).

Methods
We replicated the methods described in Brennan and Booth (2015) with the exception of
shortening training to 2 days and changing the artificial transparent (consistent) alphabetic
orthography to a natural one (Russian Cyrillic). Use of a natural orthography provides
greater ecological validity.

Participants
Participants included 34 literate, typical English-speaking adults, ages 19-38 years (17
per group). Brennan and Booth (2015) included 37 adults (~ 18 per group), therefore, we
expected that 17 per group would be adequate to get significant results. To confirm the
number of subjects needed to detect group differences, we conducted a power analysis
using the following parameters: alpha = 0.05, beta = 0.2, power = 0.8. We entered the group
means for the rime-rhyme matching cross-modal matching task reported by Brennan and
Booth (2015) in the power analysis and the results revealed that 32 total participants (16
per group) were needed to detect group differences with this degree of power (0.8).
To avoid selection biases, we recruited participants from in and around the Boulder
County and Denver areas using emails, fliers, and online notices. We employed all three
methods across a broad geographic area to ensure a diverse group of participants. We also
recruited participants that matched the demographics of the local area. We strictly adhered
to the inclusionary criteria, resulting in the inclusion of only typical adults between the
ages of 18-30 years with reading and phonological awareness skills within normal limits. Adherence to the exclusionary criteria resulted in a group of participants with none
of the following: self-reported learning disabilities and/or neurological disorders, speechlanguage disorders, hearing loss, vision loss, learning disability, cognitive impairment,
or having any other characteristics considered atypical during development or at the time

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

921

of participation. Participants would have been excluded if they had any prior exposure to
Russian and/or the Cyrillic alphabet (none reported such exposure). Additionally all participants reported having educational experience that included either a high school degree,
some college education, or a college degree. To avoid a channeling bias, we randomly
assigned participants to one of the two instruction groups prior to any testing. To eliminate
any other potential biases during the course of the study, participation for all participants
was conducted in the same lab with the same computer and headphones. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the two instruction groups. Pre-testing performance was completed to ensure that groups were matched in reading and phonological skill. Testing of
IQ was not completed, but all participants had at reading scores in the average or above
average range and had either completed high school, were currently in college, had college
degrees, or were currently in graduate school. Working memory was not specifically tested,
but a PA test included a measure that tapped into working memory (CTOPP-2: Blending Words). We believe that while no IQ measure was included, the participants in this
study achieved standardized testing results for reading and phonological awareness (which
included measures that depend on verbal working memory) in the average range. Because
these standardized measures depend on general cognition and working memory, we have
confidence that the participants in this study likely have general cognitive skills in the
average range. Participants were recruited from the University of Colorado and the nearby
community using emails, fliers, and online notices following IRB requirements. Participants completed questionnaires to ensure that they had no previous exposure to Russian
or the Cyrillic alphabet, normal (corrected) hearing and vision, no neurological disease or
psychiatric disorders, and no learning disability.

Procedure
Participants completed two sessions (one per day). The initial day included standardized
testing, orthographic instruction, and exposure to words in Russian Cyrillic and a word
matching test on the words trained. The second day included orthographic instruction,
exposure to words in Russian Cyrillic, the word matching test on the words trained (same
as on day 1), and matching tests for rimes (large grain skill) and letters (small grain skill).
All tests were "cross modal," meaning visual and auditory stimuli (visual text on screen
and spoken words/phonemes via headphones) were presented and participants judged if
the modalities matched (i.e., does the visual word match the spoken word). For all training and tests, participants sat in a quiet room approximately 24 inches from a 24-inch flat
screen monitor and wore high quality headphones. Instruction, word exposures, and testing
were presented electronically using the E-Prime 3.0 software (Psychology Software Tools,
Pittsburgh, PA).

Pretesting
Standardized assessments ensured that all participants had average level reading skill in
English and that the two instruction groups had similar PA and reading skills. Standardized measures included: Sight Word Efficiency and Pseudoword Efficiency from the Test
of Word Reading Efficiency-2 (TOWRE-2) (Torgesen et al. 1999) and three subtests from
the Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing-2 (CTOPP-2): Elision, Blending
Words, and Segmenting Words (Wagner et al. 1999). These PA measures were included
because each measure taps into grain size skill differently. Elision required phonological

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

922

manipulation at smaller and larger grain sizes. This subtest required participants to delete
single phones from words and then synthesize the remaining sounds into other words (i.e.,
delete/n/ from "snail" to get the word "sail"). Segmenting Words required manipulation at
the smallest phonological grain size (i.e., phonemes). For this measure, participants broke
words up into separate, isolated phonemes (i.e., for the word "cat", the answer is/k//ae//t/).
Blending Words required listening to isolated phonemes, holding those phonemes in working memory, and then blending them together into a larger unit or whole word (i.e., hear/
m////s//t//e//k/, blended together is "mistake"). Elision and Blending Words both required
two-step processes involving manipulation at large and small grain sizes, whereas Segmenting Words required a one-step process involving small grain manipulation and working memory. Performance on reading and phonological measures for the two instruction
groups (large and small) revealed no significant group differences (see Table 1).

Stimuli
Auditory stimuli included recorded Russian words spoken and digitally processed using
Praat software. All auditory stimuli were spoken by the same female native speaker (F0
approximately 200 Hz) with a similar loudness level. Recordings provided by a native
speaker of Russian provided greater ecological validity since most L2 Russian students
would most likely receive instruction from either a native speaker or an instructor with
native-like pronunciation.
Thirty-two Russian words from four rhyme families were selected so that identification
and matching of rimes to rhymes could be tested. Rhyme families are sets of words that
share the vowel and consonants following the vowel. In English, an example would be:
flap, clap, trap, snap, and strap. Russian words were selected based on sets of rhyme families and all words were either nouns or verbs (although the meanings were not trained in
this study). See Fig. 3 in the "Appendix" for all words used in this study.
Before instruction, participants were told (in English) they were going to get instruction
for reading Russian Cyrillic and that they should try and remember as much as possible.
During instruction, each auditory word was presented in tandem with the word in Russian
Cyrillic text on the screen (no English words were presented throughout instruction). A
Table 1Pretesting results of subjects assigned to the large grain or small grain instruction groups
Instruction groups

CTOPP Elisiona

CTOPP Blending W
 ordsa
CTOPP Segmenting W
 ordsa
TOWRE SWE timeb
TOWRE PDE timeb

Effect of group

Large

Small

F

Sig.

96.08 (5.33)

89.84 (23)

0.072

p = 0.791

88.59 (8.87)
91.73 (6.89)
49.80 (5.70)
54.31 (9.52)

81.46 (22)
87.13 (23)
53.84 (9.05)
59.58 (22.68)

1.008
0.013
2.923
2.792

p = 0.324
p = 0.909
p = 0.098
p = 0.106

Performance on three CTOPP-2 subtests and the two TOWRE-2 subtests revealed no differences between
groups
a

Because some subjects were over the age limit for standardized scoring of the CTOPP-2, the percent accuracy for each subtest was used to compare groups

b
Because some subjects were over the age limit for standardized scoring of the TOWRE-2, the total time
(seconds) to read all words in the subtest was used to compare groups

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

923

standard font was used to type the words and letters in the Cyrillic alphabet. The font was
black on a white background. Sixteen (out of 32) training words (four from each rhyme
family) were visually and auditory presented during instruction and exposure and the other
16 words were used for the rime-rhyme matching test.

Instruction
Participants were divided into two groups and participants in each group were given only
one form of instruction (large or small grain instruction). Instruction was given during both
sessions over two consecutive days (see Fig. 1a). Passive exposure to the 16 training words
(for all participants) followed instruction. The previous study (Brennan and Booth 2015)
provided instruction for three days but found no effect for letter-phoneme matching, possibly due to a ceiling effect; therefore, we provided instruction for only 2 days.
Large grain instruction directed explicit attention to the largest grain size for the stimuli being trained (i.e., whole words). This instruction method involved single presentations of 16 training words (see Fig. 1b). Each word was presented only once during initial

Fig. 1Design of Instruction Procedures. a Instruction was provided for 2 days. Participants were given only
one form of initial instruction: large (word-based) or small (letter-based) grain instruction. Instruction was
provided at the beginning of each training session. b Large grain instruction involved a single presentation of the 16 training words with each word visually presented and paired with the pronunciation. c Small
grain instruction involved single presentations of the 19 single letters with each letter presented visually and
paired with the associated phonemes. d Test measures for trained words, rimes, and letters included forced
choice cross-modal matching judgments

13

924

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

instruction. Words were presented visually on a white screen in black text and accompanied by an auditory presentation of the corresponding spoken word. Visual word duration
was approximately 3000 ms with the auditory presentation of the word beginning 1500 ms
after the visual presentation of the printed word. Each word presentation was followed by a
fixation cross on the score for a duration of 2500 ms. Pseudo-randomized order was used to
minimize the occurrence of similar graphemes or rimes being presented in direct sequence.
Participants were told to remember as much as they could.
Small grain instruction directed explicit attention to the smallest grain size (letters/phonemes). This instruction involved single presentations of each of the 19 single letters, one
letter at a time and in randomized order (see Fig. 1c). Letters were presented visually on
a white screen in black text and accompanied by an auditory presentation of the corresponding phoneme. Letters were presented visually for 3000 ms with the initiation of the
auditory phoneme beginning 1500 ms after visual presentation. The duration for the letter
exposures was selected because it falls within the range of previous studies that also utilized timed letter instruction training (Bitan and Karni 2003; Bishop 1964; Brennan and
Booth 2015; Knafle and Legenza 1978).
Following initial instruction on both days, participants were given a passive exposure
to all 16 training words (Trained Words Exposure). The format of these word exposure
trials was the same as the initial large grain instruction format. This exposure involved
the presentation of all of the training words seven times each in pseudorandomized order.
Therefore, all participants (regardless of the initial form of instruction) saw each training
word seven times during this portion of training. Because all participants were exposed
to whole words, the only difference is the form of initial instruction, which directed the
attention of the participants either to the large or small grain size units. Passive exposure
was utilized because we postulated that the initial form of instruction would be sufficient
to draw explicit attention to select grain sizes allowing us to measure generalization effects
following word exposures (as was demonstrated by Brennan and Booth (2015). With this
procedure, the participants given large grain initial instruction were expected to continue
to focus on larger units whereas those given small grain initial instruction were expected
to continue to focus on smaller units. In other words, we expected that initial instruction
would impact the grain size analyses employed by the participants and influence performance on outcome measures. All directions were the same for both instruction groups.

Learning Outcome Test Measures
Test measures included forced choice cross-modal matching judgments for trained words,
rimes, and letters. Each trial consisted of a visual presentation (word or letter) followed by
an auditory presentation of a word or letter. Participants were instructed to determine if the
visual and auditory presentations matched using the keyboard (i.e., press 1 for match, press
2 for not match). Participants could respond as soon as they heard the auditory stimulus
and had 1100 ms before the next trial began (see Fig. 1d). Accuracy and RT were logged.
For the cross-modal rime matching test, 16 novel pseudowords were used. Matches and
foils had correct onsets but either correct or incorrect rimes, thus requiring participants
to make judgments based on accurate recognition of rime component of the word (generally, onsets comprised the first 2-3 letters and rimes consisted of the last 2-3 letters). The
cross-modal letter matching test involved presentations of letters and phonemes. Foils for
the letter test included phonemes for other graphemes in the study (vowels for vowels and
consonants for consonants). On the first day, instruction was followed by the cross-modal

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

925

word matching test for trained words. On the second day, instruction was followed by all
cross-modal matching tests (trained words, rimes, and letters).

Statistical Analysis
To determine if different methods of orthographic instruction (i.e., large grain instruction
(words emphasized) or small grain instruction (letters emphasized)) resulted in differences
in learning outcomes, we utilized a general linear model analysis of variance to compare
accuracy and reaction time on tests of (1) trained words, (2) letter-sound matching, (3)
letter-sound matching for trials with conflict letters only (letters that resemble English but
have a different pronunciation), (4) rime-rhyme matching (all trials), and (5) rime-rhyme
matching foils only (trials with the onset correct but the rime incorrect).
The post hoc analysis of conflict letters included a subset of trials from the letter-phoneme matching test. Specifically, trials with letters that resemble English but have a different pronunciation (e.g., "" looks like English alphabet grapheme "B" (and the bilabial
phoneme/b/), but in Russian is actually the labiodental phoneme/v/). Cyrillic letters in this
category included <e, , , , y, x, p, , >, which resemble English letters <e, r, B, u, y, x,
p, H, n>, respectively. To determine if there were differences between instruction groups,
accuracy and RT on trials with these conflict letters were analyzed separately using a general linear model analysis of variance.
For the rime-rhyme matching test, we analyzed a subset of trials in order to determine
if there were differences between instruction groups on either accuracy or RT when trials
were more challenging. Specifically, we analyzed the foil trials of the rime-rhyme test in
which the onset was correct, but the rime portion of the word was incorrect. These trials
demanded that subjects recognized the rime/rhyme portion of the word (not just the onset)
in order to respond accurately. To determine if there were differences between instruction
groups, accuracy and RT on rime-rhyme foil trials were analyzed separately using a general linear model analysis of variance.
All of the analyses described above were completed with phonological skill (all three
CTOPP-2 measures) entered as covariates.
In order to determine if phonological skill influenced learning outcomes, correlations
between test performance and PA measures CTOPP-2 Elision and Phoneme Isolation were
calculated separately for each instruction group. In order to determine if reading skill influenced learning outcomes, additional correlations between test performance and reading
measures TOWRE-2 SWE and PDE were calculated for each instruction group.
In order to control for family-wise error rate, a type I error rate (alpha) of 0.05 was
assigned and a Bonferroni correction was utilized for all analyses.

Results
Trained Words
A repeated measures analysis was completed to examine the effects of group and day on
accuracy for the test of trained words (see Table 2). There was a significant effect of day,
with all subjects showing higher accuracy on the test of trained words on the second
day compared to the first day (F(33,1) = 25.778, p < 0.001), but there was no significant

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

926
Table 2Accuracy and RT was
measured for the matching test
for trained words following
instruction on both days of
training

Day 1 trained words

Day 2 trained words

75.96 (19.92)
78.49 (10.76)

89.74 (7.73)
90.63 (8.56)

1043 (301)
1088 (87)

1032 (148)
1074 (90)

Accuracy
Large
Small
Reaction time
Large
Small

There was no significant effect of group for accuracy or RT on either
day for the test of trained words

effect of group (F(33,1) = 0.234, p = 0.632), nor a significant interaction between day
and group (F(33,1) = 0.105, p = 0.748).
A repeated measures analysis was completed to examine the effects of group and day
on RT for the test of trained words (see Table 2). There was no significant effect of day
(F(33,1) = 0.089, p = 0.970), no significant effect of group (F(33,1) = 0.933, p = 0.341),
and no significant interaction between day and group (F(33,1) = 0.001, p = 0.970).

LetterPhoneme Matching
For accuracy on the letter-phoneme matching test, a general linear model analysis of
variance revealed a significant effect of group (F(33,1) = 7.185, p =0.012) with the small
grain instruction group achieving higher accuracy than the word instruction group (see
Fig. 2, Table 3). There was no significant effect of group for RT on the letter-phoneme
matching test (F(33,1) = 1.074, p =0.309).

Fig. 2Percent accuracy for each instruction group for the letter-phoneme matching (shown on the left) and
rime-rhyme (foil trials) matching (shown on the right). When controlling for phonological skill (as measured by the CTOPP) significant group effects were found for letter-phoneme matching with the small grain
instruction group achieving higher accuracy and rime-rhyme matching (foil trials) with the large instruction
group attaining higher accuracy

13

927

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

Table 3Instruction group comparisons for accuracy and RT on letter-phoneme matching, rime-rhyme
matching (in novel words), conflict letters, and rime-rhyme foil trials
Instruction groups

Effect of group (controlling for
phonological skilla)

Small

Large

F

Sig.

p2

79% (11)
75% (18)
64%(12)
75% (21)

72% (13)
70% (14)
67% (12)
88% (14)

7.185
0.947
1.193
5.214

p = 0.012*
p = 0.339
p = 0.284
p = 0.03*

0.042

931 (111)
992 (160)
1173 (121)
1346 (244)

902 (132)
976 (182)
1148 (91)
1246 (178)

1.074
0.014
0.895
2.187

p = 0.309
p = 0.906
p = 0.353
p = 0.151

Accuracy
Letter-phoneme matching
Conflict letters
Rime-rhyme matching
Rime-rhyme foil trials
Reaction time
Letter-phoneme matching
Conflict letters
Rime-rhyme matching
Rime-rhyme foil trials

0.162

a

When controlling for phonological skill (i.e., CTOPP-2 phonological measures entered as covariates) the
effect of instruction group was significant for letter-phoneme matching and rime-rhyme foil trials
*p < 0.05 corrected; **p < 0.01 corrected; ***p < 0.001 corrected

For phoneme-letter matching trials that included only conflict letters, effect of group was
not significant for accuracy (F(33,1) = 0.947, p =0.339) or reaction time (F(33,1) = 0.014,
p = 0.906).

RimeRhyme Matching
A general linear model analysis of variance revealed no significant effect of group
for accuracy on the rime-rhyme matching test (F(33,1) = 1.193, p =0.284) or for RT
(F(33,1) = 0.895, p =0.353). When analysis only included the foil trials (trials with a mismatched rime/rhyme), a significant effect of group (F(33,1) = 5.214, p =0.03) was found for
accuracy with the group given large instruction achieving higher accuracies than the group
given small instruction. No significant effect was found for RT when only foil trials were
analyzed (F(33,1) = 2.187, p =0.151) (see Fig. 2, Table 3).

Phonological Skill
For the small grain instruction group, there were no significant correlations between phonological skill (Elision, Blending Words, and Phoneme Isolation) and either accuracy or
RT on any of the letter-phoneme or rime-rhyme matching measures (see Table 4).
For the large grain instruction group, there were several significant correlations between
phonological skill and performance on the letter-phoneme matching task (see Table 4). A
positive significant correlation was found between letter-phoneme matching accuracy and
Blending Words (r = 0.665, p = 0.004). Positive significant correlations were also found
between letter-phoneme matching RT and Elision (r = 0.742, p = 0.001) and Blending
Words (r = 0.650, p = 0.005).

13

928
Table 4Correlations between
CTOPP-2 subtests and task
performance

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933
Elision

Blending words

- 0.105
0.054
- 0.033
- 0.223

0.279
0.074
0.245
0.207

0.307
0.742***
- 0.099
0.396

0.665**
0.650**
0.333
0.397

Small grain instruction
Letter-phoneme matching accuracy
Letter-phoneme matching RT
Rime-rhyme matching accuracy
Rime-rhyme matching RT
Large grain instruction
Letter-phoneme matching accuracy
Letter-phoneme matching RT
Rime-rhyme matching accuracy
Rime-rhyme matching RT

There were no significant correlations for the small grain instruction
group on measures of letter-phoneme and rime-rhyme matching; however, significant correlations were found for the large grain instruction
group in letter-phoneme matching accuracy and RT
*p < 0.05 corrected; **p < 0.01 corrected; ***p < 0.001 corrected

Post hoc analyses were conducted to determine if there were any demographic effects.
We conducted analyses for age and gender as well as for race/ethnicity and found no significant effects.

Discussion
This study aimed to determine if initial instruction on the Russian Cyrillic orthography that
directed attention to large or small grain units resulted in differences in accuracy for letter-sound matching and rime-rhyme matching. Our analyses revealed differences between
the instruction groups for both letter-phoneme matching and rime-rhyme matching (when
controlling for phonological skill). Specifically, initial instruction emphasizing small grain
units resulted in higher accuracy on Cyrillic letter-phoneme matching and initial instruction emphasizing large grain units resulted in higher accuracy on Cyrillic rime-rhyme
matching. These results are consistent with and extend the findings of previous studies
that trained adults to read artificial orthographies and found that different instruction methods resulted in differences in accuracy for letter learning and rime-rhyme matching (Bitan
and Karni 2004; Brennan and Booth 2015). Specifically, Bitan and Karni (2004) found
an advantage for explicit small grain instruction on letter-phoneme skill and novel word
decoding and Brennan and Booth (2015) found an advantage for large gain instruction on
rime-rhyme matching. The current findings support these previous studies and demonstrate
similar outcomes when a natural transparent alphabetic orthography is trained.
The current study also aimed to determine if different forms of initial instruction
resulted in differences in RT. While faster RT was reported by Brennan and Booth (2015)
for both letter and rime-rhyme tasks for the group given large grain instruction, the current
results reveal no statistically significant differences on RT for any tasks. While average RT
for the large grain instruction group was faster on all tasks and measures, these differences
were small and did not reach significance. One possible reason for the differences in RT

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

929

found here compared to the previous study may be due to differences in orthographic complexity. The natural orthographic system trained in this study was more complex than the
artificial orthography used in previous investigations (Bitan and Karni 2004; Brennan and
Booth 2015). The current study trained and tested 31 letters and words that had variability in word shape and size and tested on, whereas Brennan and Booth (2015) trained and
tested 19 letters and words with the same length and shape. The letters trained by Brennan
and Booth (2015) did not resemble English, which limited transfer from English to the
artificial orthography. Russian Cyrillic included letters that were familiar and unfamiliar to
English-speakers with some letters recognizable to English-speakers (either with shared or
contrasting phoneme correspondences). These similarities and conflicts resulted in a combination of transfer and interference that did not exist in the previous study. The features of
the orthography trained here (variability in word shape and size, a larger number of letters
trained, overlapping letters and unfamiliar letters) make this a more complex orthography
than what was trained in previous studies and the results for the RT analyses suggest that
when an L2 orthography is more complex, advantages for speed given large grain instruction may be minimized or eliminated.
We also found several significant correlations for accuracy and RT on the letter-phoneme task for the group given large grain instruction but not those given small grain
instruction. In fact, PA skill was positively correlated with both accuracy and RT, meaning
high skill on PA was associated with higher accuracy and slower RT on the letter-phoneme
matching task. Higher PA skill and higher accuracy on the letter-phoneme measure for the
adults given only large grain instruction suggests that when instruction lacks attention to
the smaller grain, high skill in small grain analyses may benefit learning of letter-phoneme
correspondences in a new orthography. The RT finding is especially interesting because it
reveals that the adults who have higher PA skill are given large grain instruction, they actually achieve slower RT on letter-phoneme matching. We suggest that when adults are given
small grain instruction, they implement small grain analyses regardless of their PA skill,
resulting in no correlations between skill and instruction methods. In contrast, large grain
instruction does not induce adults to employ small grain analyses and therefore only the
adults with higher PA skills employ small grain analyses, slowing their RT. When instruction encourages explicit analyses of letters (as the small grain instruction provided here),
there is less variability on RT regardless of PA skill. These results extend those previously
reported by Brennan and Booth (2015) which revealed that high PA skill compensated for
the limitations of the method of instruction provided, although in this case, high skill in PA
influenced outcomes for accuracy and RT of letter-phoneme matching given large grain but
not small grain instruction.
Given the high accuracy on all outcome measures achieved by the adults given large
grain instruction (all above 70%), it is evident that these participants were able to effectively recognize and segment small units in order to recognize letter patterns and infer phoneme-grapheme correspondences. This mirrors the findings of Bitan and Karni (2004) and
Brennan and Booth (2015), both of which found that letter knowledge was learned implicitly even when instruction emphasized large grain units. Because the words trained in the
current study lacked a semantic reference, L2 orthographic learning in a more natural
context in which word meanings are learned along with orthographic knowledge may differ from the current results (Taylor et al. 2011). Regardless, our results indicate that English speakers learned the Russian Cyrillic orthography quickly and easily when the words
trained lacked semantic knowledge. Moreover, adults given the large grain instruction were

13

930

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

able to apply small grain decoding strategies to unfamiliar words after only two training
sessions (i.e., they learned the letter-phoneme and the rime-rhyme correspondences). We
suggest that because of English reading experience, the adults in this study were equipped
with the ability to manage granularity and used both small and large grain word reading
strategies.
The adults in the current study learned an orthographic system with a similar grain size
mapping as English rather than an orthography with a drastically different mapping system. While Russian emphasizes morphological structure more than English does, it is not a
morpheme-based system, like Chinese. As a result, there was likely a great deal of positive
transfer facilitating L2 orthographic acquisition in both instruction groups. Due to the similarities between Russian and English, transfer of word reading skills from L1 could account
for the overall high accuracy for both groups on trained words. Because both English and
Cyrillic orthographic systems are alphabetic, stress-timed, and involve a partially overlapping phonologic system, transfer from L1 to L2 is likely. In comparison to English, Cyrillic
is more transparent and adults skilled in reading English would not necessarily need to
access large grain strategies and could instead rely on dependable small grain analyses for
accuracy regardless of instruction group. As is the case here, L2 readers can draw on prior
L1 literacy experience in order to know what is to be expected in mapping phonemes to letters in the L2 (Koda 2007). Because our participants were proficient at reading in English,
L1 reading skill likely equated to a thoughtful and strategic approach to learning this L2
orthography.
The results from the current study can inform approaches to L2 orthographic instruction. Specifically, the current results along with previous findings (Bitan and Booth 2012;
Bitan and Karni 2004; Brennan and Booth 2015) support the use of both large and small
grain instruction for adults learning an L2 orthography. We found that instruction emphasizing large grain units facilitates recognition of larger letter patterns such as those occurring in rimes-rhymes, a finding that is consistent with those of Brennan and Booth (2015).
Explicit instruction for small grain units appears to be better for letter-phoneme correspondence, consistent with the findings of Bitan and Karni (2004). Bitan and Karni (2004)
also show that the persistence of new knowledge over time is better given explicit instruction of small grain units. Direct letter instruction of an artificial orthography also has been
shown to result in greater "offline" improvement between sessions (Bitan and Booth 2012).
Additionally, pairing explicit reading instruction with greater phonological pre-exposure
and semantic context has been shown to increase learning and generalization, with semantic information showing a stronger influence at later stages of training (Taylor et al. 2011).
Of course, similarities and differences in orthographic depth also need to be considered
when planning L2 instruction. When teaching an L2 with a deeper orthography (i.e., inconsistent), less transfer would be expected, and thus instruction should incorporate more
strategies such as that described by Taylor et al. (2011) above. Individual preference also
plays a role in learning outcomes. While some learners preferred to use whole-words strategies, others preferred to rely more on grapheme-phoneme correspondence and the type
of strategy applied significantly impacted learning patterns in L2 orthographic outcomes
(Wise et al. 2011). Consequently, instructors must consider personalized factors in addition
to the type of orthography being trained and the influence of L1 knowledge on L2 learning.
The current investigation has several limitations which should be addressed in future
studies. Frist, the current study included a homogenous population of participants who

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

931

were young and highly educated. Future investigations should include adults with greater
variability in age and education in order to better generalize findings. Second, the current
study trained Cyrillic, which has significant overlap with English, causing both positive
and/or negative transfer between L1 and L2. While this overlap allowed us to analyze transfer, future studies that train orthographies with less overlap can evaluate the effects of each
instruction with less L1 interference. Third, pre-testing did not include direct measures
of IQ or working memory. While we assume that these skills were in the average range
since our participants were academically successful and performed in the average range on
our phonological and reading tests (and the PA measures did depend on average working
memory skills), we did directly test these skills. Future studies should include measures
of IQ and working memory as additional covariables. To calculate sample size, we conducted power analyses a priori and attempted to be consistent with the sample size reported
by a previous study using the same research design (Brennan and Booth 2015); however,
this did result in a small number of participants (N = 34, 17 per group). Because the current results are consistent with several previously published studies (Bitan and Karni 2003;
Bishop 1964; Brennan and Booth 2015; Knafle and Legenza 1978) and extend rather than
contradict previously reported results, we are confident that the current sample size was
adequate to answer our specific research questions. Given that the number of total participants in this study was small, it is of course possible that a large sample size might result
in different outcomes. Future research should consider conducting a similar study with a
much larger number of participants.
In conclusion, the current study provides evidence that for adults learning a second,
natural consistent alphabetic orthography, initial instruction emphasizing small grain units
resulted in higher accuracy for letter-phoneme matching whereas initial instruction emphasizing large grain units resulted in higher accuracy for rime-rhyme matching. Further, the
current results revealed that for adults given large grain instruction, high individual PA skill
was associated with higher accuracy but slower RT on a measure of letter-phoneme matching. In contrast, high PA skill was not correlated with either accuracy or RT for adults
given small grain instruction, suggesting that PA skill modulates learning when large grain
instruction is provided. Future investigations should investigate differences in learning outcomes for L2 orthographic learning given large versus small grain instruction with natural
languages that are inconsistent and with less overlap between the L1 and the L2.
Acknowledgements This project was partially funded by a graduate student research award granted to
Jennifer Kiskin by the University of Colorado Boulder's Center to Advance Research and Teaching in the
Social Sciences. This study was conducted as part of a master's thesis completed by Jennifer Kiskin under
the direction of Christine Brennan at the University of Colorado, Boulder. The authors would also like to
acknowledge Tina Meyers-Denman and Pui Fong Kan, both of whom served on the thesis committee for
Ms. Kiskin's thesis and provided informative feedback and suggestions related to the design of this study.
We would also like to thank Samantha M. Bartolo and Priscilla Jane Kurtz Williams for their help with data
collection and Annaliese Miller for her help editing the manuscript.

13

932

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

Appendix
See Fig. 3.

Fig. 3Russian Cyrillic orthographic stimuli. a Lowercase Russian Cyrillic letters and IPA transcription. b
All words used in initial training and generalization testing, including pronunciation in IPA transcription
and orthographic representation

References
Abu-Rabia, S. (2001). Testing the interdependence hypothesis among native adult bilingual Russian-English students. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30(4), 437-455. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10104
25825251.
Adams, M. J. (1994). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Akamatsu, N. (1999). The effects of first language orthographic features on word recognition processing in
English as a second language. Reading and Writing, 11(4), 381-403. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10080
5352.
Bishop, C. H. (1964). Transfer effects of word and letter training in reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 3, 215-221.
Bitan, T., & Booth, J. (2012). Offline improvement in learning to read a novel orthography depends on direct
letter instruction. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 896-918. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01234
.x.
Bitan, T., & Karni, A. (2003). Alphabetical knowledge from whole words training: Effects of explicit
instruction and implicit experience on learning script segmentation. Cognitive Brain Research, 16,
323-337. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-6410(02)00301-4.
Bitan, T., & Karni, A. (2004). Procedural and declarative knowledge of word recognition and letter decoding in reading an artificial script. Cognitive Brain Research, 19(3), 229-243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cogbrainres.2004.01.001.
Bitan, T., Manor, D., Morocz, I., & Karni, A. (2005). Effects of alphabeticality, practice and type of instruction on reading an artificial script: An fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research, 25(1), 90-106. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.04.014.

13

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (2020) 49:915-933

933

Boulware-Gooden, R., Joshi, R., & Grigorenko, E. (2015). The role of phonology, morphology, and orthography in english and russian spelling. Dyslexia, 21(2), 142-161. https://doi.org/10.1002/dys.1498.
Brennan, C., & Booth, J. (2015). Large grain instruction and phonological awareness skill influence rime
sensitivity, processing speed, and early decoding skill in adult L2 learners. Reading and Writing, 28(7),
917-938. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-015-9555-2.
Durgunoglu, A. Y., Nagy, W. E., & Hancin-Bhatt, B. J. (1993). Cross-language transfer of phonological
awareness. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 453-465.
Ettlinger, M., Morgan-Short, K., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., & Wong, P. (2016). The relationship between
artificial and second language learning. Cognitive Science, 40(4), 822-847. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cogs.12257.
Goodwin, A., August, D., & Calderon, M. (2015). Reading in multiple orthographies: differences and similarities in reading in Spanish and English for English Learners. Language Learning, 65(3), 596-630.
https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12127.
Goswami, U., Ziegler, J., Dalton, L., & Schneider, W. (2003). Nonword reading across orthographies:
How flexible is the choice of reading units? Applied Psycholinguistics, 24(02), 235-247. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0142716403000134.
Hirshorn, E., & Fiez, J. (2014). Using artificial orthographies for studying cross-linguistic differences in
the cognitive and neural profiles of reading. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 31, 69-85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2014.06.006.
Katz, L., & Frost, R. (1992). The reading process is different for different orthographies: The orthographic
depth hypothesis. Advances in psychology - Amsterdam, 94, 67.
Knafle, J. D., & Legenza, A. (1978). External generalizability of inquiry involving artificial orthography.
American Educational Research Journal, 15, 331-347. https://doi.org/10.2307/1162471.
Koda, K. (2007). Reading and language learning: Crosslinguistic constraints on second language reading
development. Language Learning, 57(s1), 1-44. https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.101997010-i1.
Lukatela, G., & Turvey, M. (1998). Reading in two alphabets. American Psychologist, 53(9), 1057. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.53.9.1057.
Marian, V., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2004). Mapping written input onto orthographic representations: The case
of bilinguals with partially overlapping orthographies. In Forbus, K., Gentner, D., & Regier, T. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 654-659).
Lawrence Erlbaum. Retrieved on April 15, 2019, from https://cognitivesciencesociety.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/01/CogSci04.pdf.
Nassaji, H. (2011). Issues in second-language reading: Implications for acquisition and instruction. Reading
Research Quarterly, 46(2), 173-184. https://doi.org/10.1598/RRQ.46.2.5.
Psychology Software Tools, Inc. [E-Prime 3.0]. (2016). Retrieved May 4, 2017, from https://www.pstne
t.com.
Schmalz, X., Beyersmann, E., Cavalli, E., & Marinus, E. (2016). Unpredictability and complexity of printto-speech correspondences increase reliance on lexical processes: more evidence for the orthographic
depth hypothesis. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 28(6), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445
911.2016.1182172.
Schwartz, M., Kahn-Horwitz, J., & Share, D. (2014). Orthographic learning and self-teaching in a bilingual and biliterate context. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 117, 45-58. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jecp.2013.08.008.
Taylor, J., Plunkett, K., & Nation, K. (2011). The influence of consistency, frequency, and semantics on
learning to read: An artificial orthography paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 37(1), 60. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020126.
Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., & Rashotte, C. A. (1999). Test of word reading efficiency (TOWRE). Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Wagner, R. K., Torgesen, J. K., & Rashotte, C. A. (1999). Comprehensive test of phonological processing
(CTOPP). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Wise, J., Yoncheva, Y., & McCandliss, B. D. (2011). Effects of preference and strategy on learning to read
an artificial script. Indiana University Undergraduate Journal of Cognitive Science, 6, 38-47.
Ziegler, J., & Goswami, U. (2005). Reading acquisition, developmental dyslexia, and skilled reading
across languages: A psycholinguistic grain size theory. Psychological Bulletin, 131(1), 3. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-2909.131.1.3.
Ziegler, J., & Goswami, U. (2006). Becoming literate in different languages: Similar problems, different
solutions. Developmental Science, 9(5), 429-436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00509.x.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

13

