Journal of Child Language (2019), 46, 913-937
doi:10.1017/S0305000919000278

ARTICLE

A longitudinal investigation of language mixing
in Spanish-English dual language learners: the
role of language proficiency, variability, and
sociolinguistic factors
Simona MONTANARI1*, Wendy OCHOA1,2, and Kaveri SUBRAHMANYAM1
1

California State University, Los Angeles, USA and 2University of California, Irvine USA
*Corresponding author: Simona Montanari, PhD, Department of Child & Family Studies, E&T A509,
Rongxiang Xu College of Health and Human Services, California State University, Los Angeles, 5151 State
University Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90032, United States of America. E-mail: smontan2@calstatela.edu
(Received 5 September 2018; revised 4 February 2019; accepted 17 April 2019;
first published online 9 July 2019)

Abstract
This study examines language mixing in 26 Spanish-English dual language learners over
the course of their first year of preschool. The children's patterns of language choice while
interacting in monolingual language contexts were analyzed at age 3;6 and 4;5 to examine:
(1) whether the frequency of language mixing changed during the year; (2) whether
mixing was related to proficiency as measured by utterance length and lexical diversity;
and (3) whether there were different subgroups of children, among the participants,
with similar proficiency and language use patterns. The results indicate that language
mixing, which was low at both ages, was related to limited lexical resources only at 3;6.
However, by age 4;5, language choice was more constrained by sociolinguistic variables
- children's awareness of the language prescribed by the majority culture - than by
proficiency. An exploratory cluster analysis further reveals different profiles of learners
sharing similar proficiency and language mixing characteristics.
Keywords: language mixing; Dual Language Learners; longitudinal study; language proficiency; variability

Introduction
Multilingualism is a typical aspect of everyday life for much of the world's population.
While no statistics exist as to the number of people who function with multiple
languages on a daily basis, the fact that the world's almost 7,000 languages are
spoken in approximately 200 countries suggests that multilingualism is a
characteristic of practically every region (Romaine, 2013). For instance, despite its
reputation as a monolingual English-only country, at least 364 languages are spoken
in the United States (Mackey, 2013), and cities like New York City, Los Angeles, and
Chicago are largely multilingual. Second only to English, Spanish is the language
most used in the country, and, according to US 2018 Census estimates, it is spoken
(c) Cambridge University Press 2019

914

Montanari et al.

by approximately 40 million Hispanic individuals (www.census.gov). In these families,
Spanish may be the primary home language; yet, children hear both Spanish and
English from early on and are formally and consistently exposed to English in
preschool or kindergarten, while their Spanish is still being developed. The number of
such children - DUAL LANGUAGE LEARNERS (Paradis, Genesee, & Crago, 2011) -
in US schools has doubled in recent years and Spanish-speaking children represented
77% of all English learners in 2015 (National Center for Education Statistics, 2017).
These statistics suggest that bilingual children make up a large proportion of students
in the typical classroom and the use of two languages - including in the same sentence -
is common as children are educated in the majority language.
Despite the prevalence of what are uniformly referred to as dual language learners,
children from bilingual backgrounds can be very different from one another since they
experience a tremendous range of variability in their language histories, in particular,
their onset of acquisition of, the amounts of exposure to, and the kinds of experiences
and conversational partners in their two languages (Hoff & Core, 2013). Moreover, given
the dynamic nature of bilingualism, their patterns of language exposure and use are likely
to fluctuate over time, with major changes occurring after entering daycare, preschool, or
kindergarten. The beginning of schooling may also mark the first time that children are
faced with monolingual English speakers and with monolingual patterns of language use
in the majority culture, thus becoming aware of the sociolinguistic characteristics of their
environment and the status of their languages (Gutierrez-Clellen, Simon-Cereijido, &
Leone, 2009). Indeed, it is often during this time that young bilinguals learn that English
is the majority language, the language with the highest status in the community, and the
preferred language in the school context, while Spanish is a minority language spoken
only at home and by a segment of the population.
In this subtractive context, the practice of alternating between two languages in a
single utterance or conversation - CODE or LANGUAGE MIXING (Meisel, 1994) -
may raise particular concerns among teachers and service providers since, being
non-existent in monolingual speech, it may be misinterpreted as a sign of confusion
or of lack of proficiency or communicative competence (Hughes, Shaunessy, Brice,
Ratliff, & McHatton, 2006). Echoes of this view can also be found in contemporary
research. Some recent studies conducted in a variety of settings across the world have
indeed shown that language mixing in young children is the result of
proficiency-related factors, namely, lexical gaps that children fill in by borrowing
words from their dominant language when interacting in their weaker language (see
Genesee & Nicoladis, 2007, for a review). At the other extreme, however, it has also
been suggested that language alternation in discourse by children is an indicator of
bilingual competence - so that more proficient bilinguals mix languages more than
less proficient ones - because it conforms to the linguistic and pragmatic constraints
of the two languages (Paradis, Nicoladis, & Genesee, 2000; Yow, Patrycia, & Flynn,
2016). Researchers have also found that children's patterns of language mixing may
be also mediated by factors such as the interlocutor/community's language
preferences, language status and prestige, setting, and topic (Gutierrez-Clellen et al.,
2009; Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007). Furthermore, since dual language learners are a
heterogeneous linguistic group whose language proficiency and use change over time
(Hoff & Core, 2013), their patterns of language mixing may be dynamic and
characterized by variability - which measures of average such as means may fail to
capture - and there may be different profiles of children with distinct proficiency
and language mixing patterns.

Journal of Child Language

915

It is the goal of this paper to examine language choice in bilingual preschoolers
longitudinally, taking proficiency, variability, and sociolinguistic factors into account.
In particular, we investigate patterns of language mixing in a sample of 26 Spanish-
English bilingual children from Los Angeles, California, examining how these
changed from the beginning of their first year in preschool to a year later when the
children interacted in monolingual English and Spanish contexts. Since language
mixing at early stages of development has been often interpreted as caused by
vocabulary gaps, we examine whether the children's language mixing is related to
their proficiency in Spanish and English. In addition, given the variability that
characterizes dual language learners' language histories, acquisition, and
performance, we conduct an exploratory cluster analysis to assess whether there were
different groups of dual language learners sharing similar proficiency and language
use characteristics. We also take sociolinguistic variables into account to explain
language mixing patterns that occur while interacting in the majority language,
English, as opposed to those that occur when children use the minority language,
Spanish.
Adults' code-switching and children's code/language mixing
Although there is as yet no consensus concerning the use of terminology, switching
between two languages in conversation is often referred to as CODE-SWITCHING
(Poplack, 1980) when the juxtaposition of the two codes (languages or dialects) is
grammatical and constrained by regularities, as in the case of proficient bilingual
adults. However, researchers tend to use the term CODE or LANGUAGE MIXING
to refer to young learners' speech during the early stages of bilingual development,
when it is debated whether such language alternation is as grammatically constrained
as in the case of proficient bilingual adults (Meisel, 1994). Indeed, researchers have
proposed that alternating between languages in conversation is different for
individuals who have already established proficiency in two languages and young
children who are still developing them. For instance, code-switching among bilingual
adults tends to be socially motivated, especially in communities where it is typically
practiced, and it serves to establish bilingual identity, tell a narrative, or include/
exclude a particular individual from a conversation (Paradis et al., 2011). Young
bilingual children, on the other hand, often engage in language mixing due to
vocabulary gaps (see Genesee & Nicoladis, 2007, for a review); it is only after they
become increasingly proficient in their two languages and are socialized into the
preferred patterns of language use in their communities that their language mixing
develops into the skill of code-switching (Jisa, 2000). In the present study, we will
refer to the alternation between two languages as `code-switching' among bilingual
adults and as `language mixing' among young dual language learners. We will also
use the term `dual language learners' and `bilingual children' interchangeably to refer
to children who are learning two languages in childhood.
A wealth of literature exists on code-switching in bilingual adults and children
concerning the grammatical constraints evident in their speech (e.g., Bernardini &
Schlyter, 2004; Cantone, 2007; MacSwan, 2016; Meisel, 1994; Poplack, 1980), as well
as the social and pragmatic functions served by such utterances (e.g., Gumperz, 1971;
McClure, 1981; Valdes-Fallis, 1978). However, studies on language mixing among
young bilingual learners that do not focus on grammar are fewer, and, until recently,
they have been based primarily on case studies of individual children from different

916

Montanari et al.

language communities (e.g., Genesee, Boivin, & Nicoladis, 1996; Genesee, Nicoladis, &
Paradis, 1995; Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007). At the same time, as pointed out above,
different interpretations of this phenomenon have been proposed and there is as yet
no consensus as to the reasons why adults and children mix languages. Some
researchers argue that language alternation is an indicator of bilingual proficiency
since it is a sophisticated and rule-governed behavior that is grammatically
constrained (Poplack, 1980); it occurs in places within the utterance that do not
violate the syntactic structure of either language (Poplack, 1980); and only
individuals who are fully proficient in two languages are able to unconsciously
comply with these norms (Meisel, 2006).
Poplack (1980), who analyzed the code-switching patterns of 20 Puerto Rican
Spanish-English bilingual adults with different degrees of bilingual proficiency in
New York, differentiated two types of language alternation - INTRA-SENTENTIAL
and INTER-SENTENTIAL - arguing that they are indicative of different degrees of
bilingual proficiency. Intra-sentential code-switching, which involves switching
languages WITHIN the utterance, requires the most bilingual proficiency because the
individual is forced to keep both language structures in mind while switching
without violating the syntactic structure of either language. Inter-sentential
code-switching, on the other hand, requires minimal bilingual proficiency because it
involves switching BETWEEN complete utterances. Since both language structures are
separated at the utterance boundary, the individual does not have to engage in the
difficult task of juxtaposing the two language structures before making the switch
(Poplack, 1980). Findings from this study showed that participants who were
competent in both languages engaged in a higher incidence of intra-sentential
code-switching than Spanish-dominant speakers, who instead preferred the less risky
inter-sentential code-switching. Peynircioglu and Durgunoglu (2002) found similar
results in a study of 36 Spanish-English bilingual three- to five-year-old preschoolers
from Washington, DC, who had different proficiency levels in Spanish and English.
The study revealed that, although there was an overall higher incidence of
inter-sentential language mixing, the most balanced children engaged in
intra-sentential language mixing more often than the less proficient dual language
learners. Similar findings were reported in a completely different setting by Yow
et al. (2016), who studied 36 English-Mandarin bilingual kindergarteners and
first-graders from Singapore. The bilingual children who mixed languages more -
and at the intra-utterance level - indeed demonstrated higher proficiency in both
Mandarin and English compared to those who mixed languages less, providing
additional evidence that language mixing, particularly at the intra-sentential level,
may be a mark of bilingual competence even at a young age.
However, other researchers working in similar communities have suggested that
individuals mix languages for lexical gaps in one or both languages, and thus,
language alternation - and in particular language mixing in young language learners
- may be due to limited language proficiency (see Genesee & Nicoladis, 2007, for a
review) or even language loss (Anderson, 2012). This proposal, which predicts that
individuals alternate languages more in contexts in which they are required to use
their weaker language, can explain the language mixing patterns of children who are
still in the process of developing two languages and thus resort to language mixing
to fill in vocabulary gaps. Many case studies of individual children across different
regions of the world have found, for instance, that young bilinguals borrow words or
even syntactic structures from their dominant language when speaking their less

Journal of Child Language

917

developed language because they have not yet developed such translation equivalents or
constructions in the weaker language (Bernardini & Schlyter, 2004; Nicoladis & Secco,
2000). More recent investigations that include larger samples of children have also
found that language mixing in children is proficiency-related. For instance, Greene,
Pena, and Bedore (2012), who examined single-word language mixes in a semantic
task by 606 Spanish-English bilingual five-year-olds from Texas and Utah, reported
that language dominance significantly impacted language choice as children tended
to choose the language they knew better to name semantic items. Similarly, Ribot
and Hoff (2014), who studied language choice in 115 two-and-a-half-year-old
Spanish-English bilingual toddlers in South Florida using parental reports, found
that the children who switched to English when interacting in Spanish (as reported
by parents) showed greater English skills, specifically in the expressive domain.
Children who were reported not to mix languages were more balanced bilinguals in
both expressive and receptive skills. Although these recent large-scale studies did not
examine language mixing in naturalistic conversations, their findings confirm the
hypothesis that language mixing in young bilinguals is often the result of limited
proficiency.
It must be noticed, however, that language mixing for vocabulary gaps by young
bilinguals has not always been interpreted negatively; rather, some researchers (working
in the same communities where the studies reviewed above were conducted) have seen
it as a sign of communicative competence (Reyes, 2004). For instance, since dual
language learners are still developing both languages, it is normal that they evidence
lexical gaps (Genesee et al., 1995; Nicoladis & Secco, 2000). Furthermore, most dual
language learners tend to be exposed to each language at different amounts and to
situations in which the adults around them code-switch frequently. Given that children
tend to reflect the language environment they are exposed to, it is of no surprise that
these children engage in language mixing too. Instances of language mixing should
thus not be seen as a sign of lack of proficiency at this age but as evidence of children's
ability to resort to both of their languages effortlessly to continue the flow of the
conversation and match their patterns of language use to those of their interlocutors or
community (Hereida & Altarriba, 2001; Reyes, 2004).
For example, Comeau, Genesee, and Lapaquette (2003) found that two- to
three-year-old French-English bilingual children from Montreal were capable of
varying their patterns of language choice following the lead of unfamiliar
interlocutors who changed their rates of language mixing over three sessions. This
finding was interpreted as evidence that young bilinguals can monitor language
input on-line and adjust their language use accordingly, showing sensitivity to the
interlocutors' language skills, use, and preferences and thus advanced communicative
competence. Yow et al. (2016) also reported that the five-year-olds who came from a
school in Singapore where Mandarin/English mixing was the norm mixed languages
at a significantly higher rate (32% of the time) than proficiency-matched children
whose school discouraged code-switching (1.49%), suggesting that children vary their
patterns of language use following those in their environment. Reyes (2004),
examining the language mixing patterns of 20 seven- and ten-year-old Spanish-
English bilinguals in a bilingual program in northern California, further found that
the children who mixed languages the most - the older group - were more skilled in
using both languages to keep the conversation flowing, thereby showing the greatest
level of communicative competence. Thus, language mixing in children represents a
controversial topic in the bilingual literature: while, at one extreme, some researchers

918

Montanari et al.

have argued that it is the result of uneven bilingual proficiency, at the other extreme
others have seen it as indicative of bilingual competence.
Models of code-switching that have been proposed to account for adults' language
alternation have posited that contextual factors such as interlocutor effects and
speaker ecology are critical in explaining adult code-switching behavior. For instance,
in the Control Process Model of code-switching (Green, 2018; Green & Wei, 2014),
the environment - and the interactional context - will dictate to a large extent what
the bilingual can and will do with regard to code-switching. For example, a single
language context (common in stable bilingual communities with a tradition of
language separation) or a dual language context where a speaker may converse in
one language to one person and in another language to a different interlocutor
(where there may be considerable asymmetry in speakers' proficiency in the two
languages) will result in SINGLE switches, in particular INSERTIONS and
ALTERNATIONS (Muysken, 2000), which require competitive language control
(Green, 2018) (in which items and constructions from only one language can be
used). However, contexts in which languages have roughly equal prestige and no
tradition of overt language separation (Muysken, 2000) or conversational partners
who prime copious language mixing (Green, 2018) will elicit DENSE code-switching,
which require cooperative language control, allowing items and constructions from
either language into the utterance plan (Green, 2018).
While this model was not proposed with young developing bilinguals in mind, it may
be used to explain some of the findings of other studies of children's language mixing.
Some researchers have indeed argued that children's proficiency and sensitivity to their
interlocutor/community's language patterns may interact with variables such as
language status and prestige, setting, and topic, further affecting children's patterns of
language choice. For example, in subtractive environments, arguably like the US,
children are typically exposed to English rather than Spanish in the academic setting.
Hence, many children may associate the school setting and school-related topics with
the English language. Gutierrez-Clellen et al. (2009) conducted a study of language
mixing among 58 six-year-old Spanish-English dual language learners with and
without language impairment in Southern California. The children came from homes
where Spanish was spoken predominantly; however, at school English was the language
that was primarily used for instruction. The results showed that while Englishdominant, six-year-old children tended to mix languages at a higher incidence when
conversing in their non-dominant Spanish language, Spanish-dominant children
tended to refrain from language mixing when speaking their non-dominant language,
English. This was true both for typically developing children and for children with
language impairment. The authors concluded that the Spanish-dominant children
refrained from language mixing when speaking English, their weaker language,
because, in the US, English tends to hold a higher status than minority languages,
especially in the school setting (Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009). For this same
reason, the English-dominant dual language learners found it acceptable to mix
more when speaking Spanish. Yip and Matthews (2006) found similar results in a
sample of six Cantonese-English bilinguals in Hong Kong. These children inserted
English words into their Cantonese speech more frequently than vice versa, in line
with the frequent code-switching behavior of the larger community in Hong Kong.
These results point to the complexity of language mixing in young bilinguals and
the importance of the sociolinguistic environment in accounting for this linguistic
behavior.

Journal of Child Language

919

The present study
It is the goal of this study to examine the language mixing patterns of 26 Spanish-
English dual language learners in monolingual English and Spanish contexts
longitudinally, from the beginning of their first year of preschool to a year later.
Most investigations on this topic have often involved detailed case studies of eight or
fewer children, or investigations with relatively large samples, but with no
longitudinal examination of language mixing in naturalistic conversations. To our
knowledge, this study is the first that attempts to bridge these two approaches by
analyzing language mixing patterns in naturalistic conversations in a relatively large
sample of children, and over the course of one year while they were being
acculturated to the sociolinguistic characteristics of their environment. Since the
participants were from predominantly Spanish-speaking homes, we were interested in
observing their language mixing behavior after formal and consistent exposure to
English began in preschool. We were particularly interested in examining (1) the
incidence of intra-sentential versus inter-sentential language mixing at preschool
entry (at 3;6) and a year later (at 4;5), and (2) whether these patterns were related to
proficiency as measured by mean length of utterance in words (MLUw) and Total
Number of Different Words (TNDW). MLU is the most widely used measure of
grammatical productivity (Bedore, Pena, Gilllam, & Ho, 2010), and MLUw is
typically used when comparing languages with different morphological patterns
(Goldstein, Bunta, Lange, Rodriguez, & Burrows, 2010). TNDW has been found to
be positively associated with children's vocabulary by other lexical measures
(Condouris, Meyer, & Tager-Flusberg, 2003), and it is commonly used as an
indicator of children's lexical development (Hewitt, Hammer, Yont, & Tomblin, 2005).
Since dual language learners are a heterogeneous linguistic group (Hoff & Core,
2013) - some may have equal proficiency in both languages, others may be slightly
more proficient in one of the two languages, and still others may show a
significant dominance of one language over the other - we also conducted a
preliminary cluster analysis to explore whether there were different profiles of dual
language learners in terms of their language mixing rates, MLUw, and TNDW.
Although cluster analysis has been deemed particularly useful for distinguishing
various learner profiles, it has rarely been used in past research of dual language
learners (Csizer & Dornyei, 2005). The objective of cluster analysis is to identify,
within a given sample, certain subgroups - or clusters - of participants who share
similar combinations of characteristics. The rationale for using this procedure in
this study is the finding that language mixing patterns might be either positively or
negatively related to proficiency in different children. That is, some learners with
high utterance length and lexical diversity in English but low MLUw and TNDW
in Spanish may show a low incidence of language mixing when conversing in
English but high mixing rates when speaking Spanish (as found in Greene et al.,
2012, Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009, and Ribot & Hoff, 2014). At the same time,
the opposite profile (high MLUw and TNDW in Spanish but low MLUw and
TNDW in English) might not result in high language switching rates when
speaking English (Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009; Ribot & Hoff, 2014). Yet other
children with balanced language skills across languages can show either high (Yow
et al., 2016) or low language mixing rates (Ribot & Hoff, 2014). Thus, we believe that
cluster analysis could uncover different profiles of children with varied proficiency and
language mixing patterns. While our approach is certainly innovative, we must point

920

Montanari et al.

out that our analysis is purely exploratory - and our interpretation tentative - given the
limited number of participants.

Method
Participants
The data for the present study were derived from a larger longitudinal study of bilingual
development in Mexican-American dual language learners enrolled in Head Start
programs in Southern California. We focused on the spontaneous speech samples of
26 randomly selected children (11 males, 15 females - the original sample included
more females than males) collected in Spanish and English at age 3;6 (age range: 3;2-
4;2), at the beginning of the program, and at age 4;5 (age range: 4;1-5;1), in the fall of
their second year in the program. All children were born in the US but came from
Mexican-origin families who had been living in Los Angeles County for an average of
12.7 years (SD = 8.7; Range = 6-23). All families came from low Socioeconomic Status
(SES) backgrounds as determined by the children's eligibility to participate in the Head
Start program, which is specifically designed to promote school readiness in children
between birth and age five from low-income families (https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ohs).
Indeed, as shown in Table 1, all mothers had limited education, with the majority of
them having completed high school (76.9%) or only primary school (23.1%).
All children were typically developing and had no hearing, speech, language,
cognitive, or neurological deficits based on parental reports and program screening
tests. In order to determine the children's language history, exposure patterns, and
language use, a detailed parent questionnaire was administered in Spanish. All
parents reported a Mexican background/nationality and the Mexican Spanish variety
as the language most spoken in the home. All children learned Spanish as their first
language, since this was the language primarily used at home. At the same time,
since all participants were born in the US, they had also had `some' exposure to
English from infancy through siblings, media, and the larger community, although
formal and consistent exposure to this language had begun in preschool. In terms of
language exposure and mixing patterns (see Table 1), the majority of parents
indicated, on a scale from (1) to (4), that they spoke (1) only Spanish to their
children (73.1%) or used (2) "mostly Spanish with a few English words" (26.9%), a
result that suggests that exposure to code-switching through parental input was not
widespread. However, language use was more mixed when children spoke to their
parents (57.7%) and in sibling-to-sibling interactions (55.6%).
Classroom observations provided additional information about the language
environment in the school. The Head Start program followed an English immersion
model; for instance, for most children, formal and consistent exposure to English
had begun in preschool. However, some teachers and classroom assistants were
bilingual and addressed children in Spanish at times. An analysis of language use in
the classroom using the Language Interaction Snapshot (LISn) (Atkins-Burnett,
Sprachman, Lopez, Caspe, & Fallin, 2011) - which captures the language use of
teachers and adults during a period of five minutes divided into ten cycles of
thirty-second segments each - indeed revealed that teachers spoke English for about
89% of the time and Spanish for about 11% of the time, with intra-sentential
code-switching virtually non-existent in their speech. Thus, the participants in this
study received input in, and had different degrees of proficiency in, Spanish and

Table 1. Participants' gender, age at T1, mother's education, and parent-to-child, child-to-parent, and sibling language use
Parent-to-child language

Child-to-parent
language

Gender

Age at T1

Mother's education

Siblings' language

001

M

3;7

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

002

F

3;11

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

003

F

3;10

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

Spanish only

004

M

3;7

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

English only

English only

005

M

3;4

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

English only

006

M

3;7

Primary

Spanish only

Spanish only

No siblings

007

M

3;6

Primary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish only

008

F

3;2

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

No siblings

009

F

3;4

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

English only

010

F

3;10

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

011

M

3;10

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish with a few
English words

English only

012

F

3;2

Primary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

Spanish only

013

M

4;0

Primary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

014

F

3;7

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

921

(Continued )

Journal of Child Language

Participants

922

Table 1. (Continued.)
Parent-to-child language

Child-to-parent
language

Gender

Age at T1

Mother's education

Siblings' language

015

F

3;5

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

016

F

3;6

Primary

Spanish only

English with a few
Spanish words

Spanish with a few English words

017

M

4;0

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

018

F

3;2

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

019

M

3;9

Primary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

020

M

3;3

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish with a few
English words

No siblings

021

F

3;2

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

022

F

3;6

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish with a few
English words

English with a few Spanish words

023

M

3;8

Secondary

Spanish with a few English words

Spanish with a few
English words

Spanish with a few English words

024

F

4;2

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

025

F

3;2

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish with a few
English words

Spanish only

026

F

3;4

Secondary

Spanish only

Spanish only

Spanish with a few English words

Montanari et al.

Participants

Journal of Child Language

923

English, but Spanish tended to be the home and dominant language and English the
school and weaker language. Code-switching was limited in the Spanish and English
input children received from parents and teachers; however, it was more common in
their interactions with siblings and in child-to-parent conversations.

Procedures
As in previous seminal studies of children's language mixing (Genesee et al., 1996;
Genesee et al., 1995; Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007), the data for this study were collected
in naturalistic conversations in monolingual language contexts, where children were
interacting with separate research assistants who, although bilingual, posed as
monolingual English and Spanish speakers. While it is true that this methodology
might discourage children from mixing languages, it was deemed necessary to examine
children's ability to adhere to the interactional patterns of the school context (which
was predominantly monolingual English) - and explore children's language behavior
in a parallel monolingual Spanish setting - after formal and consistent exposure to
English had begun in preschool and while children were being acculturated to the
sociolinguistic characteristics of their environment.
Before collecting the speech samples, the research assistants became familiar with the
children by spending time and interacting with them in their classroom. At the time of
data collection, children were individually taken to a room during regular school hours
and audio recorded for approximately 45 minutes in one language. The research
assistants used a predetermined set of age-appropriate toys and books - including
stuffed animals, dolls, cars, and books depicting common and culturally appropriate
themes (going to school, attending a picnic, a birthday party, etc.) - to interact with
the participants and elicit spontaneous speech. Since a monolingual-speaking
situation was created, research assistants spoke only Spanish or English, depending
on what language sample they were collecting. In situations when children spoke the
non-target language, the research assistants pretended not to understand, and asked
the children to repeat it in the target language. In total, four speech samples were
collected from each child, a Spanish and English speech sample at age 3;6 and a
Spanish and English speech sample at age 4;5.

Transcription and analyses
The samples were transcribed orthographically and analyzed by two additional research
assistants using Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT; Miller & Iglesias,
2008). Each transcription was double-checked by a second transcriber and any
disagreement was discussed by listening to the recordings several more times until
consensus was reached. The consensus transcriptions were used for the analysis. The
first 100 utterances of each sample (after skipping the first ten utterances) were then
coded for intra-sentential and inter-sentential language mixing by the same two
coders, trained on our criteria listed below, to ensure reliability and consistency of
the coding. English samples were coded for Spanish language mixing and Spanish
samples were coded for English language mixing. As shown in example (1) below,
intra-sentential language mixing was defined as any mixing within the child's
utterance, whereas inter-sentential language mixing was defined as the mixing of
complete utterances in the non-target language as in Genesee et al. (1995). Proper

924

Montanari et al.

nouns in the non-target language and imitations were not counted as language
switches.
(1)

EXPERIMENTER:

What would you like to play?
I want the juguete (`the toy'). [INTRA-SENTENTIAL MIX]
EXPERIMENTER: The what?
CHILD: Por que no me lo das? (`Why won't you give it to me?') [INTERSENTENTIAL MIX]
CHILD: damelo! (`give it to me!') [INTER-SENTENTIAL MIX]
EXPERIMENTER: I don't speak Spanish.
CHILD: Give it to me por favor! (`please') [INTRA-SENTENTIAL MIX]
EXPERIMENTER: What is it that you want?
CHILD: The car!
CHILD:

Inter-rater reliability of coding was performed by having a second transcriber
independently re-code each sample for inter-sentential and intra-sentential language
mixing. Disagreements were discussed by re-examining the transcriptions until
consensus was reached.
The proportions of inter- and intra-sentential language mixing in each language
context were then calculated out of the 100 utterances. It is important to mention
that, while all children produced 100 utterances in both English and Spanish at age
4;5, seven children did not produce 100 utterances in English at age 3;6. This was
not surprising since the children came from predominantly Spanish-speaking homes
and had just begun preschool. In these cases, we calculated the proportion of
language mixing out of the total number of utterances produced by the child in the
English context. We eliminated one case from the analyses because the child (one
female) produced 15 utterances, a database that was considered too limited to yield
valid findings. The remaining children produced between 65 and 89 utterances in
English at age 3;6, but their proportions of language mixing in this context were not
statistically different from the proportions of language mixing in the same context by
the children who produced 100 utterances (t(21) = 1.777, p = .071). Additionally, out
of the remaining children, two other cases (two girls) were eliminated from the
language mixing and cluster analyses because the z-score of the language mixing
variables exceeded the 3.29 rule of thumb for outliers. This left us with data from 11
boys and 12 girls.
Mean length of utterance in words (MLUw) and Total Number of Different Words
(TNDW) were automatically generated by SALT for the first 100 utterances (after
skipping the first ten utterances). Recall that MLUw is typically used when
measuring grammatical productivity in young bilinguals speaking languages with
different morphological patterns (Goldstein et al., 2010), while TNDW is commonly
used as an indicator of children's lexical development in both monolingual and
bilingual children (Hewitt et al., 2005). MLUw in English was calculated from the
pure English utterances and the English portion of language-mixed utterances.
MLUw in Spanish was calculated from pure Spanish utterances and the Spanish
portion of mixed utterances. Although some researchers completely eliminate
language-mixed utterances when calculating MLUw (Yow et al., 2016), we considered
this method too harsh and decided to give children credit for every word they
produced in the target language. TNDW scores were calculated by counting English
words only for English and Spanish words only for Spanish.

Journal of Child Language

925

Statistical comparisons of patterns of language mixing, MLUw values, and TNDW
scores in different languages and at different times were completed using the
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS Statistics Version 22). Paired-sample
t-tests were used to examine whether language mixing patterns, MLUw, and TNDW
scores changed across time and language. A univariate two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was conducted to assess whether time, language, and the interaction of
time and language predicted language mixing patterns. In addition, correlations
between proportions of language mixing and MLUw and TNDW values were also
calculated at each time and in each language to assess whether such language
alternation was related to proficiency in either language. We finally ran a cluster
analysis to explore whether there were different profiles of children sharing similar
patterns of language mixing, MLUw, and TNDW, using a series of one-way
within-subjects ANOVAs to examine differences among clusters. The alpha level was
adjusted for multiple comparisons throughout using the Bonferroni correction
method (Holm, 1979). Effect sizes were calculated using Cohen's d for t-tests and
partial eta squared ( 2) for ANOVAs.

Results
Language mixing patterns at ages 3;6 and 4;5
Figure 1 displays the proportion of intra-sentential and inter-sentential language mixing
in the English and Spanish context at ages 3;6 and 4;5. The results show that the
proportion of language mixing was low in both languages and at both ages, in line
with the results of previous studies (Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009; Ribot & Hoff,
2014). We first examined the intra-sentential and inter-sentential language mixing
patterns of the participants at age 3;6 by conducting a set of four paired-sample
t-tests. In order to protect against Type I error rate, we used the Bonferroni
procedure, which resulted in the new critical alpha of .0125. The first t-test showed
no significant difference between the proportion of intra-sentential (M = 0.05) versus
inter-sentential (M = 0.06) language mixing of English into Spanish (d = .18). In
contrast, there was a higher proportion of inter-sentential (M = 0.12) than
intra-sentential (M = 0.03) language mixing of Spanish into English (t(22) = -2.86,
p = .009, d = .60) (moderate effect size). In other words, while the proportion of
language switches between and within sentences were similar when the children
spoke Spanish, their use of Spanish in the English context predominantly consisted
of complete Spanish utterances. However, cross-language comparisons revealed no
significant differences between the proportion of inter-sentential and intra-sentential
language mixing in the Spanish and English context at age 3;6.
A set of four paired-samples t-tests were again conducted to examine intra-sentential
and inter-sentential language mixing patterns at age 4;5, keeping the critical alpha of
.0125 to protect against Type I error. The first pair revealed a statistical significant
difference between intra-sentential (M = 0.09) and inter-sentential (M = 0.05)
language mixing of English into Spanish (M = 0.05) (t(22) = -3.46, p = .002, d = .72)
(moderate effect size). However, there was no statistical significant difference between
intra-sentential (M = 0.02) and inter-sentential (M = 0.00) mixing of Spanish into
English at the same age (d = .34). Cross-language comparisons revealed that the
participants produced intra-sentential language mixing at a higher incidence while
speaking Spanish (M = 0.09) than while speaking English (M = 0.02) (t(22) = -4.31,

926

Montanari et al.

Figure 1. Proportion of intra-sentential and inter-sentential language mixing in the Spanish and English context
at ages 3;6 and 4;5.

Figure 2. Proportion of total language mixing (intra-sentential and inter-sentential combined for each
language) in the Spanish and English context at ages 3;6 and 4;5.

p < .001, d = .89) (large effect size). Likewise, there was a higher proportion of
inter-sentential language mixing in the Spanish context (M = 0.05) than in the
English one (M = 0.00) (t(22) = 4.81, p < .001, d = 1) (large effect size).
Figure 2 displays the proportion of TOTAL language mixing in the English and
Spanish context at ages 3;6 and 4;5. At 3;6, there was no statistically significant
difference between the proportion of total language mixing in the Spanish context
(M = 0.11) and the amount of total mixing in English (M = 0.16) (d = .28). At age
4;5, however, there was a higher proportion of language mixing when children spoke
Spanish (M = 0.14) than when they spoke English (M = 0.03) (t(23) = 5.31, p < .001,
d = 1) (large effect size). In other words, while the children switched language at
about equal amounts in Spanish and English at age 3;6, a year later, they were
inserting more English into their Spanish speech than Spanish into their English
speech. Longitudinal analyses confirmed that the amount of English language mixing

Journal of Child Language

927

Figure 3. Mean Length of Utterance in words and Total Number of Different Words in English and Spanish at
ages 3;6 and 4;5.

in the Spanish context did not change over the course of one year. However, there was a
statistically significant difference in the proportion of Spanish language mixing into
English between 3;6 (M = 0.16) and 4;5 (M = 0.03) (t(23) = 3.87, p = .001, d = .79)
(large effect size). These results indicate that using Spanish while speaking English
became virtually non-existent after a year of preschool.
MLUw and TNDW scores at ages 3;6 and 4;5
Figure 3 shows MLUw and TNDW scores at ages 3;6 and 4;5. Paired samples t-tests
(keeping the critical alpha of .0125 to protect against Type I error) revealed
statistically significant higher MLUw values in Spanish at age 4;5 (M = 2.93) than at
age 3;6 (M = 2.40) (t(24) = -5.06, p < .001, d = 1) (large effect size). Similarly, MLUw
in English was higher at age 4;5 (M = 3.09) than at age 3;6 (M = 2.09) (t(24) = -6.29,
p < .001, d = 1) (large effect size). In addition, cross-language comparisons revealed a
statistically significant difference between the children's initial English (M = 2.09) and
Spanish (M = 2.40) MLUw at age 3;6 (t(24) = 3.15, p = .004, d = .63) (moderate effect
size). However, at age 4;5, the participants' MLUw in Spanish (M = 2.93) was not
statistically different from their MLUw in English (M = 3.09) (d = .14). This means
that, although the children were initially dominant in Spanish, after one year of
preschool they had, on average, similar proficiency levels in both languages.
These results were confirmed by the TNDW analyses. For instance, at age 3;6,
there was a statistically significant higher incidence of Spanish unique words
(93.76) than English ones (68.32) (t(24) = 3.45, p = .002, d = .69) (moderate effect
size). At age 4;5, however, the children produced comparable amounts of unique
words in Spanish (M = 110.56) and in English (M = 109.00) (d = .07). Growth was
evident in both languages. Indeed, there was a higher incidence of unique Spanish
words at age 4;5 (M = 110.56) than age 3;6 (M = 93.76) (t(24) = -4.78, p < .001,
d = .96) (large effect size). Similarly, the children produced more English unique
words at age 4;5 (M = 109.00) than at age 3;6 (M = 68.32) (t(24) = -5.58, p < .001,
d = 1) (large effect size). Overall, these results suggest that the children made gains
in proficiency in both languages over the course of one year; however; growth was
more evident in English than in Spanish, as found in other studies of young dual
language learners growing up in the US (Hoff, Quinn, & Giguere, 2018;
Ruiz-Felter, Cooperson, Bedore, & Pena, 2016; Scheffner-Hammer, Lawrence, &
Miccio, 2008).

928

Montanari et al.

Language mixing as related to age, language, and proficiency
A series of 2 (language) by 2 (age) ANOVAs was used to evaluate main effects and
language by age interaction effects on inter-sentential, intra-sentential, and total
language mixing. The alpha level was again adjusted using the Bonferroni correction
(Holm, 1979). The model indicated significant main effects for age for all three types of
language mixing (inter-sentential: F(1,88) = 11.048, p = .001; intra-sentential: F(1,88) =
3.856, p = .045; total language mixing: F(1,88) = 5.705, p = .01). The effect sizes for
inter-sentential, intra-sentential, and total language mixing were large to moderate
(partial  2 = .11, .042, .06, respectively) (Cohen, 1988). The model also indicated
significant main effects for the age by language interaction (inter-sentential: F(1,88) =
8.765, p = .004; intra-sentential: F(1,88) = 7.446, p = .008; total language mixing: F
(1,88) = 11.436, p = .001). The effect sizes for inter-sentential, intra-sentential, and total
language mixing were also moderate to large (partial  2 = .09, .08, .11, respectively).
However, significant main effects for language were only found for intra-sentential
mixing (F(1,88) = 32.926, p < .001), where the effect size was large (partial  2 = .27).
The marginal means for total language mixing in English were .19 (SE = .28) at 3;6 and
.03 (SE = .28) at 4;5, a statistically significant mean difference of .16 (95% CI [.08, .24],
p < .001). Similarly, the marginal means for language mixing at age 4;5 were .14 (SE
= .28) in Spanish and .03 (SE = .28) in English, a statistically significant mean difference
of .11 (95% CI [.04, .19], p = .005). These results suggest that language mixing patterns
differed depending on age and language, with all types of mixing decreasing in English
but not in Spanish as the children got older.
In order to investigate whether language mixing patterns in the Spanish and English
context were linked to proficiency in Spanish and English as measured by MLUw and
TNDW in each language, a series of correlation analyses was carried out separately
for ages 3;6 and 4;5. Since the results did not differ between intra-sentential and
inter-sentential switches, we calculated correlations using the proportions of total
language mixing. Interestingly, the results showed few links between most proficiency
measures and language mixing patterns and the only significant relationships included
TNDW in English and language mixing in both contexts at age 3;6. In particular, we
found that the proportion of total mixed utterances in the English context at age 3;6
was negatively correlated with TNDW in English (r = -0.65, p < .001, adj.  = .0125),
suggesting that children who mixed more to Spanish while speaking English had
smaller English vocabularies. Similarly, we found a moderate, positive relationship
between language mixing patterns in Spanish and TNDW in English at the same age
(r = 0.61, p = .04, adj.  = .0125), a finding that might indicate that more language
mixing in the Spanish context was related to larger English vocabularies.

Exploratory cluster analysis
An exploratory cluster analysis was run on 23 cases, on English and Spanish variables
corresponding to language mixing (total), MLUw, and TNDW at ages 3;6 and 4;5.
Given that the aforementioned variables differed in scales, we computed their
z-scores and used them for this analysis. A hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward's
method produced three clusters between which most of the variables were
significantly different in their mean. See Figure 4 for details.
The first cluster (N = 8) (LOW BILINGUAL SKILLS / VARIABLE MIXING) was
characterized by dual language learners who were less than one standard deviation

Journal of Child Language

929

Figure 4. Cluster analysis of the participants as a function of MLUw, TNDW, and language-mixing (LM) variables
at 3;6 and 4;5.

below the mean on all proficiency and language mixing variables with the exception of
language mixing in the English context at age 3;6 and in the Spanish context at age 4;5.
As shown in Figure 4, these were possibly children with average to below-average skills
in BOTH languages (as compared to the other participants), although Spanish was their
dominant language at both ages. These were also children who switched to Spanish
while speaking English at preschool entry; however, a year later, they produced more
language mixing while interacting in Spanish than when interacting in English. The
second cluster (N = 6) (HIGH BILINGUAL SKILLS / LOW MIXING) was
characterized by participants who were up to a standard deviation above the mean
on Spanish and English TNDW and MLUw at both ages but their proportion of
language mixing in English at age 3;6 and Spanish at both ages tended to be more
than half a standard deviation below the mean. It thus appears that these children
had above-average proficiency in both languages as compared to the other
participants, and tended to produce minimal language mixing, especially at age 4;5.
Finally, Cluster 3 (N = 9) (LOW SPANISH SKILLS / HIGH MIXING IN SPANISH)
was characterized by dual language learners with Spanish TNDW and MLUw values
that were between a half and one standard deviation below the mean at both ages.
Yet, their language mixing proportion were between a half and one standard
deviation above the mean at both 3;6 and 4;5, especially in the Spanish context. It
thus appears that these children were stronger in English and they tended to mix
more when interacting in Spanish.
In order to examine whether the clusters differed significantly from one another, a
series of one-way within-subjects ANOVAs was conducted. The results revealed a
statistically significant difference between the clusters in Spanish lexical diversity at
both ages 3;6 (F(2,20) = 12.101, p < .001, partial  2 = .35) and 4;5 (F(2,20) = 8.78,
p = .002, partial  2 = .32), with large effect sizes (Cohen, 1988). Similarly, there was a
statistically significant difference between the clusters in English lexical diversity at

930

Montanari et al.

both ages 3;6 (F(2,20) = 10.07, p = .001, partial  2 = .33) and 4;5 (F(2,20) = 4.57,
p = .023, partial  2 = .24). The strength of these differences, as indexed by  2, was
also large. Analyses also indicated that the clusters differed significantly from one
another on both Spanish MLUw (F(2,20) = 10.81, p = .001, partial  2 = .34) and
English MLUw (F(2,20) = 19.02, p < .001, partial  2 = .40) at age 3;6. This pattern
remained constant at age 4;5 for both Spanish MLUw (F(2,20) = 15.55, p < .001,
partial  2 = .38) and English MLUw (F(2,20) = 3.93, p = .036, partial  2 = .22). The
magnitude of effect sizes was large in all analyses. Furthermore, the results revealed
that the clusters differed significantly from one another in the amount of language
mixing in the Spanish context at age 3;6 (F(2,20) = 5.23, p = .004, partial  2 = .30),
and there was also a marginal statistical difference between the clusters in the mixing
of Spanish into English at the same age (F(2,20) = 3.35, p = .055, partial  2 = .20),
with large effect sizes. However, by age 4;5, the clusters did not significantly differ
from each other in the proportion of language mixing in the Spanish (F(2,20) = 2.32,
p n.s., partial  2 = .16) or English context (F(2,20) = 1.20, p n.s., partial  2 = .11).
To identify specific differences, Tukey post hoc tests were carried out on the data.
These results revealed that Cluster 1 (LOW BILINGUAL SKILLS / VARIABLE
MIXING) differed from Cluster 2 (HIGH BILINGUAL SKILLS / LOW MIXING) on
all lexical diversity and utterance length variables (TNDW in Spanish at 3;6, p = .025;
TNDW in Spanish at 4;5, p = .017; TNDW in English at 3;6, p = .001; TNDW in
English at 4;5, p = .018; Spanish MLUw at 3;6, p = .034; Spanish MLUw at 4;5,
p = .003; English MLUw at 3;6, p = .000; English MLUw at 4;5, p = .03), but not on
language mixing. Similarly, Cluster 2 (HIGH BILINGUAL SKILLS / LOW MIXING)
was statistically different from Cluster 3 (LOW SPANISH SKILLS / HIGH MIXING
IN SPANISH) on all Spanish proficiency measures (TNDW in Spanish at 3;6,
p = .000; TNDW in Spanish at 4;5, p = .001; Spanish MLUw at 3;6, p = .000; Spanish
MLUw at 4;5, p = .000; English MLUw at 3;6, p = .000) but not on most English
measures or language mixing. On the other hand, Cluster 1 (LOW BILINGUAL
SKILLS / VARIABLE MIXING) differed from Cluster 3 (LOW SPANISH SKILLS /
HIGH MIXING IN SPANISH) only on TNDW in English at 3;6 ( p = .008) and on
language mixing in the Spanish context at 3;6 ( p = .003). While this analysis is
purely exploratory given the limited number of participants, it supports the
hypothesis that there were three subgroups of participants that differed in their
degree of bilingual competence, with Cluster 2 participants being proficient in both
languages, Cluster 1 children having limited skills in both languages (as compared to
the other participants), and Cluster 3 learners displaying more limited competence in
Spanish. Moreover, some participants (Cluster 3) knew more words in English at age
3;6 and hence mixed more to English while interacting in Spanish, as compared to
others (Cluster 1).
Discussion
This study analyzed the language mixing patterns of 26 Spanish-English dual language
learners at preschool entry, at age 3;6, and a year later at age 4;5. Since the participants
were from predominantly Spanish-speaking homes, we were interested in observing
their language mixing behavior in monolingual English and Spanish contexts after
formal and consistent exposure to English began in preschool. We examined: (1) the
incidence of intra-sentential, inter-sentential, and total language mixing over the
course of one year; (2) whether these patterns were related to proficiency as

Journal of Child Language

931

measured by MLUw and TNDW; and (3) whether there were different subgroups of
children, among the participants, with similar patterns of language mixing, MLUw,
and TNDW.
Our exploration of language mixing patterns in both languages between 3;6 and 4;5
revealed interesting and somewhat unexpected results. First of all, as documented in
previous studies (Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009; Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007), the
frequency of language mixing was low in both languages and at both ages in the
context of English and Spanish monolingual settings. Indeed, only between 11% and
16% of children's utterances at age 3;6 contained language switches; at age 4;5,
language mixing remained around 14% in the Spanish context but decreased to 3%
when children interacted with English-only speakers. In line with the predictions of
the Control Process Model of code-switching (Green, 2018; Green & Wei, 2014),
which posits that the environment - and the interactional context - dictate
code-switching behavior, these results suggest that young preschoolers are good at
choosing the language that is appropriate to the language context and at adhering to
it for most of their conversational turns. The findings also support the hypothesis
that bilingual children have increased communicative competence (Comeau et al.,
2003; Reyes, 2004) because they are able to monitor patterns of language use in their
environment and adjust their own accordingly, showing sensitivity to their
interlocutors' language use and preferences.
Interestingly, despite coming from primarily Spanish-speaking homes and being
dominant in Spanish, the children showed similar proportions of language mixing
while speaking Spanish and English at preschool entry. The intra- and
inter-sentential language mixing analysis revealed that the children tended to insert
complete Spanish utterances in their English, rather than single words, a type of
language mixing that has been documented at early stages of bilingualism
(Peynircioglu & Durungulo, 2002) or in less proficient bilinguals (Poplack, 1980).
Other than that, the participants resorted to both languages at about equal amounts
at age 3;6 and they also produced similar proportions of inter- and intra-utterance
language mixing across languages. A year later, language mixing patterns had
changed significantly in English but not in Spanish. In Spanish, children continued
to mix languages to the same extent as they did at age 3;6, except that switches at
the intra-utterance level became more common than those at the inter-utterance
level, in line with studies that document more intra-sentential language mixing with
increased bilingual proficiency (Poplack, 1980; Yow et al., 2016). In English, instead,
language mixing decreased dramatically and using Spanish while speaking English
became virtually non-existent after a year of preschool. Overall, these results suggest
that language mixing patterns differed depending on language and age, with all types
of mixing decreasing in English but not in Spanish as the children got older.
The analyses of the children's proficiency in Spanish and English as measured by
MLUw and TNDW revealed that, as expected based on their language history, the
children had stronger grammatical and lexical skills in Spanish at preschool entry.
However, over the course of one year, the participants made gains in proficiency in
both languages, with growth in English being more evident than growth in Spanish.
This finding confirms the results of previous studies that document an accelerated
growth in English after entering preschool but a deceleration in the development of
Spanish among dual language learners growing up in the US (Hoff et al., 2018;
Ruiz-Felter et al., 2016; Scheffner-Hammer et al., 2008). Interestingly, the results
showed no relation between most proficiency measures and language mixing

932

Montanari et al.

patterns, with the exception of TNDW in English and language choice at age 3;6. In
particular, at preschool entry, English lexical skills were negatively related to language
mixing in the English context but they were positively related to language alternation
in the Spanish context. These findings suggest that children with smaller English
vocabularies mixed more to Spanish when speaking English, but they produced fewer
switches to English when speaking Spanish. Yet no links were found between
grammatical skills and language mixing patterns or between proficiency measures
and language choice at age 4;5.
The exploratory cluster analysis revealed three subgroups of participants that differed
in proficiency and language mixing patterns - a finding that was masked by the analyses
that focused on means. Among the participants, there seemed to be about a third -
dominant in Spanish but with average to below-average skills in both languages as
compared to the other participants (Cluster 1, LOW BILINGUAL SKILLS /
VARIABLE MIXING) - who switched to Spanish when interacting in their
non-dominant language, English, at age 3;6, but who mixed more towards English at
age 4;5 after a year of acculturation to the language of the school. On the other
hand, another 25% of children (Cluster 2, HIGH BILINGUAL SKILLS / LOW
MIXING) had above-average proficiency in both languages as compared to the other
participants, and produced minimal amounts of language mixing at both ages, as the
participants in Ribot and Hoff (2014) with similar expressive and receptive skills in
English and Spanish. The rest of the participants (Cluster 3, LOW SPANISH SKILLS
/ HIGH MIXING IN SPANISH) were stronger in English and they tended to mix
more when interacting in Spanish, their weaker but also the minority language, as
the English-dominant participants in Ribot and Hoff (2014). While our analysis is
purely descriptive - and our interpretation speculative - given the limited number of
participants, these findings highlight the variability that characterizes young
bilinguals' language abilities and patterns of language use, and support the notion
that proficiency and sociolinguistic factors might interact together to produce
different dual language learners' profiles.
It is possible that children's language mixing is constrained by proficiency - i.e., lexical
gaps - only at early stages of bilingual development, when children have unbalanced
language skills or have not reached a `threshold' of bilingual competence (Paradis &
Nicoladis, 2007). For instance, the incidence of switches to Spanish in the English
context was related to English lexical skills - and possibly due to vocabulary gaps -
only at age 3;6, when children were, on average, more proficient in Spanish than in
English. The cluster analysis further revealed that the three subgroups of participants
differed in their use of language mixing only at preschool entry, with children with
more limited language skills in one (Cluster 3, LOW SPANISH SKILLS / HIGH
MIXING IN SPANISH) or both languages (Cluster 1, LOW BILINGUAL SKILLS /
VARIABLE MIXING) producing more language mixing in their non-dominant
language than those children with above-average and more balanced proficiency in
both languages (Cluster 2, HIGH BILINGUAL SKILLS / LOW MIXING). These results
seem to confirm the hypotheses that language mixing in young bilinguals is the result
of asymmetries in proficiency levels (Greene et al., 2012; Ribot & Hoff, 2014), and it is
developmental and characteristic of the early phases of bilingual learning.
However, language mixing may cease to be proficiency-related with increased
bilingual competence. Indeed, at age 4;5, when children's English and Spanish skills
were comparable on average, language mixing patterns were no longer related to
language ability and they did not differ for the three clusters of participants. In

Journal of Child Language

933

Spanish, children continued to mix languages to the same extent as they did at
preschool entry; in fact, they switched more at the intra-utterance level as
documented among bilinguals with increased bilingual competence (Poplack, 1980;
Yow et al., 2016). In English, on the other hand, language mixing decreased
dramatically for all participants, and using Spanish while speaking English became
virtually non-existent. Even children who were still dominant in Spanish at age 4;5
(Cluster 1, LOW BILINGUAL SKILLS / VARIABLE MIXING) did not use Spanish
while interacting in English. These findings indicate, for ALL children, an asymmetry
in the direction of language mixing, with the Spanish context eliciting more
switching to English than the English context eliciting mixing to Spanish. These
results are consistent with other studies of Spanish-English dual language learners in
the US that found that young bilinguals more frequently choose to speak English
than Spanish (Oller & Eilers, 2002), and more frequently code-switch to English
than to Spanish (Greene et al., 2012; Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009; Ribot & Hoff, 2014).
We speculate that, by this age, as the participants of Gutierrez-Clellen et al. (2009)
and of Paradis and Nicoladis (2007), the children in this study had become aware of the
sociolinguistic characteristics of their environment, the typical patterns of language use
in their community, and the status of their languages. That is, they had learned that
English was the majority language, the language with the highest status, and the
preferred language in the community and in the school context where they were
assessed. Thus, they found it appropriate to switch to English while speaking Spanish
irrespective of their interlocutor's preference or language use. On the other hand, the
children had developed awareness that Spanish was a minority language spoken only
at home and by a segment of speakers in their community, a language "disfavored in
typical American classrooms" and "within a sociopolitical context that does not
support maintenance of the home language" (Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009, p. 105).
For this reason, they completely refrained from using it in the school context. These
results are consistent with those of Garcia, Maez, and Gonzalez (1983), who also
found that switching to Spanish in children's English discourse decreased as children
became acculturated to the language of the school, whereas switching to English in
Spanish discourse remained constant across grade levels. Taken together, and in line
with the proposal of the Control Process Model of code-switching (Green, 2018;
Green & Wei, 2014) that contextual factors dictate code-switching behavior, the
results of this study indicate that, once children are sufficiently acculturated to the
sociolinguistic characteristics of their environment, language choice may be more
constrained by their awareness of the language prescribed by the majority culture
than by their proficiency level in that language.
Conclusion, limitations, and future research
In conclusion, the results of this study underscore the complex interplay between
proficiency-related variables and sociolinguistic factors when interpreting young
bilinguals' language choice. In the context of dual language learners in the US,
language mixing may be initially related to limited language proficiency; but within a
relatively short period of time, and with acculturation, children soon learn that using
only English in a majority language context or switching to English while speaking
the minority language are typical patterns of language use in their community. The
results of this study also highlight the variability that characterizes dual language
learners and their dual language use as they enter the school system. Some children

934

Montanari et al.

may be dominant in Spanish, others in English; some children may have limited
language skills in both languages, while others may have high levels of bilingual
proficiency; some children may engage in language mixing quite freely, while others
may refrain from mixing languages altogether. Taken together, these results suggest
that grouping participants together and analyzing measures of average may capture
some trends, but they may also obscure meaningful differences and fail to reveal
different learners' profiles.
Besides being of interest to language mixing scholars, the results of this study have
practical implications. As dual language learners enter the school system, they are often
at risk of being over- or under-identified for special education services (Kraemer &
Fabiano-Smith, 2017) because, in the English classroom, they might not be as
intelligible as their monolingual peers and their practice of alternating between their
two languages may be misinterpreted as a sign of confusion or of lack of proficiency
or communicative competence (Hughes et al., 2006). The results of this study,
however, inform educators, clinicians, and service providers that language mixing
may be more common at early stages of bilingual proficiency, when children have
not reached a `threshold' of bilingual competence (Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007).
However, once children are sufficiently acculturated to the sociolinguistic
characteristics of their environment, language choice may be more constrained by
sociolinguistic variables - their awareness of the language prescribed by the majority
culture - than by their proficiency level in that language. The findings of this study
also point to the heterogeneity of dual language learners and the futility of
explaining complex linguistic behaviors through simplistic, single-variable accounts.
While this study advances our understanding of language mixing in young dual
language learners, it also has several limitations that should be considered when
interpreting the results. First, the sample in this study was of moderate size, and
language mixing and proficiency patterns were only assessed at two points in time,
separated by one year. Clearly, we were only able to document developmental changes
that occurred within this time frame. Future studies should examine language mixing
in naturalistic conversations in larger samples and over a longer period of time,
possibly documenting changes from age two, when home language should be even
more dominant, to age three, when exposure to English in preschool begins, to the
outset of formal schooling in kindergarten. It is particularly important that future
studies be longitudinal because only this methodology can reveal whether early
language mixing develops into the systematic and rule-governed skill of
code-switching as children become increasingly proficient in their languages (Jisa, 2000).
Future investigators should also take into account that there may be different profiles
of dual language learners in terms of their bilingual language development trajectory,
and grouping participants together may mask important differences. While the
cluster analysis conducted in this study was purely exploratory, future instigations
should use this type of analysis with larger, heterogeneous samples to uncover
different profiles of dual language learners sharing similar patterns of bilingual
competence and use. Furthermore, since limited links were found between most
proficiency measures and language mixing patterns, future studies should assess
proficiency using different and perhaps more fine-grained measures, to examine
whether other lexical and grammatical measures interact and predict language
alternation at different points in development.
A final but important limitation of this study is that language mixing patterns were
examined in monolingual language contexts, where children were interacting with

Journal of Child Language

935

research assistants who posed as monolingual speakers. Thus, the children were
encouraged, if not required, to use only one language. While studies of language
choice in young bilinguals have been traditionally carried out in these `monolingual'
contexts (Genesee et al., 1996; Genesee et al., 1995; Gutierrez-Clellen et al., 2009;
Paradis & Nicoladis, 2007), it must be acknowledged that the goal of this research is
to assess the extent to which children can adhere to a SINGLE language in discourse.
Indeed, our own goal was to explore children's ability to adhere to the interactional
patterns of the school context (which was predominantly monolingual English) -
and of a parallel monolingual Spanish setting - after formal and consistent exposure
to English had begun in preschool and while children were being acculturated to the
sociolinguistic characteristics of their environment.
However, there is also a need to examine language mixing in bilingual contexts,
where all parties speak the two languages and can freely switch from one to the
other. Indeed, the studies that have interpreted language mixing as a sign of
increased communicative competence have been carried out in contexts where
children could freely engage in language mixing. For example, Comeau et al. (2003)
found that, when French-English bilingual toddlers were faced with unfamiliar
interlocutors who code-mixed, they also mixed languages, adjusting their patterns of
language use to those of their interlocutors. Similarly, Yow et al. (2016), the only
large-scale study of language mixing in a bilingual context to our knowledge, found
that five-year-olds who came from a school in Singapore where Mandarin/English
mixing was the norm, mixed languages at a significantly higher rate (32% of the
time) than proficiency-matched children whose school discouraged code-switching
(1.49%). Thus, monolingual contexts limit the opportunities for language mixing and
cannot truly reveal the full range of factors that determine this linguistic behavior.
Future studies should compare the language choices of the same children in both
monolingual and bilingual contexts. Only such investigations can lead to a better
understanding of the complex factors that affect language mixing in young bilinguals
and reveal their true communicative competence while interacting with different
speakers.
Acknowledgements. We acknowledge the support of grant #5SC3GM847583-3 to Kaveri
Subrahmanyam, Marlene Zepeda, and Simona Montanari from NIGMS, and of grant #T34GM08228 to
Wendy Ochoa from the MARC Undergraduate Student Training in Academic research program.

References
Anderson, R. (2012). First language loss in Spanish-speaking children: patterns of loss and implications for
clinical practice. In B. Goldstein (Ed.), Bilingual language development and disorders in Spanish-English
speakers (pp. 187-211). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Atkins-Burnett, S., Sprachman, S., Lopez, M., Caspe, M., & Fallin, K. (2011). The Language Interaction
Snapshot (LISn): a new observational measure for assessing language interactions in linguistically diverse
early childhood programs. In C. Howes, J. T. Downer, & R. C. Pianta (Eds.), Dual language learners in
the early childhood classroom (pp 117-46). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Bedore, L. M., Pena, E. D., Gillam, R. B., & Ho, T.-H. (2010). Language sample measures and language
ability in Spanish English bilingual kindergarteners. Journal of Communication Disorders, 43(6),
498-510.
Bernardini, P., & Schlyter, S. (2004). Growing syntactic structure and code-mixing in the weaker language:
the ivy hypothesis. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7(1), 49-69.
Cantone, K. (2007). Code-switching in bilingual children. Dordecht: Springer.

936

Montanari et al.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Comeau, L., Genesee, F., & Lapaquette, L. (2003). The Modeling Hypothesis and child bilingual
codemixing. International Journal of Bilingualism, 7(2), 113-26.
Condouris, K., Meyer, E., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2003). The relationship between standardized measures
of language and measures of spontaneous speech in children with autism. American Journal of Speech
Language Pathology, 12(3), 349-58.
Csizer, K., & Dornyei, Z. (2005). Language learners' motivational profiles and their motivated learning
behavior. Language Learning, 55(4), 613-59.
Garcia, E. E., Maez, L., & Gonzalez, G. (1983). The incidence of language switching in Spanish-English
bilingual children in the United States. Tempe, AZ: Bilingual/Bicultural Education Center, Arizona
State University (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. BE015018).
Genesee, F., Boivin, I., & Nicoladis, E. (1996). Talking with strangers: a study of bilingual children's
communicative competence. Applied Psycholinguistics, 17(4), 427-42.
Genesee, F., & Nicoladis, E. (2007). Bilingual first language acquisition. In E. Hoff & M. Shatz (Eds.),
Blackwell handbook of language development (pp. 324-42). Chichester Wiley-Blackwell.
Genesee, F., Nicoladis, E., & Paradis, J. (1995). Language differentiation in early bilingual development.
Journal of Child Language, 22(3), 611-31.
Goldstein, B. A., Bunta, F., Lange, J., Rodriguez, J., & Burrows, L. (2010). The effects of measures of
language experience and language ability on segmental accuracy in bilingual children. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 19(3), 238-47.
Green, D. W. (2018). Language control and code-switching. Languages, 3(2), 8. doi:10.3390/
languages3020008
Green, D. W., & Wei, L. (2014). A control process model of code-switching. Language, Cognition and
Neuroscience, 29(4), 499-511.
Greene, K. J., Pena, E. D., & Bedore, L. M. (2012). Lexical choice and language selection in bilingual
preschoolers. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 29(1), 27-39.
Gumperz, J. J. (1971). Language in social groups. Stanford University Press.
Gutierrez-Clellen, V., Simon-Cereijido, G., & Leone, A. E. (2009). Codeswitching in bilingual children
with specific language impairment. International Journal of Bilingualism, 13(1), 91-109.
Hereida, R. R., & Altarriba, J. (2001). Bilingual language mixing: Why do bilinguals code-switch? Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 10(5), 164-8.
Hewitt, L. E., Hammer, C. S., Yont, K. M., & Tomblin, J. B. (2005). Language sampling for kindergarten
children with and without SLI: mean length of utterance, IPSYN, and NDW. Journal of Communication
Disorders, 38(3), 197-213.
Hoff, E., & Core, C. (2013). Input and language development in bilingually developing children. Seminars
in Speech and Language, 34(4), 215-26.
Hoff, E., Quinn, J. M., & Giguere, D. (2018). What explains the correlation between growth in vocabulary
and grammar? New evidence from latent change score analyses of simultaneous bilingual development.
Developmental Science, 21(2). doi:10.1111/desc.12536
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
6(2), 65-70.
Hughes, C. E., Shaunessy, E. S., Brice, A. R., Ratliff, M. A., & McHatton, P. A. (2006). Code switching
among bilingual and limited English proficient students: possible indicators of giftedness. Journal for the
Education of the Gifted, 30, 7-28.
Jisa, H. (2000). Language mixing in the weak language: evidence from two children. Journal of Pragmatics,
32(9), 1363-86.
Kraemer, R., & Fabiano-Smith, L. (2017). Language assessment of Latino English-learning children: a
records abstraction study. Journal of Latinos and Education, 16(4), 349-58.
Mackey, W. F. (2013). Bilingualism and multilingualism in North America. In T. K. Bhatia & W. C. Ritchie
(Eds.), The handbook of bilingualism and multilingualism (pp. 707-24). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
MacSwan, J. (2016). Codeswitching in adulthood. In E. Nicoladis & S. Montanari (Eds.), Lifespan
perspectives on bilingualism (pp. 183-200). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association;
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Journal of Child Language

937

McClure, E. (1981). Formal and functional aspects of the codeswitched discourse of bilingual children. In
R. P. Duran (Ed.), Latino language and communicative behavior (pp. 69-94). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Meisel, J. M. (1994). Code-switching in young bilingual children: the acquisition of grammatical
constraints. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 16(4), 413-39.
Meisel, J. M. (2006). The bilingual child. In T.K. Bathia & W.C. Ritchie (Eds.), The handbook of
bilingualism (pp. 91-113). Oxford: Blackwell.
Miller, J., & Iglesias, A. (2008). Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (Research Version 2008)
[Computer software]. Madison, WI: SALT Software. Online <https://www.saltsoftware.com/>.
Muysken, P. (2000). Bilingual speech: a typology of code-mixing. Cambridge University Press.
National Center for Education Statistics (2017). Fast facts. Retrieved from <https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/
display.asp?id=96>.
Nicoladis, E., & Secco, G. (2000). The role of a child's productive vocabulary in the language choice of a
bilingual family. First Language, 20(58), 3-28.
Oller, D. K., & Eilers, R. (Eds.) (2002). Language and literacy in bilingual children. Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Paradis, J., Genesee, F., & Crago, M. (2011). Dual language development and disorders (2nd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Paradis, J., & Nicoladis, E. (2007). The influence of dominance and sociolinguistic context on bilingual
preschoolers' language choice. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 10(3),
277-97.
Paradis, J., Nicoladis, E., & Genesee, F. (2000). Early emergence of structural constraints on code-mixing:
evidence from French-English bilingual children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3(3), 245-61.
Peynircioglu, Z. F., & Durgunoglu, A. Y. (2002). Code-switching in preschool bilingual children. In R.
R. Hereida & J. Altarriba (Eds.), Bilingual sentence processing (pp. 339-58). Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science.
Poplack, S. (1980). Sometimes I'll start a sentence in Spanish y termino en espanol: toward a typology of
codeswitching. Linguistics, 18(7/8), 581-618.
Reyes, I. (2004). Functions of code switching in schoolchildren's conversations. Bilingual Research Journal,
28(1), 77-98.
Ribot, K. M., & Hoff, E. (2014). `Como estas?' `I'm good.' Conversational code-switching is related to
profiles of expressive and receptive proficiency in Spanish-English bilingual toddlers. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 38(4), 333-41.
Romaine, S. (2013). The bilingual and multilingual community. In T. K. Bhatia & W. C. Ritchie (Eds.), The
handbook of bilingualism and multilingualism (pp. 445-65). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ruiz-Felter, R., Cooperson, S. J., Bedore, L. M., & Pena, E. D. (2016). Influence of current input-output
and age of first exposure on phonological acquisition in early bilingual Spanish-English-speaking
kindergarteners. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 51(4), 368-83.
Scheffner-Hammer, C., Lawrence, F. R., & Miccio, A. W. (2008). Exposure to English before and after
entry into Head Start: bilingual children's receptive language growth in Spanish and English.
International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 11(1), 30-56.
Valdes-Fallis, G. (1978). Code switching and the classroom teacher. Language in Education: Theory and
Practice, 4, 6-26.
Yip, V., & Matthews, S. (2006). Assessing language dominance in bilingual acquisition: a case for mean
length utterance differentials. Language Assessment Quarterly, 3(2), 97-116.
Yow, W. Q., Patrycia, F., & Flynn, S. (2016). Code-switching in childhood. In E. Nicoladis & S. Montanari
(Eds.), Lifespan perspectives on bilingualism (pp. 81-100). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association; Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.

Cite this article: Montanari S, Ochoa W, Subrahmanyam K (2019). A longitudinal investigation of language
mixing in Spanish-English dual language learners: the role of language proficiency, variability, and
sociolinguistic factors. Journal of Child Language 46, 913-937. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000919000278

