Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: 2327-3798 (Print) 2327-3801 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Look and listen! The online processing of Korean case by
native and non-native speakers
Cheryl Frenck-Mestre, Seung Kyung Kim, Hyeree Choo, Alain Ghio, Julia
Herschensohn & Sungryong Koh
To cite this article: Cheryl Frenck-Mestre, Seung Kyung Kim, Hyeree Choo, Alain Ghio, Julia
Herschensohn & Sungryong Koh (2019) Look and listen! The online processing of Korean case
by native and non-native speakers, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 34:3, 385-404, DOI:
10.1080/23273798.2018.1549332
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1549332

Published online: 19 Nov 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 593

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 13 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE
2019, VOL. 34, NO. 3, 385-404
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1549332

REGULAR ARTICLE

Look and listen! The online processing of Korean case by native and non-native
speakers
Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
Sungryong Kohd

a,b,c

, Seung Kyung Kima, Hyeree Chood, Alain Ghioa,b, Julia Herschensohne and

Aix-Marseille Universite Aix-en-Provence; bCentre National de Recherche Scientifique - Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Aix-en-Provence; cBrain
and Language Research Institute; dDepartment of Psychology, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea; eDepartment of Linguistics,
University of Washington

a

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

We used a forced choice visual world paradigm to examine when listeners integrate case when
processing Korean, in native speakers and two groups of adult L2 learners. The L2 learners varied
as concerns the typological proximity between their L1 (French or Kazakh) and Korean.
Processing was compared for canonical (SOV) and scrambled (OSV) word order. Nominal case
marking was either accusative (NOM-ACC) or dative (NOM-DAT). Native Koreans showed
anticipatory looks to the correct image, regardless of word order or case. Neither L2 group
showed anticipatory looks to the correct image prior to the final auditory verb. Both L2 groups
demonstrated superior performance for the dative. However, the Kazakh group showed better
capacities to correctly interpret utterances based on case than the French. Our results provide
evidence of the incremental nature of processing in Korean for native speakers and, for L2
learners, the effect of L1-L2 overlap and specific case marking.

Received 28 March 2018
Accepted 7 November 2018

Introduction
To understand human language, one must generate
hypotheses about the respective roles of incoming
words in an utterance or sentence, which may or may
not be verified and sometimes lead to either misinterpretation or revision (Clifton & Staub, 2008; MacDonald,
Pearlmutter & Seidenberg, 1994; Sturt, Scheepers &
Pickering, 2002). Human language is indeed riddled
with ambiguity and even the seemingly simplest utterance may hold more than one meaning depending on
the syntactic structure that is projected (Fine, Jaeger,
Farmer & Qian, 2013), the specific interpretation of polysemous words (Foraker & Murphy, 2012) and the speaker's intent (Piantadosi, Tily & Gibson, 2012), to name but
a few factors. In the present paper, we will focus on the
listener's capacity to immediately process the overt
marking of the grammatical roles of nouns, i.e. case,
to interpret utterances in Korean, which indeed can
present numerous ambiguities (Koh, 1997; Lee, 1999)
as has been equally demonstrated for Japanese
(Miyamoto, 2002), a language that is typologically
very similar to Korean in terms of case marking, particles and word order. We will examine this question
both in native speakers and in two groups of adult
learners.
CONTACT Cheryl Frenck-Mestre

cheryl.frenck-mestre@univ-amu.fr

(c) 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

KEYWORDS

Korean case; eye movements;
second language; auditory
processing

Eye movement data from studies of online processing
by native speakers of overt case languages such as
Korean (Koh, 1997; Lee, 1999), Japanese (Kamide
Altmann & Haywood, 2003; Mitsugi & MacWhinney,
2010; 2016) and German (Henry, Hopp & Jackson, 2017;
Kamide, Scheepers & Altmann, 2003) suggest that they
immediately use case to compute sentence structure
(Koh, 1997; Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2010) and to anticipate upcoming arguments (Henry et al., 2017; Kamide,
Altmann et al., 2003; Kamide, Scheepers et al., 2003;
Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016). The capacity for nonnative speakers, more specifically adult learners, to
exploit grammatical information to predict upcoming
elements is less clear (Henry et al., 2017; Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016). Moreover, the influence of the learner's
native language on second language representation and
processing continues to fuel debate (Clahsen & Felser,
2006; Herschensohn, 2001 Hopp, 2010; Lardiere, 2009;
Schwartz & Sprouse, 2017). The present study examined
how both native Koreans and adult L2 learners of Korean
from two typologically distinct languages--French and
Kazakh--process case particles in spoken Korean sentences via the recording of eye movements. To determine whether the two populations of L2 learners
reliably used case over word order to interpret the utterances, we used both canonical and scrambled word

386

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

order. As will be outlined below, the parametric differences across the L2 learners' two languages provide for
a rich test bed of current linguistic theories of second
language attainment.
We will begin with a brief sketch of the three
languages in question--Korean, French and Kazakh--
with an emphasis on Korean, as concerns case marking
and canonical word order for monotransitive accusative
structures (e.g    "The teacher-Nom
the student-Acc sees-Pres Ind") and dative structures
with either one or two arguments (e.g. 
  "The doctor-Nom the nurse-Dat
says hello to-Pres Ind" and   
 "The doctor-Nom the patient-Dat the paperAcc hands to-PresInd"). We will discuss how the dative
case may differ from the nominative and accusative in
Korean, notably as concerns ellipsis, and how such may
affect the acquisition of different case markers in L2 learners. While our main interest is in the online computation
of case, we will also discuss scrambling in Korean both
because it is a prominent feature of Korean and due to
our use of scrambled structures to test for the correct
use of case over simple linear word order during auditory
processing. Finally, prior to the introduction of the study
at hand, we will present empirical data from studies on
the L1 acquisition of case in Korean (and Japanese) followed by that of the L2 acquisition in adult learners.

An overview of the Korean, Kazakh and French
case and word order
Korean is a left-branching head-final language that has
canonical SOV word order (Sohn, 1999). It is an agglutinative language, with a clear demarcation between nouns
and their suffixes, notably case, used to convey grammatical and/or semantic information about the roles of the
nouns in a sentence. Indeed, what Korean lacks in verbal
inflectional morphology (which marks neither number nor
person but various registers) it makes up for in rich case
marking. Numerous papers have addressed the issue of
case in Korean (Kwon & Zribi-Hertz, 2008; Lee, E., 2007;
Lee, H., 2007, 2011; Schutze, 2001). We will limit our discussion to that of the nominative, dative and accusative,
the latter of which were manipulated in the current
study. We shall address the question, first, of the status
of dative in relation to both nominative and accusative.
As we will see, the dative case is distinct in several
respects from the accusative, as well as the nominative
case. Korean marks the dative via the suffix "ey/eykey"
( ), which varies depending upon the animacy of
the noun it attaches to. This in itself demonstrates a
difference between dative versus nominative and accusative, which vary in surface form according to

phonological constraints rather than semantic ones.
Nouns with a CV syllable structure (e.g., cha,`car')
take particles with an initial consonant ("ka" and 
"lul"), whereas nouns with CVC structure (e.g. , kkoch,
"flower") take vowel-initial particles ("i" and  "ul"),
for nominative and accusative, respectively. The dative
is used to mark Recipient, but also Time, Source and
Location, although the respective constraints differ (cf.
Lee, 1999). Below are examples of the dative when
used to denote the Recipient, for animate (1a) and inanimate (1b) nouns, demonstrating the animate and inanimate dative markers.
(1)

a.

   
Ai-ka yeoja-eykey wusan-ul jun-ta
Child-Nom woman-Dat umbrella-Acc gives-Pres-Ind
"The child gives an umbrella to the woman."

(1)

b.

   
Ai-ka kkoch-ey mwul-ul jun-ta
Child-Nom flower-Dat water-Acc gives-Pres-Ind
"The child gives water to the flower(s)."

Korean also has double accusative object constructions
for the dative, as is true of English, illustrated in 2a and
2b for English and 3a and 3b for Korean. However, while
English allows for the dative/double accusative alternation
freely, in Korean the dative structure like 3a is preferred
over the double accusative in 3b. Note that while the
order of nouns is fixed in English, it is flexible in Korean
(as will be discussed below). In Korean, the dative can
also be stacked with the accusative, as illustrated in 3c.
2a.

The teacher gives a book to the student

2b.

The teacher gives the student a book.

3a.

   
Seonsaengnim-i haksaeng-eykey chaek-ul jun-ta
Teacher-Nom student-Dat book-Acc give-Pres-Ind
"The teacher gives a book to the student."

3b.

   
Seonsaengnim-i haksaeng-ul chaek-ul jun-ta
Teacher-Nom student-Acc book-Acc give-Pres-Ind
"The teacher gives the student a book."

3c.

   
Seonsaengnim-i haksaeng-eykey-lul chaek-ul jun-ta
Teacher-Nom student-Dat-Acc book-Acc give-Pres-Ind
"The teacher gives the student a book."

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

It is outside the scope of the present paper whether
the dative/double object variation also connotes semantic differences (cf. Ryu, 2013, for a discussion of
sequences of NPs marked with the identical case, for
the dative, accusative, and nominative). Lee (1997) cites
work concerning the syntactic behaviour of dative relative to other case markers in Korean to argue that dative
is a postposition rather than case proper. Of importance
for the present purposes, dative may be alternatively
expressed as dative or, in double object constructions,
as accusative, and can be stacked, as illustrated above,
but is rarely if ever dropped. This contrasts with nominative and accusative case, for which case ellipsis is relatively frequent, if indeed determined by discourse,
syntactic and perhaps semantic constraints (Lee, H.,
2007, 2011; Sohn, 1999). We shall return to the question
of case omission below, in the discussion of L1 and L2
acquisition of Korean case.
Kazakh is a Turkik language that shares some important grammatical features with Japonic and Koreanic
languages. It is left-branching, head-final, agglutinative
and the canonical word order is SOV (Kirchner, 1998). It
uses case to mark the grammatical functions of nouns,
and includes nominative, accusative, dative, genitive,
locative and ablative cases. For the present purposes,
we will concentrate on nominative, accusative and
dative. The (singular) nominative case is unmarked.
Both accusative and dative suffixes (and indeed all
other case suffixes) are subject to vowel and consonant
harmony. Akin to Korean, various permutations on the
canonical word order are allowed due to the case
(Kornfilt, 2003; Mukhamedova, 2015), as illustrated in
examples 4a through 4d for structures with Nom-Acc.
An important difference between Korean and Kazakh,
which will be discussed below, is that Kazakh allows for
variant surface orders in which the predicate (V) is
scrambled above its nominal arguments (Hoffmann,
1992). Given the presence of overt case marking and
the canonical SOV word order in Kazakh, these learners
should come to Korean equipped with grammatical
knowledge that allows them to readily acquire the
basic structure of this language (Herschensohn, 2000;
Schwartz, 1998; Schwartz & Sprouse, 2017)
4a.   
Ul qizdi koredi
Boy_0 girl_ACC see-Pres-Ind
"The boy sees the girl"

4b.   
Qizdi ul koredi
girl_ACC boy_0 see-Pres-Ind

387

"The boy sees the girl"

4c.   
qiz uldi koredi
girl_0 boy_ACC see-Pres-Ind
"The girl sees the boy"

4d.   
uldi qiz koredi
boy_ACC girl_0 see-Pres-Ind
"The girl sees the boy"

French contrasts with Korean (and Kazakh) in numerous respects. It is a head-initial language, with canonical
SVO word order, and has a moderately rich inflectional
morphology. In modern French, nouns have a basic
form derived from the Latin accusative singular. Hence,
French does not have a morpheme that indicates case
for full noun phrases that are direct objects (see 5a),
but does mark dative case by the preposition a `to' (see
6a). In contrast, accusative and dative pronouns are preverbal clitics whose phonological, morphological and
semantic environments constrain their form. While SVO
is canonical for sentences with full noun phrases, SOV
is the required order for clitic pronouns, as illustrated
in 5a and 5b for transitive accusative structures and in
6a and 6b for dative structures. Indeed, when a full
noun is not used, the obligatory object in French is a
clitic pronoun, which demonstrates various properties
that distinguish it from both full nouns and strong pronouns: it may not remain in situ (it must cliticise to the
verb), is marked for case (nominative, accusative,
dative) and may refer to either animate or inanimate
referents (cf. Herschensohn, 2004; Sneed, Herschensohn
& Frenck-Mestre, 2015). French also exhibits SOV surface
order for clitic left dislocated NPs, as illustrated in 7. As
such, native French speakers should not have difficulty
per se with SOV word order.

5a. Jean voit le chien.
"John sees the dog."

5b. Jean le voit.
John it sees "John sees it."

6a. Jean ecrit a Marie.
"John writes to Mary"

6b. Jean lui ecrit.
John her writes -> "John writes to her"

388

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

a. Cet hommeij je lj'aime.

7.

That man -> I him love "That man, I love him."

To summarise, Kazakh is typologically similar to
Korean in case marking, scrambling and basic SOV
word order while French shares aspects of those characteristics in the pronominal system. All three languages
distinguish accusative from dative objects in terms of
case marking, a phenomenon we return to below.

Scrambling in Korean
The three languages in question (Korean, French, and
Kazakh) also differ as concerns the possible permutations
of arguments. Due to the presence of case marking, both
Korean and Kazakh allow for relatively free ordering of
subject and object arguments, in like manner to Japanese, Turkish, German, etcetera and in contrast to
languages that do not have "free word order" due to a
lack of overt nominal morphology, e.g. French, English,
etcetera. While the typical sequence of nouns in
Korean is SOV, provided that the verb remains in final
position, nominal position may vary, as illustrated
below in 8a-8f.
8a.

   
Yorisa-ka namja-ekey swul-ul pan-ta
chef-Nom man-Dat alcohol-Acc sells-Pres-Ind

8b.

   
man-Dat chef-Nom alcohol-Acc sells-Pres-Ind

8c.

   
alcohol-Acc man-Dat chef-Nom sells-Pres-Ind

8d.

   
chef-Nom alcohol-Acc man-Dat sells-Pres-Ind

8e.

   
man-Dat alcohol-Acc chef-Nom sells-Pres-Ind

8f.

   
alcohol-Acc chef-Nom man-Dat sells-Pres-Ind
"The chef sells alcohol to the man"

While all of the above permutations of arguments are
permissible in Korean (and typologically similar Japanese), they are not without constraint. Lee (2007) provides a detailed description of "scrambling" in Korean,
which he argues is not entirely free but governed by
various syntactic and semantic constraints. Interestingly,
these constraints are not linguistically universal, as

illustrated by Lee's (2007) comparison of Korean and
Turkish, which is particularly relevant to the current
study. As stated above, in Korean the verb must remain
in a final position whereas in Turkish it may rise above
nominal arguments. In addition, not all word orders are
equally likely to occur nor, depending upon the theoretical stance or experimental study in question, processed
without cost. As concerns usage frequency, corpusbased studies in Japanese have shown that scrambled
sentences are far and away less frequent than canonical
word order (Kuno, 1973 (cited by Yamashita, 1997);
Yamashita, 2002). Yamashita (2002) used a variety of
written materials with various registers to examine the
occurrence of scrambled sentences in Japanese. In the
text, short distance (within clause) scrambling was
found to be the most frequent of scrambled structures,
but nonetheless rare (less than 1%). As stated by Yamashita (2002) comparisons with spoken materials are yet
to be made.
In relation to the question of computational costs, in
the framework of the minimalist programme (Chomsky
1995) following government and binding theory
(Chomsky, 1981), scrambled (OSV) structures are
derived from configurational (base) structures in which
the subject NP is positioned higher in the syntactic tree
than other NPs (cf. Koizumi & Tamakoa, 2010 for an indepth discussion of the competing analyses in concern
to movement of the object in relation to the subject
and the derivational cost of OSV compared to SOV
order). Hence, scrambled structures involve movement
and a chain that is formed between the scrambled argument and its trace. Experimental evidence for this was
provided by Miyamoto and Takahashi (2004) in a probe
recognition task, showing facilitated recognition of
probes in scrambled as compared to canonical structures
due to the assumed reactivation of the trace (but see
Shibata, Suzuki, Kim, Gyoba & Koizumi, 2005). Scrambled
structures are generally considered to be syntactically
more complex (Imamura, Sato & Koizumi, 2016;
Koizumi & Tamakoa, 2010; Yamashita, 1997) and hence
predicted to incur greater processing cost in comparison
to canonical structures. The fact that scrambled structures are far and away less frequently encountered
than canonical ones should also contribute to greater
processing difficulty. Several experimental studies of
Japanese have addressed this question, showing somewhat mixed results. When holistic measures of sentence
processing are considered, whereby participants make
speeded acceptability judgments, the results show that
participants take longer to accept syntactically correct
scrambled than canonical sentences (Imamura, Sato &
Koizumi, 2016; Koizumi & Tamakoa, 2004; 2010; Miyamoto & Takahashi, 2002). When self-paced reading

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

times are examined, the effects of scrambling on processing time are less apparent, sometimes being only marginal (Shibata et al., 2005) or absent (Mitsugi &
MacWhinney, 2010; Yamashita, 1997). However, as discussed by Miyamoto and Takahashi (2004), scrambled
word order may not be immediately apparent, due to
ambiguity, such that there is not an immediate projection of a gap or need of restructuring (cf. Ahn, 2015,
for a further discussion of ambiguity and the constraints
on scrambled structures in Korean). Moreover, for short
distance (within clause) scrambling, the restructuring
may be resolved too quickly to be picked up in self
paced reading (cf. Shibata et al., 2005 for a discussion).
In the present study, we presented participants with
both canonical and scrambled structures in the aim of
examining the online use of case, rather than to test
for the effect of structural complexity per se. Moreover,
we purposefully used within clause OSV scrambling to
reduce processing load, compared to long-distance
scrambling. The materials were such that we could
compare processing, as concerns both accuracy, at the
end of utterance, and speed as determined by the
point in the utterance at which listeners showed a statistical preference for correct interpretation, i.e. when
they directed their gaze to the image that correctly
depicted the auditory sentence. Before describing our
study, we outline previous research on the acquisition
of case in Korean.

The acquisition of case in Korean
The acquisition of case particles in Korean has been
argued to be relatively late, even under monolingual
conditions. Studies on child acquisition of Korean case
have shown that up until age 4, children by and large
do not use case when interpreting auditory input but
impose canonical SOV structure (Kim, O'Grady & Cho,
1995). This is true even when case particles are present
and indicate OSV word order (Chung, 1994; Kim et al.,
1995). When the children were asked to act out an OSV
utterance, they produced an SOV sequence due to
using canonical word order over the case to attribute
grammatical roles. This comprehension evidence contrasts with production, where monolingual Korean children produce both nominative and accusative case by
age 2.8, with the nominative case being the first to
emerge, and as early as age 1.11 (Kim, 1997). The lack
of evidence of an early effect of case marking in comprehension may be related, however, to the design used to
probe for it. Indeed, preceding OSV utterances by a prior
discourse context, which introduced the object argument and thus licensed it as the focus of the subsequent
utterance, significantly improved Korean 4 year olds'

389

interpretation of these utterances (Kim et al., 1995). The
same effect of discourse was found for 3- and 4-yearold Japanese children by Otsu (1994) who argued that
isolated scrambled sentences violate discourse principles, thus leading to a breakdown in comprehension
in young children. Subsequent work with Japanese 2-6
year olds has also suggested that as early as age 3 they
may reliably use case marking to understand spoken sentences (Murasugi & Kawamura, 2004), although it should
be noted that the study examined a very small number
of participants and only numerical differences were
reported. Hence, it remains an open question whether
the use of case particles during comprehension lags
behind production in monolingual children of agglutinative languages.
The mastery of case particles in Korean is likely to be
subject to protracted difficulty in L2 acquisition. Despite
its universal nature, correctly interpreting and producing
case has been shown to be a source of difficulty for L2
learners (Brown & Iwasaki, 2013; Ahn & Herschensohn,
2013; Hopp, 2010, 2015) as well as "heritage speakers"
i.e. speakers who are raised in a different linguistic community from that of their caretakers who are native
speakers of another language (Kim, O'Grady and
Schwartz, in press). Moreover, although the question of
whether convergence on the target grammar depends
upon the particular L1-L2 pairing remains open to
debate, recent work has suggested that adult learners
of Korean whose L1 does not have case marking on full
NPs are at a disadvantage compared to those whose
L1 does (Ahn 2015; Brown & Iwasaki, 2013). Indeed, in
a longitudinal case study of 3 Japanese L1 speakers
and 3 English L1 speakers, Brown and Iwasaki (2013)
showed different trajectories and success rate as concerns the acquisition of case particles in Korean. The L1
Japanese speakers showed clear reliance on their L1
case marking system which, however, also led these learners to ignore certain aspects specific to the (L2) Korean
system and commit more errors than their L1 English
counterparts in these instances. In like manner, the
cross-linguistic comparison of L1 Russian, Dutch and
English learners of L2 German showed that for advanced
learners, the capacity to compute grammatical relations
from the case was dependent upon the overlap of the
learners' L1 and L2, at least under conditions where processing was time constrained (Hopp, 2010). Note, for
"end-state" learners, i.e. those who have acquired nearnative status, the convergence of the L1 and L2 did not
play a significant role; these learners showed the online
use of the case to understand sentences in like fashion
to native L1 German speakers (Hopp, 2010). The
present study was designed to address these issues, i.e.
whether L2 learners of Korean are able to use case-

390

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

marking under conditions where they must compute
grammatical relations under time pressure, and
whether the presence of case in their L1 will impact
this ability.
Another issue in the acquisition of case particles in
Korean is linked to the fact that these particles are not
consistently produced by native speakers in speech.
For both the nominative and accusative, Korean case
particles can be rather freely dropped in an informal
speech once they have been established in the discourse
context, although such is governed by various grammatical and pragmatic constraints (Sohn, 1999). Studies of
L1 acquisition of Korean (and Japanese) show that children drop case particles more often than adults, and
drop accusative more than nominative (for an in-depth
discussion, cf. Ko, 2005). Interestingly, adult L2 (Anglophone) learners of Korean also drop case more frequently than do native speakers, both when licensed
and not (Ahn & Herschensohn, 2013). However, such
was true principally for oral as opposed to written production. These facts led Ahn and Herschensohn (2013)
to assume that L2 learners of Korean have difficulty
with the overt realisation of morphology in general and
case particles in particular, rather than with the underlying syntax per se.
Both linguistic theory and production data provide
evidence that in languages that overtly mark case,
case-marking may, in fact, be optional, although it is
indeed governed by numerous principles (Aissen, 2003;
Kwon and Zribi-Hertz, 2008; Sohn, 1999). Aissen (2003)
focuses her discussion on "differential object marking"
(DOM), i.e. the variability of case marking, and couches
her arguments in Optimality Theory (Prince & Smolensky,
1993). As stated in Aissen (2003), "while the boundaries
that separate the obligatory case-marked objects from
those which are optionally case-marked or never casemarked may shift (according to the language in question) they nonetheless obey the general principle outlined by Bossong (1985: 3) that "the higher in
prominence a direct object, the more likely it is to be
overtly case-marked." Aissen (2003) cites evidence from
numerous typologically distinct languages, including
Korean and Turkish, to bolster her argument (cf.
Kornfilt, 2007 for a discussion of DOM in Turkish and
related languages). In addition, Aissen (2003) cites evidence for "differential subject marking" or DSM, although
she argues that this phenomenon is overall less frequent
and more restricted than DOM. Kwon and Zribi-Hertz
(2008) suggest that Aissen's (2003) theory is "to the
best of our knowledge, the only available theory of DM
which covers both DOM and DSM" and use it as a starting
point to consider the phenomenon in Korean (and Japanese). Kwon and Zribi-Hertz (2008) provide various

examples of both bare objects (DOM) and bare subjects
(DSM) - that is, nouns whose case marks are missing;
their examples of both bare and obligatorily casemarked nouns pose a challenge for Aissen's (2003)
claims concerning the factors that govern the ranking
of constraints. Kwon and Zribi-Hertz (2008) show that
information structure must also be taken into account,
and they conclude by showing how their analysis can
be reconciled with Aissen's theory. The present paper
does not allow us to adjudicate between the various linguistic models of case ellipses. For the present purposes, it is simply important to note that this
phenomenon is clearly attested in Korean and is
observed less often for dative than accusative or nominative case.

The present study
In the present study, we examined the online processing
of the Korean case in native Korean speakers and in L2
learners whose native language was either French or
Kazakh. We predict that the acquisition of case particles
in L2 Korean may prove difficult, independent of the
properties of the learner's L1 grammar (Hopp, 2010,
2015). Nonetheless, based on the results from previous
studies of adult non-native processing in Korean, the protracted difficulty in computing structural relations from
the case in an L2 may be more apparent in learners
whose language does not have nominal case marking
than those that do. Hence, at a macro level, we predict
that L2 learners of Korean whose L1 is typologically
similar Kazakh may show a pattern of online processing
that is more similar to native Koreans than do L2 learners
whose native language is French (cf. Rothman, 2011 for
the Typological Primacy Model). However, one can also
take a more fine-grained approach by examining processing as a function of the type of case markers. Indeed, as
illustrated in the examples 9 through 12 below, we compared processing for monotransitive accusative structures and for dative structures, in both canonical and
scrambled word order; these sentences were all
marked for case, as would be appropriate for sentences
devoid of context (Ahn, 2015).
(9)

Accusative canonical:
  
sonyeo-ka yorisa-lul minta
girl-NOM chef-ACC push-PRES_IND
"The girl pushes the chef."

(10)

Accusative scrambled:
  
yorisa-lul sonyeo-ka minta
chef-ACC girl-NOM push-PRES_IND
"The girl pushes the chef."

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

(11)

Dative canonical:
  
kanhosa-ka seonsaengnim-eykey iyakihanta
nurse-NOM teacher-DAT say hello to-PRES_IND
"The nurse says hello to the teacher"

(12)

Dative scrambled:
  
seonsaengnim-eykey kanhosa-ka iyakihanta
teacher-DAT nurse-NOM say hello to-PRES_IND
"The nurse says hello to the teacher"

To examine online processing, we used a modified
version of the visual world paradigm. In the typical
visual world paradigm, participants hear an utterance
as they view a single visual scene in which the target
item is displayed along with distractors that bear some
grammatical, semantic or phonological resemblance to
the target. In our paradigm, we used two scenes, which
were counterbalanced on the left and right-hand side
of the screen, one which correctly depicted the utterance
and the other in which the roles of the agent and the
patient were reversed. All depicted agents and patients
were of animate objects. Participants were presented
with the entire visual display one second prior to the
onset of the spoken sentence and their eye movements
were recorded from the onset of the display until they
manually selected one of the two scenes by means of
a joystick. The auditory stimuli were marked with inaudible triggers that signalled the onset of each noun and
sentence-final verb, such that we could time lock the participants' eye movements to each element as the utterance unfolded while they scanned the two scenes.
As illustrated in examples 9 through 12, all sentences
were verb final with two (or in some cases three) overtly
marked full nouns prior to the verb. The paradigm
allowed us to test 3 hypotheses. First, we examined
whether native and non native participants differed in
the online use of case as determined by preferential
looks to the correct image. We did not expect listeners
to show a statistical preference for either image during
the processing of the first NP. Although NP1 was
overtly marked, for NOM in canonical structures and
either ACC or DAT in scrambled structures, the listener
could construe the first noun as either the agent or the
patient depending upon the subsequent verb. It is also
unlikely that any clear preference should be found
during the auditory processing of NP1 due to the rapidity
of the speech signal in comparison to the physiological
constraints of eye movements. The average time
needed to programme and launch a saccade is roughly
200 ms (Rayner, 1998) while the duration of the morphological suffixes never exceeded such. We thus predicted
that listeners should begin to look at the correct image

391

only after having processed the second NP, which was
always NOM in scrambled structures and either ACC or
DAT in canonical structures. This pattern is predicted
for native speakers who should immediately exploit
case information (cf. Koh, 1997; Lee, 1999). For L2 learners, if they do not process the utterance incrementally
and/or cannot do so quickly enough to show immediate
effects, we should not see preferential looking to the
correct image prior to the processing of the verb.
Second, by presenting both scrambled and canonical
word order, we can determine whether our participants
are truly using case morphology or if they are preferentially using word order. If participants are using word
order, despite the availability of case marking, for both
SOV and OSV structures they should look at the image
depicting the first auditory noun as agent (Kim et al.,
2018). This would lead to a preferential gaze to the incorrect image for OSV sentences, for which the first auditory
noun is the patient. We predicted that native speakers
would exploit case marking. Last, based on the properties of DAT compared to NOM and ACC, we predicted
that listeners may make immediate use of case faster
and more reliably for dative than accusative structures.
How L2 learners may perform in relation to native speakers is yet another question. For online integration of case,
if the presence of overt case marking on the L1 plays a
prominent role in acquisition we can predict that our
Kazakh participants should show patterns of eye movement behaviour that is more similar to native Koreans
than our French participants, however; this effect
should interact with the factor case marker. We predicted
that the two L2 groups should be more similar to each
other and closer to native speaker performance for
dative structures, since both Kazakh and French have distinctive morphological marks for dative case. In as far as
accuracy is concerned we predicted ceiling level performance for native speakers. For the L2 learners, if
word order is used over the case, we predicted a drop
in accuracy for OSV utterances and, a greater differential
between SOV and OSV structures for French than Kazakh
learners if the L1 features play a predominant role.

Methods
Participants. Twenty-one native speakers of French and
16 native speakers of Kazakh enrolled in the 3rd semester of Korean intensive language classes at Seoul
National University (SNU) based on their performance
on placement tests were recruited as L2 learners, along
with a control group of 18 native Korean speakers
enrolled as undergraduate students at SNU. Two native
Korean participants were later excluded from analyses
due to either poor quality of the eye-movement recording (1) or failure to follow instructions as concerns

392

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

responses (1). All participants were over 18 years of age
with no ocular-motor deficits or history of neurological
insult. All participants gave informed written consent
prior to taking part in the study and were monetarily
compensated for their participation. The study was
approved by the Internal Ethics Committee at SNU.
L2 participants filled out a language background
questionnaire as well as a measure of vocabulary in
Korean and case morphology for the nominative, accusative, and dative, following the main experiment. For all L2
participants, the mean length of formal learning of
Korean at SNU was 160 h across 3 semesters of Korean
intensive language classes. As revealed by the language
background questionnaire, the two learner groups had
similar characteristics as concerns mean age, mean
length of residence in Korea mean onset of first exposure
to Korean and mean number of months studying Korean
prior to arriving in Korea (see Table 1). The language
background questionnaire also queried numerous
aspects of self-rated proficiency, from the ability to
hold a casual conversation to being able to follow university-level classes in Korean. Overall, the two L2 groups
differed only in their subjective ability to read a Korean
language newspaper. All participants were able to
produce the written translations of all nouns and verbs
used in the materials in either French or English as well
as give the correct grammatical description of the
three case markers used across the different nouns.
Stimuli. Experimental stimuli consisted of 40 auditory
sentences, each paired with a visual scene comprised
of 2 line drawings created by a professional artist (the
full set of stimuli are available upon request). The experimental sentences were constructed according to a 2
(Case: accusative vs. dative verb) x 2 (Order: canonical
(SOV) vs. scrambled (OSV)) within-subjects design. Five
accusative and 5 dative verbs and 20 concrete nouns
were used to create sentences. Accusative verbs varied
in length from 2 to 4 syllables (average of 2.8) and
dative verbs from 2 to 5 syllables (average of 3.4). Each
verb was presented in 4 auditory sentences with 4
different noun pairs (e.g.   
(studentnom teacheracc seePres_Ind) "the student sees the
teacher",    (mannom womanacc
seePres_Ind), "the man sees the woman" etc.). For each
verb type, each of the 20 critical nouns was seen either
once or twice as the subject and as the object noun
across sentences (e.g.    (adultnom
childacc pushPres_Ind) "the adult pushes the child" and
   (childnom adultacc wakePres_Ind)
"The child wakes the adult", and  
 (patientnom doctordat say helloPres_Ind) "The
patient says hello to the doctor" and  
 (doctornom patientdat speakPres_Ind) "The

doctor speaks to the patient"). For 3 of the 5 dative
verbs a third (accusative) noun was heard prior to the
verb (e.g.     "The
childnom the womandat the umbrellaacc gives"). Using
dative verbs that require the third noun, marked for
the accusative, was to ensure that verbs were all high frequency. For all dative utterances, the first and second
noun were always marked for either nominative or
dative depending upon word order (SOV or OSV). All
nouns and verbs were selected to be part of the L2 learners' vocabulary, which was also verified in the postexperiment questionnaire. The pairing of two nouns, as
well as the use of a pair with a given verb, was performed
to meet semantic restrictions. Sentence creation was
further restricted by the possibility of creating unambiguous visual scenes to depict the sentences.
Each auditory sentence was produced in canonical
(SOV) and scrambled (OSV) word order (eg. 
  (chefnom girlacc chasePRES_IND) and
   (girlacc chefnom chasePRES_IND)
"The chef chases the girl"). All verbs were produced in
the inflected form for present indicative for standard
newspaper reporting and all nouns were fully marked
for case (nominative, accusative, dative). Two counterbalanced lists were created such that all participants
heard 20 accusatives and 20 dative sentences, with 10
of each verb type in canonical and 10 in scrambled
word order, and no repetition of sentences within a list.
Twenty filler sentences comprised of a copula and 2
nouns were also created and presented in each of the
two lists.
Sentences were recorded by a linguistically trained
female native Korean speaker in a sound-attenuated
recording studio at 48kHz (32-bit float) at a rate of
roughly 550 ms per word. The mean duration of experimental sentences was roughly 2 s. The speaker used a
neutral intonational pattern that did not accentuate
either noun. All sentences were recorded in a single
session and all sentences were produced twice. Post
recording, the list of sentences was split into individual
tracks. For each experimental sentence, the onset as
well as duration of each auditory element (N1, N2, VB)
was determined using SPAAS software adapted for
Korean (www.sppas.org) and verified using PRAAT.
These onsets were used as triggers sent during the eye
movement recording and later used to compute the
location of the participants' gaze as the auditory sentence unfolded.
All line drawings were created by a professional artist
using India ink and paper, and were subsequently digitised for purposes of the experiment. All drawings were
created on a template comprised of 2 equally sized rectangles, one on the left and one on the right half of the

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

393

Table 1. Demographics of participant groups. Means and standard deviations in parentheses.
Group

Mean Age

French
Kazakh
Korean

24 (4.4)
24 (2.5)
21 (1.2)

Age exposed

Months in Korea

Length of study at SNU

Score on vocabulary test

21 (3.5)
18 (2.5)
At birth

10.5 (11)
9.3 (4.7)
Since birth

3 semesters
3 semesters
First-year undergraduate

98% (2.9%)
99%(1.25%)
100% (0)

screen at a resolution of 1024 x 768 pixels. Each drawing
consisted of 2 complementary scenes, one depicting the
first noun as the subject of the action and the other the
second noun as the subject (see Figure 1). The correct
image appeared equally often on the left and right
side of the screen across trials and experimental conditions. All visual stimuli were presented only once, in
conjunction with an experimental or filler trial.
Procedure. Participants were tested at SNU in a soundattenuated room. The experiment began with a series of
4 warm-up trials to familiarise the participant with the
procedure, followed by a randomised list of 40 experimental and 20 filler trials. Participants sat 60 cm away
from a CRT screen with their head restrained by a chin/
forehead rest and were asked to listen to sentences
and press one of two response buttons corresponding
to the image depicting the sentence. Participants' eye
movements were recorded using an Eyelink 2 Head
mounted eye-tracker and were sampled at 250 hz. Participants' eye movements were calibrated at the outset
of the experiment using a nine-point calibration grid
that randomly presented fixation points at 500 ms intervals. Recalibrations were performed roughly every 10
trials and drift checks were performed as necessary.
Each trial began with a central fixation point for 500 ms
and warning tone followed by the presentation of the
visual scene. The auditory sentence was presented
1000 ms after the display of the visual scene, which
remained on the screen until the participants' response
on the button box. The next trial began immediately following the participants' response and no feedback was
provided. The entire session lasted roughly 30 min.

Results
Eye movement data and response accuracy were
extracted using the Data Viewer software (Eyelink).
Trials contaminated by loss of the tracker or excessive
movement were discarded (resulting in 3%, 3,5% and
4% of trials for native Koreans, Kazakh L2 learners and
French L2 learners respectively). Two items were
excluded from the analyses due to native speakers'
showing chance level accuracy as a result of ambiguity
in the line drawing.

Figure 1. An example of a visual scene presented to participants
1 second prior to and throughout the auditory stimulus until the
participant's response.

Accuracy
Three models were fitted to determine whether the 3
groups differed in performance. The first model

Statistical analysis
We ran logistic regressions using generalised mixed
effects models (glmer) to analyse both accuracy and
dwell time. We used R packages lme4 (Bates et al.,
2015) and LMER convenience functions (Tremblay &
Ransij, 2015). Below we report the results from the
models with a random effect structure justified by the
data, which show the smallest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) (Matuschek, Kliegl, Vasishth, Baayen &
Bates, 2017). Models were constructed from the simplest
to the maximal model and model comparisons were systematically performed, however; the majority of the
models for dwell times also met the criterion of being
the maximal model (Barr, Levy, Scheepers & Tily, 2013).
For dwell times, a binary variable was constructed
based on the amount of time spent on the correct and
incorrect image during each auditory word. For
example, if on a given trial a participant spent 350 ms
on the correct and 100 ms on the incorrect image
respectively, then 350 "1" and 100 "0" responses were
entered into the logistic regression model. As such, the
variability in dwell times across participants and trials
was retained in the model. Dwell times were calculated
from the auditory onset of a given region of interest
(ROI) to the onset of the next ROI for the first two ROI
(N1 and N2) and from the onset of the ROI to the
onset of the manual response for the final ROI (VB). For
the dative sentences that contained a third (accusative)
noun prior to the verb, this time was not included in
the ROI analyses. The specific models are described
below, for accuracy and dwell time analyses.

394

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

compared Korean controls to Kazakh learners and
included the sum-coded factors Group (Korean native
vs. Kazakh learners), Case (Accusative vs. Dative) and
Order (Canonical vs. Scrambled) and their interactions.
The second model compared Korean controls to
French learners and included the same sum-coded
factors: Group (Korean native vs. French learners), Case,
Order and their interactions. The third model again
included the same sum-coded factors and directly compared the 2 learner groups: Group (Kazakh vs. French
learners), Case, Order and their interactions. The participant was included as a random factor; Item was not
included due to non-convergence when added. No
slope was included due to non-convergence of the
model when added. Figure 2 illustrates the accuracy
results for the observed data.
The model comparing Korean controls to Kazakh learners revealed an effect of Group ( = 0.75, se = 0.18, z =
4.23, p < .0001) due to higher overall accuracy for
Koreans (94%) than Kazakh learners (79%), which was
modified by interactions involving Group x Order ( =
0.28, se = 0.11, z = -2.44, p < .01) and Group x Case ( =
0.50, se = 0.11, z = 4.36, p < .0001). The comparison of
Koreans to French learners revealed the same effects,
with a main effect of Group ( = 1.03, se = 0.17, z = 6.23,

p < .0001) due to lower overall accuracy for French
learners (68%), and interactions between Group x
Order ( = -0.44, se = 0.11, z = -4.01, p < .0001) and
Group x Case ( = 0.36, se = 0.11, z = 3.34, p < .0001).
The model comparing the 2 learner groups directly
revealed a main effect of Group ( = -0.29, se = 0.14,
z = -2.02, p < .04), indicating overall higher accuracy for
Kazakh than French learners, as well as interactions
between Group x Order ( = 0.16, se = 0.08, z = 2.02,
p < .04) and Group x Case x Order ( = 0.20, se = 0.08,
z = 2.60, p < .01). Based on the interactions found in
these models, we performed independent analyses on
the data for each group, with the sum coded factors
Case and Order. The best model included for the
Korean data included only Participant as a random intercept, whereas the model for the French and Kazakh learners included both Participant and Item as random
intercepts. No random slope was included to any of
the models due to non convergence of the model
when added.
For the Korean natives, there was an effect of Case
( = 0.54, se = 0.20, z = 2.72, p < .01) but not of Order
( = -0.14, se = 0.20, z = 0.71, ns), nor the interaction
( = 0.08, se = 0.20, z = 0.39, ns). Korean controls performed at practically ceiling level for all conditions,

Figure 2. Percentage of a correct response as a function of case marking, word order and participant group (ACC = accusative, DAT =
dative, CAN = canonical, SCR = scrambled).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

with slightly better accuracy for accusative than dative
sentences.
For the French L2 learners, there was an effect of
Order ( = 1.07, se = 0.12, z = 8.68, p < .00001), which
was modified by the interaction with Case ( = 0.41, se
= 0.12, z = 3.55, p < .0004). The subsequent treatment
coded model revealed that for dative sentences performance was above chance for both canonical ( = 2.00, sd =
0.31, z = 6.40, p < .0001) and scrambled ( = 0.69, sd =
0.27, z = 2.59, p < .01) word orders. In contrast, for accusative sentences accuracy was above chance for canonical
word order ( = 2.44, sd = 0.32, z = 7.52, p < .0001) but
below chance for scrambled ( = -0.54, sd = 0.26, z =
2.09, p < .04).
For the Kazakh learners, both the effects of Case
( = -0.48, se = 0.15, z = -3.25, p < .001) and of Order
( = 0.76, se = 0.15, z = 4.92, p < .0001) were significant
with no interaction ( = 0.01, se = 0.15, z = 0.08, ns).
Kazakh learners showed above chance accuracy for all
conditions, but higher accuracy for dative than accusative sentences and for canonical than scrambled word
order.

Eye tracking analyses
Independent analyses were performed on the 3 ROI (N1,
N2 and Verb). In like manner to the models for accuracy,
we first ran 3 independent generalised linear mixed
effects models (glmer) to compare the Korean controls
to Kazakh learners, the Korean controls to the French
learners and then the 2 learner groups to each other,
for each ROI. All models included the sum coded
factors Group, Case, Order and their interactions. Participant and Item were both included as random intercepts
and random slopes of both Case and Order for Participant. The models met the requirements of being both
the maximal model and that with the lowest AIC value.
At the first noun (N1), we found that the interactional
terms involving Group, Case and Order were significant
across all models Korean vs. Kazakh learners ( = 0.05,
se = 0.003, z = 17.72, p < .0001); Korean vs. French learners ( = 0.02, se = 0.003, z = 9.13, p < .0001); Kazakh vs.
French ( = 0.03, se = 0.003, z = 9.61, p < .0001). At the
second noun (N2), we observed the same interactional
terms involving Group, Case and Order across all
models Korean vs. Kazakh learners ( = -0.03, se =
0.003, z = -10.05, p < .0001); Korean vs. French learners
( = -0.07, se = 0.003, z = -28.36, p < .0001); Kazakh vs.
French ( = 0.04, se = 0.002, z = 17.73, p < .0001). At the
Verb, we also found the same interactional terms
involving Group, Case and Order across all models
Korean vs. Kazakh learners ( = 0.04, se = 0.002, z = 21.19,
p < .00001); Korean vs. French learners ( = 0.03, se =

395

0.002, z = 15.25, p < .00001); Kazakh vs. French ( = 0.004,
se = 0.001, z = 3.17, p < .002).
Given the above interactions with Group, we performed independent analyses on the 3 groups for each
of the 3 ROI using sum-coded fixed factors. For all
three groups and for all ROI, we report the complete
model, which included random intercepts for Participant
and Item and random slopes of both Case and Order for
Participant.
For the Korean native controls, at the first ROI, N1,
we found no effects: Intercept ( = -0.09, se = 0.11,
z = -0.86, ns); Case ( = -0.04, se = 0.11, z = -0.35, ns);
Order ( = -0.09, se = 0.10, z = -0.90, ns), Case x Order
( = -0.06, se = 0.09, z = -0.66, ns). Participants did not
look at either of the two images above chance level
during the auditory presentation of the first noun,
whether the sentence was in canonical or scrambled
order and independent of the case marking on the
noun. At the second ROI (N2) we found a significant
effect for the Intercept ( = 0.54, se = 0.17, z = 3.26, p
< .001), but no effect of either Case ( = -0.08, se =
0.15, z = -0.54, ns) or Order ( = 0.18, se = 0.15, z = 1.18,
ns) nor their interaction ( = -0.06, se = 0.12, z = -0.46,
ns). Native Koreans looked at the correct image above
chance when listening to the second auditory noun, irrespective of Case or word Order. At the final ROI (Verb),
the same pattern was observed, whereby there was a
significant effect of the Intercept ( = 0.99, se = 0.11,
z = 8.63, p < .00001) but no effect of either Case
( = -0.14, se = 0.10, z = -1.39, ns) or Order ( = 0.15,
se = 0.10, z = 1.51, ns) nor their interaction ( = -0.13,
se = 0.08, z = 1.59, ns). Independent of Case or Order, participants looked at the correct image the vast majority of
the time during the processing of the verb and until their
response. These results are illustrated in Figure 3 for the 3
ROI for all items and in Figure 6 for an example using
heat maps.
For the French learners, no effects were found at the
first ROI, N1 Intercept ( = -0.01, se = 0.11, z = 0.05, ns);
Case ( = -0.08, se = 0.10, z = 0.82, ns); Order ( = -0.05,
se = 0.10, z = -0.50, ns), Case x Order ( = -0.01, se =
0.08, z = 0.15, ns). At the second ROI, N2, there was no
effect of the Intercept ( = -0.07, se = 0.11, z = 0.61, ns)
nor of Case ( = -0.00, se = 0.11, z = -0.02, ns) or Order
( = -0.06, se = 0.11, z = -0.60, ns), however the interaction of Case x Order was significant ( = -0.17,
se = 0.09, z = 1.95, p < .05). Subsequent sub-analyses of
only Accusative case on one hand and Dative on the
other did not reveal any significant effects at N2,
however. At the final ROI, the Verb, there were effects
of Intercept ( = 0.31, se = 0.08, z = 3.71, p < .0002),
Case ( = -0.14, se = 0.08, z = -2.23, p < .03) and Order
( = -0.20, se = 0.07, z = -3.08, p < .002) but not their

396

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

Figure 3. Native Korean participants' percentage of dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation of
each element (N1, N2, and VB), as a function of Case (ACC = accusative, DAT = dative) and word order (CAN = canonical, SCR =
scrambled).

interaction ( = -0.07, se = 0.05, z = 1.44, ns). During the
processing of the auditory verb, French learners looked
at the correct image above chance. The effect was
larger for dative than accusative sentences, and for canonical than scrambled word order. These results are illustrated in Figure 4 for the 3 ROI for all items and in Figure
7 for an example using heat maps.
For the Kazakh learners, again, no effects were found
at the first ROI, N1: Intercept ( = -0.09, se = 0.13, z =
-0.66, ns); Case ( = -0.05, se = 0.14, z = -0.37, ns);
Order ( = -0.01, se = 0.13, z = 0.11, ns), Case x Order
( = -0.04, se = 0.10, z = -0.40, ns).: The same was true
for the second ROI, N2 Intercept ( = -0.04, se = 0.13,
z = 0.28, ns); Case ( = -0.09, se = 0.11, z = -0.84, ns);
Order ( = -0.13, se = 0.11, z = 1.15, ns), Case x Order
( = -0.06, se = 0. 09, z = 0.65, ns). In contrast, at the
final ROI, the Verb, there was an effect of the Intercept
( = -0.32, se = 0.06, z = 5.47, p < .00001), but no effect
of either factor nor their interaction: Case ( = -0.09,
se = 0.05, z = -1.83, p < .07); Order ( = -0.08, se = 0.06,
z = 1.39, ns), Case x Order ( = -0.03, se = 0. 04, z = 0.83,
ns). Hence, the Kazakh group did not look at the
correct image above chance during the processing of
either the first or second noun, but did look preferentially

at the correct image during the processing of the final
verb, and this did not depend upon either Case or
Order. These results are illustrated in Figure 5 for the 3
ROI for all items and in Figure 8 for an example using
heat maps.

Discussion
The present ensemble of results depicts a complex
pattern of processing of case markers during auditory
sentence processing in Korean. The online nature of
the current experiment allowed us to determine not
only whether, but indeed when listeners used case
marking to determine the syntactic structure of utterances. Our results provide important and novel information as concerns the online auditory processing of
case in both native speakers and L2 learners. Indeed, to
our knowledge, ours is the first study to have used a
design that allowed us to follow participants' online
use of case in Korean during auditory processing. In typologically similar languages, such as Japanese, several
studies have shown that native speakers use case and
lexical semantics during auditory processing to predict
upcoming elements in an utterance (Kamide, Altmann
et al., 2003; Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016). Our results

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

397

Figure 4. French-Korean learners' percentage of dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation of
each element (N1, N2, and VB), as a function of Case (ACC = accusative, DAT = dative) and word order (CAN = canonical, SCR =
scrambled).

Figure 5. Kazakh-Korean learners' percentage of dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation of each
element (N1, N2, and VB), as a function of Case (ACC = accusative, DAT = dative) and word order (CAN = canonical, SCR = scrambled).

398

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

Figure 6. Heat maps showing Native Korean participants' dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation of each element (N1, N2, and VB) for a canonical accusative utterance.

Figure 7. Heat maps showing French-Korean learners' dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation
of each element (N1, N2, and VB) for a canonical accusative utterance.

Figure 8. Heat maps showing Kazakh-Korean learners' dwell time for the correct and incorrect image during the auditory presentation
of each element (N1, N2, and VB) for a canonical accusative utterance.

produce converging evidence of incremental processing
in native Korean speakers during the processing of utterances. As discussed below, our L2 learners did not
demonstrate this capacity, in line with previous studies
of auditory processing in Japanese and German L2 learners (Hopp, 2015; Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016). In
relation to previous studies of case marking in Korean
by L2 learners and heritage speakers, our results
provide important complementary information to the
offline measures (Ahn, 2015; Ahn & Herschensohn,
2013; Kim et al., 2018).
Consider first the data obtained for the group of
native Korean speakers. As could be expected, accuracy
was at ceiling level; participants had no difficulty understanding the utterances or choosing the correct image
based on case marking. This is in line with the results

from offline studies of native Korean speakers in
various tasks requiring the interpretation and production
of case (Ahn, 2015; Ahn & Herschensohn, 2013; Kim et al.,
2018) as well as online reading studies that involved syntactic ambiguity resolution (Koh, 1997). The more compelling pattern is that found for the eye movement
record as the utterance unfolded. Despite the relative
simplicity of the utterances, native speakers only
showed a statistically robust commitment to the
correct interpretation of the utterance during the processing of the second noun and, even then, the percentage
of looks to the correct image was roughly 60%. During
the processing of the auditory verb, native Koreans
showed a definitive preference for the correct image,
with an average of roughy 80% of the total gaze to the
correct image at this point in the auditory input. These

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

results clearly show that native Korean speakers build a
syntactic representation incrementally, in line with previous studies of Korean and Japanese (Kamide,
Altmann et al., 2003; Kim, 1999; Koh, 1997; Koizumi &
Tamaoka, 2010; Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016; Miyamoto
& Takahashi, 2004). Importantly, the eye movement data
for the native speakers revealed, akin to the accuracy
data, that they exploited case independently of word
order. For both canonical (SOV) and scrambled (OSV)
structures, native speakers looked towards the correct
image starting from the second noun. In addition, they
did so independently of the type of case marking, i.e.
for both accusative and dative structures. As a whole,
thus, it can be said that native Korean speakers used
case over word order for both dative and accusative
and showed the computation of the correct structure
as soon as enough grammatical information was
present to clearly rule out any possible alternative
interpretations.
The results for the L2 learners contrast in numerous
ways from that found for the native Korean speakers. Furthermore, the two groups of L2 speakers differed statistically from each other on both accuracy and gaze to the
correct image. As outlined below, the Kazakh group
showed a pattern of performance that was more
similar to the native Korean group than did the French
group, although the Kazakh group indeed differed
from the control group. Prior to discussing the various
theoretical accounts for the greater convergence of the
Kazakh group compared to the French group, we
provide an overview of the patterns of results found
for each.
For the French learners, their accuracy data was consistent with their eye movement data in that they
revealed a clear use of word order over case. They
showed better comprehension for canonical than
scrambled structures, but this was particularly true for
accusative structures. They showed a sharp decrease in
the correct choice of images specifically for OSV utterances for the accusative, which showed only 38%
correct choice compared to 89% for SOV word order.
For dative structures, they also showed a decrease in
accuracy for OSV compared to SOV structures but were
still above chance for both canonical (85%) and
scrambled structures (65%). This pattern is reminiscent
of data found for heritage speakers of Korean (Kim
et al., 2018). In the absence of context or prosodic
focus, heritage speakers--children who were exposed
to Korean from birth but who were raised in an English
speaking environment--used word order over the case
as shown by only 29% of correct interpretations for accusative OSV utterances compared to ceiling level performance for SOV utterances. Even when a prior context was

399

provided in which the accusatively marked noun was
presented with a topic case marker, these 8-12-yearold heritage speakers were not able to drop their preference for word order, as shown by chance level performance for accusative OSV utterances preceded by context
(42% correct). The same was found when the acoustic
salience of the morphological markers was enhanced
(48% correct).
These Korean heritage children share characteristics
with Spanish heritage children in an English majority
environment. Cuza and Perez-Tattam (2016) explored
noun-adjective word order discrepancies and gender
levelling (predominance of masculine as default) of heritage Spanish children compared to monolingual Spanish
controls. They adopted the Feature Re-assembly Hypothesis (Lardiere, 2009; Putnam & Sanchez, 2013) to account
for a high degree of phrasal word order errors and
gender mismatch in the children's production data, proposing that the Spanish nominal features had been reassembled in part due to contact with English, which is
genderless and shows a different noun phrase order.
For the heritage Korean children, one can see the
influence of strict word order from English strongly
influencing their performance as well.
Interestingly, Kim et al. (2018) found in a second
experiment that their heritage speakers fared better for
OSV utterances when the bisyllabic dative marker
(-hanthey) was used (54% correct) as opposed to the
accusative (22%). The pattern found for offline comprehension is surprisingly similar across Kim et al's (2018)
study and ours for the adult L1 French participants; our
French learners nonetheless performed numerically
better than the group of heritage Korean speakers for
OSV utterances, whether for the accusative (38%
correct) or dative (65% correct). It is noteworthy that
Kim et al. (2018) also showed substantial variation in
their participants' performance as a function of proficiency, although this is speculative as no statistics were
reported to support these differences. Our data allow
us to go a step farther. The eye movement record
allowed us to demonstrate, first, that the French learners
did not show any evidence of computing the structure of
the utterance prior to having heard the verb, as revealed
by their chance level gaze to the correct and incorrect
image up until the processing of the final verb. At the
verb, participants showed a strong effect of both word
order and case, with a greater percentage of looks to
the correct image for canonical (SOV) than scrambled
(OSV), and dative than accusative structures. Despite
numerical differences, however, we did not find the
interaction that obtained for the accuracy results,
whereby there was a specific deficit for the scrambled
accusatives. It is possible, given the trend in the eye

400

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

movement data that this interaction would hold with a
larger sample size.
The Kazakh learners showed yet another pattern of
response. For the end of utterance accuracy, they
showed a greater percentage of looks to the correct
than the incorrect image in all conditions although
they still showed higher accuracy for canonical than
scrambled utterances and for dative than accusative
structures. However, these learners did not show a
greater drop in accuracy specifically for scrambled accusatives (61% correct), in contrast to the group of French
learners (38%). The pattern of eye movements for this
group was intermediary between that of the native
Koreans and the French. The Kazakh learners, akin to
the French, did not look preferentially to the correct
image prior to the processing of the verb. Thus, they
showed later use of case than native Koreans. However,
in a similar fashion to the Koreans, they looked at the
correct image more often than the incorrect image
during the processing of the verb independent of word
order or case. Hence, unlike the French learners but
akin to the Koreans, the Kazakh learners showed reliance
on case marking in all conditions, and they were not disadvantaged by scrambled word order as concerns their
gaze to the correct image. One can conclude, thus that
the Kazakh learners did not compute the syntactic structure of the utterance until all information was available,
but then were able to use their knowledge of case
marking to correctly interpret the utterances. This
pattern is similar to that found for the "intermediary"
and "high" proficiency heritage speakers reported in
Kim et al. (2018) although, as stated, these authors, unfortunately, failed to report any statistics to validate their
between-group differences.
The difference in patterns of accuracy and eye movements between the French and Kazakh learners, as well
as the greater similarity in patterns between the
Kazakh and Korean participants, can be viewed in light
of typological similarity. Rothman (2011) proposes the
Typological Primacy Model to account for transfer preferences in L3 acquisition, a model whose main tenets can
be applied to any multilingual context. He suggests that
learners select syntactic competencies in their repertoire
based on the perceived typology of the languages (or
psycho-typological proximity). For our French and
Kazakh learners, we infer that the latter perceived
(albeit unconsciously) a typological similarity between
Korean and Kazakh in terms of word order (SOV), case
marking and scrambling options and were able to transfer their competencies in those areas into Korean, both
for its grammatical representation and for processing
strategies. The French learners could perhaps relate the
dative more easily to the dative marked "a NP" in

French and dative pronouns (with SOV word order),
but these small grammatical pieces are much more
selective. One might think the French left dislocation
SOV order could provide another selective transfer, but
their poor performance on scrambled sentences seems
to obviate that interpretation. Mitsugi and MacWhinney
(2010) examined whether linguistic typology played a
role in the capacity to compute sentence structure for
scrambled and canonical sentences in Japanese. They
used a self-paced reading paradigm to compare the performance of native Japanese participants and 3 groups
of L2 learners whose L1 was either typologically similar
to Korean (Japanese) or distant (English and Chinese).
Based on a series of null results, which showed no differences in the time needed to process OSV and SOV sentences for any of the participant groups, the authors
concluded first, that there is no processing cost associated with scrambling and second, that linguistic typology played no role in acquisition. These results are at
odds with numerous other studies showing a clear processing cost for scrambled sentences for native Japanese
readers in grammaticality judgment tasks (Imamura, Sato
& Koizumi, 2016; Iwasaki, 2008; Koizumi & Tamakoa,
2010; Miyamoto & Takahashi, 2002). In addition, it is
quite difficult to base any strong conclusions on an
absence of an effect, such that the claim for a lack of
typological effects is weak.
It is of interest to note that both of our L2 learner
groups demonstrated better comprehension for dative
than accusative structures. Kim et al. (2018) reported
similar results for their heritage speakers and attributed
the effect to the saliency of phonetic realisation of the
dative in comparison to the accusative. This indeed
may be one factor although, as outlined in the introduction, dative case differs from accusative and nominative
in relation to numerous semantic and grammatical
factors. Goldschneider and DeKeyser (2001) note a
number of variables that could determine acquisition
order for L2A morpheme order studies: perceptual salience, semantic complexity, morphophonological regularity, syntactic category and frequency. When we
compare Korean accusative to dative case, we observe
several significant differences. The two-syllable dative -
eykey, used for animate objects, is more perceptually
salient than the monosyllabic -(l)ul. The dative may
serve several semantic functions, but it is usually a
source or goal in thematic terms, and has a consistent
morphological form that differs only in terms of the
animate versus inanimate allomorphs (a consistent
semantic alternation); accusative, in contrast, may serve
a broader range of thematic roles. In terms of morphophonological regularity, dative varies according to
semantic constraints, whereas accusative varies in form

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

according to its phonological environment. More significantly, accusative is very frequently omitted in discourse
contexts where its presence is optional, whereas dative is
not. Accusative nouns are more frequent in occurrence,
but they may not be case-marked, so the accusative
case marking is less transparent to learners. All these
factors could contribute to the better performance of
our participants on dative over the accusative case.
Finally, both French and Kazakh mark dative case on
nouns and pronouns, whereas French shows no overt
mark of accusative on direct objects in French.
Pertaining to the above, the difference in performance as a function of verb class cannot be attributed to
any potential confounds such as subtle differences in
length or lexical frequency for the dative and accusative.
First, as concerns accuracy rate, Korean natives showed
no effect of Case, although they were indeed at ceiling
level. For the L2 learners, the French and Kazakh L1
groups showed different patterns of results across
groups. If the effect were simply frequency, we should
have seen a similar pattern across the two groups, with
better accuracy for one of the two cases. Second, as concerns the eye movement record, the Korean native group
showed no effect of either Case or Order at the verb or
earlier, which again argues against any simple frequency
effects. The same was true for the Kazakh group. For the
French group, however, there was an effect of Case at the
verb. If the advantage for the dative were purely driven
by frequency; we should have observed a similar case
effect with the other groups.
The present study looked exclusively at comprehension. Various L2 studies on the case have examined
either the difference between comprehension and production capacities or differences in production as a function of the task (Ahn & Herschensohn, 2013; Iwasaki,
2008; Kim et al., 2018). These studies have shown that
L2 participants produce case markers more accurately
and more often in written than oral production (Ahn &
Herschensohn, 2013) In oral production, learners make
more errors during spontaneous speech than scripted
speech (Ahn & Herschensohn, 2013; Iwasaki, 2008; Kim
et al., 2018). Production capacities also surpass comprehension for 10-12 year old Korean heritage speakers, at
least for low proficiency speakers (Kim et al., 2018), in
like manner to what has been reported for children
acquiring Korean or Japanese as an L1 although this conclusion has been questioned (cf. Ahn, 2015 for a review).
Our study does not allow us to make such comparisons,
but given the common pattern of results reported above
it would be of interest to determine whether our adult L2
learners would show better production of the case than
their comprehension scores revealed for scrambled
structures. In a similar vein, it is possible that the low

401

scores we found for scrambled accusative utterances
may also be attributed to the transient nature of
speech. We are currently investigating this by comparing
comprehension in reading to that for the current auditory design, using the same materials and recording
eye movements. Preliminary results for a new sample
of French learners showed an improvement in comprehension for scrambled sentences in reading compared
to auditory processing (Frenck-Mestre, Choo, Kim, Ghio,
Herschensohn & Koh, in preparation).
Our results show that neither French nor Kazakh learners of Korean were able to exploit case morphology to
determine the meaning of utterances prior to the onset
of the verb, whereas native Korean speakers already
showed preferential looking at the image that correctly
depicted the utterance from the second noun. It can
thus be concluded that our L2 learners did not demonstrate the kind of incremental, predictive processing
based on case marking that the native speakers did.
This result is in line with those from a visual world paradigm study of Japanese auditory processing conducted
with Japanese native speakers and L2 learners of Japanese
whose L1 was English (Mitsugi & MacWhinney, 2016). The
study replicated seminal work (Kamide Altmann et al.,
2003) showing that native Japanese speakers make anticipatory looks to the upcoming element in the auditory
sequence based on the case marking of the nouns, and
this held true for both canonical (SOV) and scrambled
(OSV) word orders. In contrast, in a separate analysis
that specifically investigated the performance of L2 Japanese speakers, Mitsugi and MacWhinney (2016) did not
find statistical evidence that the L2 learner group demonstrated any such anticipatory looks; these listeners only
showed an increase in the number of looks to the structurally predictable element after it had actually been
uttered. Mitsugi and MacWhinney concluded that L2 learners of Japanese, at least at intermediary levels of proficiency, do not use nominal case morphology to
incrementally build sentence structure.
The question whether L2 learners recruit morphosyntactic cues to form predictions during auditory processing was also addressed by Hopp (2015) in a visual
world paradigm adapted from Kamide, Scheepers et al.
(2003). L2 German learners, who were categorised into
4 groups according to proficiency on a standardised
test of German, and native German speakers listened
to auditory sentences that provided unambiguous nominative and accusative case marking on the two nouns in
SVO and OVS structures. The results showed, first, statistically robust interactions which allowed the data for
native speakers and L2 learners to be analysed independently. Native speakers showed anticipatory looks to the
element in the visual scene depicting the second noun,

402

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

based on case morphology provided by the first noun,
prior to the actual onset of NP2. In the L2 groups, none
showed anticipatory looks to the second NP as a function
of case marking on NP1. At the second NP, however, the
effect of proficiency came into play. Only L2 learners with
a higher level of proficiency demonstrated the capacity
to integrate case morphology rapidly enough for it to
play a role prior to the complete processing of the
second noun. Nonetheless, it is notable that the L2
groups did not statistically diverge from each other
prior to the final region of the auditory sentence and
did not show the same type of anticipatory processing
based on nominal case marking that native listeners
did. Hence, both studies corroborate our finding that
L2 learners have difficulties processing case information
during auditory processing quickly enough for it to
produce anticipatory eye movements to the correct
visual scene. It is nonetheless possible that L2 learners
are simply slower at morphosyntactic feature extraction
and, as a consequence, do not show "predictive" processing but still indeed have knowledge of these features.
Our current eye movement research on reading, where
participants are able to re-read segments rather than
be constrained by the transient nature of the speech
signal, should help to elucidate this question.
To conclude, the present study provides evidence of
the immediate and predictive use of Korean case
marking in auditory sentence processing in native speakers, which corroborates previous results in the online
computation of written materials (Koh, 1997, Lee,
1999). This was found independent of the particular
case marker (dative versus accusative) and word order
(canonical SOV or scrambled OSV). The data for L2 learners show that the ability to process case morphology
online depends on both word order and the specific
case marking. In addition, overlap as concerns grammatical features across the L1 and L2 (canonical word order
and the possibility to transpose arguments, overt realisation of case morphology and the factors that regulate
ellipsis) played an important role. Kazakh learners of
Korean were at an advantage compared to French learners as concerns comprehension of scrambled structures, for both accusative and dative, while both L2
groups showed superior comprehension for dative. The
eye movement record revealed that Kazakh learners,
akin to French learners, failed to exploit case morphology
prior to the sentence-final verb, however; whereas
French revealed difficulties related to both case and
scrambling, the Kazakh learners showed a pattern
similar to native speakers, albeit delayed. In sum, the
present work provides compelling evidence of the incremental nature of processing in L1 Korean, significant
effects of the particular case marking for L2 learners

and effects of their L1 in the capacity to exploit case
morphology.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This research was funded by an Academy of Korean Studies
Grant (AKS grant # 2015-R44) as well as an Appel a Projet de
Recherche International, Aix-Marseille Universite (AAPRI-42016) to CFM, and from the Excellence Initiative of Aix-Marseille
University - A*MIDEX, a French "Investissements d'Avenir" programme". The views expressed here are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the funding agencies. The
funders had no role in the study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

ORCID
Cheryl Frenck-Mestre

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3784-2191

References
Ahn, H. (2015). Second language acquisition of Korean case by
learners with different first languages (Doctoral dissertation).
University of Washington.
Ahn, H., Herschensohn, J. (2013). Anglophone acquisition of
case particles in L2 Korean. In J. C. Amaro (Ed.), Proceedings
of the 12th generative approaches to second language acquisition (pp. 1-10). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings
Project.
Aissen, J. (2003). Differential object marking: iconicity vs.
economy. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 21, 435-483.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random
effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep
it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68, 255-278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting
linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of
Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Bossong, G. (1985). Differentielle Objektmarkierung in den
Neuiranischen Sprachen. Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Brown, L., & Iwasaki, N. (2013). Cross-linguistic influence in the
L2 acquisition of Korean case particles by Japanese-speaking
and English-speaking learners: L1-L2 proximity and learner
perceptions. Electronic Journal of Foreign Language
Teaching, 10, 176-195.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Chung, G. (1994). Case and its acquisition in Korean (Doctoral dissertation). University of Texas.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in
language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Clifton, C. Jr., & Staub, A. (2008). Parallelismn and competition in
syntactic ambiguity resolution. Language and Linguisitics
Compass, 212, 234-250.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Cuza, A., & Perez-Tattam, R. (2016). Grammatical gender selection and phrasal word order in child heritage Spanish: A
feature-reassembly approach. Bilingualism, Language and
Cognition, 19, 50-68.
Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. A., & Qian, T. (2013). Rapid
expectation adaptation during syntactic comprehension.
PLoS ONE, 8. doi:10.1371/e77661.
Foraker, S., & Murphy, G. L. (2012). Polysemy in sentence comprehension: Effects of meaning dominance. Journal of
Memory and Language, 67, 407-425.
Goldschneider, J. M., & DeKeyser, R. M. (2001). Explaining the
"natural order of L2 morpheme acquisition" in English: A
meta-analysis of multiple determinants. Language Learning,
51, 1-50.
Henry, N., Hopp, H., & Jackson, C. N. (2017). Cue additivity and
adaptivity in predictive processing. Language, Cognition
and Neuroscience, 32, 1229-1249.
Herschensohn, J. (2000). The second time around: Minimalism
and L2 acquisition. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Herschensohn, J. (2001). Missing inflection in L2 French:
Accidental infinitives and other verbal deficits. Second
Language Research, 17, 273-305.
Herschensohn, J. (2004). Functional categories and the acquisition of object clitics in L2 French. In P. Prevost, & J.
Paradis (Eds.), The acquisition of French in different contexts
(pp. 207-242). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hoffman, B. (1992, June). A CCG approach to free word order
languages. ACL `92 proceedings of the 30th annual
meeting on association for computational linguistic (pp.
300-302), Newark, DE.
Hopp, H. (2010). Ultimate attainment in L2 inflection:
Performance similarities between non-native and native
speakers. Lingua, 120, 901-931.
Hopp, H. (2015). Semantics and morphosyntax in predictive L2
sentence processing. International Review of Applied
Linguistics in Language Teaching, 53, 277-306.
Imamura, S., Sato, Y., & Koizumi, M. (2016). The processing cost
of scrambling and topicalization in Japanese. Frontiers in
Psychology, 7, 531. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00531
Iwasaki, N. (2008). L2 acquisition of Japanese: Knowledge and
use of case particles in SOV and OSV sentences. In S.
Karimi (Ed.), Word order and scrambling (pp. 273-300).
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T. M., & Haywood, S. L. (2003). The timecourse of prediction in incremental sentence processing:
Evidence from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 133-156.
Kamide, Y., Scheepers, C., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2003). Integration
of syntactic and semantic information in predictive processing: Cross-linguistic evidence from German and English.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32, 37-55.
Kim, Y. (1997). The acquisition of Korean. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The
crosslinguistic study of language acquisition (Vol. 4, pp. 335-
443). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kim, Y. (1999). The effect of case marking information on
Korean sentence processing. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14(5/6), 687-714.
Kim, S., O'Grady, W., & Cho, S. (1995). The acquisition of case and
word order in Korean: A note on the role of context.
Language Research, 31(4), 687-695.
Kim, K., O'Grady, W., & Schwartz, B. D. (2018). Case in heritage
Korean. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 8(2), 252-282.

403

Kirchner, M. (1998). Kazakh and Karakalpak. In A Johanson, & EA
Csato (Eds.), The Turkic languages (pp. 318-332). London:
Routledge.
Ko, I. (2005). Nominative case-marker omission and A-chain
deficit in child language acquisition of Korean.
Working Papers in Linguistics, University of Manoa Hawai,
36, 1-13.
Koh, S. (1997). The resolution of the dative NP ambiguity in
Korean. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26, 265-273.
Koizumi, M., & Tamaoka, K. (2004). Cognitive processing of
Japanese sentences with ditransitive verbs. Gengo Kenkyu
(Journal of the Linguistic Society of Japan, 125, 173-190.
Koizumi, M., & Tamaoka, K. (2010). Psycholinguistic evidence for
the VP-internal subject position in Japanese. Linguistic
Inquiry, 41, 663-680.
Kornfilt, J. (2003). Scrambling, subscrambling, and case in
Turkish. In S. Karimi (Ed.), Word order and scrambling (pp.
4-125). New Jersey: Blackwell.
Kornfilt, J. (2007). DOM and two types of DSM in Turkish. In H.
de Hoop, & P. de Swart (Eds.), Differential subject marking
(pp. 79-111). New York: Springer.
Kwon, S. N., & Zribi-Hertz, A. (2008). Differential function
marking, cases, and information structure: Evidence from
Korean. Language, 84, 258-299.
Lardiere, D. (2009). Some thoughts on the contrastive analysis
of features in second language acquisition. Second
Language Research, 25, 173-227.
Lee, E. (2007). Types of scrambling in Korean syntax (Doctoral dissertation). University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Lee, H. (2007). Case ellipsis at the grammar/pragmatics interface: A formal analysis from a typological perspective.
Journal of Pragmatics, 39, 1465-1482.
Lee, H. (2011). Gradients in Korean case ellipsis: An experimental investigation. Lingua, 121, 21-34.
Lee, I. (1999). A principles-and parameters approach to the acquisition of IP in Korean (Doctoral dissertation). University of
Essex.
Lee, Q. (1997). Dative constructions and case theory in Korean
(Doctoral dissertation). Simon Frazier University, Canada.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994).
Lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution.
Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Matuschek, H., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., Baayen, H., & Bates, D.
(2017). Balancing Type I error and power in linear
mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language, 94, 305-315.
Mitsugi, S., & MacWhinney, B. (2010). Second language processing in Japanese scrambled sentences. In B. VanPatten, & J.
Jegerski (Eds.), Research in second language processing and
parsing (vol. 53, pp. 159-175). Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Mitsugi, S., & MacWhinney, B. (2016). The use of case marking
for predictive processing in second language Japanese.
Bilingualism, Language and Cognition, 1, 19-35.
Miyamoto, E. T. (2002). Case markers as clause boundary inducers
in Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Review, 31, 307-347.
Miyamoto, E. T., & Takahashi, S. (2002). Sources of difficulty in
the processing of scrambling in Japanese. In M. Nakayama
(Ed.), Sentence processing in East Asian Languages (pp. 167-
188). Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Miyamoto, E. T., & Takahashi, S. (2004). Filler-gap dependencies
in the processing of scrambling in Japanese. Language and
Linguistics, 5, 153-166.

404

C. FRENCK-MESTRE ET AL.

Mukhamedova, R. (2015). Kazakh: A comprehensive grammar.
London: Routledge.
Murasugi, K., & Kawamura, T. (2004). On the acquisition of
scrambling in Japanese. Language and Linguistics, 5, 131-151.
Otsu, Y. (1994). Early acquisition of scrambling in Japanese. In T.
Hoekstra, & B. D. Schwartz (Eds.), Language acquisition studies
in generative grammar (pp. 253-264). Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The communicative
function of ambiguity in language. Cognition, 122, 280-290.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality Theory: Constraint
Interaction in Generative Grammar. Rutgers University
Community Repository, ROA Version, 8/2002.
Putnam, M., & Sanchez, L. (2013). What's so incomplete about
incomplete
acquisition?
Linguistic
Approaches
to
Bilingualism, 3-4, 476-506.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rothman, J. (2011). L3 syntactic transfer selectivity and typological determinacy: The typological primacy model. Second
Language Research, 27, 107-127.
Ryu, B.-R. (2013). Multiple case marking as case copying: A
unified approach to multiple nominative and accusative constructions in Korean. In S. Muller (Ed.), Proceedings of the 20th
international conference on head-driven phrase structure
grammar (pp. 182-202). Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Schutze, K. (2001). On Korean "case stacking": The varied functions
of the particles ka and lul. The Linguistic Review, 18, 193-232.

Schwartz, B. D. (1998). The second language instinct. Lingua,
106, 133-160.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (2017). The role of universal
grammar in nonnative language acquisition. In I. Roberts
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of universal grammar (pp. 291-
304). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shibata, H., Suzuki, M., Kim, J., Gyoba, J., & Koizumi, M.
(2005). Reading times and priming effects in Japanese
scrambled sentences. Tohoku Psychologica Folia, 63,
84-94.
Sneed, E., Herschensohn, J., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2015). Pronoun
processing in anglophone late L2 learners of French:
Behavioral and ERP evidence. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 34,
15-40.
Sohn, H.-M. (1999). The Korean language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sturt, P., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, P. (2002). Syntactic ambiguity resolution after initial misanalysis: The role of recency.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 371-390.
Tremblay, A., & Ransij, J. (2015). LMER Convenience functions.
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/LMERConvenience
Functions.pdf
Yamashita, H. (1997). The effects of word-order and case
marking information on the processing of Japanese.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26(2), 163-188.
Yamashita, H. (2002). Scrambled sentences in Japanese:
Linguistic properties and motivations for production. Text,
22(4), 597-633.

