820080

research-article2018

JLSXXX10.1177/0261927X18820080Journal of Language and Social PsychologyLehnert and Horstermann

Article

The Role of Implicit
Nationality Preference in
Speaker Evaluations in the
Multilingual Context of
Montreal

Journal of Language and Social Psychology
2019, Vol. 38(3) 283-304
(c) The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0261927X18820080
journals.sagepub.com/home/jls

Tessa E. Lehnert1 and Thomas Horstermann1

Abstract
Multilingual contexts in cross-border regions are characterized by a high number
of inhabitants making use of various languages depending on the context. A
language that a person speaks thus cannot be used as indicator of national group
membership, which highlights the need for a distinction. The present study aimed
to transfer an adapted model positing language and nationality attitudes as distinct
factors of speaker evaluations, both on an explicit and implicit level, to the context
of Montreal. Explicit attitudes were assumed to primarily affect explicit speaker
evaluations, whereas implicit attitudes were expected to be the primary predictor
of implicit speaker evaluations. Results primarily confirmed the distinctness of
language and nationality concepts on an implicit attitude level. Moreover, the crucial
role of nationality preference on an implicit level was highlighted: Quebecers'
implicit nationality attitudes affected implicit preferences for the Quebec nation
suggesting affirmation of model transferability.
Keywords
speaker evaluations, nationality attitudes, implicit attitudes, multilingualism, Montreal
Language has often been considered to be a key dimension in the social process of
intergroup differentiation (e.g., Sachdev & Bourhis, 1990). Previous European and
North American research mainly regarded monolingual societies, which are
1University

of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg

Corresponding Author:
Tessa E. Lehnert, Faculty of Language and Literature, Humanities, Arts and Education, University of
Luxembourg, 11 Porte des Sciences, L-4366 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
Email: tessa.lehnert@uni.lu

284

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

characterized by the use of one dominant language as the norm. Language could be
thus utilized as a reliable national group indicator entailing the conceptual equivalence of language and national group membership (Giles & Coupland, 1991). By
contrast, multilingual contexts, particularly those in cross-border regions, involve a
high number of languages that are used by various persons within the same context
(e.g., for the context of Quebec, see Lamarre, 2013). Consequently, a speaker's language in a particular situation does not necessarily provide reliable information with
respect to his or her national group membership, which highlights the need for a more
flexible conceptualization of language and nationality. In the linguistically highly
diverse context of Luxembourg, recent evidence suggested that language and nationality attitudes represent two distinct concepts, both on an explicit (controlled) and
implicit (automatic) level (Lehnert, Krolak-Schwerdt, & Horstermann, 2018a).
Research has also shown that multilinguals' evaluations of distinct speakers were
affected by their attitudes toward relevant national groups. Specifically, explicit
nationality attitudes predicted explicit evaluations of speakers' language, and implicit
attitudes influenced implicit evaluations of speakers' nationality (Lehnert, KrolakSchwerdt, & Horstermann, 2018b). Unlike the models in previous research thus far
that focused on the role of language attitudes by primarily using explicit measures, our
adapted model provides vital indications of implicit influencing factors of speaker
preferences in multilingual contexts.
A decisive issue that has not been addressed thus far is whether this adapted
speaker evaluation model making a distinction between language and nationality
concepts is transferable to other multilingual contexts. The context of Luxembourg
and Montreal are to some extent comparable because both contexts are characterized by a large proportion of multilingual inhabitants showing high competencies
in the languages relevant to the respective contexts. However, each society is
marked by distinct historical, political, and sociocontextual factors allowing for
situational interpretation of multilinguals' attitudes (Cargile, Giles, Ryan, & Bradac,
1994). The formation of speaker evaluations as an adaptive process is also embedded in this immediate social situation (Cargile et al., 1994). Specifically, the formation of language attitudes is affected by sociostructural factors (e.g., norms for
correct language usage, social class, and prestige) as well as social norms comprising a shared understanding of right and wrong within groups (Cargile et al., 1994).
These context-sensitive and internalized values can affect evaluations of socially
sensitive topics (e.g., languages and national groups) such that people hide socially
unacceptable responses (Hofmann, Gawronski, Gschwendner, Le, & Schmitt,
2005). Implicit methods based on the measurement of reaction times can be used to
unfold automatic evaluations, which stay unrevealed when using explicit selfreport measures (Tajfel & Turner, 2004). The distinction between explicit and
implicit processes thus represents an important complement to the examination of
multilinguals' attitude formation. The present study seeks to verify the extent to
which the adapted speaker evaluation model tested in Luxembourg is applicable to
another multilingual context.

Lehnert and Horstermann

285

The Adapted Speaker Evaluation Model for Multilingual
Contexts
Previous speaker evaluation models that have been developed over the past 50 years
have made several assumptions giving rise for the need of a theoretical revision.
First, language attitudes were considered the main influencing factor of manifest
speaker evaluations, with the latter used as measure of language attitudes that were
declared to be latent constructs (Cargile & Bradac, 2001). Moreover, language and
national group evaluations were often used interchangeably. Specifically, it was argued
that a language attitude automatically activates an evaluation of the associated social
category (e.g., Berger & Bradac, 1982; Giles & Billings, 2004). For example, hearing
German elicits the category of a German person who belongs either to the in-group our
out-group. As response to this conceptual overlap, some studies showed that evaluations of a specific speaker and general attitudes toward a language refer to distinct
concepts (Lehnert et al., 2018a; Schoel et al., 2013).
Second, most studies have been conducted in monolingual societies in which
inhabitants primarily use one dominant language (Cargile & Bradac, 2001). In multilingual contexts often emerging in cross-border regions, inhabitants' communication
is characterized by a context-dependent use of different languages impeding the determination of one standard language. Consequently, language cannot be used as a reliable national group indicator. A study from 2018 in Luxembourg lends support to the
conceptual distinctness of language and nationality attitudes, both on an explicit and
an implicit attitude level (Lehnert et al., 2018a).
Explicit attitudes refer to controlled, deliberate, and effortful reasoning, whereas
implicit attitudes include automatic, effortless reactions based on people's associative
representations of social objects (Gawronski & Creighton, 2013). Both types of cognitive processing strategies are assumed to work in parallel and influence each other
(e.g., Deutsch & Strack, 2006). In accordance with previous studies (Lehnert et al.,
2018a, 2018b), language attitudes describe general beliefs and feelings in a listener's
mind expressing, for instance, the importance of a distinct language. Nationality attitudes refer to attitudes toward a socially constructed group of persons that share a
common feature, for instance, culture, identity, or language (Anderson, 1991). Even
though language can be a crucial part of a national group, it is not a mandatory feature
of nationality. For instance, Australians define themselves as a separate national group,
even though they share the language English with other national groups, such as the
United States. Because the conceptual boundaries between nationality and language
were rather blurred in previous research in monolingual contexts, language, and
nationality concepts have been used interchangeably. Moreover, only language attitudes were defined as attitudinal determinant of speaker evaluations, which led to the
fact that the potential impact of nationality attitudes was neglected in previous research.
On the basis of the adapted speaker evaluation model for multilingual contexts,
research has shown that nationality attitudes also constitute a potent factor that influences speaker evaluations (Lehnert et al., 2018a).

286

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Figure 1. The adapted speaker evaluation model for multilingual contexts considering the
influence of sociocontextual factors.

Moreover, the model shown in Figure 1 posits that explicit and implicit attitudes
show a differential predictive influence, such that explicit speaker preferences are
mainly affected by explicit attitudes, while implicit speaker preferences are dominantly
predicted by implicit attitudes. This differential influence is derived from Fazio's (1990)
motivation and opportunity as determinants model. This prominent domain-specific
dual-process model postulates that motivation and opportunity determine the influence
of explicit and implicit attitudes on behavior (for reviews, see Fazio, 2007; Olson &
Fazio, 2008). Various studies investigating the influence of attitudes on concrete behavioral responses confirmed this predictive pattern (e.g., Perugini, 2005).
While studies exist, which examined potential differences between explicit and
implicit language attitudes (e.g., Pantos & Perkins, 2013), in the field of specific
speaker evaluations, the differential influence of these explicit and implicit attitude
types has not been tested thus far. In a previous study, preference for speakers' language was particularly apparent on an explicit level, whereas preference for speakers'
nationality became more salient on an implicit level (Lehnert et al., 2018b). Hence, the
extension of previous speaker evaluation models by adding a distinction between language and nationality as well as between explicit and implicit cognition has the potential to make a significant contribution to the investigation of speaker evaluations in
multilingual contexts.

The Influence of Sociocontextual Factors on the Speaker
Evaluation Process
The adapted speaker evaluation model for multilingual contexts has been tested thus far
in the multilingual context of Luxembourg (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b). In the Grand

Lehnert and Horstermann

287

Duchy of Luxembourg, a three-language policy (Luxembourgish, German, and French)
in combination with a high proportion of resident foreigners (47.7%) and cross-border
workers (31.6%) leads to the fact that many inhabitants are highly competent in multiple languages (STATEC, 2017). The small country (590,700 inhabitants; STATEC,
2017) has a special geographical location because it has direct borders with the countries France, Germany, and Belgium. Luxembourg as part of this territorial area, which
is called greater border region, was influenced by a long, shared history.
In general, multilinguals' preferences for sensitive topics such as languages and
national groups can be linked to society's historical and political origins. Luxembourgish
participants, for instance, showed a preference for French on an explicit level, whereas
they evaluated their own language, Luxembourgish, as more favorable on an implicit
level (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b). The positive evaluation of French on an explicit
level can be explained by the fact that French takes on an important role in the job
market. With respect to Luxembourg's historical development, French was always the
language of nobility and formality and still has a prestigious status today (Horner &
Weber, 2008). The positive evaluations for Luxembourgish on an implicit level can be
explained by Luxembourgish participants' preference for their own language.
Besides the language-nationality distinction as the fundamental approach for multilingual societies, it becomes apparent that each context contains specific sociocontextual factors, which can be used to explain existing explicit and implicit language
and nationality preferences. While a wide range of studies have conclusively shown
that a deviation from the given standard language can elicit less favorable attitudes
(e.g., Giles & Watson, 2013; Gluszek & Dovidio, 2010), results of some studies that
combined explicit and implicit measures revealed an interesting pattern. For instance,
Pantos and Perkins (2013) showed an implicit bias for participants' in-group language,
whereas the explicit attitudes showed positive evaluations of foreign accent. These
implicit results are consistent with social identity theory (SIT; Tajfel & Turner, 2004)
postulating that people distinguish their own group from others by evaluating in-group
members more favorably than out-group members.
Previous speaker evaluation models suggested that the formation of language attitudes can be seen as a social process embedded in an immediate situation (Cargile
et al., 1994). Cargile et al. (1994) stated that political, historical, and economic factors
affect language attitudes and specifically refer to the sociostructural dimensions of
standardization and vitality suggested by Ryan, Giles, and Sebastian (1982).
Standardization means that certain political actions (e.g., promotion of a particular
language) and social norms (e.g., conventions that distinguish a group from others) are
implemented. Speakers' dynamic and social interpretation of these norms describes
the vitality dimension, which relates to historical development, intergroup processes,
and institutional support (Ryan et al., 1982). Recent integrative models focusing on
situational and sociocontextual factors also argue that language attitudes are associated with intergroup beliefs and relations (Giles & Marlow, 2011). Moreover, previous
speaker evaluation research made a distinction between the perception of a speaker's
social status and his or her solidarity (Brown & Cichocki, 1995). The status-solidarity
structure is comparable to the distinction between competence and warmth, which are

288

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

considered essential components of the perception of social groups (Fiske, Cuddy,
Glick, & Xu, 2002). While status and competence refer to the perceived abilities and
qualifications of a person, the dimensions of solidarity and warmth relate more to
social and identity-oriented skills (Brown & Cichocki, 1995; Fiske et al., 2002).

The Complex Linguistic Context of Montreal
Situated in the province of Quebec, the city of Montreal counts 1,704,694 inhabitants
from which 65.3% indicate French and 23.8% indicate English as their sole mother
tongue, respectively (Statistics Canada, 2016). Even though French is the province's
official and dominant language, English is the most commonly used language in some
contexts in Montreal, such as English-speaking schools or universities. The majority
of Francophone inhabitants in the province of Quebec constitute an exceptional feature because English is dominantly used in the rest of Canada's provinces. A particular
example of a predominantly English-speaking province is Ontario bordering the province of Quebec because 4% of the population primarily residing in Northeastern parts
of Ontario are Francophone (Statistics Canada, 2016). The French spoken by this
minority group is similar to the Quebec variety of French (Jaenen, 1993). Another
important aspect of daily life in Montreal is its high English-French bilingualism rate
with 57.4% of inhabitants making use of both languages (Statistics Canada, 2016), for
instance in shops or supermarkets (Lamarre, 2013). At work, the majority uses French
(60.8%), but English, spoken by 23.4% (Statistics Canada, 2016), places a prestigious
value on Montreal's job market (Lamarre, 2013). The coexistence of Francophones
and Anglophones in this largely bilingual region and the status of the French and the
English languages in Montreal can be elucidated with reference to incisive historical
developments.
The location on the St. Lawrence River turned out to be an advantage throughout
the long history or Montreal. A fur trading post laid the basis for the foundation of the
city of Montreal in 1642. In 1760, British troops conquered Montreal and English laws
were applied. A great migration particularly from British Isles turned the city into an
English-dominated society. The industrialization process in the 19th century substantially contributed to the city's economic upswing attracting many French Canadians in
search of work. Further immigration waves from Europe transformed Montreal into a
culturally diverse city. In 1911, the English-speaking group represented a small (25%)
elite group that had more resources compared with the French-speaking group, which
were again in the majority. The period after 1945 was marked by an increased claim of
the French-speaking majority to change this imbalance of power (Linteau, 2013). The
result was the enforcement of a province-wide language policy, particularly Bill 101
(1977) boosting the status of the French language, for instance, by making French
school attendance obligatory for immigrant children (Bourhis, 2012).
Overall, throughout the past centuries, life in Montreal was marked by a continuous
contact between French and English. Furthermore, Montreal's history and explicit language planning initiated a debate about the relation between language and national
identity (Lamarre, 2013). In previous language attitude research in this border region,

Lehnert and Horstermann

289

the concepts of language and nationality were closely interwoven. Specifically, French
was used as distinctive and closed marker of the French-Canada and later of the
Quebec nation (Lamarre, 2013). Francophone Montrealers strongly identify with the
Quebec nation, which was officially recognized as a nation within a united Canada in
2006 (HOC Rep. No. 087, 2006). By contrast, the dominantly English-speaking provinces identify most with Canada as a whole (Bourhis, 2012). In the multilingual context of Montreal showing a high bilingualism rate, a Montrealer may use French or
English depending on the context. Based on the blurred conceptual boundaries between
the concepts of language and nationality (Lamarre, 2013), the sole use of language as
indicator of national group membership would, however, lead to different conclusions
about a person's nationality. Specifically, a Montrealer speaking English would
wrongly indicate a Canadian national membership, but the person concerned may
identify more with the Quebecer national group.
Hence, similar to Luxembourg where the adapted speaker evaluation model was
first tested, language cannot as easily be used as sole categorical marker of national
group because the latter is considered as composite (Lamarre, 2013). The adapted
speaker evaluation model directly addresses these issues by proposing a flexible
framework model distinguishing between language and nationality attitudes, both on
an explicit and implicit level. The transfer of the model to the context of Montreal
enabled us to examine whether the distinctness of language and nationality concepts
refer to generalizable assumptions. Apart from similar conditions in multilingual contexts with respect to context-dependent language use, the examination of sociocontextual factors that are distinctive for the context of Montreal is important for interpreting
explicit and implicit preferences for languages and national groups.

The Present Study
The present study aimed to transfer the adapted speaker evaluation model to the multilingual context of Montreal. In Luxembourg, the adapted model was tested using the
two languages Luxembourgish and French and the corresponding national groups
(e.g., Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b). In the context of Montreal, the assumptions were
tested using the languages French and English and the coexistent nations Quebec and
Canada as a whole. As representative of the Canadian nation, we decided to use the
province of Ontario because the majority of its residents identity with Canada as a
whole (Bourhis, 2012). The Franco-Ontarians living near the border of the province of
Quebec constitute a community who is competent in both French and English
(Statistics Canada, 2016). As central assumption, we presumed distinctness of language and nationality concepts, both on an explicit and an implicit attitude level.
Moreover, the language-nationality distinction was tested in speaker evaluations. In
accordance with previous studies (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b), in the present study,
the conceptual distinctness was verified by testing the existence of convergent and
discriminant validity. Accordingly, measures of the same concept were expected to
show stronger correlations than measures of distinct constructs.

290

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Hypothesis 1: Language and nationality concepts refer to distinct concepts.
Hypothesis 1a: Language and nationality attitudes refer to distinct concepts, both
on an explicit and implicit level.
Hypothesis 1b: Explicit and implicit evaluations of speakers' language and nationality refer to distinct concepts, respectively.
Furthermore, we assumed sociocontextual factors to affect the formation of language
and nationality attitudes. In line with previous findings (e.g., Lehnert et al., 2018a,
2018b), we expected Montreal's multilinguals attitudes toward languages (French and
English) and national groups (Quebec and Canada) to show an implicit bias in favor of
their own language (French) and nation (Quebec). Accordingly, explicit and implicit
speaker evaluations should reveal different findings.
Hypothesis 2: Implicit measures compared with explicit measures reveal a bias in
favor of multilinguals' own language and national group.
Based on the motivation and opportunity as determinants model (Fazio, 1990), it was
expected that explicit attitudes primarily influence explicit evaluations, whereas
implicit attitudes were assumed to be the main predictor of implicit evaluations.
Specifically, results of a previous speaker evaluation study (Lehnert et al., 2018b)
showed a certain pattern: Explicit attitudes mainly predicted explicit evaluations of
speakers' language, and implicit attitudes primarily predicted implicit evaluations of
speakers' national group.
Hypothesis 3: Explicit and implicit attitudes have a differential impact on speaker
evaluations.
Hypothesis 3a. Explicit attitudes predict explicit speaker preferences.
Hypothesis 3b. Implicit attitudes predict implicit speaker preferences.

Method
Sample
A total of 93 participants took part in the present study. In accordance with previous
studies (e.g., Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b), the main precondition for study participation was long-term residency and school education in Quebec as well as high competences in French and English. Because we addressed the examination of people's
language attitudes, we excluded five participants who were registered in French or
English language study programs. The final sample of 88 Quebecer college or university students (58 female, 7 nonstudent, 86.4% Canadian citizens) had a mean age of
23.07 years (SD = 4.05). All participants had learnt French at a younger age (M = 1.6
years) than they had learnt English (M = 7.8 years). On self-rating scales (1 = high
level, 3 = low level), participants showed higher competences in French (M = 1.05)
than in English (M = 1.14), t(87) = 2.18, p = .03. All students, except one, were

Lehnert and Horstermann

291

registered in Francophone universities or colleges. Participants had the choice between
French and English as language for study instructions, and all participants, except
three, chose French. For a total study duration of 30 minutes, each participant was paid
CAD$ 7.

Preliminary Power Analysis
To test the main model assumption of the conceptual distinctness of language attitudes
and nationality attitudes on an explicit level, the internal consistencies of the explicit
language attitude scales were used as indicator of the correlation if language and
nationality reflect one and the same construct. On the basis of the scale reliability and
the sample size, the 95% confidence interval that would indicate the indistinguishability of language and nationality attitudes spanned from r = .71 to r = .86. Significant
correlations within the confidence interval would indicate that both measures reflect
the same construct (convergent validity), whereas significant correlations below the
interval would indicate that the constructs are related but theoretically distinct (discriminant validity). Nonsignificant correlations below the interval would indicate that
they are independent from each other.

Experimental Design and Stimulus Materials
The present experimental study was created with the InquisitTM software (Draine,
1998) and run online. A Verbal-Guise-Technique (Nesdale & Rooney, 1996) as frequently used technique in speaker evaluation studies was employed. The VerbalGuise-Technique refers to the presentation of speech samples recorded by different
speakers. In our study, different Quebecers and different Franco-Ontarians, as representatives of the Canadian nation, created speech recordings in French and English,
respectively. Specifically, we asked four male Quebecers and four male Canadians to
record the speech samples in French and English. This led to a pool of eight different
speakers from which speech samples (representing the four distinct types described in
Table 1) could be chosen randomly. Hence, each participant was presented with four
speakers that were recorded by different individuals.
All eight speakers have learnt French and English in school. The Quebecer speakers were born and raised in Montreal. The Franco-Ontarians were born in Ontario, but
moved to Montreal and lived there for many years. Regarding relevant prosodic features, frequency analyses showed that speakers' voice fundamental frequency varied
between 98 Hz and 171 Hz, which lies within normal range (Baken & Orlikoff, 2000).
Speaker comparability was inspected in a prestudy and showed that French fluency
did not vary significantly between Quebecers (M = 4.37, SD = 0.33) and FrancoOntarians (M = 4.16, SD = 0.21), t(13) = 1.65, p = .13. Ratings of English fluency
were also comparable between Franco-Ontarian (M = 4.47, SD = 0.27) and Quebecer
(M = 4.29, SD = 0.29) speakers, t(13) = 1.42, p = .19.
After provision of informed consent to participate, the study started with the presentation of the four speakers. A 2 (nationality) x 2 (language) within-participant

292

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Table 1. Distinct Speaker Types in Montreal and the Corresponding Types of Attitude.
French language
Quebecer
Canadian
Type of attitude

A: Quebecer speaking
French (Eric)
C: Canadian speaking
French (Matthew)
nationality

English language
B: Quebecer speaking
English (Francois)
D: Canadian speaking
English (Michael)
nationality

Type of attitude
Language
Language

Note. The names of the speakers are presented in parentheses. The type of attitude describes the factor
that is revealed when building a difference between the adjacent evaluations.

design already implemented in previous studies (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b) was
adapted for the context of Montreal. In the cover story, participants were asked to listen to four attendants of a professional training, who introduced themselves (name,
age, nationality, and hobbies) in their language of choice. The recordings did not contain specific information regarding the attendants' abilities, but rather served the purpose of a familiarization with the four speakers. In a later stage of the study, participants
were asked to express their general impressions of the speakers by assessing the perceived status and solidarity as the two essential person perception components.
Participants could listen to short (4,000 ms) speech samples as often as desired in their
preferred order.
After the presentation of the speech samples, we have checked whether the participants memorized the four speakers. Participants categorized 20 trials of speech
excerpts into four speaker categories. The task had to be repeated (maximal six times)
when the threshold of two errors was exceeded. Participants thus learnt the category
labels and the stimuli, which enabled them to categorize without much cognitive processing. Based on previous studies (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b), categorization tasks
designed to access immediate reactions and implicit attitudes preceded explicit selfreport scales and self-assessments of language level.

Measures
Explicit Self-Report Measures. As an explicit measure of specific speaker evaluations,
the adapted Speaker Evaluations scale was used (see Lehnert et al., 2018b). Originally
established by Brown and Cichocki (1995), the scale measured evaluations of speakers' Solidarity ( = .67; e.g., friendly and trustworthy) and Social Status ( = 87; e.g.,
intelligent and self-confident) on a 5-point Likert-type scale (for the total item overview, Lehnert et al., 2018b). In accordance with a previous study (Lehnert et al.,
2018b), the overall Speaker Evaluations scale showed a high internal consistency
( = .89) and was used in our statistical analyses.
General attitudes toward French and English were queried via the adaption
(Lehnert, Krolak-Schwerdt, & Horstermann, 2016) of the Attitudes Towards
Languages Scale (AToL; Schoel et al., 2013) examining the dimensions Value ( =
.85; e.g., ugly-beautiful, unpleasant-pleasant), as main subscale, Sound ( = .76;

Lehnert and Horstermann

293

e.g., harsh-soft, abrupt-flowing), and Structure ( = .80; e.g., unstructured-structured, vague-precise). Nationality attitudes were examined with the Attitudes Towards
Language Users Scale (AToLU; for the total item overview, Lehnert et al., 2018a).
The scale structure with respect to perceived Warmth ( = .89, e.g., impolite-polite,
cold-warm) and Competence ( = .89, e.g., unreliable-reliable, lazy-active) followed the two-dimensional distinction implemented by Fiske et al. (2002). For the
different AToL and AToLU subscales, averaged scores were built for the two language
and group conditions, respectively. Evaluation order of the three self-report scales
was randomized among participants.
Because we were interested in the prediction of preference for speakers' language
and nationality, the evaluations of the speakers were subtracted from each other to be
aggregated into two comparative scores. Based on the scheme provided in Table 1, for
instance, the subtraction of speaker evaluation B from A gave insight into the evaluation of language because the latter was the only factor varied. Similarly, to get insight
into general language and nationality preferences, ratings of English were subtracted
from ratings of French, and ratings of Canadians were subtracted from ratings of
Quebecers. For all difference scores, positive values indicated a preference for French
and the Quebecer nation, and negative values pointed to a preference for English and
the Canadian nation.
Implicit Speaker Evaluation Measures. For the implicit measurement of speaker evaluations, the evaluative priming task already tested in a previous study (Lehnert et al.,
2018b) was used. In this task, response latencies as reactions toward various stimuli
presented on a screen build the base for unfolding automatic associations. Based on
the traditional priming design (Fazio, Jackson, Dunton, & Williams, 1995), participants' task was to indicate the valence of adjectives that were presented to them shortly
after a prime stimulus. After the prime display of 200 ms and an interstimulus phase of
100 ms (De Houwer, Hermans, & Eelen, 1998), 20 positive and 20 negative target
adjectives validated by Glock, Kneer, and Kovacs (2013) were randomly presented. In
general, a positive prime is expected to cause faster responses when followed by evaluatively compatible adjectives compared with incompatible ones (for a review, see
Fazio, 2001). Because we aimed to examine implicit evaluations of specific speakers,
the four speaker names served as primes, which led to eight trial types and a total of
120 measurement trials (15 trials per type). In each trial, participants used the "E" or
"I" key to categorize the target adjectives. For instance, positive evaluations of speaker
Eric were unfold by fast response latencies in compatible (e.g., Eric-warm) compared
with incompatible (e.g., Eric-cold) trials. Four difference scores were calculated by
subtracting compatible from incompatible trials, higher values indicating more positive evaluations. Similar to explicit speaker preferences, the priming scores were combined into two comparative values indicating preference for language and nations.
Implicit Language and Nationality Attitude Measures. General implicit attitudes toward
languages and nations were collected with an adapted audio-based version (e.g.,

294

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Table 2. Block Structure of an Audio IAT for Examining Language Attitudes.
Content of the contrasted target categories on the screen
Block
1 (P)
2 (P)
3 (M)
4 (P)
5 (M)

Upper left part of screen
Positive
Quebecer speaking French
Quebecer speaking French
OR
Positive
Quebecer speaking English
Quebecer speaking English
OR
Positive

Upper right part of screen
Negative
Quebecer speaking English
Quebecer speaking English
OR
Negative
Quebecer speaking French
Quebecer speaking French
OR
Negative

Note. IAT= Implicit Association Test; P = Practice block. M = Measurement block.

Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b) of the traditional Implicit Association Test (IAT; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). Traditional IATs are characterized by blocks of
binary categorization tasks in which response latencies are measured. Evaluative compatibility entails faster reaction times because a stimuli automatically activates an
evaluation associated with it (Greenwald et al., 1998). The adapted audio IAT used
both visual (positive and negative words) and audio (excerpts from speech recordings)
stimuli to be categorized into speaker categories. The design of an IAT for examining
language attitudes is depicted in Table 2. Each participant completed four IATs, which
measured language and nationality attitudes, respectively.
For instance, the comparison of Quebecer speaking French and Quebecer speaking
English allows us to examine language attitudes because evaluative differences can be
attributed solely to language. In a language attitude IAT, the two measurement blocks
(each 40 trials) contained compatible (Quebecer speaking French-positive, Quebecer
speaking English-negative) and incompatible (Quebecer speaking English-positive,
Quebecer speaking French-negative) categories, respectively. Measurement blocks
were preceded by practice blocks (each 20 trials). All measurement trials were included
to calculate four D scores by subtracting the compatible from the incompatible blocks
(for the best performing algorithm, see Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2003). The four
D scores were combined into two final D scores as implicit language and nationality
attitude measures indicating either a preference for French and Quebecer nation (positive scores) or for English and Canadian nation (negative scores).

Results
Distinctness of Language and Nationality Preferences
In Hypothesis 1a (attitudinal level) and Hypothesis 1b (speaker evaluation level), the
central model assumption of language-nationality distinctness on an explicit attitude

295

Lehnert and Horstermann
Table 3. Intercorrelations of Explicit Language and Nationality Scales.

1.Explicit scales examining
language attitudes
2.Explicit scales examining
nationality attitudes

1

2

.59**

.53**

--

.81**

**p < .01.

Table 4. Intercorrelations of Explicit and Implicit Speaker Preferences.

Explicit language preference
Explicit nationality preference

Implicit language
preference

Implicit nationality
preference

-.18
.07

-.08
-.18

level was tested using correlation analyses. The results are listed in Table 3 and Table 4.
Language attitude subscales showed no significantly stronger correlations than subscales examining language and nationality attitudes, Fisher's z = 0.57, p = .284.
Nationality attitude scales showed significantly stronger correlations (convergent validity) than scales examining different attitude types (divergent validity), Fisher's z =
3.50, p < .001. On an implicit level, the between-construct correlation showed a significant moderate value (r = .26, p = .021), indicating that implicit language and
nationality attitudes are related but distinct constructs.
Regarding preferences for speakers' language and nation, explicit and implicit language measures did not show significantly stronger correlations than explicit and
implicit measures of distinct constructs, Fisher's z = -0.66, p = .255. However,
explicit and implicit nationality measures showed significantly stronger correlations
(convergent validity) than explicit and implicit measures of distinct constructs (divergent validity), Fisher's z = -1.64, p = .050.

Differences Between Explicit and Implicit Preferences
In Hypothesis 2, we expected to find an implicit bias in favor of multilinguals' own
language and group. Results for Montreal's multilinguals' implicit attitudes, which are
depicted in Table 5 showed a strong in-group bias, in particular in favor of their own
language.
On an explicit level, the Quebecers were perceived as significantly warmer than
Canadians. Competence ratings pointed in the exact opposite direction, but did not
reach significance. With respect to language (value as main scale), no significant preference was observed.

296

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Table 5. Means, Standard Deviations, and Paired-Sample t Test Results for Attitude
Measures.
French/Quebecer

English/Canadian

Explicit

M

SD

Value
Competence
Warmth

3.98
3.43
3.68

0.76
0.79
0.77

M
3.98
3.59
3.44

t(87)

p

0.69
0.68
0.81

0.02
-1.89
2.35

.982
.062
.021

0.00
0.20
0.25

-9.68
-5.11

<.001
<.001

1.03
0.54

Implicit

Compatible block

Incompatible block

Language
Nationality

921.73
951.41

1041.24
1004.59

175.06
185.39

Cohen's d

SD

227.26
199.79

Note. High explicit values indicate positive attitudes. Implicit values represent Implicit Association Test
mean response latencies in ms, and short reaction times imply positive attitudes.

Table 6. Explicit and Implicit (in ms) Evaluations of the Four Speakers.

Explicit
Implicit

Quebecer
speaking French

Quebecer
speaking English

Canadian speaking
French

Canadian speaking
English

3.54 (0.61)
18.53 (77.92)

3.31 (0.65)
29.37 (86.90)

3.61 (0.58)
17.44 (76.63)

3.68 (0.63)
4.56 (82.01)

Note. High values indicate positive evaluations. Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.

Regarding multilinguals' evaluations of the four speakers, crucial differences that are
shown in Table 6 arose between the explicit and implicit levels. For explicit evaluations,
a 2 (national group) x 2 (language) analysis of variance revealed a significant main
effect of group, F(1, 86) = 23.77, p < .001, p2 = .22, such that ratings were overall
higher for Canadian (M = 3.65, SD = 0.55) than Quebecer speakers (M = 3.44, SD =
0.55). In addition, the main effect of speakers' language was significant, F(1, 86) = 5.35,
p = .023, p2 = .06, indicating that ratings of speakers using French (M = 3.58, SD =
0.53) were significantly higher than ratings of speakers using English (M = 3.48, SD =
0.53). The interaction effect was also significant, F(1, 86) = 10.52, p = .002, p2 = .11,
suggesting that evaluations were overall higher for congruence of speakers' nation and
language (M = 3.62, SD = 0.56) than incongruence (M = 3.47, SD = 0.54). On an
implicit level, analysis of variance results showed no significant effects of group, F(1,
87) = 2.17, p = .145, p2 = .02, language, F(1, 87) = 0.02, p = .893, p2 = .00, or
interaction, F(1, 87) = 2.40, p = .125, p2 = .03.

Differential Impact of Explicit and Implicit Attitudes on Speaker
Evaluations
In Hypothesis 3, we assumed that explicit attitudes would predict explicit preferences,
whereas implicit attitudes would affect implicit preferences. The differential

297

Lehnert and Horstermann
Table 7. Summary of Multiple Regression Analyses for Variables Predicting Speaker
Preferences.
Explicit preference for
speakers' language
Variable
Explicit language attitudes (L-e)
Explicit nationality attitudes (c)
Implicit language attitudes (L-i)
Implicit nationality attitudes (N-i)
L-e x L-i
N-e x N-i

Implicit preference for
speakers' nationality

B

SE B



B

SE B



-0.24
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.14
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.27*
0.15
0.23
-0.01
-0.12
-0.10

-45.20
28.53
0.03
0.54
-0.24
0.38

28.13
30.27
0.15
0.19
0.15
0.14

-0.23
0.14
0.02
0.32**
-0.23
0.28**

Note. SE = standard error.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

predictive influence of explicit and implicit attitudes on speaker preferences was tested
with four multiple regression analyses. Explicit and implicit preferences for speakers'
language and nationality, respectively, served as criterion variables. The results are
listed in Table 7.
Out of these four regression analyses, only the model with implicit nationality preference as criterion variable reached significance, F(6, 80) = 3.63, p = .003, R2 = .21.
In concordance with our assumptions, implicit nationality attitudes and the interaction
between explicit and implicit nationality attitudes predicted the implicit preference for
speakers' nationality. Implicit preference for speakers' language was not found to be
significantly predicted by any attitude variable, F(6, 80) = 2.13, p = .06, R2 = .13.
Out of the two models testing the attitudinal influence on the explicit evaluations,
only one model showed a significant individual predictor: Explicit language attitudes
significantly influenced explicit preference for speakers' language. However, the overall models predicting explicit preference for speakers' language, F(6, 80) = 1.23, p =
.299, R2 = .09, and speakers' nationality, F(6, 80) = 1.44, p = .210, R2 = .10, did not
reach significance.

Discussion
The present study aimed at testing whether the adapted speaker evaluation model
focusing on a distinction between language and nationality concepts as well as between
explicit implicit cognition is transferable to the multilingual context of Montreal.
Previous findings from the multilingual context of Luxembourg gave reason to expect
explicit attitudes to be the decisive factor influencing explicit preference for speakers'
language and implicit attitudes to be more important in predicting implicit nationality
preference. Before testing the complementarily assumed differential influence of
explicit and implicit attitudes on speaker evaluations, it was verified whether the central model assumption of language-nation distinctness was applicable to Montreal.

298

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

This assumption was tested with the languages French and English as well as the two
nations Quebec and Canada as a whole. Based on previous studies (e.g., Lehnert et al.,
2018a, 2018b), we expected that sociocontextual factors would contribute to the attitude formation such that implicit attitudes toward languages and national groups
would be biased in favor of the in-group. Whereas the explicit measure did not reveal
in-group favoritism, the assumed implicit bias for participants own language and
nation was confirmed in the present study.

Language and Nationality Concepts
Regarding the central model assumptions, it was confirmed that implicit language and
nationality attitudes refer to distinct concepts. On an explicit attitude level, results
were more ambiguous. This ambiguous pattern indicates that the concepts of language
and nation are not necessarily perceived as distinct concepts on an explicit level.
Quebec's history and explicit language policy could have played a role in these cognitive processes. The province-wide promotion of the French language and the resulting
stronger presence of French in daily life domains (e.g., schooling, work, or leisure
activity) led to the fact that the concepts of language and nation became closely tied up
constructs (Lamarre, 2013).
On a descriptive level, explicit and implicit attitude measures revealed different
results. On an explicit level, participants in Montreal showed no significant language
preference. These results can be explained by an evaluative balance of French as
explicitly promoted and protected language, on the one hand, and English as an important language at work, on the other hand (Lamarre, 2013). Furthermore, participants
preferred their own Quebec nation with respect to warmth, which is in line with literature conclusively showing a link between positive in-group perception and social identity (SIT; Tajfel & Turner, 2004). Also in line with SIT, an implicit in-group bias,
particularly for language, was observed. Confirming our assumptions, social, political,
and historical factors prevalent in Montreal can be used to explain this result. Many
Francophones in Montreal have internalized feelings of oppression by the presence of
English in Quebec and aim to endorse the status of their language French (Montreuil
& Bourhis, 2004), which is more likely to come to light on an implicit level.
Distinctness of language and nationality preferences was partly confirmed with
explicit and implicit speaker evaluation measures. Explicit and implicit measures of
nationality preference correlated stronger than measures of language and nationality
preference. Similar to the attitude level, explicit and implicit speaker evaluations
showed notable variation. Explicit speaker evaluations revealed a preference for
Canadian over Quebecer speakers. The favorable rating of a Canadian speaking
English is in line with previous studies highlighting the powerfulness of standard language (for a meta-analysis, see Fuertes, Gottdiener, Martin, Gilbert, & Giles, 2012).
Participants showed an explicit preference for speakers using French, in particular for
the Canadian speaking French (Matthew). Montrealers seemed to appreciate his effort
and willingness to speak in French (Macintyre, 2007). Montrealers, who all held a
high competence level in English, assessed the Quebecer speaking English as least

Lehnert and Horstermann

299

favorable. This devaluation could relate to Francophones' negative feelings when
being forced to speak English (Macintyre, 2007) and a lingering fear of English
assimilation.
Regarding implicit evaluations, even though differences did not reach significance,
it is striking that Quebecer speakers, in particular the one using English was assessed
favorably. It is conceivable that Montrealer participants implicitly felt connected to the
Quebecer speaking English because the French-English bilingualism is part of their
daily life and identity (Noels, Clement, & Pelletier, 2001). However, the Canadian
speaking English received the most negative evaluations indicating that a nonuse of
French in Montreal is implicitly less accepted, even if English fulfills an important
role on the job market. In return, participants might have sympathized with the
Quebecer speaking English because they might feel pressured to learn English (Noels
et al., 2001).
Overall, the central model assumption regarding language-nationality distinctness
was confirmed on an implicit level and partly confirmed on an explicit level, allowing
the transferability of the speaker evaluation model including the investigation of the
final model assumption.

Differential Attitudinal Impact on Speaker Evaluations
With respect to the assumed differential influence of attitudes on speaker evaluations,
results show that an implicit preference for the Quebecer group was related to an
implicit preference for speakers of the Quebecer nation. In addition, the interaction
between explicit and implicit nationality attitudes was a significant predictor of implicit
preference for speakers' nation. Different social-cognitive theories support this finding
by positing that explicit-implicit congruence in interactive patterns is crucial for the
prediction of evaluative responses (Perugini, 2005). On an explicit evaluation level,
results showed a surprising pattern, which was already found in a comparable way in
previous studies in Luxembourg (Lehnert et al., 2018a, 2018b). In the present study, an
explicit preference for speakers using French was influenced by an explicit preference
for the other language, in this case, English. The lack of a consistency between general
attitudes and evaluations can be explained by people's tendency to observe and to evaluate their own reactions. People with a high tendency to evaluate their own reactions
are more likely to use elaborated processing strategies, which may be visible in oppositional relationship (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005; Lane, Banaji, Nosek, & Greenwald, 2007).
In sum, the present findings in Montreal showed that language attitudes affected
preference for speakers' language on an explicit level, whereas, on an implicit level,
nationality attitudes were dominant in predicting preference for speakers' nation. A
similar pattern was observed in Luxembourg: Language preference was salient in
explicit predictive models and nationality preference in implicit models (Lehnert
et al., 2018b). In addition to previous speaker evaluation models focusing on the role
of language while using mostly explicit measures, our adapted model underpinned the
relevance of a second vital factor, namely nationality, particularly effective on an
implicit level. It is, however, important to emphasize that each multilingual context is

300

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

affected by specific factors representing the key to the interpretation of the respective
interplay of explicit and implicit processes. Overall, the present study confirmed the
transferability of the adapted speaker evaluation model for multilingual contexts.

Limitations and Future Research
Several limitations should be considered. First, the present sample comprised a higher
proportion (65%) of female participants, which may have affected the findings.
Because the model has been tested with male speech thus far, future research with
female speakers would contribute to the examination of the influence of speakers' and
hearers' gender.
Second, the present study design contained the presentations of four speakers and participants' general impression of these speakers. Because no particular emphasis was laid
on either the status/competence dimension or the solidarity/warmth dimension, but rather
both dimensions were assumed to be implicated in the evaluation process, it is possible
that participants' individual interpretations of the situation varied. For future studies, it
would be insightful to provide cover stories, in which particular emphasis is placed on one
of the two evaluative dimensions. For instance, the assessment of the status/competence
dimension could be stressed in job interview settings. Thus, an important impulse for
future research would be the expansion of the model's scope to specific professional
domains to create a link between speaker evaluations and behavioral responses.
Third, it should be noted that the participants of the present Montrealer sample learnt
French at a younger age than they had learnt English and indicated higher competences
in French than in English on self-rating scales, which might have affected the results.
Because Montrealers' English self-assessments could be biased by feelings of inferiority or insecurity, further demographic questions on the use of the languages French and
English, for instance, amount and content of language use per week, would be beneficial for the closer examination of the comparability of language competences. It would
be insightful to compare the present findings with an Anglophone sample consisting of
bilingual Canadians, for instance in Ontario, where different social and political factors
might contribute to the formation of language and nationality preferences.
Fourth, it should be noted that the statistical power analyses aimed at ensuring sufficient power for the main model assumption of the distinctness of explicit language
and nationality attitudes. Further analyses investigating intercorrelation differences
between constructs and the effects of attitudes on speaker evaluations might have less
statistical power. Therefore, the significance of smaller effect sizes should be interpreted with caution, especially in terms of the individual effect of attitude variables on
speaker evaluations. Last, it is possible to assume that sociocontextual factors change
over time, and future studies using a longitudinal design may thus be meaningful for
the interpretation of attitude change.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the valuable contribution of Sabine Krolak-Schwerdt, who
unexpectedly passed away in December 2017. They also would like to thank Howard Giles and
the three anonymous reviewers for their thoughts and insightful comments.

Lehnert and Horstermann

301

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of attitudes on behavior. In D. Albarracin, B. T.
Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of psychology (pp. 173-221). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Anderson, B. (1991). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. London, England: Verso.
Baken, R. J., & Orlikoff, R. F. (2000). Clinical measurement of speech and voice (2nd ed.). San
Diego, CA: Singular Thomas Learning.
Berger, C., & Bradac, J. J. (1982). Language and social knowledge: Uncertainty in interpersonal relations. London, England: Arnold.
Bourhis, R. Y. (2012). Social psychological aspects of French-English relations in Quebec:
From vitality to linguicism. In R. Y. Bourhis (Ed.), New Canadian perspectives: Decline
and prospects of the English-speaking communites of Quebec (pp. 313-378). Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada: Canadian Heritage.
Brown, C., & Cichocki, W. (1995). Listeners' reactions to four French accents: A study of gender as a variable in linguistic attitudes. Linguistica Atlantica, 17, 45-62.
Cargile, A. C., & Bradac, J. J. (2001). Attitudes towards language: A review of speaker-evaluation research and a general process model. In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Communication
yearbook 25 (pp. 347-382). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cargile, A. C., Giles, H., Ryan, E. B., & Bradac, J. J. (1994). Language attitudes as a social process: A conceptual model and new directions. Language & Communication, 14, 211-236.
De Houwer, J., Hermans, D., & Eelen, P. (1998). Affective and identity priming with episodically associated stimuli. Cognition and Emotion, 12, 145-169.
Deutsch, R., & Strack, F. (2006). Duality models in social psychology: From dual processes to
interacting systems. Psychological Inquiry, 17, 166-172.
Draine, S. C. (1998). Inquisit [Computer software]. Seattle, WA: Millisecond Software.
Fazio, R. H. (1990). Multiple processes by which attitudes guide behavior: The MODE model
as an integrative framework. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 75-109.
Fazio, R. H. (2001). On the automatic activation of associated evaluations: An overview.
Cognition and Emotion, 15, 115-141.
Fazio, R. H. (2007). Attitudes as object-evaluation associations of varying strength. Social
Cognition, 25, 603-637.
Fazio, R. H., Jackson, J. R., Dunton, B. C., & Williams, C. J. (1995). Variability in automatic
activation as an unobtrusive measure of racial attitudes: A bona fide pipeline? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1013-1027.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) stereotype
content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived status and competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 878-902.

302

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

Fuertes, J. N., Gottdiener, W. H., Martin, H., Gilbert, T. C., & Giles, H. (2012). A meta-analysis
of the effects of speakers' accents on interpersonal evaluations. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 42, 120-133.
Gawronski, B., & Creighton, L. A. (2013). Dual process theories. In D. E. Carlston (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of social cognition (pp. 282-312). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Giles, H., & Billings, A. C. (2004). Assessing language attitudes: Speaker evaluation studies. In
A. Davies & C. Elder (Eds.), The handbook of applied linguistics (pp. 187-208). Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Giles, H., & Coupland, N. (1991). Language: Contexts and consequences. Belmont, CA:
Thomson Brooks/Cole.
Giles, H., & Marlow, M. (2011). Theorizing language attitudes: Existing frameworks, an integrative model, and new directions. In C. Salmon (Ed.), Communication yearbook 35 (pp.
161-197). New York, NY: Routledge.
Giles, H., & Watson, B. M. (2013). The social meanings of language, dialect, and accent:
International perspectives on speech styles. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Glock, S., Kneer, J., & Kovacs, C. (2013). Preservice teachers' implicit attitudes toward students with and without immigration background: A pilot study. Studies in Educational
Evaluation, 39, 204-210.
Gluszek, A., & Dovidio, J. F. (2010). The way they speak: A social psychological perspective
on the stigma of nonnative accents in communication. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 14, 214-237.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74, 1464-1480.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and using the Implicit
Association Test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 197-216.
HOC Rep. No. 087. (2006). Routine proceedings: The Quebecois, Hansard of 39th Parliament,
1st Session. Retrieved from http://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/39-1/house
/sitting-87/hansard
Hofmann, W., Gawronski, B., Gschwendner, T., Le, H., & Schmitt, M. (2005). A meta-analysis
on the correlation between the Implicit Association Test and explicit self-report measures.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1369-1385.
Horner, K., & Weber, J.-J. (2008). The language situation in Luxembourg. Current Issues in
Language Planning, 9, 69-128.
Jaenen, C. J. (1993). Les Franco-Ontariens [The Franco-Ontarians]. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada:
University of Ottawa Press.
Lamarre, P. (2013). Catching "Montreal on the move" and challenging the discourse of unilingualism in Quebec. Anthropologica, 55, 41-56.
Lane, K. A., Banaji, M. R., Nosek, B. A., & Greenwald, A. G. (2007). Understanding and
using the Implicit Association Test: IV. What we know (so far) about the method. In B.
Wittenbrink & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Implicit measures of attitudes (pp. 59-102). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Lehnert, T. E., Krolak-Schwerdt, S., & Horstermann, T. (2016). Judging people and their
language use: Evidence for the distinctness of attitudes towards languages and speakers'
nationality. EAPRIL Conference Proceedings 2015, 2, 262-274.

Lehnert and Horstermann

303

Lehnert, T. E., Krolak-Schwerdt, S., & Horstermann, T. (2018a). Language and nationality attitudes as distinct factors that influence speaker evaluations: Explicit versus implicit attitudes
in Luxembourg. Language and Communication, 61, 58-70.
Lehnert, T. E., Krolak-Schwerdt, S., & Horstermann, T. (2018b). Explicit and implicit speaker
evaluations and their differential attitudinal determinants. Language Sciences, 69, 68-79.
Linteau, P.-A. (2013). The history of Montreal. The history of a great North American city.
Montreal, Quebec, Canada: Baraka Books.
Macintyre, P. D. (2007). Willingness to communicate in the second language: Understanding
the decision to speak as a volitional process. Modern Language Journal, 91, 564-576.
Montreuil, A., & Bourhis, R. Y. (2004). Acculturation orientations of competing host communities toward valued and devalued immigrants. International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, 28, 507-532.
Nesdale, D., & Rooney, R. (1996). Evaluations and stereotyping of accented speakers by preadolscent children. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 15, 133-154.
Noels, K. A., Clement, R., & Pelletier, L. G. (2001). Intrinsic, extrinsic, and integrative orientations of French Canadian Learners of English. Canadian Modern Language Review/La
Revue Canadienne Des Langues Vivantes, 57, 424-442.
Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Implicit and explicit measures of attitudes: The perspective
of the MODE model. In R. E. Petty, R. H. Fazio, & P. Brinol (Eds.), Attitudes: Insights from
the new implicit measures (pp. 19-63). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Pantos, A. J., & Perkins, A. W. (2013). Measuring implicit and explicit attitudes toward foreign
accented speech. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 32, 3-20.
Perugini, M. (2005). Predictive models of implicit and explicit attitudes. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 44, 29-45.
Ryan, E. B., Giles, H., & Sebastian, R. J. (1982). An integrative perspective for the study of
attitudes toward language variation. In E. B. Ryan & H. Giles (Eds.), Attitudes toward language variation (pp. 135-160). London, England: Edward Arnold.
Sachdev, I., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1990). Language and social identification. In D. Abrams &
M. Hogg (Eds.), Social identity theory: Constructive and critical advances (pp. 101-124).
Hemel Hempstead, England: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Schoel, C., Roessel, J., Eck, J., Janssen, J., Petrovic, B., Rothe, A., . . . Stahlberg, D. (2013).
"Attitudes Towards Languages" (AToL) scale: A global instrument. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 32, 21-45.
STATEC. (2017). Population par sexe et par nationalite [Gender and nationality distribution].
Retrieved
from
https://statistiques.public.lu/stat/TableViewer/tableView
.aspx?ReportId=12853&IF_Language=fra
Statistics Canada. (2016). Census profile for Montreal. Retrieved from https://www12.statcan.
gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/prof/details/page.cfm?Lang=E&Geo1=CMACA
&Code1=462&Geo2=PR&Code2=12&Data=Count&SearchText=Montreal&SearchType
=Begins&SearchPR=01&B1=All
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (2004). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In J. T. Jost
& J. Sidanius (Eds.), Political psychology: Key readings in social psychology (pp. 276293). New York, NY: Psychology Press.

Author Biographies
Tessa E. Lehnert is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Luxembourg. She graduated
in psychology in Luxembourg and Germany. Her main research interests are in the field of

304

Journal of Language and Social Psychology 38(3)

person perception in daily social interactions and professional contexts, with a particular focus
on social cognition (attitude formation, explicit, and implicit processes) and identity formation
in multilingual contexts.
Thomas Horstermann is a data analyst at the University of Luxembourg. After graduating in
psychology at the Bergische Universitat Wuppertal in Germany, he completed his PhD in psychology at the University of Luxembourg and is working there since 2008. His main research
interests include the psychology of decision making, social cognition, and computer-based
methods for the assessment of decision-making processes.

