Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Priming effects on subsequent episodic memory: Testing attentional
accounts

T



Alexander J. Kaula , Richard N. Henson
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Priming
Attention
Resources
Episodic Memory
Source Memory

Prior work has shown that priming improves subsequent episodic memory, i.e., memory for the context in which
an item is presented is improved if that item has been seen previously. We previously attributed this effect of
"Priming on Subsequent Episodic Memory" (PSEM) to a sharpening of the perceptual/conceptual representation
of an item, which improves its associability with an (arbitrary) background context, by virtue of increasing
prediction error (Greve, Cooper, Kaula, Anderson, & Henson, 2017). However, an alternative explanation is that
priming reduces the attentional resources needed to process an item, leaving more residual resources to encode
its context. We report four experiments that tested this alternative, resource-based hypothesis, based on the
assumption that reducing the available attentional resources by a concurrent load would reduce the size of the
PSEM. In no experiment was there an interaction between attentional load and priming on mean memory
performance, nor a consistent correlation across participants between priming and PSEM, failing to support the
resource account. However, formal modelling revealed that a resource account is not, in fact, inconsistent with
our data, by confirming that nonlinear (sigmoidal) resource-performance functions can reproduce any interaction with load, and, more strikingly, any pattern of correlation between priming and PSEM. This work reinforces
not only the difficulty of refuting attentional resource accounts of memory encoding, but also questions the value
of load manipulations more generally.

Introduction

of the words had been presented on the previous day (Day 1) in a
different task (phoneme monitoring). To make the lexical decision task
harder, the words and pseudowords were presented simultaneously
with one of two background sounds. Those words that had been seen on
the previous day had faster lexical decision times, i.e., showed priming.
More importantly, words from the lexical decision task were then
presented again, together with new words, in a surprise recognition
memory test, where participants were asked to indicate which words
occurred on Day 2. Primed words not only received a higher probability
of "remember" responses (a subjective measure of recollection; Tulving,
1985), but also had higher accuracy for remembering which sound they
had been presented with during the lexical decision task (an objective
measure of "source" memory; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000). This PSEM
effect was subsequently replicated by Gagnepain et al. (2011) using
similar stimuli, and then by Greve et al. (2017) using different (visual)
stimuli, in which images of unfamiliar faces were primed and memory
tested for their pairing with arbitrary and unique background scenes. A
related finding was reported by Poppenk, Kohler, and Moscovitch
(2010), using primed versus unprimed proverbs and source memory for
the task in which they were studied (though priming was not measured

It is not surprising that recognition memory for an item (e.g, word
or picture) - i.e., a judgment of whether it was seen recently - is generally improved the more times that item is repeated (Kinoshita, 1997;
Jacoby, 1999, although c.f. Gardiner, Kaminska, Dixon, & Java, 1996;
Dewhurst & Anderson, 1999), since repetitions can be assumed to increase the "strength" with which that item is represented in memory (or
increase its "familiarity", Yonelinas, 2002). Measures of priming, such
as the speed of making a decision about an item, also generally increase
with the number of item repetitions (Ostergaard, 1998). Perhaps more
surprising is the finding of a number of recent studies (Gagnepain,
Lebreton, Desgranges, & Eustache, 2008; Gagnepain et al., 2011; Greve,
Cooper, Kaula, Anderson, & Henson, 2017) that repeating an item
(producing greater priming) can also improve subsequent episodic
memory for the context in which that repetition occurred, i.e., improve
subsequent "recollection" (Yonelinas, 2002). We call this the effect of
Priming on Subsequent Episodic Memory (PSEM).
For example, Gagnepain et al. (2008) asked participants to make a
lexical decision about auditory words and pseudowords, where one half



Corresponding author at: MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 7EF, United Kingdom.
E-mail address: kaula.alex@gmail.com (A.J. Kaula).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104106
Received 29 May 2019; Received in revised form 28 January 2020; Accepted 5 February 2020
Available online 25 February 2020
0749-596X/ (c) 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

appeared in the study phase, and participants have to indicate with
which face had been paired with the scene (see Fig. 1).
The simplest form of resource account is the "time-on-task". It is
possible that the reduced time taken to perform a task on a primed
stimulus in the study phase (as evident by faster responses) means that
more time remains (before the next trial starts) to encode aspects of its
context. Experiment 1 tested this "temporal resource" account by fixing
the "free time" between the response on one trial and the start of the
next trial. One way to conceive of this manipulation is that it places a
load on temporal resources, such that it reduces any additional resource
that would otherwise be freed by priming. Two other types of resource
that have been distinguished in the attention literature are "perceptual
resources", which are directed to the sensorium, and "central resources", which operate on representations independent of current
sensory input (see e.g. Yi, Woodman, Widders, Marois, & Chun, 2004;
Chun & Johnson, 2011; Lavie, Beck, & Konstantinou, 2014). Experiment
2 used a typical operationalisation of perceptual load, in which one half
of the face stimuli were made harder to see in the study phase, while
Experiments 3a and 3b used a typical operationalisation of central load,
in which an additional demanding secondary (auditory) task was imposed during the Study phase.
Using the same intuition used in many prior "dual task" studies, the
resources account predicts an interaction between load and priming,
whereby PSEM (a difference score of primed minus unprimed) is reduced under higher load. The resources account would also seem to
predict a positive correlation between the amount of behavioural
priming (the effect of Priming on response speed, or PRS) in the study
phase and associative memory in the test phase (i.e., size of PSEM), and
that this relationship should also be modulated by load. In short, we
found no evidence for these predictions, with Bayes Factors preferring
the null hypothesis of no effect. One might be tempted to conclude that
the absence of such interactions with load questions the resources account, and thereby favours alternative accounts (like the PIMMS account). However, we go on to show that relatively simple computational models, based on a limited resource, can reproduce the complete
set of qualitative patterns in our data, including the lack of effect of load
on PSEM and lack of PRS-PSEM correlations (despite significant main
effects of load), and therefore our data are not, in fact, inconsistent with
a resources account. Indeed, we conclude that such resource models are
impossible to reject with the type of experimental manipulations

directly). Note however that another study by Kim, Yi, Raye, and
Johnson (2012) found the apparent opposite effect - whereby source
memory decreased with the number of times an item had been seen
previously - which we discuss in more detail in the General Discussion
The PSEM effect reported in Greve et al. (2017, Experiment 3) was
one of three empirical effects predicted by the PIMMS framework
("Predictive Interactive Multiple Memory Signals", Henson &
Gagnepain, 2010). According to this framework, associative memory is
proportional to prediction error (PE), which reflects the divergence
between the prior probability of an item (given a context) and the
likelihood of that item (based on, e.g., sensory evidence). When the
prior probability is flat (because the context scenes in Greve et al.,
2017, did not predict a particular face), then sharpening the sensory
evidence by priming increases the PE, and therefore improves the encoding of the context-item (scene-face) pairing.
However, while PSEM is just one example of a memory effect consistent with PIMMS, it also has an alternative explanation in terms of
attentional resources. According to this account, priming reduces the
resources needed to process an item, and therefore the remaining resources are available for encoding the context in which the item occurred. This resembles the "item-context trade-off" account of Jurica
and Shimamura (1999), who observed that several factors that affect
item memory tend to have opposite effects on context (source) memory,
and the `stimulus learning/predifferentiation' account considered by
Kim et al. (2012), which proposes that resource demands are reduced
for pre-exposed items.
We conducted four experiments to test the resource account of the
PSEM effect, using the same basic scene-face associative memory
paradigm of Greve et al. (2017). This paradigm consists of three phases.
In the first "Training" phase, one half of the face stimuli (the primed
ones) are presented on their own for an arbitrary pleasantness rating
task (see Methods). In the second "Study" phase, these primed faces,
together with faces not seen in the training phase (unprimed), are
presented on a background scene. The primary task again requires
pleasant/unpleasant decisions about on the faces (for which response
speed provides a measure of priming), but participants also have to
detect (rare occasions) when the scene contained the moon (so the
scenes could not be ignored). In the final "Test" phase, each scene is
presented together with three faces from the same (primed/unprimed)
condition (three-alternative-forced-choice, 3AFC), all of which had

Fig. 1. The basic design of Experiments 1-3. One of the 16 blocks shown, with each block testing memory for 12 scene-face pairs. In the initial Training phase, 6 faces
were shown three times, serving to "prime" those faces. These faces were then repeated again in the Study phase, intermixed with 6 faces that were not shown in the
Training phase, and each face was presented in front of a unique scene. In both Training and Study phases of a block, the primary task was to judge pleasantness of
the faces. During the Study Phase, an additional task was to detect the occasional target scenes that contained the moon (not shown), to ensure all scenes were
attended. The Distractor task involved 10 s of odd/even number classification, to disrupt immediate memory. The Test phase required 3-alternative forced choice
(3AFC) for which face occurred with a given scene (foils were faces that were seen in the Study phase with different scenes). The main manipulations in each
experiment occurred during the Study phase, as described in the text.
2

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

approximately matched with the Low Load condition (based on mean
response times in pilot experiments). Note that, for all remaining experiments (2-3b), Study trial length was response-linked, as in the fRSI
condition, and due to load manipulations expected to lengthen response
times at study, faces were onscreen for 800 ms rather than 400 ms,
which had the effect of lengthening the available response window to
allow responses up to 1600 ms from stimulus onset (previously
1200 ms) for these later experiments.
Task 3: Distraction Phase. In order to prevent contributions from
working memory, and to minimise recency effects, whereby the laterpresented face-scene pairings would be better remembered, a short
distractor task followed the Study Phase. This consisted of five trials of
an odd/even number-categorisation task with a fixed SOA of 2000 ms.
At the start of each trial, a white fixation cross appeared in the centre of
the screen, replaced after 250 ms with a randomly selected number
between 10 and 100. When the participant responded, feedback was
given via replacement of the number with either a green (correct response) or red (incorrect) fixation cross, which remained onscreen until
the end of the fixed trial time. At the end of the task, reminder instructions were presented for the next task.
Task 4: Test Phase. The Test Phase consisted of a 3AFC task, where
all pairings encountered in the study phase were tested, yielding 12
trials. Trials ended when a response was given. In each trial, a scene
was presented from the study phase, together with 3 face images presented at 75% scale and arrayed below the scene image, numbered 1-3.
The position of the target and the 2 foils was pseudo-randomised such
that the target could not appear in the same position for more than 3
consecutive trials, and appeared in each position an equal number of
times. Target and foils were always chosen from the same condition (i.e.
primed/unprimed) and were always of the same sex. At the end of this
task, participants were informed that the block had ended and given
reminder instructions for Task 1 of the following block, or informed at
the end that the experiment had ended.

performed here, which has implications for any experiment that uses
load manipulations.
Experiment 1: Temporal resources
Experiment 1 tested the simple possibility that the PSEM effect
arises because priming speeds response to an item, leaving more time to
encode its context (before the next item appears).
Methods
16 participants (6 male) were recruited aged 18-35 (M = 25,
SD = 4.1), and paid 6 for their time, according to ethics protocol
CPREC 2005.08. For this first, exploratory experiment, sample size was
based on similar sample sizes in the literature, in combination with
counterbalancing constraints. Two participants were replaced because
they did not perform significantly above chance at test (see Statistical
Analysis section below). All were right handed and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.
The experiment consisted of 4 phases, repeated across 16 blocks.
Participants sat at a computer and used a keyboard to respond. After a
brief summary of the tasks given by the experimenter, instructions were
presented onscreen. A short (approx. 2 min) practice session consisting
of shortened versions of each task was completed prior to the beginning
of the experiment proper, and thus participants were aware of the task
requirements from the outset.
Task 1: Training Phase. This phase consisted of 18 evenly-spaced
trials in which 6 faces were presented three times in a pseudorandom
order (with all faces being presented, in a random order, before being
repeated). A trial began with a white fixation cross in the centre of the
screen for 500 ms, after which a face image appeared, with the fixation
cross remaining visible over the face, always sitting approximately
halfway down the nose. Participants indicated with a speeded response
whether they found the face to be a `more pleasant' or `less pleasant'
(than some subjective average) face, a judgement which could be neither correct nor incorrect. When a response was made, feedback that a
response had been logged was given by the white crosshair changing to
black. Each face image was presented for 1750 ms, after which the next
trial began, giving an SOA of 2250 ms. After 18 trials which
took ~ 45 s, the software presented a brief reminder of the instructions
for the next task, with participants indicating with a key press when
they were ready to continue.
Task 2: Study Phase. This phase consisted of 12 study trials plus 2
(+/- 1) target trials interspersed randomly. Study stimuli in each trial
were pairings of scenes with either primed or unprimed faces. The Load
parameter alternated in each block, counterbalanced with respect to
whether participants started with a Load or No Load block. Trial sequences were pseudo-randomly generated such that neither Primed nor
Unprimed trials occurred for more than 3 successive trials. Each study
trial began with a scene presented in the centre of the screen for
1000 ms. Target trials were scenes that included a moon, to which
participants responded with a speeded key-press (spacebar). All other
non-target scenes were followed by a face image, overlaid centrally on
the scene image, with a white fixation cross appearing in the centre of
the face image, as in the Training Phase. After a further 400 ms, the
images disappeared from the screen, leaving only the fixation cross. As
in the Training Phase, participants indicated their speeded judgement
about whether the face was `more pleasant' or `less pleasant', with
feedback given in the form of the fixation cross turning to black. In Low
Load blocks, the response window was fixed at 1200 ms from face onset
(800 ms from stimulus offset), regardless of when a response key was
pressed (i.e., a variable response-stimulus interval, vRSI). Thus, no RTs
greater than 1200 ms were possible, which piloting suggested would
capture more than 95% of responses. In High Load blocks, the trial
ended a fixed 485 ms after a response was made (fixed response-stimulus interval, fRSI), such that the average response window was

Statistical analysis
Linear mixed effects (LME) modelling was used to model each trial,
using the "lmer" and "glmer" functions in R (see /https://osf.io/rh5sc/
for all data and analysis code). Study phase RT data were transformed
by taking the natural log of the reciprocal of the response time in seconds, yielding a measure of speed (and rendering the distribution over
trials more Gaussian). For Test phase accuracy data, each trial was
coded as 1 or 0, and logistic LME was implemented via a binomial
linking function, yielding a Z-statistic for each fixed effect. All LME
models assumed factorial fixed effects of load and priming, with
random effects for participants and participant-by-effect interactions. A
random effect of each face stimulus was also added to model stimulusrelated variance (except in Experiment 3b, where convergence was only
possible without this random effect). For the accuracy data, we additionally ran a Bayesian LME using the "brm" function in R, with unit
normal shrinkage priors on all fixed effects, with mean of zero and
standard deviation of 1, and 4 chains of 50,000 iterations. This enabled
us to report a Bayes Factor (BF) in favour of either the alternative hypothesis (BF10) or null hypothesis that the effect was zero (BF01).
Parameter estimates are reported in terms of their mean (M) and
standard error (SE); for Study RS, their units are log(s-1); for Test
Accuracy, they are probabilities on the logit scale. For the figures, data
are shown as trial-averaged means for each participant, plus additional
across-participant statistics for simple effects on these trial-averaged
data.
Correlations between priming of RS at Study and accuracy at Test
were tested with Pearson's correlation coefficient, and the effect of Load
on these correlations was tested with Pearson and Filon's Z-statistic
(1898), as implemented in the "cocor" package in R. All p-values are
two-tailed.
Some participants found the memory task so difficult that they
3

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 2. Panels A-C show mean scores (N = 16) during 3 phases of Experiment 1. Priming of face pleasantness responses was found during Training (A, using a linear
trend analysis across the three presentations) and during Study (B). Panel C shows effect of priming on memory during final 3AFC Test phase (chance = 33%),
revealing no effect of restricting temporal resources during Study, nor interaction. Panel D shows relationship between priming effects at study (PRS) and test (PSEM)
with no overall correlation, no correlation under either load condition, nor any difference in slopes. Cyan (expected, priming direction) and grey (no-priming) lines
link individual subject data points across conditions. Abbreviations fRSI and vRSI: fixed (f), variable (v) response-stimulus interval. Bars with asterisks indicate
significant linear trend (Training phase), or significant simple effect as analysed using a paired-sample T-test, p < .05. (For interpretation of the references to colour
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

because the manipulation only affected the time after a response), nor
interaction, T(41.1) = 4.04, p = .688.
Test. The logistic LME of Test accuracy showed a significant main
effect of Priming (M = 0.35, SE = 0.15), Z = 2.41, p = .016, with
greater associative memory for primed trials i.e., a significant PSEM
effect. Fixing the time after a response did not produce a significant
change in Test performance (M = 0.01, SE = 0.11), Z = 0.055,
p = .956, nor did it moderate the size of the PSEM effect, with no
significant interaction between Study Load and Priming (M = -0.02,
SE = 0.14), Z = -0.596, p = .551. Indeed, priming was significant in
the predicted direction when analysing Low and High load conditions
separately (see Fig. 2C). Bayes Factors did not provide evidence for or
against priming, BF01 = 1.32, but did provide decisive evidence against
any effect of load or interaction with priming, BF01 > 18.4.
PRS-PSEM correlations. After averaging over trials in order to create
a mean priming score for each participant, there was no significant

appeared to give up. We therefore replaced participants who performed
at chance: overall Test performance (averaged across conditions) was
tested with a permutation test, where answers to the 16 blocks x 12
trials (192 in total) were randomly shuffled and compared with the
correct responses 10,000 times, to give a null distribution of Test scores.
The actual test score was then ranked in this distribution of scores, and
accepted as significantly different from chance if it was greater than the
95th percentile score, otherwise the participant was replaced.
Results
Study. The linear mixed effects (LME) model of Study Phase response speed showed a significant main effect of Priming (M = 0.036,
SE = 0.013), T(26.9) = 2.86, p = .008, with faster responses to primed
trials, as expected (Fig. 2B). There was no significant effect of Load,
(M = 0.010, SE = 0.011), T(14.9) = 0.93, p = .354 (as expected,
4

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Method

correlation across participants between the effects of priming on response speed (PRS) at Study and its effects on subsequent memory
(PSEM) at Test, averaged across Load, R = 0.288, p = .279, nor was
there any significant difference in the correlations for high versus low
Load, Z = 0.387, p = .700 (Fig. 2D).

32 participants (10 male), age 18-35 (M = 25, SD = 4.5) years
were included, none of whom had participated in previous PSEM experiments. Four participants were replaced: 1 because of extremely
rapid responses, faster than 3SD from mean response speed, and 3 because they did not perform significantly above chance during test (see
Methods of Experiment 1).
Degradation of faces during the Study phase alternated between
Low Load `clear' blocks and High Load `degraded' blocks. In half of both
Low and High Load blocks, the Test face stimuli were also degraded, so
that face stimuli either were a match or a nonmatch between Study and
Test phases, with this `Match' factor rotating over blocks. Piloting
suggested that that making a random 57% of pixels gray was sufficient
to make the face harder to identify. Face images remained onscreen
during Study Phase trials for an increased period of 800 ms (from
400 ms previously). Otherwise, the procedure was identical to the fRSI
condition of Experiment 1.

Discussion
Experiment 1 replicated the PSEM effect of Gagnepain et al. (2008,
2011) and Greve et al. (2017; Experiment 3). However, it did not find
any evidence to support the hypothesis that PSEM occurs because
priming increases the time available for episodic encoding after a response has been made to primed stimuli, i.e., no evidence for priming
increasing the availability of temporal resources. Despite significant
priming of response speed (PRS) to faces during the Study phase, the
PSEM effect was not reduced when the interval between a participant's
response on one Study trial and the start of the next was fixed (High
Load condition), relative to variable (Low Load condition), i.e., removing the potential extra time released by priming a face did not reduce the size of the priming advantage on subsequent memory for a
scene-face association.
The general resource account would seem to predict a positive
correlation between the PRS and PSEM effects when collapsing across
conditions, i.e., the greater speed-up a participant showed from
priming, the greater the PSEM effect for that participant. We did not
find this correlation. Moreover, the strength of any relationship between priming effects at Study and Test did not differ between high and
low temporal loads, contrary to the reduced correlation that might be
expected if a fixed response-stimulus interval removed additional
temporal resources available for primed trials. Thus, we concluded that
while PSEM may be explained by the freeing-up of resources, these are
not temporal resources, and so explored other types of attentional resource in Experiments 2-3.

Results
Study. The LME on response speed at Study showed a significant
main effect of Priming (M = 0.065, SE = 0.009), T(43.5) = 7.24,
p < .001, with faster responses to primed trials as expected (Fig. 3B).
The main effect of Load was not significant,
(M = -0.014), SE = 0.009), T(48.0) = -1.62, p = .112, but there
was a significant interaction between Load and Priming (M = -0.038,
SE = 0.011), T(149) = -3.51, p < .001. Separating trials by Load
revealed that priming was significant for both Low load trials
(M = 0.065, SE = 0.009), T(70.7) = 7.78, p < .001, and High load
trials, (M = 0.028, SE = 0.008), T(30.7) = 3.63, p = .001, but was
greater for clear faces (Low load) than degraded faces (High load), most
likely because of the perceptual match with the faces at Training, which
were always clear.
Test. The logistic LME of Test accuracy included an additional fixed
effect of Study-Test Match (whether a face was clear at Study and at
Test, degraded at both, or switched), in case memory was improved
when perceptual format matched. There was a significant main effect of
Priming (M = 0.479, SE = 0.145), Z = 3.30, p < .001, i.e., significant
PSEM, as in Experiment 1. There was also a significant main effect of
Load (M = -0.271, SE = 0.125), Z = -2.18, p = .029, with worse
associative memory for degraded trials, demonstrating that the manipulation had an effect. There were no more significant effects, i.e., no
main effect or interaction with Study-Test Match, |Z| < 0.891,
p > .373, and importantly, no interaction between Priming and Load
(M = -0.052, SE = 0.176), Z = -0.071, p = .944 (see Fig. 3C, where
data averaged over Test degradation; for full data, see Supplementary
Table 1). Bayes Factors provided decisive evidence for priming,
BF10 = 79.0, and for a load effect, BF10 > 1e15, but also decisive
evidence against any interaction, BF01 = 31.5.
PRS-PSEM correlations. There was a borderline positive correlation
across participants between PRS at Study and PSEM at Test, averaged
across Load (and Study-Test Match), R = 0.348, p = .051. This did not
appear to differ according to Load, Z = -0.703, p = .482 (Fig. 3D).

Experiment 2: Perceptual resources
The manipulation of perceptual load has been shown to affect
processing of surrounding stimuli (see Lavie, 2005 for review). According to Burgess, Gilbert, and Dumontheil (2007), stressing perceptual attention requires: i) the immediate availability of information to
be processed, ii) that the processing requires target perceptual features
of the present stimulus, and iii) that the responses and rules governing
them are relatively well-learned. Experiment 2 fulfilled these criteria
for increasing perceptual load by degrading one half of the face images
through the addition of pixelwise noise (as also used successfully by Yi
et al., 2004).
To show that our perceptual load manipulation affected face processing, it is important to demonstrate a main effect of degradation on
memory. However, if faces were only degraded at Study (and presented
intact at Test), then any effect of perceptual degradation on memory
performance could simply reflect a reduced perceptual overlap between
Study and Test stimuli. In other words, degrading faces at Study would
induce a Study-Test mismatch in the face images (and in the extreme
case, participants might not recognise the same face at Test when the
visual noise is removed). This is a potential confound in Experiment 3 of
Greve et al. (2017), and the present experiment controlled for this by
adding a second (within-participant) factorial manipulation of perceptual degradation at Test, as well as Study. In order to retain power while
including this additional factor, the sample size from Experiment 1 was
doubled to 32. If Study-Test match is an important determinant of
memory, then there would be a main effect of matching versus mismatching conditions. If the freeing of perceptual resources by priming is
the cause of PSEM effects, then there should be an interaction between
priming and image-clarity (perceptual load), regardless of study-test
match.

Discussion
Experiment 2 found no evidence to support the perceptual load
account of the PSEM effect. Perceptual load was increased by adding
pixel noise to one half of the faces. This manipulation was clearly
successful in affecting face (item) processing, because Study responses
overall were slower, and memory at Test was worse, for faces that were
degraded at Study (when collapsing over primed and unprimed conditions). However, there was no evidence that this perceptual load reduced the PSEM, i.e., no evidence at Test for an interaction between
Load and Priming, with the PSEM effect significant under both low and
5

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 3. Panels A-C show mean scores (N = 32) during 3 phases of Experiment 2. Priming of face pleasantness responses was found during Training (A, using a linear
trend analysis across the three presentations) and Study (B), in addition to a main effect (longer bar) of degradation during Study. Panel C shows effect of priming on
memory accuracy during final 3AFC Test phase (chance = 33%) and effect (longer bar) of degrading face images during Study Phase, but no interaction. Data
collapsed over Match factor, which did not show significant effects (see text). Panel D shows relationship between priming effects at study (PRS) and test (PSEM) with
a positive correlation for the Perceptual Load condition.

i.e., whether faces were clear or degraded at study. In other words,
while the positive average correlation is consistent with a resource
account in general, the lack of moderation of PSEM by perceptual load
suggested an alternative type of resource is critical.

high perceptual loads, and numerically similar.
There was some suggestion that the perceptual match between
Study and Test phases also affected memory (which would have confounded any effect of perceptual load if we had only presented clear
faces at Test), in that there was a borderline interaction between StudyTest match and priming on memory performance at Test, with a bigger
PSEM effect for non-matching faces. Nonetheless, the PSEM was significant for matching and non-matching conditions separately, and
most importantly, this potential effect of matching did not interact with
the perceptual load at Study, which was the main manipulation of interest.
There was a significant interaction between Load and Priming on
response speed in the Study phase, in that the priming effect was
greater for clear than degraded faces. This can be explained by greater
perceptual overlap for the clear faces in the Low load condition with the
clear faces presented in the Training phase. However, the mean positive
correlation between effects of priming at Study (PRS) and at Test
(PSEM) showed no evidence of being moderated by perceptual load,

Experiment 3a: Central attentional resources i
Experiments 3a and 3b attempted to manipulate central rather than
perceptual load, by using a concurrent secondary task on auditory stimuli. Central load is assumed to affect cognitive processes like maintenance, refreshment, rehearsal, and manipulation of offline, internal
representations (Baddeley, 2003; Chun & Johnson, 2011). The primary
difference between Experiments 3a and 3b concerned the difficulty of
this secondary task.
The procedure for Experiment 3a was identical to Experiment 2,
except that only clear faces were used, all trials were accompanied by
occasional auditory tones, and on alternating blocks there was a secondary task to be performed on the tones. This secondary task (High
6

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

effect remained significant in the High Load condition. Again, any
correlation between PRS and PSEM was not significant, and did not
differ between conditions.
One possible limitation is that the secondary task was not demanding enough to abolish the PSEM effect in the High Load condition.
A second potential limitation is that the tones in the Low Load condition
still made some demand on central resources, even though they were
supposed to be ignored (particularly given the frequent switching
across blocks in the task-relevance of the tones). This might have reduced the effective difference in central load between the two conditions (reducing the size of the predicted interaction, despite there still
being a main effect of central load). A final limitation of Experiment 3a
is that the measure of secondary task performance in the High Load
condition was coarse and at ceiling. This meant we could not test
whether there was any effect of priming on secondary task performance, which might arise if participants prioritised resources for the
primary (face) task, such that differences in the central resources remaining affected the secondary (tone) task instead. These limitations
were addressed in Experiment 3b.

load condition) required participants to maintain a 2-digit number, and
update it each time a tone was heard. This satisfies the criteria of
Burgess et al. (2007) for central, stimulus-independent processing, in
that the number being attended is not present in the environment and
the responses referring to these internal representations. In baseline
(Low Load) blocks, participants were asked to ignore the tones.
Method
Maintaining the sample size of Experiment 2, 32 participants (12
males) aged 18-35 (M = 23, SD = 3.2) years were recruited, none of
whom had participated in previous PSEM experiments. One participant
was replaced due to outlying (slow) Study Phase responses, three were
replaced who did not perform significantly above chance overall in the
Test Phase, while one was replaced due to an extremely outlying Test
data.
The experiment was identical to Experiment 2 apart from the use of
clear faces only, and the following changes. During the Study Phase,
participants wore headphones through which they heard occasional
tones. Tones were timed to appear with a probability of .6 during the
period immediately before onset of a scene stimulus, with their precise
occurrence during this 500 ms period sampled from a normal distribution with  = 250 ms,  = 125 ms. Prior to the Study Phase,
instructions presented onscreen indicated whether tones should be attended to (High Load blocks), or ignored (Low Load blocks); 8 blocks of
each. High Load block instructions showed a `starting number', between
10 and 87, and participants were instructed to begin maintaining this
number in their head while they performed the primary face task,
adding one each time they heard a tone. At the end of a High Load
block, participants were prompted to report the final tally, which they
input via the keyboard.

Experiment 3b: Central attentional resources II
Experiment 3a addressed the limitations of Experiment 3a by using:
1) a more difficult task on the tones in the High Load condition, which
required incrementing a number in working memory by either 1 or 2,
depending on whether the tone was of low or high pitch, 2) no tones or
task in the Low Load condition, thereby maximising the difference in
central load between conditions, and 3) a secondary task that provided
a more continuous, trial-by-trial measure of performance. This measure
was a judgment, at the end of a trial, of the duration of the last tone
presented (see Methods for details), based on pilot data showing that
we could detect an effect of a primary task on this measure.

Results
Method
Study. The LME on response speed at Study showed a significant
effect of Priming, (M = 0.050, SE = 0.009), T(45.4) = 5.69, p < .
001, with faster responses to primed trials as expected (Fig. 4B). Interestingly, the presence of a secondary task did not affect primary
(face) task performance, with no significant effect of Load, (M = 0.006,
SE = 0.011), T(35.6) = 0.503, p = .618, nor interaction,
T(834) = -0.772, p = .440.
Secondary task performance was close to ceiling, with a median 7
correct out of 8 responses (range = 4 to 8).
Test. The logistic LME of Test accuracy showed a significant main
effect of priming, (M = 0.241, SE = 0.083), Z = 2.89, p = .004, again
replicating the PSEM effect. A main effect of secondary task showed
that attending to tones in the Study phase resulted in worse memory
(M = -0.526, SE = 0.091), Z = -5.79, p < .001, also as expected
(Fig. 4C). However, though PSEM was numerically smaller under High
than Low Load, the interaction did not approach significance
(M = -0.113, SE = 0.117), Z = -0.961, p = .337. Bayes Factors
showed some evidence for priming, BF10 = 3.72, decisive evidence for
an effect of Load, BF10 greater than 1e19, and decisive evidence against
any interaction with priming, BF01 = 20.4.
PRS-PSEM correlations. The mean correlation between PRS and
PSEM (averaged across Load) was not significant, R = 0.019, p = .915,
and there was no significant difference between Load conditions,
Z = -0.616, p = .538 (Fig. 4D).

Participants. 32 participants (9 males) aged 18-35 (M = 23,
SD = 4.4) years were included in the analysis, none of whom had
participated in previous PSEM experiments. Because of the extremely
challenging nature of the High Load condition, a total of 21 participants
had to be replaced, after failing to achieve above-chance performance
across Load conditions in either the primary memory task (N = 6) or
the secondary task (in the High Load condition), as measured by absence of a significant correlation between duration of the tones heard
and their judged duration (N = 17, 2 of whom were also below chance
on the primary task).
Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 3a apart
from the following changes. Tones only occurred in the High Load
blocks. They were equiprobably high (1000 Hz) or low (500 Hz) pitched, with onset at either 200 ms or 700 ms after trial onset, and
durations sampled from a normal distribution,  = 500 ms,
 = 175 ms, matched within blocks so that tone pitches, onsets and
durations were equated between primed and unprimed trials. In High
Load blocks, participants had to increment a starting number between
10 and 87 by adding 1 when they heard a low tone or by 2 when they
heard a high tone. Due this added complexity, the interval after a response was extended by 1250 ms, after which the text `Now!' appeared
onscreen. This cued participants to reproduce as accurately as possible,
using a sustained keypress, the duration of the tone they had heard at
the beginning of the trial. They then entered the number that their
internal tally had reached at the end of each High Load block.
Statistical analysis. Analyses were identical to previous experiments, except for the additional exclusion of trials where no duration
report was recorded (median = 6, range of 0 to 23 trials lost).
Furthermore, performance of the secondary task in the High Load
condition was analysed by measuring the correlation, over trials, between actual and reported tone duration (therefore ignoring individual

Discussion
Even though it did not seem to adversely affect Study response
speed, the secondary task used to increase central load was successful in
reducing memory accuracy at Test. Nonetheless, even though the PSEM
effect was numerically smaller in the High than Low (central) Load
condition, the interaction did not reach significance, and the PSEM
7

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 4. Panels A-C show mean scores (N = 32) during 3 phases. Priming of face pleasantness response speed was found during Training (A) and Study (B), but not
affected by secondary task during Study. Panel C shows effect of priming on memory accuracy during final 3AFC Test phase and main effect of secondary task during
Study Phase, but no interaction. See Fig. 2 legend for more details. Panel D shows no observed relation between priming effects on RS and subsequent memory.

impaired subsequent memory Z = -6.12, p < .001 (Fig. 5C). However, as in previous experiments, any evidence for an interaction between Priming and Load (M = -0.146, SE = 0.124) did not reach
significance, Z = -1.18, p = .238.
Bayes Factors did not support evidence for a main effect of priming,
BF10 = 0.194, but did provide decisive evidence for a main effect of
load, BF10 greater than 1e19, and, most importantly, decisive evidence
against any interaction between priming and load, BF01 = 21.6, suggesting that it was not the case that the data were simply too noisy to
detect an interaction.
PRS-PSEM correlations. PRS and PSEM were not significantly correlated across Load conditions, R = .208, p = .251. However, the
correlations did differ significantly by Load, Z = 3.07, p = .002, being
significantly positive in the Low load condition, but not differing significantly from zero in the High load condition (Fig. 5D).
Secondary Duration Report Task and Number Maintenance Task.
After Fisher transform, the correlation coefficients between heard and
reported duration for the secondary duration report task in the High
Load condition did not differ between Primed (M = .431, SE = .025)

differences in offsets of temporal perception). The correlations for
primed and unprimed trials were compared using a paired T-test after
Fisher-transforming the Pearson correlation coefficient.

Results
Study. The LME on response speed at Study showed a significant
showed a main effect of priming, (M = 0.058, SE = 0.008),
T(82.1) = 6.81, p < .001, with faster responses to primed faces
(Fig. 5B). Unlike Experiment 3a, there was also a significant main effect
of Load, (M = -0.097, SE = 0.015), T(32.3) = -6.29, p < .001,
such that the concurrent task slowed responses, as expected. Furthermore, there was an interaction between Priming and Load,
(M = -0.028, SE = 0.013), T(122) = -2.23, p = .028, where
Priming under Low Load was greater than under High Load.
Test. The logistic LME of Test accuracy showed a significant main
effect of priming (M = 0.210, SE = 0.094), Z = 2.22, p = .026, again
replicating the PSEM. A main effect of Load (M = -0.550,
SE = 0.089), confirmed that the concurrent task in the Study phase
8

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 5. Panels A-C show mean scores (N = 32) during 3 phases. Priming of face pleasantness responses was found during Training (A) and Study (B), but not affected
by secondary task during Study. Panel C shows effect of priming on memory accuracy during final 3AFC Test phase and main effect of secondary task during Study
Phase, but no interaction. See Fig. 2 legend for more details.

and Unprimed (M = .437, SE = .036) trials, T(31) = 0.51, p = .610. In
other words, participants did not differ in their ability to maintain tone
durations depending on whether faces were primed or unprimed. The
scatter plot in Fig. 6 shows that PSEM did not appear related to any
effect of priming on the secondary, `duration report' task. The median
number of correct responses in the mental number-maintaining-andincrementing task was 5 out of a possible 8 (range = 8).
Discussion
Despite increasing the difficulty of the secondary task in the High
(central) Load condition, and minimising the load in the Low Load
condition (by removing any tones), Experiment 3b, like Experiment 3a,
still failed to find evidence of a significant interaction between central
load and PSEM. The increased difficulty was confirmed by the significant slowing of Study responses (unlike Experiment 3a), in addition
to their impaired Test performance. Nor did any effect of priming appear in the new measure of secondary task performance, as might
happen if participants allocated a greater proportion of their resources
to the primary task (maintaining the PSEM effect), such that resources

Fig. 6. Scatter plot shows no relationship between PSEM and priming effects on
duration report (PDR) in the High Load condition, where latter measured as
Fisher-transformed correlation between actual and reported tone duration.

9

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

freed by priming facilitated secondary task performance instead.
Indeed, there was no evidence of a significant correlation between
priming effects on primary and secondary tasks in the High Load condition. (Although it might have been helpful to have a baseline measure
of secondary task performance under Low Load, this would compromise
the effort to maximise the difference in central load between High and
Low Load conditions.)
Though the interaction between Load and Priming on subsequent
memory did not reach significance, the PSEM effect was numerically
smaller in the High Load condition, and the simple effect of Priming
under High Load no longer reached significance. This lack of evidence
for the interaction is unlikely to owe simply to noise in the data, because the Bayes Factor still provided decisive evidence for no interaction (if the data had been noisy, then the Bayes Factor would not favour
either the null or the alternative hypothesis). Nonetheless, it remains
logically possible that, despite our efforts and the difficulties experienced by participants, we were unable to sufficiently impact the resources available, and therefore simply failed to find a true effect of
load on PSEM. Rather than leaving this investigation with the possibility of insufficient load manipulations, we created a formal model of
how a resource account might apply to the present experiments. This
turned out to be important in appreciating the limitations of dual-task
logic, and particularly illuminating about the elusive nature of correlations between priming effects on our various measures.

Fig. 7. Schematic illustration shows how changing difficulty parameter, d , allows improved performance with reduced resources. Line A shows normal
performance. Line B shows that when difficulty parameter d is reduced, performance for the same amount of resources is increased. Red vertical line between x-axis and Line A indicates resources required for maintenance of performance when change in d makes the task easier. (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

patterns from a single underlying resource. Fig. 8 shows two such
patterns. Panel A shows an interaction pattern, which is often used to
argue for a single underlying resource. However, Panel B shows that the
same single resource can also produce two main effects in the absence
of an interaction, which is often used to argue for separate resources.
Whether or not an interaction pattern is found (on subsequent memory)
depends only on whether there is a difference in the gradient of the
resource-performance function between primed and unprimed data
points under high and low load, and thus in the absence of further information, one cannot predict the outcome in a 2 x 2 design.3 In other
words, without any further assumptions, it is apparent that there exists
a set of parameters that can reproduce the lack of interaction between
Load and Priming.
However, performance on the final associative memory task is not
the only measure in our experiments: there are also measures of performance (response speed) for the primary study task in the Study
Phase (which is when resources are assumed to impact), as well as for
the secondary task in Experiment 3b, and according to a limited-resources account, one might expect a positive correlation between the
effects of priming on response speed and subsequent memory (if PRS
indexes the amount of resources freed), and a negative correlation between the effects of priming on subsequent memory and performance of
the secondary task (if more of the resources freed by priming are devoted to secondary task rather than to memory encoding). To model
these, we need to consider performance-resource functions for the faceprocessing task at Study (as well that for subsequent memory at Test),
specify how resources are allocated to each task, and add variability
across participants to estimate correlations.

Modelling of experiments
The above experiments tested the idea that some form of resource is
"freed up" by the prior processing of primed stimuli, and these freed
resources are used to improve subsequent memory (the PSEM effect).
However, any interaction between Load and the PSEM effect failed to
reach significance in all four experiments. We now address the question
from a computational perspective.1
Relating resources to performance
Norman and Bobrow (1975) describe a function that relates task
performance to attentional resource in its most general terms as
monotonically non-decreasing. In theory, a wide variety of such functions are plausible, but a reasonable case is a sigmoid: at low levels of
resource allocation, task performance is impossible, and after this
threshold there is an improvement in performance as more resources
are applied, followed by a tailing-off as additional resources no longer
improve performance due to other limits, e.g., sensory or response
limits:

P=

1
(1 + e-(r - d)/ s )

whereP is performance, r is resources, s is the sharpness of the sigmoid
and d is the "difficulty" of the task.2 If r ranges between 0 and 1, and
s = 0.1, then Fig. 7 shows two different difficulties: d = 0.35 (harder)
and d = 0.20 (easier). As can be seen from comparing Line B with Line
A, a lower difficulty (for example, in processing a face because of prior
exposure to that face) means a higher performance (P ) results from the
same level resources (r ).
A well-established (e.g., Dunn & Kirsner, 1988) feature is clear even
before any further modelling takes place: given we do not know the
form of the function, and cannot directly measure the hypothesised
resources, it is possible to produce several qualitatively different data

Simulation 1: Modelling basic PRS and PESM, e.g, in Experiment 1
Participant Resources and Resource Allocation. In the model,
each participant, s , is assumed to possess some total amount of resource, Rs , sampled from a normal distribution, with the proportion
allocated to each of i = 1M simultaneous tasks being defined as
M
0 < ai < 1, such that i = 1 ai = 1 and ris = ai Rs . For the basic paradigm
without any concurrent load, M = 2 , such that r1s = a1 Rs represents the
resources allocated (by participant s ) to the primary Study task of
making face pleasantness judgments (hereafter, "Face Task") and

1

The MATLAB code with which this model was implemented and the simulations generated, available online at https://osf.io/rh5sc/
2
In general, we would expect P=0 if r=0, which is true if r ranges from -
to +, but in reality r is finite, so P is allowed to be slightly above zero when
r=0.

3
Only by finding a reversed association in a 2x3 design can more than one
resource be inferred, Dunn and Kirsner (1988).

10

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 8. Schematic shows how distinct data patterns can arise from sampling different points on a single (nonlinear) performance-resource function. Panel A shows a
priming-by-load interaction, while Panel B shows main effects of both priming and load, but no interaction.

we did not always find significant correlations between priming effects
at Study and Test, and this seemed puzzling if they depend on the same
resource, since we might assume that the more resources that have been
freed by priming, the more priming effect would be seen in both tasks.
Moreover, another reason for a positive correlation is that participants
with a higher Rs should show larger priming effects on both measures.
However, simulation of the simplest version of the experiment (i.e. Face
Task and Memory Task, with no perceptual or central load, as in the
model of Experiment 1) shows that simply by varying only the allocation parameter, a1, a range of positive, zero or negative correlations can
be produced (see Fig. 10).
To understand the reasons for this, first, measurement error, u , is
removed from the simulation. Performance of the two primary (Face
and Memory) tasks is then simulated, randomly sampling Rs while
keeping the s and d sigmoid parameters equated for both tasks, and
keeping a1 and x p both fixed at .5, equivalent to participants allocating
resources evenly between the tasks (Panel A of Fig. 10). In this case,
PRS and PSEM are almost perfectly positively correlated. As can be seen
from the illustration, this positive correlation arises because, under
these assumptions about allocation, priming effects on both RS and
Memory are produced from the same regions of the sigmoids underpinning task performance.
However, as a1 is allowed to vary towards either 0 or 1 (entailing
asymmetries of Rs allocation), correlations become negative (Panel B).
Again, the illustration helps understand this feature of the model: for
higher-than-average-value samples of Rs , higher performance in the
task allocated more of the resources places a participant at the lowestgradient part of a decreasing-gradient part of the sigmoid, thus producing limited priming effect. Meanwhile, in the other task, task performance for the same participant will be produced from the highestgradient part of an increasing-gradient part of the sigmoid, producing a
relatively large priming effect, and thus we see the negative correlation
between PRS and PSEM.
If a1 is set between values producing strong positive and negative
correlations, then sampling Rs produces a complex relationship between PSEM and PRS (Panel C). Under this situation, the pattern (which
could be described as divergent values of PSEM produced for similar
values of PRS) may be explained by the fact that both PRS and PSEM
are difference scores, so higher and lower Rs values may place simulated participants in similar-gradient regions of one sigmoid and differing-gradient regions of the other.
The relationships shown in the simulations are delicate: small

r2s = a2 Rs or r2s = (1 - a1) Rs represents the resources remaining for the
other "task" of encoding the scene-face associations into memory
(hereafter, "Memory Task"). Finally, to introduce some random variability, measurement noise was added, u N (0,  ) , to the final performance values.
Effect of Prior Exposure. As alluded to earlier, prior exposure/
training can be modelled as decreasing the difficulty, dj , of the j th task.
Priming reduces the difficulty of the primary (face) task, such that
d1p < d1, where p indicates a primed (trained) trial (and unprimed trials
correspond to the baseline case, i.e., d1u = d1) . Changing parameter d
has the effect of translating the resource-performance function in
question along the x -axis, as seen already in Fig. 7. This means that the
participant can reduce the proportion of resources allocated to this
primary task by as much as allowed by the change in difficulty, d1 - d1p
produced by training, and still maintain performance of that task. This
in turn releases more resources for the "other task" of memory encoding, i.e. r2sp = a2p Rs > (1 - a1) Rs = r2s . More resources released
means that memory encoding is better for primed-face trials, explaining
the basic PSEM effect. Note that in the simulations that follow, we assume that the resource-performance functions for the Study task and
the Memory task are identical (i.e., difficulty parameters d1 and d2 , as
well as the sharpness parameter s, are equal). Of course, this is unrealistic in practice, but rather than trying to fit the data, we are interested in the simplest model possible that can accommodate our results, i.e., the model with the fewest assumptions and fewest degrees of
freedom.
In reality, we know that performance on the primary task also improves, suggesting that participants (on average) do not release all the
resources that are saved by priming. Instead, it is assumed that participants maintain a proportion, 0 < x p < 1, of the resources freed by
and
hence
priming,
i.e.,
r1ps = a1 Rs - x p (d1 - d1p)
r2ps = (1 - a1) Rs + x p (d1 - d1p) .
Fig. 9 shows the results of a simulation of Experiment 1. Here, our
load manipulation is not modelled, since it had no effect on performance of either the Face or Memory Task. This simulation instead offers
a simple demonstration of how we can model the basic PSEM effect.
Performance on the Face Task improves following priming (Panel A),
concurrent with improved performance on the Memory Task (Panel B).
With additive measurement noise included, a weak correlation is seen
between PRS and PSEM effects. The reason for the weakness and
sometimes lack of correlation is explored in the next section.
Correlations Between PRS and PSEM. In the experiments above,
11

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 9. Basic simulation (N = 16) of PRS and PSEM, illustrating how priming can be modelled as freeing up resources from Face Task for Memory Task. Lines
between boxplot markers show individual simulations. Note this simulation shows an exaggerated effect for illustration purposes. Variation in simulated performance
comes from randomly sampling values of simulated-subject overall resources, Rs , and by addition of measurement error for each data point.

differences in a1 tip the balance from positive, to `complex', to negative.
However, it seems unrealistic to assume that every participant uses the
same re-allocation of their resources between the two tasks. If random
sampling of a1 from a uniform distribution U (0, 1) is now added, then,
as shown in Panel D, any apparent relationship between PRS and PSEM
is no longer seen. Note that in all other simulations shown and discussed in this chapter, the parameter a1 is kept fixed at .5, and measurement error, u N (0, 0.05) is sufficient to obscure what would
otherwise be positive corellations between PSEM and PRS.4

r1phs = a1 Rs - x p (d1 - d1p) + xh (d1h - d1)
r2phs = (1 - a1) Rs + x p (d1 - d1p) - xh (d1h - d1)
This model can easily produce the qualitative pattern of results in
Experiment 2, with main effects on RS and subsequent memory of both
priming and load, as shown in Fig. 11, and a significant positive correlation in the High Load condition (like the trend in Experiment 2,
though as above, this can easily be made nonsignificant by changing
parameters).

Simulation 2: Effects of perceptual load

Simulation 3: Effects of central load in Experiment 3.

A simple way to model the effect of adding perceptual load is to
assume that it increases the difficulty of the face task, meaning more
resources are required to maintain performance, i.e. d1h > d1, where h
stands for high load (again we assume that the low load condition, l ,
corresponds to the baseline case, i.e., d1l = d1) . In the high load condition, the participant must either redirect resources from the memory
task, or perform the face task less well, or both. Since in the experiment
we observed that on average participants did perform both tasks less
well, we can assume that some proportion, 0 < xh < 1, of the additional
resources that would have been required to maintain performance in
the face task are redirected from the memory task, i.e., for unprimed
trials:

In Experiment 3, a secondary central load task was added to the
study phase. It is possible to model both of these experiments by introducing a third task with its own (independent) resource-performance
curve, and with some amount, r3s , of a participant's overall resources
being directed to Task 3 performance, as determined by the task's allocation parameter, a3. The most obvious difference between how
Experiments 2 and 3 are modelled is that, instead of resources being
transferred from Memory Task to Face Task, they are instead transferred away from both tasks in some proportion (see Fig. 12 for illustration).
The parameter xh can continue to be used, but in this case, it will
determine the proportion of the resources required for the central load
task to be taken from the Memory Task, xh a3 Rs , and from the Face Task,
(1 - xh) a3 Rs . Thus in unprimed trials under high load, resources for the
three tasks will be:

r1hs = a1 Rs + xl (d1h - d1)
r2hs = (1 - a1) Rs - xh (d1h - d1)
whereas for primed trials:

r1hs = a1 Rs - (1 - xh) a3 Rs
r2hs = (1 - a1) Rs - xh a3 Rs

4

Although the simulations presented here were run at the participant level, it
might be tempting to think that the predicted correlations would be more
evident at the level of individual trials. However, as soon as one considers that
resources could be attributed to tasks differently across trials, then the same
indeterminancy arises, in that any correlation pattern can be reproduced.

r3hs = a3 Rs
In Experiment 3a, there was not a trial-by-trial measure of performance, so it was not possible to address whether performance was
12

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 10. Panels A-D show 4 (N = 12) simulations of primed (P) and unprimed (U) performance in Face and Memory tasks. Overall resources, Rs , were randomly
sampled from N (0.75, 0.15) each with a different value for allocation paramater, a1, with all other settings equated and measurement error, u , set to zero. Horizontal
lines show mean task performance, solid (U), dotted (P). Colours used are consistent for individual simulations across panels, for ease of comparing performance
across tasks and with scatter plots.

thus:

improved in primed trials. In Experiment 3b however, a measure was
found that was sensitive to changes in central attentional resources (The
Duration Task). This can be modelled by adding a further parameter,
x p2 , which is the proportion of the resources freed from the Face Task by
priming which go toward Memory Task performance, the remainder of
which (i.e. 1 - x p2 ) will be added to secondary (Duration Task) resources, so in primed trials under high load, resources are distributed

r1phs = a1 Rs - (1 - xh) a3 Rs - x p (d1 - d1p)
r2phs = (1 - a1) Rs - xh a3 Rs + x p2 x p (d1 - d1p)
r3phs = a3 Rs +(1-x p2) x p (d1 - d1p)
In practice, there was no advantage of priming for Duration Task
13

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 11. Qualitative reproduction of the results of Experiment 2. Panel B shows PRS in the Face Task, and also an effect of perceptual load. Panel D shows effects of
both priming and load on subsequent memory performance, with no apparent interaction. Lines plotted between points panels A and D, connect single subject
performance in Primed and Unprimed conditions of No Load and Perceptual Load. Heavier lines linking line plots with sigmoid curves show mean performance in
each of the 4 conditions, and how that performance maps to the sigmoid functions that underlie performance.

Fig. 12. Initial resource allocation (1st row), resource allocation in No Load condition (2nd row), with resources split between Face and Memory tasks, and in High
(central) Load condition (3rd row), where a secondary task is added to Face and Memory tasks.

being low enough to accommodate this).
In contrast to the results of Experiment 3a, Experiment 3b produced
a main effect of load on response speed and also on memory performance. In addition, the design afforded a secondary-task performance
measure during each trial, in which it was hypothesised an effect of
priming may be seen, although none was found. Experiment 3 was
therefore simulated (Fig. 13) by adjusting 2 parameters (see small arrows, Panel C) of the Experiment 3a model and adding another parameter. The secondary task load allocation parameter, a3, was increased
from 0.20 to 0.35, reflecting the increased load of the secondary task,
and the load distribution parameter, xh , was reduced from 1 (all resources redirected from Memory Task) to 0.65, reflecting load's effect
on Face Task performance in Experiment 3b. As with previous simulations, and consistent with behavioural results, no obvious relationship
was found between PRS and PSM (Panel B). A new parameter, x p2 , was
included, which was the proportion of resources freed from the Face
Task by priming which would go towards Memory Task performance,
and the remainder of which would go towards secondary (Duration)
task performance. Since no significant effects of priming on Duration

trials, so x p2 = 1, and all resources freed from the Face Task by priming
go towards performance of the Memory Task.
In Experiment 3a, performance of the secondary load task was at
ceiling. Furthermore, we observed a main effect of load on memory
performance, but no such effect on response speed in the study phase,
so we can assume that performance of that task was accomplished using
resources redirected away from the Memory Task, not Face Task, and
thus set the proportion of load demand to be met by Memory Task
resources, xh , to 1. With xh set to 1, no load effect is seen on performance of the Face Task: the demands of the secondary task are met
wholly by resources redirected from the memory task, and so there is a
large main effect of load on subsequent memory (see Supplementary
Fig. 1). In line with the experimental data, in which performance of the
secondary load task was at ceiling in Experiment 3a and in which
Memory Task performance was not reduced to the same extent as in
Experiment 3b, it is simply assumed that resource allocation to the load
task, a3 , is smaller than in Experiment 3b. Performance of the secondary
task is not simulated, but it is assumed that r3hs is always sufficient for
maximum performance (the underlying difficulty parameter, d3 , simply
14

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

Fig. 13. Qualitative reproduction of the results of Experiment 3b, in which we further increased Central Load by including a more difficult dual task during the study
phase in half of the blocks. Panel A shows PRS and effect of load in the Face Task. Panel D shows effects of both priming and load on subsequent memory
performance, with the suggestion of an interaction between load and PSEM. Consistent with behavioural results, panel B does not show any clear relationship
between PRS and PSEM. Panel E shows simulated performance on the secondary load task, with no effect of priming. Panel C shows the settings used in this
simulation, and small arrows highlight the two parameters which were changed from the simulation of Experiment 3, and the addition of parameter xp2 (see text).

account (nonetheless, this `self-paced' procedure was used in all subsequent experiments). Experiment 2 tested the idea that the PSEM effect
can be explained by a "freeing up" of perceptual resources. Visually
degrading faces, while successfully slowing responses to faces during
Study and reducing overall memory performance at Test, did not
moderate the PSEM effect. Experiments 3a and 3b tested instead the
role of central resources by adding a secondary task involving auditory
stimuli. Again, though this task (load) reduced overall memory performance, any interaction with PSEM did not reach significance in either experiment, nor did any priming effects emerge in performance of
the secondary task instead (Experiment 3b). Experiments 2 and 3 relied
on a different logic from Experiment 1, because they addressed types of
resources that cannot be directly measured or controlled. In Experiment
1, temporal resources (time-on-task) were in fact matched between
primed and unprimed trials in the variable Response-Stimulus Interval
conditions, without impacting PSEM: thus, time-on-task could be ruled
out as an explanation for the PSEM effect. In Experiments 2 and 3,
however, the availability of resources in primed and unprimed conditions could not be controlled in the same way, and although an interaction would have been positive evidence for involvement of the hypothesised resources, the modelling reinforced the point that (unlike in
Experiment 1), the absence of such an interaction cannot be used to
reject the involvement of the particular resources placed under load in
Experiments 2 and 3.

Task performance were seen, this new parameter, x p2 was set to 1, and
the simulation does not produce any priming effect on Duration Task
performance (Panel E).

General Discussion
The present experiments and modelling were designed to test an
intuitive, resource-based account of the effect of priming on subsequent
episodic memory (PSEM), as demonstrated here when the pairing of a
scene which a face was better remembered if the face had been primed.
Despite replicating the PSEM effect four times, in no experiment did we
find that a manipulation of resources, whether temporal, perceptual or
central resources, reduced the size of the PSEM effect. Nor did these
load manipulations affect the correlation between the amount of
priming and size of the PSEM effect. We then developed a computational model, which demonstrated that our results are not, in fact, inconsistent with a resource-based account. With only minimal assumptions about sigmoidal resource-performance functions for each task, our
model was able to simulate any pattern of interaction between load and
PSEM, and, more counter-intuitively, any correlation between amount
of priming and PSEM.
Experiment 1 tested the simple idea that the faster responses enabled by priming faces increase the time available post-response for the
encoding of the scene-face association. However, constraining this time
by ensuring that the next trial always started a fixed interval after the
response had no effect on PSEM, ruling out this `temporal resources'
15

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

PSEM effect.
More generally, the flexibility of this relatively simple modelling
reinforces the difficulty of interpreting the results of experiments that
manipulate attentional load (resources). Indeed, we constrained the
models as much as we could (e.g, identical parameters for the resourceperformance curves for each task; allocations of resources to tasks that
were fixed across participants, but in reality could vary across people,
etc). Future studies could explore the consequences of relaxing some of
these constraints. As well as being educational, the models raise further
conceptual questions, in particular how to model load manipulations.
Perceptual load was modelled by changing task difficulty (i.e., parameters of the sigmoid), whereas central load was modelled by changing
the allocation of resources. This seemed justifiable because degrading
the faces (in high perceptual load condition) affected the same performance measure as priming, i.e., speed in the primary (face judgment)
task, rather than create a new task with a new performance measure.
The central load manipulations in Experiments 3a and 3b, on the other
hand, introduced a new measure of performance on the distractor task,
so required an additional resource allocation. Nonetheless, the effects of
these two model parameters - task difficulty vs resource allocation - is
largely equivalent, particularly on the primary outcome of interest
(PSEM), so these conceptual differences in modelling would seem difficult to test by behavioural data alone.6 It is possible that these two
choices for modelling load correspond to different brain mechanisms, as
supported by neuroimaging studies reporting separable systems subserving perceptual- and central-attentional tasks (e.g. Burgess et al.,
2007).

Formal modelling
Rather than simply conclude that we had found no evidence for a
resource-based account of the PSEM effect, we formalised various resource accounts in computational models. Starting with the common
and reasonable assumption that performance of any task is a sigmoidal
function of resources, we simulated priming as reducing the difficulty of
the task (shifting the sigmoid to the left, such that similar performance
can be achieved with fewer resources). If the resources that are released
by this reduced difficulty of the primary (face judgment) task at Study
are put towards encoding the scene-face pairing instead, then this explains the basic PSEM effect. The memory encoding processes facilitated by these "freed" resources could act simultaneously with the
processes required for the primary face judgment task, such that there is
no added effect of curtailing the time after a response to the face has
been made, thereby explaining the lack of any moderation of the PSEM
effect in Experiment 1.
The increased perceptual load in Experiment 2 was simulated by
making the primary face task more difficult, i.e., shifting the sigmoid
for the primary task to the right instead. This affects the amount of
resources that are left for the other task of memory encoding, for which
performance is also a (separate) sigmoidal function of those resources.
It then becomes apparent that the presence and nature of an interaction
between priming and perceptual resources (load) on subsequent
memory depends on where each of the four conditions (primed/unprimed under low/high load) lies on the sigmoid for memory encoding.
Given that the resource requirement of each condition is not known a
priori, the nonlinear aspect of the sigmoid effectively allows any pattern
of single dissociation between priming and load, including no interaction when close to the central (more linear) part of the sigmoid (see
Fig. 8). Moreover, because the conditions can lie on different points on
the primary task sigmoid relative to the memory task sigmoid, one can
obtain an interaction on priming (RS) measures of the Study task, but
no (or the opposite) interaction on memory in the Test phase, or vice
versa. Therefore the lack of interactions in Experiment 2 cannot be used
to refute a perceptual resources account.
If the amount of resources freed by priming differs across participants (e.g, owing to different effects of priming on the task difficulty, or
even differences in the total resources available to each participant),
one might expect a positive correlation between the effect of priming on
primary task speed (i.e., PRS) and its effect on subsequent memory (i.e.,
PSEM), since participants for whom priming frees more resources, or
who have greater resources in total, should show greater effects of
priming on memory. However, our simulations showed this intuition to
be incorrect. The correlation between PRS and PSEM can vary from
positive through zero to negative, again depending on where the four
conditions lie on the sigmoidal performance functions for each task (see
Fig. 10).5 This can explain why we sometimes found a significant positive correlation (when averaging over condition) between PRS and
PSEM, but mostly failed to find significant correlations. This flexibility,
counter to initial intuitions, reinforces the value of formal modelling.
A different way to model attentional load was adopted for
Experiments 3a and 3b, where a third task was added to the model
(namely, the auditory task performed during Study, in order to reduce
central resources available for the primary face task). Depending on
parametrisation of how the total resources are divided among the three
tasks, the model could again simultaneously fit performance on all
three tasks (face RS, face-scene memory and tone duration judgments)
in both experiments, including the critical lack of interaction between
(central) load and PSEM. Moreover, it could reproduce the lack of load
effects on various correlations between performance on the different
tasks. Again, this prevents us from ruling out resource accounts of the

Relation to previous studies
Regardless of the precise explanation of the PSEM effect, the present
findings should be related to previous empirical studies. Our experiments replicate the PSEM effect originally reported by Gagnepain et al.
(2008; 2011) using auditory stimuli, and by Greve et al. (2017; Experiment 3) using visual stimuli (the latter paradigm identical to that
used here; for fuller description of these studies, see Introduction). The
PSEM effect would therefore seem robust.
Although effects of priming on subsequent item recognition memory
have been reported (both apparent adverse effects, e.g., Rosner, LopezBenitez, D'Angelo, Thomson, & Milliken, 2018; Wagner, Maril, &
Schacter, 2000, and positive effects, e.g., Turk-Browne, Yi, & Chun,
2006), these are not directly relevant to the present source/episodic
memory effects we report here. However, there is one prior study by
Kim et al. (2012), which reported what would seem to be the opposite
pattern to the present one, whereby priming impaired episodic memory
(i.e., a negative PSEM effect). This study reported 6 experiments with a
similar design to here: There was an initial pre-exposure/training
(Phase 1), in which participants made animacy judgements to standardised line drawings of common objects (Snodgrass & Vanderwart,
1980). Each drawing was presented one, four, or sixteen times in this
phase (what they called "exposure frequency"). Then in Phase 2 (the
critical study phase), these items were shown once, in one of 4 quadrants of the screen, while participants performed the same animacy
task. In Phase 3, the final test phase, participants were required to indicate whether items had been seen previously in the experiment
6

It might be tempting to conclude that, since there was no effect of (central)
Load on Face Task response speed in Experiment 3a, the auditory task did not
interfere with the Face Task. However, the model refutes this: whether or not
there is an effect of load on Face Task response speed depends only on the value
of the x_h parameter. If xh = 1, then regardless of load demands on resources,
they are entirely met by Memory Task resources, so no response speed effect
will be observed. Likewise, the lack of priming on performance of the distractor
task in Experiment 3b can simply be captured by setting the x p2 parameter to 1,
so that resources freed from the Face Task by priming would all go toward
improved performance of the Memory Task.

5
The addition of minimal measurement noise can easily further disguise any
true correlations; see also Berry, Shanks, and Henson (2008).

16

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

(`Old'), or not (`New'), and if `Old', required to indicate in which
quadrant the item was thought to have appeared (a source memory test
of episodic memory). In all their experiments, they found a convincing
detrimental effect of exposure frequency on recall for the study phase
context, i.e., greater "priming" was associated with worse, rather than
better, episodic memory (though Kim et al. do not report a measure of
priming, such as RS, for the animacy judgement, nor correlate with the
effect on subsequent memory).
The authors explained their results in terms of a `recursive reminding' hypothesis: encountering a stimulus brings to mind previous
encounters with that stimulus (including potentially the experience of
being reminded of that stimulus), and this directs attention away from
perceptual aspects of the encounter (such as the stimulus location on
the screen), towards an internally-generated representation instead.
This is a converse of the perceptual resource account we attempted to
test here, arguing that availability of perceptual resources is diminished
because these resources are involuntarily directed to another process
(memory retrieval).
Regardless of the explanation of their findings, this empirical result
is prima facie at odds with the present findings and those of Gagnepain
et al. (2008; 2011) and Greve et al. (2017). There are a number of
procedural differences that might explain this. One possibility is that
the present findings (and those of Greve et al., 2017, Experiment 3)
could be confounded by intentional encoding strategies, since even
though participants were not instructed to memorise the scene-face
pairing in the Study phase, the benefit of doing so would soon be apparent after one study-test cycle (given that multiple study-test cycles
were run within each participant). However, this intentional vs incident
explanation would not account for the positive PSEM effect reported in
the two Gagnepain et al. studies, which also used incidental study, like
Kim et al. (i.e., the memory test came as a surprise), and, in one experiment, Kim et al. continued to find their negative effect of prior
exposure frequency despite explicitly instructing participants to attempt memorisation during critical study. Another difference is that
each context (source) used here was a unique scene, whereas the four
locations used by Kim et al. repeated over trials both during pre-exposure and at study, raising the possibility that interference could account for the negative frequency effect they report. This also seems
unlikely however because Gagnepain et al. used only recurring sources
(two concurrent sounds), like Kim et al. (Kim et al. also aimed to mitigate interference effects in another experiment.)
Another potentially important difference in results is that Kim et al.
only included new items at study (i.e., not presented during pre-exposure/training phase, equivalent to the present "Unprimed" condition)
in one experiment, and source memory for these items did not differ
significantly from once-exposed items. In other words, Kim et al. only
found worse source memory for items that had all been pre-exposed,
but some less often pre-exposed than others, whereas the present
paradigm and those of Gagnepain et al found better memory for items
pre-exposed 1-3 times relative to items never pre-exposed. With more
statistical power (comparable perhaps to that in the present experiments), the numerical advantage of once pre-exposed relative to nonexposed items that Kim et al reported in their one experiment might
have become significant, in which case it would match the present
findings, and suggest something important about experimental novelty
during the Study phase.
However, we think the most likely explanation of the apparent
discrepancy across studies relates to the complexity of the visual stimuli
and their contexts (sources), with the line-drawings and quadrants of
Kim et al. potentially requiring fewer (perceptual) resources than the
more complex faces and scenes used here, or possibly the more complex
sounds and words used by Gagnepain (if one can compare complexity
across modalities). For example, the scenes in the present paradigm
(and sounds in the Gagnepain et al paradigm), could have competed
with processing of the target faces (or words in the Gagnepain et al
paradigm), whereas the spatial location of the line-drawings in Kim

et al's study is unlikely to affect their processing. In other words, there
may have been minimal demands on resources in Kim et al's paradigm,
leaving an opportunity for other factors to play a role, such as like recursive reminding. Whereas in the present paradigm, and that of
Gagnepain et al, the greater overall demands meant that resources play
a more important role, overcoming any encoding disadvantage for
primed items in terms of recursive reminding, and producing instead an
encoding advantage for primed items.
Prediction error and PIMMS
Our claim that we cannot refute resource-based accounts does not of
course rule out the account based on prediction error (PE) in Greve
et al. (2017), whereby priming increases the divergence between
minimal prior expectations (of a face given a scene/context) and sensory evidence (for a face), owing to priming sharpening the sensory
evidence, and this increased PE leads to a stronger scene-face association. Indeed, a generalised theory based on PE (e.g, in the PIMMS framework of Henson & Gagnepain, 2010) might also explain the Kim
et al. results. If one assumes that predictions derive not only from
concurrent stimuli, but also from the general experimental context
(including history of recent experiences), then the different exposure
frequencies during the pre-exposure (training) phase of Kim et al's
study could establish predictions of the probability of certain items reoccurring in the critical study phase, such that the presentation of a
low-frequency item during Phase 2 is less expected (more surprising)
than the presentation of a high-frequency item. If so, PE would be
higher for low-frequency items, potentially resulting in them becoming
better associated with their (spatial) context in the critical study phase,
and producing a negative PSEM. In the present and Gagnepain et al.
paradigms, on the other hand, there is less likely to be greater general
expectancy for the primed than unprimed stimuli in the Study phase,
particularly given that the training-study-test cycle is repeated multiple
times, so that participants are likely to realise the the probability of a
primed versus unprimed item appearing in the study phase is approximately equal (since there were half of each type). If this difference
in prior expectation were the only factor at work, then no PSEM would
be expected. To explain the positive PSEM effect that was found, one
could appeal to the sharpening of sensory evidence by priming proposed by Greve et al. (2017), which does predict a higher PE (greater
divergence between prior and evidence) for primed stimuli. Because the
stimuli were more complex in the present and Gagnepain paradigms,
compared to the Kim et al paradigm, this second factor would also have
less effect in the Kim et al. study, explaining how the PSEM effect can be
positive or negative as a function of the trade-off between priming
(exposure)-related changes in prior expectation and priming-related
changes in sensory evidence. This could be easily tested by simultaneously manipulating the prior probability of stimulus occurrence and
the complexity of the stimulus, and testing for opposite effects on
subsequent episodic memory.
Conclusions and future directions
Whereas the experimental work presented here provides no support
for a resources account of the PSEM effect, the modelling work shows
that the lack of any effect of manipulating current resources (via load)
on the PSEM effect does not rule out a resources account. In more
general terms, the modelling highlights the difficulty of inferring relationships between performance on different tasks when an experimenter does not have control of, a model of, or a way to measure, resource allocation. In light of the different PSEM effects reviewed above,
an interesting future direction would be to manipulate a factor like
stimulus probability, which might produce a pattern of episodic
memory performance that cannot be so easily explained by a resources
account.
17

Journal of Memory and Language 113 (2020) 104106

A.J. Kaula and R.N. Henson

CRediT authorship contribution statement

recollection than local increases in hippocampal activity? New insights on the role of
priming. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(2), 391-403. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2010.21454.
Gagnepain, P., Lebreton, K., Desgranges, B., & Eustache, F. (2008). Perceptual priming
enhances the creation of new episodic memories. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1),
276-287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2007.03.006.
Gardiner, J. M., Kaminska, Z., Dixon, M., & Java, R. I. (1996). Repetition of previously
novel melodies sometimes increases both remember and know responses in recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3(3), 366-371.
Greve, A., Cooper, E., Kaula, A., Anderson, M. C., & Henson, R. N. A. (2017). Does prediction error drive one-shot declarative learning? Journal of Memory and Language,
94(2017), 149-165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.11.001.
Henson, R. N. A., & Gagnepain, P. (2010). Predictive, interactive multiple memory systems. Hippocampus, 20(11), 1315-1326. https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20857.
Jacoby, L. L. (1999). Ironic effects of repetition: Measuring age-related differences in
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(1),
3-22.
Jurica, P. J., & Shimamura, A. P. (1999). Monitoring item and source information:
Evidence for a negative generation effect in source memory. Memory & Cognition,
27(4), 648-656. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03211558.
Kim, K., Yi, D. J., Raye, C. L., & Johnson, M. K. (2012). Negative effects of item repetition
on source memory. Memory & Cognition, 40(6), 889-901.
Kinoshita, S. (1997). Masked target priming effects on feeling-of-knowing and feeling-offamiliarity judgments. Acta Psychologica, 97(2), 183-199.
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused?: Selective attention under load. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(2), 75-82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.12.004.
Lavie, N., Beck, D. M., & Konstantinou, N. (2014). Blinded by the load: attention,
awareness and the role of perceptual load Blinded by the load: attention, awareness
and the role of perceptual load, (March).
Mitchell, K. J., & Johnson, M. K. (2000). Source monitoring: Attributing mental experiences. In E. Tulving, & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Memory (pp. 179-
195). New York: Oxford University Press.
Norman, D. A., & Bobrow, D. G. (1975). On data-limited and resource-limited processes.
Cognitive Psychology, 7(1), 44-64. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(75)90004-3.
Ostergaard, A. L. (1998). The effects on priming of word frequency, number of repetitions, and delay depend on the magnitude of priming. Memory and Cognition, 26(1),
40-60. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03211369.
Poppenk, J., Kohler, S., & Moscovitch, M. (2010). Revisiting the novelty effect: When
familiarity, not novelty, enhances memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 36(5), 1321-1330. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0019900.
Rosner, T. M., Lopez-Benitez, R., D'Angelo, M. C., Thomson, D., & Milliken, B. (2018).
Remembering "primed" words: A counter-intuitive effect of repetition on recognition
memory. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie
experimentale, 72(1), 24-37. https://doi.org/10.1037/cep0000139.
Snodgrass, J., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of 260 pictures: Norms for
name agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6(2), 174-215. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0278-7393.6.2.174.
Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40,
385-398. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.40.4.385.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Yi, D. J., & Chun, M. M. (2006). Linking implicit and explicit
memory: Common encoding factors and shared representations. Neuron, 49,
917-927. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.01.030.
Wagner, A. D., Maril, A., & Schacter, D. L. (2000). Interactions between forms of memory:
When priming hinders new episodic learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
12(supplement 2), 52-60. https://doi.org/10.1162/089892900564064.
Yonelinas, A., Ph. D. (2002). The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30
years of research. Journal of memory and language, 46(3), 441-517. https://doi.org/
10.1006/jmla.2002.2864.
Yi, D. J., Woodman, G. F., Widders, D., Marois, R., & Chun, M. M. (2004). Neural fate of
ignored stimuli: Dissociable effects of perceptual and working memory load. Nature
Neuroscience, 7(9), 992-996. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1294.

Alexander J. Kaula: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation,
Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization,
Funding acquisition. Richard N. Henson: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Resources, Data
curation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our colleague at the MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Dr Andrea Greve, for her insightful comments
throughout the experimental work of this study.
Funding statement
This work was supported by MRC programme grant to R.H. (SUAG/
010 RG91365) and MRC PhD Studentship to A.K. (1471132).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104106.
References
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back and looking forward. Nature
Reviews. Neuroscience, 4(10), 829-839. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1201.
Berry, C. J., Shanks, D. R., & Henson, R. N. A. (2008). A single-system account of the
relationship between priming, recognition, and fluency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 34(1), 97-111. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0278-7393.34.1.97.
Burgess, P. W., Gilbert, S. J., & Dumontheil, I. (2007). Function and localization within
rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 362(April), 887-899. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2007.2095.
Chun, M. M., & Johnson, M. K. (2011). Memory: Enduring traces of perceptual and reflective attention. Neuron, 72(4), 520-535. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
10.026.
Dewhurst, S. A., & Anderson, S. J. (1999). Effects of exact and category repetition in true
and false recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 27(4), 664-673.
Dunn, J. C., & Kirsner, K. (1988). Discovering functionally independent mental processes:
The principle of reversed association. Psychological Review, 95(1), 91-101. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.1.91.
Gagnepain, P., Henson, R. N. A., Chetelat, G., Desgranges, B., Lebreton, K., & Eustache, F.
(2011). Is neocortical-hippocampal connectivity a better predictor of subsequent

18

