Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

Enough time to get results? An ERP investigation of
prediction with complex events
Chia-Hsuan Liao & Ellen Lau
To cite this article: Chia-Hsuan Liao & Ellen Lau (2020) Enough time to get results? An ERP
investigation of prediction with complex events, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35:9,
1162-1182, DOI: 10.1080/23273798.2020.1733626
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2020.1733626

View supplementary material

Published online: 28 Feb 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 518

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE
2020, VOL. 35, NO. 9, 1162-1182
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2020.1733626

REGULAR ARTICLE

Enough time to get results? An ERP investigation of prediction with complex
events
Chia-Hsuan Liao and Ellen Lau
Department of Linguistics, University of Maryland College Park, College Park, MD, USA
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

How quickly can verb-argument relations be computed to impact predictions of a subsequent
argument? We take advantage of the substantial differences in verb-argument structure
provided by Mandarin, whose compound verbs encode complex event relations, such as
resultatives (Kid bit-broke lip: the kid bit his lip such that it broke) and coordinates (Store owner
hit-scolded employee: the store owner hit and scolded an employee). We tested sentences in
which the object noun could be predicted on the basis of the preceding compound verb, and
used N400 responses to the noun to index successful prediction. By varying the delay between
verb and noun, we show that prediction is delayed in the resultative context (broken-BY-biting)
relative to the coordinate one (hitting-AND-scolding). These results present a first step towards
temporally dissociating the fine-grained subcomputations required to parse and interpret verbargument relations.

Received 12 July 2019
Accepted 15 February 2020

Introduction
Language comprehension can be conceived as a
bottom-up or reactive process in which the processing
of each input word is tied to its position in the input
string, or it can be conceived as a top-down or predictive
process in which expectations about the linguistic form
or message are generated early and updated as new
input arrives. In recent decades, much work has argued
that comprehension involves some degree of prediction.
Listeners can respond to another interlocutor immediately in conversations, and sometimes can even fill in a
particular word that the other person fails to produce
(Schegloff, 2000). Behavioural and ERP work has shown
that predictive sentence contexts have a robust facilitatory influence on the processing of the subsequent
word (see Kutas, DeLong, & Smith, 2011; Van Petten &
Luka, 2012, for review), and eye tracking work has been
able to demonstrate such effects prior to the critical
word; for example, given a scene of a man, a girl, a
motorcycle, and a carousel, and presented with the sentence frame "the man likes to ride ____", participants
tend to look at the picture of a motorcycle, whereas
given the context "the girl likes to ride ____", participants
tend to look more at the picture of the carousel (Kamide,
Altmann, & Haywood, 2003). These examples and others
have been taken to suggest that comprehenders quickly
integrate information from the context to predict what is
coming next.

Sentence processing;
prediction; argument
structure; compound verb;
N400

Recent studies have noted that predictions are not
always fast, and that in fact, the speed with which predictions are updated can be used as a chronometer for
determining the time course of the linguistic and interpretive computations required to do so (Chow, Lau,
Wang, & Phillips, 2018; Chow, Smith, Lau, & Phillips,
2016; Federmeier, Kutas, & Schul, 2010; Momma, Sakai,
& Phillips, 2015). Recent work by Chow and colleagues
has focused on argument structure computation, using
an ERP approach to estimate how long it takes to
compute noun argument roles and update predictions
about upcoming verbs accordingly (at least 1800 ms
or so, based on these results discussed further below).
These kinds of data provide an initial framework for
developing a detailed timecourse model of top-down
interpretation processes, and give important insights
for longstanding debates about how interpretive errors
arise in "role-reversed" contexts (e.g. the waitress that
the customer served).
The current study adopts this approach to investigate
a different but equally important component of argument structure computation that has received much
less attention in the psycholinguistic literature - that is,
the mechanisms by which complex verb relations are
computed online. For example, Mandarin Chinese has a
highly productive system of compound verbs - such as
coordinate verbs (X hit-scolded Y, meaning X hit and
scolded Y) and resultative verbs (X bit-broke Y,

CONTACT Chia-Hsuan Liao
cliao@umd.edu
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2020.1733626
(c) 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

KEYWORDS

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

meaning X bit Y and in doing so caused Y to break) -
which require mechanisms to combine the verbs into a
single complex predicate denoting a complex event,
and to derive the corresponding set of argument roles.
Another body of work has asked about how comprehenders deal with simple verb-object structures that require
more complex semantics such as coercion (Kuperberg,
Choi, Cohn, Paczynski, & Jackendoff, 2010), or light-verb
constructions (Wittenberg, Paczynski, Wiese, Jackendoff,
& Kuperberg, 2014). However, to our knowledge, relatively little is known thus far about the processing algorithms by which complex verb structures are interpreted,
even though they are pervasive in many languages. Here
we take a preliminary step towards disentangling the
fine-grained linguistic and conceptual subcomputations
that are likely to be required, by comparing the speed
of prediction update associated with coordinate compounds and resultative compounds in Mandarin. If
each individual verb of the compound predicts a very
different object than the compound as a whole, how
long does that update take, and does it depend on the
nature of the meaning relation? While many studies
will be needed to develop a full model of these highly
complex processes, we hope to show that this new
method provides a way to successfully dissociate some
of them experimentally.

Predictive mechanisms in sentence processing
The amplitude of the N400 response in ERP has frequently been used to track the prediction of lexical and
conceptual material (Kutas & Federmeier, 2000; Lau, Phillips, & Poeppel, 2008). The N400 component peaks
between 300 and 600 ms after the onset of the stimulus
presentation, and is negatively correlated with the predictability of a target word (Kutas & Hillyard, 1984). Predictability is usually operationalised in these
experiments by the construct of cloze probability,
which is the percentage of responses that a given
word occurred in a separate offline completion task
(Taylor, 1953). For example, given a sentence context
like "He was afraid that doing drugs would damage his
____", a majority of participants in the offline norming
might complete the sentence with "brain" and a minority
with "reputation", and the predicted high-cloze continuation "brain" would then elicit a significantly smaller
N400 than the less predicted low-cloze "reputation"
(Thornhill & Van Petten, 2012). These kinds of effects
have been frequently replicated (Federmeier, 2007; Federmeier & Kutas, 1999; Thornhill & Van Petten, 2012).
Many authors have taken these results to indicate that
linguistic input is predicted in context (although it is
worth noting that a non-predictive explanation is

1163

possible in which these effects are due to variations in
integration difficulty after the bottom-up input is
encountered).
Whether N400 reductions reflect conceptual pre-activation, lexical pre-activation, or both, is still an open
question. Consistent with a conceptual component,
N400 responses are observed for meaningful pictures
and environmental sounds as well as spoken and
written words, and N400 modulations are observed
when sentences are completed with pictures (Kutas &
Federmeier, 2011). Federmeier and Kutas (1999)
observed N400 reduction for unexpected completions
that were semantically related to the expected completion ("They wanted to make the hotel look more like
a tropical resort, so along the driveway they planted
rows of palms/pines/tulips"), consistent with the idea
that the conceptual features themselves were pre-activated by the context, although other accounts are also
possible (see Thornhill & Van Petten, 2012, for similar
results). Consistent with a lexical pre-activation component, work by Laszlo and Federmeier (2009) showed
N400 sensitivity to unexpected words that are orthographically related to the expected ending, and Brothers,
Swaab, and Traxler (2015) showed that on a trial-bytrial basis, N400s were reduced earlier and to a greater
extent for words that participants had specifically predicted than words that were simply contextually supported. Together, we take these different lines of work
to suggest that N400 effects reflect a combination of
pre-activating conceptual features and pre-activating
specific lexical items.

"Slow prediction" and argument structure
Although prior work has shown that comprehenders use
contextual information to predict specific lexical forms,
recent studies have argued that predictions are not
always fast and accurate (Chow et al., 2018; Chow,
Smith, et al., 2016; Momma et al., 2015). These studies
were investigating a longstanding puzzle in the literature
about why reversing the thematic roles of noun phrases
in a sentence usually does not modulate N400 amplitude. For example, Chow et al. (2018) tested Mandarin
sentences such as Cop ba thief arrest "the cop arrested
the thief" and the "role-reversed" Thief ba cop arrest
"the thief arrested the cop." Although the cloze probability in the canonical sentences was much higher
than that of the role-reversal sentences, there was no
N400 difference between the two conditions. This insensitivity of the N400 to differences in predictability caused
by argument role reversals has been observed many
times across many languages, and numerous hypotheses
have been proposed to account for it (Brouwer, Fitz, &

1164

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Hoeks, 2012; Hoeks, Stowe, & Doedens, 2004; Kim &
Osterhout, 2005; Kuperberg, Kreher, Sitnikova, Caplan,
& Holcomb, 2007).
The work by Chow et al. (2018) argues that the explanation for the role-reversal results at least partly
depends on how quickly predictions can be generated
on the basis of the context. Chow and colleagues manipulated the linear distance between an argument and a
verb, via varying the position of an adverbial temporal
phrase in a sentence. In the short-distance conditions,
the adverbial temporal phrase was placed at the beginning of the sentence, and the argument was immediately
followed by the verb (Last week, cop ba thief arrest); in the
long-distance condition, the adverbial phrase was placed
between the argument and the verb (Cop ba thief last
week arrest), which created a buffer (around 1800 ms) to
formulate the prediction of an upcoming verb. The
results showed that there was no N400 effect in short-distance conditions, but critically the N400 response was
recovered in long-distance conditions. Momma et al.
(2015) report similar findings in Japanese. Together,
these data argue that argument roles can be used to
predict an upcoming verb if sufficient time is provided;
the corollary implication is that not all information in
the context impacts prediction immediately. Chow,
Momma, Smith, Lau, and Phillips (2016) discuss several
reasons that argument roles might impact predictive
computations slower than other kinds of information:
(1) in the absence of the verb, argument roles like agent
and patient are not directly observable from the syntactic
structure but must be inferred, (2) the semantic memory
database of event schemas that support correct verb predictions may not be organised in such a way that it can be
rapidly probed with cues like cop-as-agent or thief-aspatient. In a separate paper, they are able to use similar
logic to demonstrate that it is the argument roles in particular that are slow to impact prediction, as comprehenders appear quick to identify which noun phrases in the
sentence are arguments of the verb at all and to preferentially weight these arguments in computing predictions
for the verb (Chow, Smith, et al., 2016).
For the current research, the key takeaway from the
prior work by Chow et al. (2018) is that we can estimate
the temporal dynamics of argument structure computations by using N400 designs that vary the timing
between the word-to-be-predicted and the critical
elements of the context that could contribute to that
prediction, and thus gain insight into the processes
that relate the linguistic input with conceptual representations in long-term memory. In the current study, our
goal is to use the same kind of approach to investigate
the online computation of more complex argument
structures and their corresponding event structures, by

taking advantage of some convenient properties of compound verbs in Mandarin.

The current study
Compounding is a very productive word formation
process in Mandarin. In fact, according to Huang
(1998), stems of all lexical categories, except for prepositions, could be combined to form a compound. In the
current study, we investigate the argument and event
structure computations required to process compound
verbs composed of two verbal morphemes (V1-V2); in
particular, compound verbs whose two verbal morphemes are involved in a causal/resultative relation (i.e.
V1 resulting in V2). In the most common type of resultative compound verb (Shen & Mochizuki, 2010), V1 is a
transitive verb and V2 predicates the object of V1, indicating how the object of V1 was affected by the event
described by V1. For example, in sentence (1), the
complex predicate washed-ruined introduced a subject
agent that performed a washing event, and an object
patient that was ruined as a result of washing.
(1)

  . (Transitive)
Mom washed-ruined le the clothes
"Mom washed the clothes so that the clothes were
ruined."

While the literature on argument structure processing
often characterises the problem as a relatively straightforward one of mapping arguments to a predicate and
participants to an event, resultatives are one of many
cases that remind us that languages regularly make
use of structures that go beyond this simple characterisation. In the interpretation of resultatives and other compound verbs, participants are related to events, but
events are also related to other events. In resultatives,
this relation has a specifically causal dimension: the
result described by V2 is in some way caused by the
event described by V1. The goal of our study was to
begin to map the time course of the syntactic and
semantic processes that are engaged by these more
complex relations, in order to bring new insights to our
understanding of the components of argument structure
computation in general. As a starting point, we hypothesised that the extra complexity of the argument and
event structure in resultatives would require extra processing time, delaying updates to predictions about
upcoming arguments.
In the three experiments reported here, the basic logic
was the following. We created subject-verb-object item
sets where the amplitude of the N400 response to the
object noun was the dependent measure of interest.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

All versions of a given item had the same object noun,
which was carefully selected to have a relatively low
cloze probability in control conditions (10%), but a relatively high cloze probability in the resultative condition
(e.g. Table 1). The key question of interest across the
three experiments is how much processing time is
required for comprehenders to be able to take advantage of the predictability of the resultative context to
reduce N400 responses on the object.
Given the prior literature discussed above, we assume
that in a simple context like The kid had bitten _____,
upon recognising the word bite as a simple verb and
retrieving its meaning from the lexicon, comprehenders
can rapidly generate a prediction for the object based on
the verb alone, searching for frequent biting events in
semantic and episodic memory and identifying the
patient of the event as the likely upcoming object
noun. If Chow, Momma, et al. (2016) are correct, comprehenders can also rapidly identify the pre-verbal noun as
an argument and use it to search memory specifically for
biting events that have the kid as a participant. By contrast, if the verb is a resultative compound verb, then
comprehenders would have to additionally analyze the
correct structure of the compound, evaluate the event
relation of the two verbal morphemes, disambiguate
the thematic structure, and generate a representation
of the complex event, such that the parser could probe
memory for schemas or episodes involving the proper
agents and patients for the complex event. For
example, in The kid bit-broke _____, comprehenders
would have to recognise the verb-verb sequence as a
resultative compound verb, evaluate the relations of
biting and breaking events, disambiguate thematic structure involved with biting and breaking, and generate a
representation of a broken-by-biting event, where the
subject should be an animate agent to perform the
biting event, and the object should be a patient that
could be broken by biting. Then they need to be able
to successfully probe long-term memory for broken-by-

Table 1. Example stimulus in each condition in Experiment 1
(averaged cloze probability in parenthesis).
Condition
Simple

Verb
V1-ASP

Sentence context
 
The kid bit-ASP le

Target

Cloze


lip

Low(10%)


lip

High(39%)

"The kid had bitten his lip"

Resultative

V1-V2

 
The kid bit-broke le

"The kid bit his lip such that his lip was
broken"

Causative

Made-V2

 
The kid made-broken le


lip

"The kid did something to his lip such
that his lip was broken"

Low(9%)

1165

biting events, potentially constrained to those involving
the kid. Our goal was thus to begin to home in on how
much time it might take to use this extra information
coded by a resultative compound verb to generate predictions about the object.
Before proceeding to the experiments, some basic
background on the resultative construction in Mandarin
is in order. Although our study focuses on the washedruined or "transitive" type of resultative, which is the
most common one and assigns an agent role to the
subject and a patient-theme role to the object, it is
worth noting the existence of other resultative types
with different argument relations. In "unergative" resultatives, V1 is still a transitive verb, but V2 predicates the
subject of V1, which thus bears an agent-experiencer
role, as in Mom washed-tired the clothes ( 
). Argument roles assigned by V1 are also not
restricted to agent and patient roles; in Boy upset-cried
Mom (  ), V1 assigns an experiencer
role to the object. V1 is also not restricted to being a transitive verb; in Mom coughed-hoarse voice (  
), both V1 coughed and V2 hoarse are intransitive verbs,
but combining them together forms a transitive complex
predicate. In our materials, the intended parse of the
"transitive" resultative was encouraged through the
higher frequency of this type of resultative, verb subcategorization preferences, and plausibility.
A considerable number of existing studies have investigated the role of factors such as lexical frequency,
semantic transparency, morphological headedness in
Mandarin compound verb word recognition (Kuo, 2006;
Zhang & Peng, 1992; see Myers, 2006 for a review), but
few have examined the processing of these verbs in a
sentence context. To our knowledge, Lin and Jaeger's
conference paper (2014) is the only study that has examined the factors of structural probability and thematic
role order of resultatives in sentence context. Their
eye-tracking results showed that transitive resultatives
had the shortest first-pass and total fixation time at the
post-verb critical region, indicating that the transitive is
the easiest one to process compared with other types
of resultative verbs.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we asked whether comprehenders
could use predictions afforded by a resultative compound verb to facilitate processing on the object noun
when reading with a stimulus-onset asynchrony
(SOA) of 800 ms from verb to object (e.g. The kid had
bit-broke his lip). In the Resultative condition, the compound verbs were always composed of a transitive V1
and an intransitive V2, in which V2 predicated the

1166

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

object of V1 and indicated the result of V1. Objects were
selected to be strongly predictable by the resultative
context, as determined by offline completion norming.
In this first experiment we included two baseline conditions in which the context did not strongly predict
the object. The Simple condition contained a simple
verb (V1-asp, e.g. The kid had bit his lip). The Causative
condition was included to rule out the possibility that
any facilitation in the Resultative condition was due to
unintended associative priming from V2 alone. Since
V2 itself was intransitive, we added a transitive light
verb to make, to form a transitive complex predicate
(e.g. The kid had made-broken his lip). To match the
number of characters of the verbs in the Resultative
and the Causative conditions, we added an experiential
aspect marker guo after V1 in the Simple condition. All
of the verbs thus had the same word length.
Experiment 1 used an 800 ms SOA between each
word (600 ms on, 200 ms off), where the compound
verb was presented on a single screen, as is natural in
Mandarin. In other words, from the onset of the verb,
comprehenders had 800 ms to process the verb and to
predict an upcoming object noun. We note that although
in English studies the typical SOA used for RSVP is shorter
than 800 ms, such a slow presentation rate is relatively
common in Mandarin (e.g. Su et al., 2016; Zhou et al.,
2010). With no clear prior evidence about what time
range might be required for complex argument/event
structure processing, we chose to begin with an
800 ms SOA as it is a slow enough presentation rate to
not be consciously taxing, but has been successfully
used to identify certain slower aspects of argument
role computation/prediction (Momma et al., 2015). If
800 ms SOA is enough time for participants to
compute the resultative structure and use it to generate
predictions about the object, then ERP responses to the
critical object noun should track the offline cloze probability, with reduced N400 amplitude in the Resultative
condition relative to the Causative and Simple conditions. However, if prediction on the basis of the Resultative takes longer than is afforded by an 800 ms SOA,
then we would see no N400 differences among the
three types of verbs. As this second case predicts a null
effect, we also included a sanity check comparison in a
separate set of items to show that N400 effects are
indeed elicited for predictable and unpredictable
object nouns following simple verbs.

Participants
Forty-nine naive young adults (28 females, 20-35 years
old, mean: 24) participated in the study at National
Taiwan Normal University. All of them were right-

handed native Mandarin speakers, without a history of
neurological or psychiatric disorders. Of the 49 participants, 20 were excluded after pre-processing because
of excessive eye-blinking, muscle potentials, sweat artifact and alpha waves.1 The reported results were
obtained from the remaining 29 participants (15
females, 20-34 years old, mean age: 24). All of them consented to participate in the experiment. The experiment
protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board
Office at the University of Maryland, College Park.

Materials
Our stimuli were sentences of SVO structure, with the
verbs varying among the following three conditions:
Resultative (bit-broken), Causative (made-broken) and
(bit-asp), and the rest of the sentence being the same.
Note that even though the subject and objects were
kept identical, we intended to make the object in the
Resultative context more predictable than that in the
Causative and Simple contexts (see Table 1).
We started by finding resultative verbs from A dictionary of Chinese verb-resultative complement phrases (Wang,
Jiao, & Pang, 1987). We selected an initial list of high frequency resultative compound verbs (n = 186) as the critical verbs for our Resultative condition. Based on the
verbs (V1-V2) in the Resultative condition, we created
our Causative and Simple conditions. The verbs in the
Causative condition were resultative complex predicates
whose V1 was a causative light verb make and V2 was
taken from the Resultative condition. As for the Simple
condition, its verbs were literally simple predicates. We
took V1 from the Resultative condition and added an
experiential aspect marker guo after V1 to match the
number of characters in Resultative and Causative conditions. Note that resultative compound verbs in Mandarin are usually accomplishment or achievement
verbs which denote telic events (Tai, 1984), and they frequently occur with the perfective aspect marker le. We
thus added the perfective aspect marker le at the end
of each verb in all experiment conditions to make
them sound more natural in a sentence context.
In total we created 186 triplets of verbs, with one
Resultative verb, one Causative verb and one Simple
verb in each triplet. We added a subject noun phrase
in each set, such that the subject noun phrase was the
same among different conditions. The 186 triplets of
subject-verb frames, 558 sentence frames in total, were
divided into nine lists. Each list had 62 frames that
were critical to the current study, and none of the
frames were repeated among the lists. We had another
360 filler sentence frames, which were stimuli for
another experiment, were divided into nine lists (so 40

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

filler frames per list) to pair up with the current study.
Therefore, each list contained 102 sentences. 225 participants were recruited for the cloze norming (25 participants per list); none of the participants took part in the
ERP experiment. Cloze norming data were collected
online via Ibex Farm (http://spellout.net/ibexfarm/). We
presented the context of a sentence frame all at once
and the sentence frame would remain on the screen. Participants were instructed to provide the best continuations for the sentence frames. When computing the
cloze probability of the target objects, we counted near
synonyms (e.g.  road and  roadway), nouns
that were further specified by a modifier, (e.g.  beautiful hair and  hair), and words that contained a functional morpheme (e.g.  and  knife) as the same
lexical item.
Through cloze norming, our goal was to select sentence frames in which a given object noun phrase was
more predicted by the Resultative condition than by the
Causative or Simple conditions. Sentence frames that
did not meet this criterion were excluded. The finalised
stimuli were comprised of 90 triplets, with the average
cloze probability for the target noun being 39% (range:
16%-80%) in the Resultative condition, 9% (range: 0%-
36%) in the Causative condition, and 11% (range: 0%-
36%) in the Simple condition (See Table 1). After finalizsng
the target words, we added more contexts following the
target object nouns to make the sentences slightly
longer and sound more natural. Each sentence consisted
of six to nine words, with each word being one to four
characters long. As a sanity check, we also included a
set of 60 sentences from Liao and Chan (2016) with a
similar cloze probability contrast (high cloze: 40%; low
cloze: 0%), but where the predictability was driven by multiple features of the context and not just the verb.
However, note that the cloze target of these sanity
check sentences was in the sentence final position.
Due to the fact that we had three lists for the experiment manipulations and two lists for the sanity check
sentences, six experimental lists were constructed such
that no sentence context or target was repeated within
the same list. The presentation order of the sentence
stimuli was randomised within each list. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of the six lists.

Procedure
Participants sat in front of a computer screen with their
hands on a keyboard. Sentences were segmented into
words; the complex verb and aspect marker were
always presented as a single word on the same screen
(see example in (2)), which were presented one word

1167

at a time in a white font (traditional Chinese characters)
on a black background at the centre of the screen. Each
sentence was preceded by a fixation cross that appeared
for 600 ms. Each word appeared on the screen for
600 ms, with a 200 ms inter-stimulus interval, for an
SOA of 800 ms (See Figure 1 for details). At the end of
20% of the trials, a comprehension question would
show up on the screen, and the participant had to
answer via button pressing in order to proceed to the
next trial. Prior to the experimental session, participants
were presented with six practice trials with feedback to
familiarise themselves with the task. The experimental
session was divided into three blocks of 50 sentences
each, with short pauses in between. Including set-up
time, an experimental session lasted around 90 min.
(2) Sentence segmentation for stimulus presentation:
///
The kid/ bit-broke le/ lip/

Data acquisition and analysis
E-prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools Incorporated)
was used to present the experimental stimuli, record participants' behavioural data, and send the event codes to
the digitisation computer. EEG was recorded from 30
electrodes placed according to the 10/20 system (FP1,
FP2, F7, F3, FZ, F4, F8, FT7, FC3, FCZ, FC4, FT8, T3, C3,
CZ, C4, T4, TP7, CP3, CPZ, CP4, TP8, T5, P3, PZ, P4, T6,
O1, OZ, O2). Each channel was referenced to an
average of the left and right mastoids for both online
and offline analyses. Four additional electrodes (two on
the outer canthus of each eye and two on the upper
and lower ridge of the left eye) were placed to monitor
blinks and horizontal eye movements. The impedance
of all the electrodes was kept below 5 k. EEG signals
were continuously digitised at 1000 Hz, filtered
between DC to 100 Hz (NuAmps, NeuroScan
Incorporated).
ERP analyses were time-locked from the onset of the
verb. The EEG data were processed with EEGLAB
(Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and ERPLAB (Lopez-Calderon
& Luck, 2014) in Matlab (MathWorks, Inc.). A linear derivation file was first imported to convert the four monopolar eye-movement monitoring channels to two
bipolar channels (VEOG and HEOG). We applied a
notch filter at 60 Hz and an Infinite Impulse Response
(IIR) filter with the band-pass value set between 0.1
and 30 Hz, 12 dB/oct. Then the continuous EEG file was
epoched (1) from -100 to 1600 ms, from the onset of
the verb until the end of the object noun phrase, for all
the experimental conditions and (2) from -100 to

1168

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Figure 1. Presentation of stimuli in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2.

800 ms for the sanity check items. Baseline correction
was applied with the pre-stimulus -100 to 0 ms interval.
After baseline correction, artifact rejection was carried
out by reviewing the epochs both automatically and
manually: At each channel, a 200-ms window was
moved across the data (100 ms before and 1600 ms
after the stimulus) in 100-ms increments and any
epoch where the peak-to-peak voltage exceeded 70 V
was rejected. We then reviewed the data, and if
needed, adjusted the voltage threshold for individual
subjects. Epochs contaminated by excessive blinking,
body movements, skin potentials, and amplifier saturation were rejected. The overall rejection rates (including
sanity check items) across participants was 20.3  11.3%
(mean  SD); participants with greater than 40% trials
rejected were excluded from further analysis. The rejection rates of each critical condition were: Resultative:
22.6  11.9% (mean  SD), Causative: 22.1  11.0%,
Simple: 22  10.3%.
Our hypotheses centred around the N400 response at
the object noun phrase. We selected nine electrodes
over the central-parietal area (C3, CZ, C4, CP3, CPZ,
CP4, P3, PZ, P4), known to show the most prominent
N400 effect, and averaged them as our single clustered
region of interest (ROI). We carried out a repeatedmeasure Type III ANOVA on the mean amplitudes in
the measurement time windows of 1100-1300 ms,
which was 300-500 ms after the onset of the noun, evaluating effects of Verb type (Resultative, Causative,
Simple). When Mauchly's test of Sphericity was violated,
Greenhouse-Geisser correction (Greenhouse & Geisser,
1959) was applied to adjust the p-values.
In the sanity check items that were designed to replicate
standard N400 effects of cloze probability, we carried out a
paired t-test over the same set of electrodes evaluating the
effect of predictability (High-cloze, Low-cloze).

Results
Behavioural data
The overall accuracy rate to the comprehension questions was 93% (80%-100%), showing that participants
were paying attention during the experiment.
ERP data
In order to ensure a clean baseline, we time-locked ERPs
to the onset of the verb, where the three conditions first
differed from one another, even though our interest of
analysis would focus on the N400 responses at the
noun. We ran statistic analyses on a pre-defined clustered ROI. However, when we visually inspected the
data, we observed somewhat inconsistent patterns
across electrodes: although the N400 responses to Causative condition were numerically more negative than
Resultative among electrodes in our ROI, the N400
responses to Simple were more negative than Resultative over some electrodes (e.g. Cz) but not others (e.g.
Pz). Figure 2 shows the grand average ERPs to Resultative, Causative and Simple conditions across several electrodes (Cz, Pz) that usually show robust N400 effects. We
included the whole-head grand averaged ERPs in the
supplementary materials.
Statistical analyses during the N400 time-window
showed a main effect of Verb type (F(2, 56) = 3.70, p <
0.05). Follow-up paired t-tests reveal that the N400
response to the object in the Resultative condition was
significantly smaller than the Causative (t(28) = -2.55,
p < 0.05), but when compared the N400 response to
the object in the Resultative condition to the Simple condition, there was no significant difference (t(28) = -1.09,
p = 0.28).
Plotted in Figure 3 are the grand average ERPs to the
Predictability effect in High- and Low-cloze sanity check

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1169

Figure 2. Top: Grand average ERPs from the verb to the noun at Cz and Pz in Experiment 1. Bottom: Topographic distribution of ERP
effects in the 300-500 ms intervals at the noun in Experiment 1 (Left: Causative minus Resultative; Right: Simple minus Resultative).

sentences. During the N400 time window, there was a
significant main effect of cloze (t(28) = 26.10, p < 0.001),
which confirms the clear impression from visual inspection that the High-cloze continuations elicited reduced
N400 amplitude than the Low-cloze continuations.

Discussion
Experiment 1 was designed to investigate how quickly
the computation of a resultative compound verb can
impact predictions of an upcoming noun. We used an
800 ms SOA rate and asked whether the cues encoded
in the resultative compound verbs could be used to
update predictions in time to facilitate processing of

the subsequent noun. We used materials in which
offline cloze probability was high for the Resultative condition and low for the Causative and Simple conditions,
so that rapid use of resultative cues for prediction
should result in a reduced N400 for the noun in the
Resultative condition relative to the other two. In contrast, if an 800 ms SOA is not enough time to use resultative cues to update predictions, we expected that all
three conditions should elicit relatively similar N400
amplitudes.
However, it is difficult to draw strong conclusions
about either possibility from these results, as they fit
neither of these predicted patterns. As shown in
Figure 2, centro-parietal electrodes did show a reduced

1170

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Figure 3. Left: Grand average ERPs to cloze sanity check sentences at Cz in Experiment 1. Right: The topographic distribution of ERP
effects in the 300-500 ms interval in Experiment 1 (Low cloze minus High cloze).

N400 response to the object in the Resultative condition
than in the Causative condition, and this difference was
significant in a follow-up pairwise comparison.
However, the N400 contrast between the Resultative
and the Simple conditions were not significant, even
though the cloze probability to the object of the
Causative and the Simple conditions were quite similar
(Causative: 9%; Simple: 11%). In fact, if we took a closer
look, we found that some anterior electrodes
seemed to fit the fast prediction pattern, with smaller
N400 in Resultative relative to Simple, whereas more posterior electrodes seemed to fit the slow prediction
hypothesis, with no N400 difference between Resultative
and Simple conditions. It remained unclear to us why the
Simple patterned differently than the Causative condition, since both of their object nouns were relatively
unpredictable based on the offline cloze norming. Such
a finding was not consistent with any hypothesis we
were aware of.
Although this pattern of data is equally unexpected
on both hypotheses, both hypotheses are also consistent
with reasonable post-hoc explanations that can inform
improvements in the design. If resultative cues can be
used rapidly to update predictions, it is possible that
we failed to detect a true N400 difference between
Simple and Resultative conditions because our cloze
probability contrast was not robust enough across
items, or that the 1 x 3 design limited power for detecting our effect of interest. In particular, it could be that the
N400 to the object in the Causative condition was not
reduced for a different reason, perhaps due to properties
specific to the Causative construction. In Experiment 2,
we worked to mitigate these possibilities by selecting a
more tightly controlled subset of Resultative and
Simple verb items from Experiment 1, in a different
design that compared two different types of compound
verbs and their corresponding Simple controls.

Although our sanity check sentences demonstrated a
classic N400 effect, showing that participants did engage
prediction during the experiment, we note that these
items were qualitatively different than experiment
materials: the cloze contrast was not closely matched
to the experimental materials, target words were
placed at sentence final position, and the predictability
of target words was driven by multiple sources of contexts, not just subject and a verb. Therefore, in Experiment 2, we also modified the items in the simple
predictability contrast to be more comparable to experimental materials.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we aimed to improve on the design and
materials of Experiment 1. We selected a more tightly
controlled subset of Resultative and Simple verb items
from Experiment 1, and created a 2 x 2 design in which
the predictive effect of the resultative was compared
against the predictive effect of a different type of compound verb, coordinate verbs. This allowed us to test
different sources of online prediction difficulty in
complex predicates.
Similar to resultative verbs, coordinate verbs are compound verbs that are composed of two contentful verbal
morphemes, V1 and V2. Whereas the verbal morphemes
in a Resultative are involved in a causal relation (V2 by
V1), the two morphemes of Coordinate are in a coordinate relation (V1 and V2). For example, in the sentence
The store owner hit-scolded the employee, the interpretation is that the store owner hit and scolded the
employee. Although coordinates and resultatives bear
a surface similarity in both being composed of two predicates, comprehenders can distinguish them online
through cues provided by the meaning of the two
verbs and by the subcategorization of V2. For example,

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

given the compound verb hit-scold, the V1 hit is a transitive verb, which requires an agent and a patient, and so is
the V2 scold. Since V1 hit and V2 scold have the same subcategorization, they naturally form a coordinate relation,
and both of them are the head of the compound verb. It
should be noted that because V2 scold is not a stative
verb, it cannot denote the state of change after the V1
hitting event. The compound verb hit-scold cannot be a
resultative verb.
The goal of Experiment 2 was to identify potential
sources of online prediction difficulty in complex predicates. As in Experiment 1, the target nouns were
more predictable in the complex predicate contexts
compared with the simple predicate contexts. If computing a complex predicate is generally hard in a way
that causes delays in prediction, then we would expect
to observe no N400 effect to the objects in both Resultative and Coordinate contexts. However, if it is resultative predicates specifically that are costly, because of
the causal relationship between V1 and V2, then we
would expect to obtain an interaction between Set
type and Predictability effect, with a significant N400
contrast in Coordinate context, but not Resultative
one.

Participants
The participants were 40 naive young adults (28 females,
18-40 years old, mean: 24) from National Taiwan Normal
University. All of them were right-handed native Mandarin speakers, without a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. Of the 40 participants, 7 were
excluded after pre-processing because of excessive
eye-blinking, muscle potentials, sweat artifact and
alpha waves. The reported results were obtained from
the remaining 33 participants (18 females, 19-40 years
old, mean: 24). All of them consented to participate in
the experiment. The experiment protocol was approved
by the Institutional Review Board Office at the University
of Maryland College Park.

Materials
Similar to Experiment 1, the materials were sentences
of SVO structure, with the verbs varying among
different conditions. Two sets of compound verbs
were created: Resultative set and Coordinate set.
Within each set, in addition to a compound verb condition, we included a simple verb condition as a baseline condition. The verbs in the simple verb conditions
were the V1 from the compound verb conditions, followed by an experiential aspect marker guo to match
the number of characters in the compound verb

1171

conditions. In other words, the Resultative set contained Resultative (V1-V2), and R-Simple (V1-asp) conditions whereas the Coordinate set contained
Coordinate (V1-V2) and C-Simple (V1-asp) conditions.
Note that resultative compound verbs in Mandarin
are usually accomplishment or achievement verbs
which denote telic events (Tai, 1984), and they frequently occur with the perfective aspect marker le.
We thus added a perfective aspect marker le at the
end of each verb in all experiment conditions.
Although the verbs varied, the subject and object
were identical between conditions in the same set. We
intended to make the object in Resultative context and
Coordinate context more predictable than that their
Simple controls. Materials for the Resultative set were
60 Resultative verbs and corresponding Simple verbs
selected from Experiment 1. For the Coordinate set, the
procedure to finalise the materials was similar to the procedure to Resultative verbs in Experiment 1. Coordinate
verbs were chosen from An Online Revised Mandarin Dictionary by the Ministry of Education, R.O.C. (http://dict.
revised.moe.edu.tw/cbdic/index.html). We did not
include Coordinate compound verbs whose V1 and V2
are synonyms. In addition, we excluded Coordinate
verbs whose V1 was identical to the V1 of the Resultative
verbs, because in this case the baseline condition to the
Coordinate condition (C-Simple) and the baseline condition to the Resultative condition (R-Simple) would be
identical. We selected 119 coordinate compound verbs
and created 119 pair of verbs, with each pair containing
one Coordinate verb, and one Simple verb. We added a
subject noun phrase in each set, such that the subject
noun phrase was the same between conditions. Then,
the 119 sets of subject-verb frames (each set contained
2 subject-verb frames, so 238 frames in total), were
divided into two lists such. Each list contained 119 sentences. Fifty participants were recruited for the cloze
norming (25 participants per list); none of the participants took part in the ERP experiment. Cloze norming
data were collected online via Ibex Farm (http://
spellout.net/ibexfarm/). We presented the context of a
sentence frame all at once and the sentence frame
would remain on the screen. Participants were instructed
to provide the best continuations for the sentence
frames. The presentation order of the sentence stimuli
was randomised.
To demonstrate that participants were able to generate predictions based on a minimal sentence context, we
also created predictability sentence frames that only
contained a subject and a simple verb, which were a
better match to the experimental conditions. One
hundred subject-verb frames were subject to online
cloze norming. Another 25 participants were recruited

1172

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

to perform sentence completion task. None of the participants took part in the ERP experiment. The presentation order of the sentence stimuli was randomised.
Through cloze norming, our goal was to select sentence frames in which a given object noun phrase was
highly predicted by Resultative condition and Coordinate condition, but not by their baseline R-Simple and
C-Simple conditions. Sentence frames that did not
meet this criterion were excluded. The finalised stimuli
were 60 items in the Resultative set and 60 items in
the Coordinate set. The averaged cloze probability to
the target nouns in the Resultative set was 39% for Resultative (range: 16%-80%) and 9% for R-Simple (range:
0%-36%) and in the Coordinate set was 38% for Coordinate (range: 16%-72%) and 10% for C-Simple (range:
0%-44%). The cloze sanity check items were of similar
contrast to the experimental materials (High-cloze: 38%
vs. Low-cloze: 9%) (See Table 2). After finalising the
target nouns, we added more contexts following the
target nouns to make the sentences slightly longer and
sound more natural. Each sentence consisted of six to
nine words, with each word being one to four characters
long.
Two experimental lists were constructed such that no
sentence context or target was repeated within the same
list. Each list consisted of 240 sentences, including 60
items of Resultative set, 60 items of Coordinate set, 60
items of cloze sanity check items, and additional 60
filler items that were of similar length for an unrelated
experiment that will not be described here. The presentation order of the sentence stimuli was randomised
within each list. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of the two lists.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.

Data acquisition and analysis
Data acquisition and analysis, including the regions of
interest, were identical to Experiment 1. The overall
mean rejection rate (including sanity check items)
across participants was 24.1  12.4% (mean  SD); participants with greater than 40% trials rejected were
excluded from further analysis. Rejection rates of experimental conditions were summarised as follows: Resultative: 28.6  12.9%, R-Simple: 30.8  16.3%, Coordinate:
27.8  9.4%, and C-Simple: 28.4  12.8%. We carried out
a repeated-measure ANOVA on the mean amplitudes
in the measurement time windows of 1100-1300 ms,
which was 300-500 ms since the onset of the noun,
and evaluated effects of Set type (Resultative, Coordinate) and Predictability (High-cloze, Low-cloze). Followup paired t-tests were performed when an interaction
was observed.
In the sanity check items that were designed to replicate
standard N400 effects of cloze probability, we carried out a
paired t-test over the same set of electrodes evaluating the
effect of predictability (High-cloze, Low-cloze).

Results
Behavioural data
The overall accuracy rate to the comprehension questions was 91% (83%-96%), showing that participants
were paying attention in the experiment.
ERP data
Plotted in Figure 4 shows the grand average ERPs to
the verb and object noun in the Resultative and RSimple conditions and in the Coordinate and CSimple conditions. Visual inspection suggested that
there was no N400 cloze difference to the objects in
the Resultative set, but that there was a difference in
the Coordinate set. A repeated-measure Type III

Table 2. Example stimulus in each condition in Experiment 2 (averaged cloze probability in parenthesis).
Condition
Resultative sets
Resultative

Verb
V1-V2

Sentence context
 
The kid bit-broke le

Target

Cloze


lip

High(39%)


lip

Low(9%)


employee

High(38%)


employee

Low(10%)

"The kid bit his lip such that his lip was broken"

R-Simple
(Baseline of Resultative)

V1-ASP

 
The kid bit-ASP le
"The kid had bitten his lip"

Coordinate sets
Coordinate

V1-V2

 
The store owner hit-scolded le
"The store owner hit and scolded the employee"

C-Simple
(Baseline of Coordinate)

V1-ASP

 
The store owner hit-ASP le
"The store owner had hit the employee"

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1173

Figure 4. Top: Grand average ERPs from the verb to the noun of the Resultative set (Left) and Coordinate set (Right) at the Cz electrode
in Experiment 2. Bottom: Topographic distribution of ERP effects in the 300-500 ms intervals at the noun in Experiment 2 (Left: RSimple minus Resultative; Right: C-Simple minus Coordinate).

ANOVA analyses demonstrated a significant Set type
by Predictability interaction (F(1,32) = 4.346, p < 0.05).
Follow-up pairwise analyses revealed that that there
was a significant difference between Coordinate and
its C-Simple baseline (t(32) = 2.96, p < 0.01), but not
between Resultative and its R-Simple baseline (t(32)
= 0.56, p = 0.58).
It is worth noting that visual inspection suggested
that the coordinate comparison also showed an earlier
increased negativity for the C-Simple condition relative
to the Coordinate condition that onset approximately
500 ms into the verb region (more negative for simple
verbs than coordinated verbs). Although we did not
have any specific hypotheses about what ERP differences might emerge at the verb, this difference might
raise the question of whether the N400 difference
observed at the object noun in the coordinate conditions might be partly due to ongoing negativity for
the C-Simple condition from the verb region. We think
this is unlikely as the waveforms appear to come back
together prior to the N400 window on the noun, but
we will return to this point in examining the results of
Experiment 3.
Figure 5 shows the grand average ERPs for the Predictability effect in the sanity check items (High-cloze

vs. Low-cloze). Visual inspection suggested that the
High-cloze continuations had reduced N400 amplitude
than the Low-cloze continuations. The results of the pairwise comparison also showed a significant effect of cloze
(t(32) = 4.89, p < 0.05).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 suggest that prediction for
the object noun is not immediately updated by information from Resultative verbs. The interaction between
Set type and Predictability indicated that predictability
was modulated differentially by the two types of compound verbs we tested: Coordinate verbs and Resultative
verbs. Specifically, we found an N400 effect in the Coordinate set, indicating that information encoded in coordinate verbs can impact prediction in time. However,
there was no N400 effect in the Resultative set. Based
on the significant interaction, we could infer that the
computation of Resultative was too slow to impact prediction in time.
Our finding that Coordinate verbs immediately contributed to object predictions, above and beyond V1
alone, is important for ruling out several possible explanations of the failure for Resultative verbs to do so. In

1174

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Figure 5. Left: Grand average ERPs to cloze sanity check sentences at Cz in Experiment 2. Right: The topographic distribution of ERP
effects in the 300-500 ms interval in Experiment 2 (Low cloze minus High cloze).

Experiment 1, we observed a larger N400 difference
between Resultative (V1-V2) and Causative (V2) than
between Resultative and Simple (V1). One possible explanation of this pattern could have been simply that predictions were rapidly updated on the basis of V1 only,
with V2 contributing little to constrain predictions.
However, in Experiment 2, we showed that although
both Resultative and Coordinate are compound verbs,
comprehenders were only able to quickly incorporate
V1 and V2 into their prediction when they form a coordinate relation. Therefore, we would like to argue what
slowed down prediction in Resultative is a process that
was specific to Resultative verbs. We suggest that it
could be the process of computing the causal relationship between V1 and V2 that slowed down prediction,
but other alternatives are also possible. We will discuss
these alternatives in the General Discussion section.
In Experiment 2, we made the sanity check sentences
more comparable to the experimental sentences: The
sentence context of sanity check items consisted of a
subject and a simple verb, and the cloze contrast was
matched to that of experiment conditions. With these
manipulations, the N400 effect was still significant,
showing that participants were engaged to update their
predictions given the minimal contexts. However, it is
essential to note that the N400 effect of the sanity check
sentences was much smaller than that in Experiment
1. These results suggest that a cloze difference of this
magnitude based on subject and a verb corresponds to
a relatively small effect size on N400 amplitude.
Based on the results of Experiment 2, we could infer
that the computation of Resultative was too slow to
impact prediction in time when words are presented
with an 800 ms SOA. This hypothesis would predict that
with enough time the N400 contrast should emerge.
Experiment 3 was designed to test this hypothesis.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 showed that participants could quickly
update predictions based on Coordinate verbs but not
Resultative verbs. In Experiment 3 we asked, could predictions be updated if comprehenders were given
several hundred more milliseconds? We used the same
materials as in Experiment 2 except that we added a
buffer to allow additional processing time by inserting
a prenominal modifier with minimal conceptual
content, such as a possessive or a quantifier, between
the compound verb and its object noun, which resulted
in an extra 400 ms of processing time compared to
Experiment 2 (see details below). Our hypothesis predicts
that the N400 cloze effect should re-emerge in the Resultative set when sufficient processing time is provided.

Participants
The participants were 48 naive young adults (22 females,
18-33 years old, mean: 23) from National Taiwan Normal
University. All of them were right-handed native Mandarin
speakers, without a history of neurological or psychiatric
disorders. Of the 48 participants, 10 were excluded after
pre-processing because of excessive eye-blinking, muscle
potentials, sweat artifact and alpha waves. The reported
results were obtained from the remaining 38 participants
(20 females, 18-33 years old, mean: 23). All of them consented to participate in the experiment. The experiment
protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board
Office at the University of Maryland College Park.

Materials
The materials were identical to Experiment 2, except
that we inserted a modifier (either a possessive or a

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

quantifier) between a verb and a noun, such that participants might have a little buffer to update their
predictions.
Although we assumed the predictability of the target
noun would remain the same despite the insertion of a
modifier, we conducted post-hoc cloze norming to
confirm this. Our norming focused on the 60 Resultative
sets of subject-verb-modifier frames (each set contained
Resultative and R-Simple conditions, so 120 frames were
normed in total). They were divided into two lists. Fifty
participants were recruited for the cloze norming (25 participants per list); none of the participants took part in the
ERP experiment. Cloze norming data were collected
online via Ibex Farm (http://spellout.net/ibexfarm/). We
presented the context of a sentence frame all at once
and the sentence frame would remain on the screen; participants were instructed to provide the best continuations for the sentence frames. The presentation order
of the sentence stimuli was randomised. Surprisingly,
our norming revealed that the cloze contrast between
the Resultative and R-Simple conditions actually became
smaller (in Experiment 3, Resultative: 40% vs. R-Simple:
18% whereas in Experiment 2, Resultative: 39% vs. RSimple: 9%). Fortunately, this difference goes against our
hypothesis (a smaller cloze difference in Experiment 3
than 2, although we expect the N400 effect to reemerge in Experiment 3) and therefore only acts to
provide a more conservative test of that hypothesis.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 2, except for
the presentation rate. With presentation rate of 800 ms
in Experiment 2, the EEG recording time was about
40 min. As we added a modifier between the verb and
the noun in all conditions, the EEG recording time
could be even longer. To keep participants from being

Figure 6. Presentation of stimuli in Experiment 3.

1175

too tired during the experiment, which could introduce
artifacts such as alpha waves, we increased the presentation rate from 800 to 600 ms in Experiment 3. Each
word appeared on the screen for 500 ms, with a
100 ms inter-stimulus interval (See Figure 6 for details).
Given the new SOA, participants had up to 1200 ms
(i.e. the duration from a verb to a modifier) to update predictions whereas in Experiment 2, only 800 ms (i.e. the
duration of a noun) was available to make predictions.

Data acquisition and analysis
Data acquisition and analysis were identical to Experiment 2. We time-locked ERPs to the onset of the verb,
where experimental conditions started to differ, with
the epoch ranging from -100 to 1800 ms, to cover the
brainwave responses from the onset of the verb to the
end of the object noun (600 ms each for the verb,
modifier, and object). As for the sanity check items, the
epoch was from -100 to 600 ms. The overall mean rejection rate (including sanity check items) across participants was 23.1  12.7%; participants with greater than
40% trials rejected were excluded from further analysis.
Rejection rates of the experimental conditions were summarised as follows: 24.1  11.4%, R-Simple: 24.4  13.2%;
Coordinate: 23.8  12.6%, C-Simple: 23.7  11.6%.

Results
Behavioural data
The overall accuracy rate to the comprehension questions was 92% (83%-98%), showing that participants
were paying attention in the experiment.
ERP data
Plotted in Figure 7 shows the grand average ERPs to the
Resultative and R-Simple conditions and to the

1176

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Coordinate and C-Simple conditions. Visual inspection
suggested that there was an N400 effect to the objects
in the Resultative set as well as in the Coordinate set.
Statistically, we found a Predictability main effect (F
(1,37) = 10.73, p < 0.005) and no evidence of a Set type
by Predictability interaction (F(1,37) = 0.05, p = 0.82).
Figure 8 shows the grand average ERPs to High-cloze
and Low-cloze sanity check sentences. Visual inspection
suggested that the High-cloze continuations elicited a
reduced N400 response than the Low-cloze continuations. Statistics also showed a significant effect (t(37)
= 6.35, p < 0.05).

Discussion
In Experiment 3, we investigated if predictions on the
basis of Resultatives can be updated when participants
were given several hundred more milliseconds. A
modifier was inserted between the verb and the object
noun to create a little buffer for participants to update predictions. Under these conditions, we did not obtain an
N400 reduction at the object in Resultative set in Experiment 2, but it emerged in Experiment 3. By contrast,
the N400 reduction was observed at the object in Coordinate set in both experiments. These effects held even

though the addition of the modifier unintentionally
made the cloze contrasts slightly smaller than Experiment
2 and Experiment 1 (mean differences of 20% in Experiment 3 and 30% in Experiment 2 and Experiment 1).
Overall, these results showed that the causal relations
between V1 and V2 could constrain predictions, if participants were provided with sufficient time - here, a buffer of
1200 ms between complex verb and object noun.
During the verb region in Experiment 3, we showed
the same numerical pattern from Experiment 2 of more
negativity for the C-Simple condition than the Coordinate condition at around 500 ms post-verb onset. One
concern from Experiment 2 was whether the apparent
N400 effect at the noun could rather be due to differences carried over from the verb region. The prenominal
modifier in Experiment 3 allowed us to see that the verbelicited differences appeared to subside by about 800 ms
post-verb onset, as illustrated in Figure 7. In order to
confirm that there were no reliable differences
between Coordinate and C-Simple conditions immediately prior to noun onset, we ran an additional paired
t-test on 100 ms before the onset of the noun. Results
showed that the Coordinate condition did not differ
from the C-Simple condition (t(37) = 1.29, p = 0.20).
Therefore, it unlikely that early differences on the verb

Figure 7. Top: Grand average ERPs from the verb to the noun of the Resultative set (Left) and Coordinate set (Right) at the Cz electrode
in Experiment 3. Bottom: Topographic distribution of ERP effects in the 300-500 ms intervals at the noun in Experiment 3 (Left: RSimple minus Resultative; Right: C-Simple minus Coordinate).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1177

Figure 8. Left: Grand average ERPs to cloze sanity check at Cz in Experiment 3. Right: The topographic distribution of ERP effects in the
300-500 ms interval in Experiment 3 (Low cloze minus High cloze).

are responsible for the significant N400 effect observed
on the subsequent object noun for the coordinate comparison in Experiment 2.

over the other. In fact, as the two classes of explanation
target different stages of processing, it is likely that they
are not mutually exclusive. In the following, we consider
the two accounts in more detail.

General Discussion
Three ERP experiments were conducted to investigate
the predictive mechanism of online sentence comprehension through properties of Mandarin compound
verbs. We focused on resultative compound verbs
whose V2 predicates the object of V1, featuring that
the object is affected by V1. We asked if the causal
relationship of a resultative compound verb could
rapidly constrain predictions of a subsequent object.
The predictive effect of resultative compound verbs
was compared against that of coordinate compound
verbs, which allowed us to test different sources of
online prediction difficulty in complex predicates.
The N400 was used as a neural indicator of what is
predicted in the current study. Although results from
Experiment 1 were inconclusive, the better-controlled
design in Experiment 2 suggested that predictions on
the basis of the resultative were not updated in time to
impact processing of the object when verb and object
onset were separated by 800 ms. This "timing" hypothesis was supported by Experiment 3, where the N400
predictability effect was recovered when participants
were provided with up to 1200 ms between verb and
object onset to update predictions.
Two classes of explanation for why prediction update
is delayed are (1) the computation of a resultative predicate is slow and/or (2) using the resultative predicate to
generate predictions - to retrieve entities/nouns from
memory that are likely to complete the clause - is
slow. We do not have strong evidence to favour one

Slow prediction due to the computation of a
complex resultative predicate
One possibility is that predictions based on the resultative predicate take significant time because computing
the predicate itself takes time. As discussed in earlier sections, complex predicates are different from simple verbs
in many aspects. For example, with the combination of
two verbal morphemes, comprehenders could be struggling with lexical processing, such as accessing the
meaning of V1 and V2, constructing the mental representation of the complex predicate, and decomposing the
internal structure of the complex predicate. Any of the
above computations could take longer and slow down
predictions. To identify sources of online prediction
difficulty in complex predicates, we introduced coordinate compound verbs in Experiments 2 and 3, and
compare the predictability effect of resultative compound verbs against coordinate ones. Our results
revealed that not all complex predicates yield equally
slow predictions: with an 800 ms SOA, predictability
effects were observed after coordinate verbs but not
resultative verbs. These data suggest that what slowed
down the predictive mechanism were processes that
were specific to resultative compound verbs.
Different theoretical frameworks differ in exactly what
kinds of complex predicate representations are computed over compound verbs. Li (1990) proposed that
when the two verbal morphemes were merged into a
complex predicate, theta roles from V1 and V2 should

1178

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

merge into a composite theta role. For example, in the
complex predicate bit-broke "broken by biting", whose
V1 bite required an agent and a patient and V2 break
required a theme, the theme role from V2 should be
merged with the patient role from V1, and then the composite theta role, patient-theme, would be assigned to
the object noun phrase. Different from Li, Williams
(2014) treats resultatives as an event that involved a
causer and causee, or an agent and a patient that underwent an event of change. In other words, V1-V2 together
is not the same event as V1 or V2 alone, nor does it equal
a conjunction of V1 and V2. The meaning of a resultative
rather refers to events that had V2 by means of V1. Since
our experiments were not set up to test any of the above
frameworks, we do not have a stand to argue for one
analysis than the other. However, both frameworks
feature unique properties in the resultative structure. If
some of these properties are particularly costly to
compute, we could explain why updating predictions
subsequent to a resultative verb took longer than other
types of verbs.

Slow prediction due to memory search for an
optimal candidate
We also entertained the slow prediction hypothesis proposed by Chow et al. (2018), which would hold that predictions were slow because it takes longer to use the
cues from resultatives to retrieve the best fitting word
or concept for the context.
Chow, Momma, et al. (2016), specifically propose that
lexical prediction can be seen as a two-step memory
retrieval process, which involves (1) a fast parallel
process that activates all the event schemas associated
with the individual context words, and (2) a slow serial
search through this initial set for the schemas that
match the argument role assignment of the nouns in
the context. For example, in Cop ba thief arrest ("the
cop arrest the thief"), it was fast for comprehenders to
recognise that cop was an agent and thief was a
patient. Nevertheless, because the information of
taking-cop-as-an-agent and taking-thief-as-a-patient
were compound cues and not simplex cues, comprehenders would have to serially search through the semantic
space for an item that satisfied all the features, delaying
successful prediction. On the other hand, other authors
point out the challenges in formulating a principled distinction between simplex and compound cues that captures the semantic retrieval phenomena, and instead
suggest that delays in contextual prediction may reflect
differential weighting of cue certainty across time
(Kuperberg, 2016). What these accounts have in
common is that they all place the locus of the timing

effects in the process of prediction update, rather than
the process of parsing and interpreting the context.
To explain the results of the current study, these kinds
of account would posit that the computation of complex
predicates, including the configuration of argument
structures, was completed rapidly, but what slowed
down prediction update was the process of retrieving
the candidate that best satisfied the context. Consider
predictions generated from a coordinate compound
verb first. When perceiving the verb hit-scold, comprehenders recognised the verb-verb sequence as a coordinate verb, and consider both verbs heads of the complex
predicate. Therefore, both verbs served as retrieval cues
at an initial stage, with a set of hittable and a set of scoldable candidates being activated, and those that matched
both cues being the most activated. In this case,
employee was the most preferred answer to the
context The store owner hit-scolded _______(See
Figure 9 for Venn diagrams of comprehenders' prediction space). In this case, a simple summation of the activation elicited by each verb weighted equally would be
likely to yield successful retrieval of the best-fitting candidate. Our ERP results indeed indicated that participants
could make use of the cues provided by a coordinate
verb to update their prediction promptly.
However, prediction on the basis of a resultative
verb could be more complicated. When perceiving
the verb bit-broke in The kid bit-broke _______, comprehenders should recognise the verb-verb sequence
as a resultative verb, in which only V1 bite is the
head of the complex predicate. Given identification
of this structural relationship, it could be that at an
initial stage, only the V1 event is used as a retrieval
cue, or that this cue is initially weighted more strongly.
In this case, initial activation would be focused on entities involved as participants in biting events involving
a kid, such as toy, corn and lip. In a two-stage model, it
might be only at a second, later stage that these initial
candidates are serially searched for one that could be
broken by biting, in this case, lip (see Figure 9). In a
more continuous model, the delayed memory access
of the predictable candidates in the resultative case
might reflect the lower frequency, and thus lower
resting activation level, of the complex real-world
events that support the prediction (that is, biting
events in general will be more frequent than biting
events that result in breaking). It could also be that
generating a prediction about the likely result of an
event does not solely depend on retrieving memories
of existing events, but also requires an extra processing step of inference or simulation. All of these explanations predict the dissociation in timing from the
coordination contexts, in which identifying predictable

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

1179

Figure 9. Venn diagrams of prediction space of Coordinate verb (Left) and Resultative verb (Right).

candidates can be done with reference to simple
events in memory.

ERP responses to verbs
Our results suggest that the computations required to
generate predictions following resultative verbs take
longer than following coordinate verbs. While our
design focused on neural activity during the target
noun, these results raise the question of whether traces
of those costly computations could be observed during
the ERP to the verb itself. To our knowledge, we are
the first group that used EEG responses to study the processing of Mandarin resultatives. Since we did not have
any a priori hypothesis about the processing of resultative verbs, we plotted the topographic distribution of
ERP effects in P200 (150-300 ms), N400 (300-500 ms)
and P600 (500-800 ms) intervals at the verb (see Figure
10). If we could observe any pattern across the three
experiments, we might get an initial clue about which
stage of processing drives slower prediction update in
response to resultative verbs, and whether this would
be a useful avenue to pursue in future work.
As depicted by Figure 10, relative to the Simple condition, the Resultative condition seemed to elicit a
larger negativity over the central-parietal sites in the
N400 time window. The topographic distribution and
the peak latency resembled an N400 effect. We ran
post-hoc paired t-tests to examine the effect, with the
same ROI as what we defined for the N400 effect at
the noun. Our analyses showed that the N400 effect
was not significant in Experiment 1 (t(28) = 2.20, p =
0.15), but was significant both in Experiment 2 (t(32) =
5.47, p < 0.05) and Experiment 3 (t(37) = 10.63, p <
0.001). We also plotted the topographic maps of the
Coordinate set (see Figure 11). However, unlike the
Resultative set, we found no effects at the N400 time

window when considering Coordinate relative to CSimple conditions (Experiment 2: t(32) = 0.26, p = 0.62;
Experiment 3: t(37) = 0.23, p = 0.64).
Although resultative verbs and coordinate verbs are
both compound verbs, the post-hoc analyses reveal
that only resultative verbs elicited a larger N400
response. As the N400 is primarily associated with
lexical or conceptual processing, these data then tentatively suggest that resultative verbs require additional
lexical or conceptual computations that could be tied
to the delayed prediction effects at the subsequent
noun. However, it could also be the case that these
effects on the verb are unrelated to the effects on the
object and simply differences between the lexical properties of the resultative and coordinate verbs, such as
different degrees of semantic association between V1
and V2, lexical frequency, number of brush strokes,
neighbourhood density, etc. Since the current study
was not aimed at evaluating responses at the verb, we
did not attempt to control these properties, and so we
leave a more systematic investigation of these differential verb responses for future work.

Implications for L2 acquisition and processing
Finally, as the current study took advantage of languagespecific properties by which argument structure is
encoded in Mandarin, we would like to briefly discuss
potential implications of the current study for L2 acquisition and processing. It is interesting to note that Mandarin resultative compound verbs are notably
challenging for L2 learners. In Yuan and Zhao (2011),
English L2 speakers of different proficiency levels, as
well as native Mandarin speakers, were asked to rate
the acceptability of sentences that were composed of
different resultative compound verbs. Ratings from Mandarin native speakers were collected as a baseline. The

1180

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Figure 10. Left: Topographic distribution of Resultative effect across different time windows in Experiments 1-3. Right: Grand average
ERPs from the verb to the noun of Resultative and R-Simple conditions at the Pz electrode in Experiments 1-3.

results revealed that regardless of proficiency levels in
Mandarin, L2 learners rejected almost all of the sentences that contained a resultative compound verb. An
exception was sentences of transitive resultative compound verbs, where advanced L2 learners showed the
same acceptance rate as native speakers. The authors
attributed the benefit of Mandarin transitive resultative

compound verbs to similar thematic configurations in
English resultative constructions (i.e. Mom washed the
clothes ruined): in both languages, the object noun
phrase of a resultative complex predicate received a
patient role from V1 and a theme role from V2. Such a
transfer effect from learners' first language could also
explain why resultative compound verbs of other

Figure 11. Left: Topographic distribution of Coordinate effect across different time windows in Experiments 1-3. Right: Grand average
ERPs from the verb to the noun of Coordinate and C-Simple conditions at the Pz electrode in Experiments 1-3.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

thematic relations were rejected by the learners,
although it still remained a puzzle why thematic role
reconfiguration was challenging for L2 learners. To
further explore the mental representation of Mandarin
resultatives in L2 learners, we suggest that a better
understanding of the computation involved in L1 resultative comprehension should be developed. We believe
that the current study constitutes one such step.

Conclusion
The current study investigated how quickly two types of
complex predicates associated with verb-verb compounds - coordinates and resultatives - could be computed and used to update predictions for the
subsequent input, using the N400 response as a
measure of online prediction. If processing speed were
mainly a function of syntactic complexity, then we
would expect both conditions to demonstrate the
same temporal dynamics, but if the computations
required by certain semantic relations are particularly
costly, the two verb types should dissociate. Results
from our three experiments indicate that predictions
afforded by a resultative verb do not impact processing
of the subsequent noun at an effective verb-noun SOA
of 800 ms, but that predictive effects emerge with a
verb-noun SOA of 1200 ms. This contrasts with the
case of coordinate verbs, which impacted predictions
at the verb at both SOAs. We discussed two broad
families of accounts for the dissociation: (1) the computation of a resultative compound verb is more taxing
and/or (2) retrieving a candidate that fits the resultative
context requires longer time. Our study shows that evaluating the speed of prediction update with the N400 is
an effective approach for dissociating some of the finegrained subcomputations required for the interpretation
of complex verb constructions. Future work using this
method, in combination with other tools, can help to
lay the groundwork for a detailed time course model of
argument structure computation.

Note
1. The rejection rate was unusually high because (1) the
epoch was fairly long (-100 to 1600 ms), and (2) the air
conditioner in the lab was broken during data collection
section. 10 out of the 20 excluded participants were
removed because of sweat artifact.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Science Foundation
grant (BCS-1749407) to Ellen Lau and the William Orr Dingwall
Dissertation Fellowship to Chia-Hsuan Liao. We would like

1181

to thank Alexander Williams and Colin Phillips for helpful discussions and Shiao-Hui Chan and her research assistants for
the support for EEG data collection in Taiwan. We also thank
the two anomalous reviewers for their constructive comments
for an earlier version of this paper.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Funding
This research was supported by a National Science Foundation
grant (BCS-1749407) to Ellen Lau and the William Orr Dingwall
Dissertation Fellowship to Chia-Hsuan Liao.

References
Brothers, T., Swaab, T. Y., & Traxler, M. J. (2015). Effects of prediction and contextual support on lexical processing: Prediction
takes precedence. Cognition, 136, 135-149.
Brouwer, H., Fitz, H., & Hoeks, J. (2012). Getting real about
semantic illusions: Rethinking the functional role of the
P600 in language comprehension. Brain Research, 1446,
127-143.
Chow, W. Y., Lau, E., Wang, S., & Phillips, C. (2018). Wait a second!
delayed impact of argument roles on on-line verb prediction.
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 33(7), 1-26.
Chow, W. Y., Momma, S., Smith, C., Lau, E., & Phillips, C. (2016).
Prediction as memory retrieval: Timing and mechanisms.
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(5), 617-627.
Chow, W. Y., Smith, C., Lau, E., & Phillips, C. (2016). A "bag-ofarguments" mechanism for initial verb predictions.
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(5), 577-596.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open source
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including
independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 134(1), 9-21.
Federmeier, K. D. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and roots of
prediction in language comprehension. Psychophysiology,
44(4), 491-505.
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other name:
Long-term memory structure and sentence processing.
Journal of Memory and Language, 41(4), 469-495.
Federmeier, K. D., Kutas, M., & Schul, R. (2010). Age-related and
individual differences in the use of prediction during
language comprehension. Brain and Language, 115(3), 149-
161.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24(2), 95-112.
Hoeks, J. C., Stowe, L. A., & Doedens, G. (2004). Seeing words
in context: The interaction of lexical and sentence level
information during reading. Cognitive Brain Research, 19(1),
59-73.
Huang, C. T. J. (1998). Logical relations in Chinese and the theory
of grammar. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T., & Haywood, S. L. (2003). The timecourse of prediction in incremental sentence processing:
Evidence from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49(1), 133-156.

1182

C.-H. LIAO AND E. LAU

Kim, A., & Osterhout, L. (2005). The independence of combinatory semantic processing: Evidence from event-related
potentials. Journal of Memory and Language, 52(2), 205-225.
Kuo, G. (2006, January). Processing Chinese resultative compounds: A study on its morphological headedness. Paper presented at the 4th conference of the European association
of Chinese Linguistics (EACL-4), Budapest, Hungary.
Kuperberg, G. R. (2016). Separate streams or probabilistic inference? What the N400 can tell us about the comprehension of
events. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(5), 602-
616.
Kuperberg, G. R., Choi, A., Cohn, N., Paczynski, M., & Jackendoff,
R. (2010). Electrophysiological correlates of complement
coercion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(12), 2685-
2701.
Kuperberg, G. R., Kreher, D. A., Sitnikova, T., Caplan, D. N., &
Holcomb, P. J. (2007). The role of animacy and thematic
relationships in processing active English sentences:
Evidence from event-related potentials. Brain and
Language, 100(3), 223-237.
Kutas, M., DeLong, K. A., & Smith, N. J. (2011). A look around at
what lies ahead: Prediction and predictability in language
processing. In M. Bar (Ed.), Predictions in the brain: Using
our past to generate a future (pp. 190-207). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2000). Electrophysiology reveals
semantic memory use in language comprehension. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4(12), 463-470.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2011). Thirty years and counting:
Finding meaning in the N400 component of the eventrelated brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology,
62, 621-647.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during reading
reflect word expectancy and semantic association. Nature,
307(5947), 161-163.
Laszlo, S., & Federmeier, K. D. (2009). A beautiful day in the
neighborhood: An event-related potential study of lexical
relationships and prediction in context. Journal of Memory
and Language, 61(3), 326-338.
Lau, E., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for
semantics: (de)constructing the N400. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9(12), 920-933.
Li, Y. (1990). On VV compounds in Chinese. Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory, 8(2), 177-207.
Liao, C.-H., & Chan, S.-H. (2016). Direction matters: Event-related
brain potentials reflect extra processing costs in switching
from the dominant to the less dominant language. Journal
of Neurolinguistics, 40, 79-97.
Lin, C.-J., & Jager, L. (2014, March). Reading resultative verb compounds in Chinese sentences: An eye-tracking study. Poster
presented at the 2nd East Asian Psycholinguistics
Colloquium (EAPC2), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Lopez-Calderon, J., & Luck, S. J. (2014). ERPLAB: An open-source
toolbox for the analysis of event-related potentials. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 8, 213.

Momma, S., Sakai, H., & Phillips, C. (2015, March). Give me several
hundred more milliseconds: The temporal dynamics of verb
prediction. Paper presented at the 28th annual CUNY conference on Human sentence processing, Los Angeles, CA.
Myers, J. (2006). Processing Chinese compounds: A survey of
the literature. In G. Libben, & G. Jarema (Eds.),
Representation and processing of compound words (pp.
169-196). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schegloff, E. (2000). Overlapping talk and the organization
of turn-taking for conversation. Language in Society, 29(1),
1-63.
Shen, Y., & Mochizuki, K. (2010, May). Inheritance of argument
structure and compounding constraints of resultative compound verbs in Chinese and Japanese. In L. E. Clemens, &
C.-M. L. Liu (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22 North American conference on Chinese Linguistics (NACCL-22) and the 18th the
International association of Chinese Linguistics (IACL-18) (pp.
341-355). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Su, J. J., Molinaro, N., Gillon-Dowens, M., Tsai, P. S., Wu, D. H., &
Carreiras, M. (2016). When "he" can also be "she": An ERP
study of reflexive pronoun resolution in written mandarin
Chinese. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 151.
Tai, J. H. (1984). Verbs and times in Chinese: Vendler's four categories. Parasession on Lexical Semantics, 20, 289-296.
Taylor, W. L. (1953). "Cloze procedure": A new tool for measuring readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30(4), 415-433.
Thornhill, D. E., & Van Petten, C. (2012). Lexical versus conceptual anticipation during sentence processing: Frontal positivity and N400 ERP components. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 83(3), 382-392.
Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Prediction during language
comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP components.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 83(2), 176-190.
Wang, Y., Jiao, Q., & Pang, Y. (1987). A dictionary of Chinese verbresultative complement phrases. Beijing: Beijing Language
Institute Press.
Williams, A. (2014). Causal VVs in Mandarin. In C. T. J. Huang, Y.H. A. Li, & A. Simpson (Eds.), The Handbook of Chinese
Linguistics (pp. 311-341). Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Wittenberg, E., Paczynski, M., Wiese, H., Jackendoff, R., &
Kuperberg, G. (2014). The difference between "giving a rose"
and "giving a kiss": Sustained neural activity to the light verb
construction. Journal of Memory and Language, 73, 31-42.
Yuan, B., & Zhao, Y. (2011). Asymmetric syntactic and thematic
reconfigurations in English speakers' L2 Chinese resultative
compound constructions. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 15(1), 38-55.
Zhang, B., & Peng, D. (1992). Decomposed storage in the
Chinese lexicon. In G. E. Stelmach & P. A. Vroon (Eds.),
Advances in Psychology (Vol. 90, pp. 131-149). Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Zhou, X., Jiang, X., Ye, Z., Zhang, Y., Lou, K., & Zhan, W. (2010).
Semantic integration processes at different levels of syntactic hierarchy during sentence comprehension: An ERP study.
Neuropsychologia, 48(6), 1551-1562.

