Applied Psycholinguistics (2020), 41, 517-545
doi:10.1017/S0142716420000077

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Second language learning of phonological
alternations with and without orthographic
input: Evidence from the acquisition of a
German-like voicing alternation
Shannon L. Barrios*

and Rachel Hayes-Harb

University of Utah
*Corresponding author. E-mail: s.barrios@utah.edu
(Received 13 December 2018; revised 11 December 2019; accepted 03 January 2020; first published
online 12 May 2020)

Abstract
While a growing body of research investigates the influence of orthographic input on the
acquisition of second language (L2) segmental contrasts, few studies have examined its
influence on the acquisition of L2 phonological processes. Hayes-Harb, Brown, and Smith
(2018) showed that exposure to words' written forms caused native English speakers to misremember the voicing of final obstruents in German-like words exemplifying voicing neutralization. However, they did not examine participants' acquisition of the final devoicing
process. To address this gap, we conducted two experiments wherein native English speakers
(assigned to Orthography or No Orthography groups) learned German-like words in suffixed
and unsuffixed forms, and later completed a picture naming test. Experiment 1 investigated
learners' knowledge of the surface voicing of obstruents in both final and nonfinal position,
and revealed that while all participants produced underlyingly voiced obstruents as voiceless
more often in final than nonfinal position, the difference was only significant for No
Orthography participants. Experiment 2 investigated participants' ability to apply the
devoicing process to new words, and provided no evidence of generalization. Together these
findings shed light on the acquisition of final devoicing by naive adult learners, as well as the
influence of orthographic input in the acquisition of a phonological alternation.
Keywords: final obstruent devoicing; German; orthography; second language phonology; word learning

Recent research has established that written input can play a powerful role in the
acquisition of a second language (L2) sound system (Bassetti, 2006; Escudero,
Hayes-Harb, & Mitterer, 2008; Escudero, Simon, & Mulak, 2014; Hayes-Harb &
Cheng, 2016; Hayes-Harb, Nicol, & Barker, 2010; Showalter, 2018; Showalter &
Hayes-Harb, 2013). To date, the literature on the role of orthography in L2 word
form learning has focused almost exclusively on the acquisition of phonemic
contrasts in the target language. However, attaining target-like knowledge of a
(c) Cambridge University Press 2020.

518

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

language entails acquiring not only its phoneme inventory, but also its phonological
processes. For example, in German and many other languages (including Dutch,
Russian, Turkish, and Catalan), obstruent voicing contrasts are neutralized in
syllable-final position (e.g., hun[d]e dogs vs. hun[t] dog, both written with <d>).
That is, these languages exhibit an alternation between voiced (e.g., [d]) and voiceless (e.g., [t]) phones such that the underlying forms of alternating words (and the
way they are spelled) will not always match their surface forms.
It is important to note that the acquisition of a phonological process depends on
the learner's ability to make inferences about the relationship between the phonolexical (i.e., underlying) forms of words and their surface realizations based on information available in the linguistic input. For second language learners, this input
often includes both auditory and written forms. To the extent that adult learners
make use of written input to infer the phonological structure of L2 words, we might
expect written forms to exert influence over the acquisition of alternations such as
those produced by final devoicing processes. For example, for native Englishspeaking learners of German, the spelled forms of alternating words (i.e., words that
undergo the final devoicing process) are potentially misleading with respect to the
surface voicing of the final obstruents.
Some researchers have reported that adult native English speakers have difficulty
acquiring German final devoicing, and have attributed the observed difficulty to the
learners' exposure to written input (Young-Scholten, 2002, 2004; Young-Scholten &
Langer, 2015). In a recent study, Hayes-Harb, Brown, and Smith (2018) provided
direct empirical evidence for the causal relationship hypothesized by YoungScholten and colleagues, demonstrating that exposure to words' written forms
can interfere with native English speakers' ability to remember the surface voicing
of final obstruents in a set of unsuffixed words exemplifying a German-like pattern
of voicing neutralization. Crucially, however, this study focused on the acquisition
of target-like patterns of surface voicing in final position only (e.g., learners were
exposed to /tob/ [top] and /top/ [top]). Their learners were not also exposed
to (or tested on) word forms with the target obstruent in nonfinal position where
the underlying voicing value is maintained (i.e., they did not also learn suffixed
forms like /tobn/ [tobn]). As Hayes-Harb et al. (2018) did not examine participants' knowledge of alternating forms, the study was not informative as to the
acquisition of the process of German final devoicing. As a result, it remains unclear
whether orthographic input was helpful or detrimental with respect to the acquisition of the final devoicing process. Moreover, as van de Vijver and Baer-Henney
(2014) note, knowledge of phonological processes, such as German final devoicing,
involves not only knowledge of both the words that alternate (and those that do not)
but also productive knowledge of the process that extends to novel words. The
present study thus represents a logical next step in advancing our understanding
of the role of orthographic input in the acquisition of German final devoicing by
adult L2 learners by focusing not on the ability to remember a trained set of
(non-alternating) surface forms (as in Hayes-Harb et al., 2018) but rather on the
ability to remember a set of alternating surface forms (Experiment 1) and on the
ability to apply the devoicing process to new word forms (i.e., generalization;
Experiment 2).

Applied Psycholinguistics

519

Orthographic input in L2 phonolexical development
A growing body of research has examined the influence of orthographic input on
the acquisition of L2 segmental contrasts. Some researchers have observed that
learners can benefit from written input when learning the phonological forms of
L2 words containing novel contrasts that are difficult to perceive on the basis of
auditory input alone. In particular, learners exposed to systematic graphemic information representing a novel contrast exhibited more accurate memory for the
words' phonological forms than learners who were not exposed to orthographic
information (Escudero et al., 2008; Showalter & Hayes-Harb, 2013). These studies
typically employ a mini-lexicon paradigm, wherein naive adult participants are
taught a set of L2 words (and/or nonwords) involving the novel contrast of interest,
and exposure to the words' spelled forms is manipulated between groups of participants. These studies have demonstrated that for some novel contrasts, the availability of written input can support the establishment of phonolexical representations
for newly learned words that encode the contrast. Examples include the English
/ae/-// contrast for native Dutch speakers (Escudero et al., 2008), Dutch vowel
contrasts for native Spanish speakers (Escudero et al., 2014), and Mandarin tone
contrasts for native English speakers (Showalter & Hayes-Harb, 2013).
By contrast, other researchers have reported no beneficial effect of exposure to
orthographic input on the acquisition of a novel phonological contrast (Durham,
Hayes-Harb, Barrios, & Showalter, 2016; Hayes-Harb & Hacking, 2015; Pytlyk,
2011; Showalter & Hayes-Harb, 2015; Simon, Chambless, & Kickhofel Alves,
2010) or have demonstrated that orthographic input may interfere with the acquisition of target-like L2 phonological representations, particularly when the written
input provides learners with "misleading" information about the phonological
forms of new words. Interference effects have been reported when L2 orthographic
conventions differ from those of the native language (L1; Bassetti, 2006), when
grapheme-phoneme correspondences (i.e., the mapping[s] between grapheme
and phoneme) are different in the L1 and L2 (Hayes-Harb & Cheng, 2016;
Hayes-Harb et al., 2010; Showalter, 2018), or when the L1 and L2 differ in whether
or not familiar graphemes signal a contrast (Escudero et al., 2014). Other factors,
including the degree of perceptual difficulty posed by the contrast (Escudero, 2015)
and the transparency of the L2 writing system (Mok, Lee, Li, & Xu, 2018), have also
been found to modulate written input effects.
To date, this literature has focused almost exclusively on the acquisition of phonological contrasts; few studies have examined its influence on the acquisition of L2
phonological processes. In the following section, we review literature on the
acquisition of morphophonological alternations, in particular voicing alternations
in German, and what is presently known about the role of orthography in the acquisition of these alternations by adult L2 learners.
The acquisition of German final devoicing
Like English, the German phoneme inventory contains both voiced and voiceless
obstruents (e.g., /p/-/b/, /f/-/v/, etc.). However, while obstruents can contrast in
voicing in other positions, only voiceless obstruents are permitted in syllable-final
position in German (Grantham O'Brien & Fagan, 2016). In final position,

520

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

underlyingly voiced obstruents are produced as their voiceless counterparts (e.g., the
word verb is spelled <verben> and <verb> in the plural and singular form and is
pronounced [v bn] and [v p], respectively). This phonological pattern has
traditionally been treated as one of final obstruent devoicing (cf. Jessen &
Ringen, 2002). It is worth noting that there has been considerable debate about
the completeness of the voicing neutralization, with many researchers providing evidence from production or perception that underlying voicing contrasts are preserved to some extent in surface forms (Kleber, John, & Harrington, 2010; Port &
O'Dell, 1985; Roettger, Winter, Grawunder, Kirby, & Grice, 2014). Nevertheless, the
phonological process of final obstruent devoicing in German introduces a morphophonological alternation in voicing (i.e., variation in the surface phonetic form of
certain stems as a result of the application of a morphological process) across various morphological paradigms in German that is not found and English and, thus,
must be acquired by an English learner of German if he or she is to attain target-like
knowledge of German.
In non-alternating words, the underlying and surface forms of morphemes are
identical in both the singular and the plural (e.g., the word stain is spelled
<flecken> and <fleck> in the plural and singular form and is pronounced [flkn]
and [flk], respectively). In alternating words, however, the underlying voicing is
preserved in morphologically complex forms (e.g., [v bn] verb.plural where
the /b/ is resyllabified as an onset), but is devoiced in final position (e.g., [v p],
verb.singular). The traditional account from generative phonology is that observing
alternations in the ambient language should lead language learners to posit underlying representations that are different from surface forms, as well as a phonological
process that allows the surface forms to be derived from the underlying forms.
Moreover, the existence of non-alternating forms, in which nonfinal obstruents surface as voiceless, should provide the learner with important evidence that a process
of intervocalic voicing is untenable. It is important to note that the German final
devoicing process is not indicated orthographically. That is, despite the neutralization of voicing in the auditory input, the written form of verb <verb> represents the
underlying voicing value of the stem-final obstruent phoneme. As a result, for learners with access to written input, orthography is potentially misleading with respect
to the surface voicing of underlyingly voiced final obstruents. Alternatively, written
input may provide a clue to the underlying voicing of alternating forms; we return to
this point in more detail in the Discussion section.
Morphophonological alternations, such as German final devoicing, are productive in adult native speakers of a language. That is, adults have tacit knowledge of
these processes as demonstrated by their ability to extend the pattern of alternation
to other known lexical items, as well as to nonce items (Berko, 1958). However, as
morphophonological alternations vary cross-linguistically, language learners
(L1 and L2) must acquire knowledge of them through exposure to the language.
The discovery and encoding of alternations by language learners is a complex task
that requires "comparison of morphologically related forms, choosing a basic or
underlying form, and learning a grammar that can generate the various surface
realizations" (Albright & Hayes, 2011, p. 672). While some researchers report that
certain morphophonemic alternations are acquired relatively early (e.g., vowel
harmony in the accusative suffix in Turkish, Aksu-Koc, & Slobin, 1985; vowel

Applied Psycholinguistics

521

and consonant alternations in Northern Saami, Bals, 2004; vowel alternations in
European Portuguese, Fikkert & Freitas, 2006), others have claimed that adult-like
mastery does not emerge until relatively late (Pierrehumbert, 2003). A number of
factors, such as phonetic grounding, frequency, locality, amount of exposure, and
knowledge of abstract features, have been shown to influence the acquisition process
and generalization behavior (Baer-Henney & van de Vijver, 2012; Cristia & Seidl,
2008; van de Vijver & Baer-Henney, 2014; Wilson, 2006).
Buckler and Fikkert (2016) investigated how voicing alternations are represented
in the lexicon of Dutch and German 3-year-olds. Like German, Dutch also exhibits
final obstruent devoicing and voicing alternations across morphological paradigms.
That is, a syllable-final voiceless obstruent in the singular of a noun may correspond
in the plural to a voiced obstruent (e.g., <bed> [bt] bed - <bedden> [bdn]
beds). The authors employed a visual fixation procedure to measure the child's sensitivity to mispronunciations of voicing word-medially in both monomorphemic
words and both alternating and non-alternating bimorphemic plural forms. They
hoped that this method would allow them to detect learners' knowledge about
the voicing alternations in the two languages in advance of their production ability.
The German children demonstrated robust representation of voicing alternations
within morphological paradigms (i.e., they demonstrated knowledge of which
lexical items alternated and which did not, and word recognition was inhibited
by mispronunciations). The Dutch children, in contrast, exhibited evidence of
overgeneralization of the voicing alternation (e.g., they showed more recognition
of plural words with [d], regardless of whether this was the correct pronunciation
of the words or a mispronunciation), suggesting that they were aware of the voicing
alternation, but preferred for the alternation to occur across all words. The authors
attribute the earlier mastery of the voicing alternation by German than Dutch peers
to differences in the robustness of cues to voicing and the voicing alternation in the
phonological system and across the lexicon.
Other researchers have employed "wug tests" (Berko, 1958) to investigate the
productive mastery of voicing alternations in children learning German and
Dutch. These studies have typically observed generalization errors, even when
the same child can correctly deploy variants of familiar words (Kerkhoff, 2007;
van de Vijver & Baer-Henney, 2011; Zamuner, Kerkhoff, & Fikkert, 2006, 2012).
For example, van de Vijver and Baer-Henney (2011) examined the acquisition of
voicing and vowel alternations in German-learning children. In the first experiment
involving a reverse wug test, a group of 5-year-old German-learning children were
asked to produce the singular form for plural words and nonwords from either a
voicing alternation context, a vowel alternation context, or both. The children were
largely successful in providing the singular form for known plural words, demonstrating they know which lexical items alternate and which do not, as well as which
type of alternation the words undergo. However, they failed to provide a
singular for plural nonwords (repeating the plural form instead), suggesting that
their knowledge of the alternations is not yet productive at this age. In a second
experiment, the children were asked to provide the plural for singular words and
nonwords. While they were more accurate at providing a plural for a word than
a nonword, they were able to provide a plural for some nonword stimuli as well,
generalizing alternations from pairs of words to nonwords. They were, however,

522

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

more likely to generalize the voicing alternation, which is phonetically motivated,
than the vowel alternation, which is not. However, alternations were dispreferred in
nonwords across both experiments. Similar findings have been reported from wug
tests examining the productivity of Dutch-learning children's knowledge of final
obstruent devoicing (Kerkhoff, 2007; Zamuner et al., 2006, 2012).
L2 learners have been found to devoice word-final consonants in speech
production even when devoicing is not part of either the L1 or the L2 grammars
(see, e.g., Broselow, Chen, & Wang, 1998; Eckman, 1981; Hayes-Harb, Smith,
Bent, & Bradlow, 2008). This phenomenon has been attributed to the relative
"unmarkedness" of final devoicing, with relevant predictions formalized in the
markedness differential hypothesis (Eckman, 1977). Nonetheless, studies that have
investigated the acquisition of German final devoicing by adult L2 learners have
typically reported non-target-like mastery (e.g., Hayes-Harb et al., 2018; Smith &
Peterson, 2012; Young-Scholten, 2002). Smith and Peterson (2012) investigated
the acquisition of German final devoicing by native English adult learners of
German as a L2. Learners' productions of orthographically similar English and
German words were compared along several relevant acoustic measures known
to vary with the voicing of final segments. As a group, the learners performed differently in German and English, suggesting that they (or at least some of them) had
learned the final devoicing pattern to some degree and had modified one or more
relevant acoustic parameters in their German production. There was considerable
individual variation, however. Only a few participants performed within the native
range, while most showed only limited progress.
Young-Scholten (2002) reported longitudinal data on the phonological acquisition of three native-English-speaking adolescents at various points during their stay
in Germany as exchange students. She observed that the learners differed in their
success in acquiring the German final devoicing pattern. She noted that the individuals who exhibited the most progress in learning the pattern were those who
reported the least amount of exposure to written input. While this research did
not establish a causal relationship between orthographic input and failure to acquire
German final devoicing, it is consistent with the hypothesis that the transfer of
native English speakers' final voicing contrast is reinforced by misleading
orthographic representations of German words.
Building on Young-Scholten's finding, Hayes-Harb et al. (2018) directly investigated the hypothesis that exposure to German written forms interferes with learners'
ability to establish target-like surface forms for underlyingly voiced final obstruents.
Twenty-six native English speakers with no prior German language learning experience were taught a German-like mini-lexicon consisting of 12 auditory nonwords
forming six minimal pairs differing in the underlying voicing of the word-final
obstruents. Subjects were randomly assigned to one of two word learning conditions: No Spell and Spell. During the word learning phase, each nonword was associated with a pictured "meaning." The Spell group additionally saw the written form
of each word displayed below the image. At test, participants in the Spell group were
more likely than participants in the No Spell group to produce the words that were
spelled with final voiced obstruent letters with a voiced final obstruent, suggesting
that orthographic input may have overridden the auditory input for participants in
this group. Moreover, this finding was replicated in a second group of participants

Applied Psycholinguistics

523

even though these participants received explicit instruction about German spelling
in an effort to prevent the interference from written input in Hayes-Harb et al.
(2018, Experiment 2). Their study thus established a causal link between knowledge
of a words' spelled forms and non-target-like surface voicing in L2 German acquisition by native English speakers. However, it did not investigate the acquisition of
the process of final obstruent devoicing in German. As Young-Scholten (2002,
p. 268) noted, it is not possible to determine what a learner's underlying representations are on the basis of her or his production of just one of the alternants. To this
end, in the present study we investigate the influence of orthographic input in the L2
acquisition of the German final devoicing process by native English speakers. In
Experiment 1, we ask whether naive adult learners demonstrate a German-like pattern of final devoicing when there is evidence in the auditory input for both the
voiced and the voiceless alternants (Research Question 1; RQ1), and whether orthographic input interferes with the acquisition of the phonological process even when
evidence of the alternation is available in the auditory input (Research Question 2;
RQ2). In Experiment 2, we replicate the findings from Experiment 1 with a new set
of participants, then ask whether these naive adult learners can extend their knowledge of a German-like pattern of final devoicing to new word forms (Research
Question 3; RQ3), and whether orthographic input interferes with the generalization of the phonological process to novel forms (Research Question 4; RQ4).

Experiment 1: acquisition of the final devoicing alternation
Participants

Twenty native speakers of English (4 male, 16 female; mean age = 22.3 years;
range = 18-29 years) with no prior experience learning German or any other
final-devoicing language were recruited from undergraduate linguistics courses at
the University of Utah and earned course credit for their participation. An additional 2 participants (one from each word learning condition) completed the study,
but their data is not considered here because these 2 participants did not pass the
criterion test (details below). None of the participants reported having a hearing,
speech, language processing, or neurological disorder. Subjects were randomly
assigned to one of two word learning conditions: the Orthography group or the
No Orthography group.
Stimuli

Stimuli consisted of 12 German-like words, including some actual German words
as well as nonwords. All words were of the form consonant-consonant-vowel-
consonant (CCVC), with the onsets [k], [t], or [t], the vowels [o], [i], [a], or
[a], and the codas [t/d], [p/b], and [k/g] (see Appendix A). Half of the words were
alternating (i.e., ending in a voiced stop consonant) and the other half were nonalternating (i.e., ending in a voiceless stop consonant). Previous artificial lexicon
studies have included minimal pairs in their stimulus sets, typically for the purpose
of emphasizing the relevant phonological contrasts in the input to participants.
Here, we did not include final voiced and voiceless minimal pairs, as HayesHarb et al. (2018) noted that doing so may have artificially enhanced the influence

524

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

of orthographic input in their study. To create morphologically complex forms that
provide evidence for the underlying voicing of the words, we also presented words
in their "pseudo-plural" forms. German-like plural forms of each of the words were
created by adding the suffix /-en/ to the singular form (e.g., /kak/ [kak] penguin - /
kaken/ [kakn] penguins; /tob/ [top] fork - /toben/ [tobn] forks). Two
female native speakers of German were recorded reading the words in their singular
and plural forms four times each; two tokens (the second and third production) of
the singular and plural forms of each word were selected from each talker for the
experiment, for a total of four auditory tokens of each word in the singular and four
in the plural form. The words were randomly paired with visual referents portraying
their meanings (line drawings of vehicles, animals, clothing, etc.; Snodgrass &
Vanderwart, 1980). Participants in the Orthography group additionally saw the
written form of each word below the image. The full set of auditory and visual stimuli is provided in Appendix A. Auditory and visual stimuli for both experiments
have been made available at http://www.iris-database.org.
Procedure

We employed an artificial lexicon study format consisting of a word learning phase,
a criterion test, and a final production test. During the experimental procedure, the
participant was seated in a sound-attenuated booth. Auditory stimuli were played at
a comfortable listening level over headphones while visual stimuli were presented on
a computer screen in front of them. The visual and auditory stimuli were presented
using DMDX experiment presentation software (Forster & Forster, 2003). A keyboard and a microphone were used to record the responses during the criterion test
and the final test, respectively. Following the experimental task, participants completed a language background questionnaire. The entire visit lasted 40-50 min.
Word learning phase

During the word learning phase, participants were exposed to the auditory forms of
the words and saw a corresponding image depicting the words' meanings.
Participants in the Orthography group additionally saw the spelled form of the word
displayed immediately below the image. In a given exposure trial, participants first
heard the singular form of the word and saw its corresponding meaning displayed
for 2000 ms. Then, 500 ms later, the auditory and visual for the plural form of the
same word were displayed for 2000 ms. This was followed by a 1500 ms break before
the next trial began. Figure 1 provides an example of a word learning trial for the
Orthography group. Participants in the No Orthography condition did not see the
written forms displayed below the images during word learning.
A word learning block consisted of the random-ordered presentation of each
of the 12 words 4 times (once with each of 4 unique auditory word tokens;
2 speakers x 2 tokens/speaker) in both their singular and plural forms, for a total
of 48 singular and 48 plural forms per block. The block was presented 4 times, for a
total of 192 singular and 192 plural forms per iteration of the word learning phase.
Each block was separated by a participant-controlled break. No response was
required of participants during this phase. Participants were instructed to learn
the new words and their meanings.

Applied Psycholinguistics

525

Figure 1. Example word learning trial for the Orthography group for Experiment 1 and Experiment 2A.

Figure 2. Example of a match and a mismatch trial from the criterion test for Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2A.

Criterion test phase

Following the word learning phase, participants completed a criterion test to ensure
that they had sufficient knowledge of the words to complete the final test. The criterion test consisted of a two-way forced-choice auditory word-picture matching
task, in which participants heard the singular form of a word and saw an image
and were asked to decide if the auditory form and the image matched or not by
pressing keys labeled YES or NO on a keyboard. The criterion test consisted of each
of the 12 singular forms presented once in a match trial and once in a mismatch trial
(24 trials total), with trials presented in a random order. Figure 2 illustrates a match
and mismatch trial from the criterion test. It is important to note that the criterion
test only tested participants' ability to detect mismatches among very different
words. Subjects passed the criterion test when they reached 90% accuracy or better.
Picture naming test

In the final test, participants completed a picture naming task. On a given trial,
participants saw an image and were asked to produce the auditory form that corresponded to that image. They had 6 s to produce the word before the next trial
commenced. The test consisted of two blocks. In the first block, two productions
of each of the 12 singular forms were elicited in a random order. In the second block,
two productions of each of the 12 plural forms were elicited, for a total of 48
productions per participant. Figure 3 provides an example of the singular and plural
test trials.

526

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Figure 3. Examples of the singular and plural test trials for Experiment 1 and Experiment 2A.

Coding

Each of the 960 productions (12 words x 2 morphological conditions x 2 tokens x
20 speakers) elicited during the final test was extracted from the long sound file with
the help of PRAAT software (Boersma & Weenink, 2018) and were coded by the
authors for their "global correctness." Globally correct productions contained final
consonants with the target place and manner, and differed from the target by no
more than one segment (added, deleted, or substituted) beyond the voicing of
the final segment (e.g., for the target /top/ the following productions were accepted
as globally correct: [top], [stop], [tob], [tp], [stob], but not [stp]). Both authors
separately judged each auditory token for global correctness. When there were disagreements, the conflict was resolved by consulting a third individual. Out of 960
total speech tokens produced, 801 (83.4%) were judged to be globally correct and
were submitted to coding. There was no difference between the average percentage
of globally correct productions for the Orthography group (84.4%) and the No
Orthography group (82.5%); t (18) = -0.29, p = .778.
In order to determine whether participants produced singular (final) and plural
(nonfinal) segments as voiced or voiceless, an additional 32 participants from the
same population (15 male, 17 female; mean age = 22.03 years; range = 18-27 years)
were recruited as "coders" and were asked to identify the target consonant in each
production. The choice to use native English-speaking coders with similar phonetic/
phonological systems to categorize the productions as voiced or voiceless, as
opposed to native German-speaking coders or acoustic analyses, reflects our interest
not in whether our initial-state learners have acquired the phonetics of German final
devoicing, but rather whether they have learned the phonological pattern of alternation and produced what they intended to be voiced or voiceless final obstruent
categories. All globally correct productions from each participant were presented to
coders in a two-way forced-choice task. Coders heard the productions of the
German-like words ending in either a voiced or a voiceless final obstruent and were
asked to judge whether the final segment was voiced or voiceless (e.g., heard tro[b/p]
and judged whether the final segment was a <b> or a <p>). They completed four
practice trials with additional words and final/nonfinal consonants not related to the
task (e.g., heard [pel] and judged whether the final segment was a <l> vs. <r>)
prior to completing the test in order to ensure their understanding of the task.
In order to reduce the tokens judged by each coder to a manageable number,
not all tokens were presented to all coders. Each globally accurate production of
a singular form was randomly assigned to one of four "singular" lists. Globally accurate productions of each plural form were also distributed randomly and equally

Applied Psycholinguistics

527

Figure 4. Mean proportion voiceless productions by word learning group, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 1. Error bars represent one SE of the mean.

across four "plural" lists. Which singular and which plural lists were coded, as well
as the order of presentation among lists, was counterbalanced across coders, such
that each of the four singular lists was paired with each of the four plural lists twice
(once preceding it, and once following it). Ultimately, each token was coded by eight
coders, and each coder coded 200 or 201 tokens.
Results of Experiment 1

Experiment 1 was designed to address two research questions:
* RQ1: Do naive adult learners demonstrate a German-like pattern of final
devoicing when there is evidence in the auditory input for both the voiced
and the voiceless alternants?
* RQ2: Does orthographic input interfere with the acquisition of the phonological
process even when evidence of the alternation is available in the auditory input?
The answer to the first research question lies in a differential effect of morphological condition on the two levels of underlying voicing, and crucially, more voiceless productions in the singular (unsuffixed) than the plural (suffixed) forms of the
underlyingly voiced words.
The answer to the second research question comes from a comparison of the performance of the Orthography and No Orthography groups with respect to evidence of
the acquisition of devoicing. A three-way interaction (Underlying Voicing x
Morphological Condition x Word Learning Condition), where the Orthography
group does not acquire the final devoicing process as the No Orthography group does,
would provide evidence of interference from written input.
Figure 4 presents the mean proportion of voiceless productions by word learning
condition, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 1. As
expected, participants in both groups produced underlyingly voiceless obstruents as
voiceless the majority of the time. Moreover, underlyingly voiceless (non-alternating)

528

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

words varied little as a function of morphological condition (underlyingly voiceless
singular = .89, plural = .82 for the No Orthography group and singular = .94,
plural = .89 for the Orthography group). Relative to the non-alternating words, words
containing underlyingly voiced consonants were produced as voiceless relatively less
often and the proportion of voiceless productions varied considerably more as a
function of word learning group and morphological condition (No Orthography,
singular = .52, plural = .29; Orthography, singular = .25, plural = .11).
To analyze the data from our two word learning groups of interest, we first performed an omnibus analysis using generalized mixed-effects models with crossed
random effects for speaker, word, and coder using the lme4 package (version
1.1-15; Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) of R (version 3.3.1). The model
was fit with voiceless productions as the dependent variable (coded as voiceless = 1,
voiced = 0 for each observation) for which a logistic linking function was used. The
analysis included contrast coded fixed effects for word learning condition (-.5 = No
Orthography, .5 = Orthography), underlying voicing (-.5 = voiced, .5 = voiceless),
and morphological condition (-.5 = plural, .5 = singular) in a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial
design. Random effects were fit using a "maximal" random effects structure (Barr,
Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013), including random intercepts for speaker, word, and
coder, by-speaker random slopes for underlying voicing and morphological condition, by-word random slopes for word learning condition and morphological condition, and by-coder random slopes for underlying voicing, morphological
condition, and word learning condition. Models were fit using a maximum likelihood technique. Planned comparisons were conducted using simultaneous tests for
general linear hypotheses with the multcomp package in R (Hothorn, Bretz, &
Westfall, 2008). P-values were adjusted using the single-step method and a
family-wise error rate protection via Bonferroni correction. Data and analysis code
for both experiments have been made available at https://dataverse.org/.
Results indicated that participants produced more voiceless productions for
underlyingly voiceless than for underlyingly voiced words (main effect of underlying voicing) and for unsuffixed (singular) than for suffixed (plural) forms (main
effect of morphological condition). These main effects were qualified by a twoway interaction of word learning condition and underlying voicing and a threeway interaction of word learning condition, underlying voicing, and morphological
condition, suggesting that the magnitude of the devoicing effect varied as a function
of word learning group. No other main effects or interactions were significant. The
results of the omnibus analysis are reported in Table 1a.
To better understand this three-way interaction and to directly address our first
research question, we conducted follow-up analyses to examine the effects of underlying voicing and morphological condition separately for the No Orthography and
Orthography groups. The model of the data subset by word learning group included
fixed effects underlying voicing and morphological condition and their interaction,
as well as random intercepts for speaker, word, coder, and by-speaker and by-coder
random slopes for underlying voicing and morphological condition, and by-word
random slopes for morphological condition.
Fixed effects for the No Orthography group indicated that more voiceless productions were observed for underlyingly voiceless than for underlyingly voiced
words (main effect of underlying voicing) and for unsuffixed (singular) than for

Applied Psycholinguistics

529

Table 1. (a) Mixed effects model omnibus analysis examining the effects of underlying voicing,
morphological condition, and word learning condition, and individual mixed effects analyses for (b)
the No Orthography group and (c) the Orthography group for Experiment 1
Random effects
Fixed effects
Parameters
(a) Omnibus analysis

By
speaker

By
word

By
coder

Estimate

SE

z

p

SD

SD

SD

1.08

0.22

5.01

<.001

0.65

0.46

0.40

0.45

0.42

0.92

0.14

0.62

0.38

a

(Intercept)
Underlying voicing

3.00

0.40

7.51

<.001

1.18

Morphological condition

0.84

0.27

3.16

<.01

0.91

Word learning condition

-0.73

0.41

-1.81

.070

Underlying Voicing x
Morphological Condition

-0.38

0.31

-1.22

.225

Underlying Voicing x Word
Learning Condition

3.19

0.77

4.12

<.001

Morphological Condition x
Word Learning Condition

-0.19

0.44

-0.44

.658

Underlying Voicing x
Morphological Condition x
Word Learning Condition

0.75

0.34

2.17

.030

1.47

0.29

5.02

<.001

0.67

0.51

(b) No Orthography groupb
(Intercept)
Underlying voicing

1.35

0.46

2.93

.003

0.80

Morphological condition

0.98

0.40

2.48

.013

1.00

0.71

0.14

Underlying Voicing x
Morphological Condition

-0.90

0.47

-1.93

.054

0.74

0.31

2.41

.016

0.61

0.73

0.43

0.54

0.66

0.51

(c) Orthography groupc
(Intercept)
Underlying voicing

4.62

0.66

6.97

<.001

1.51

Morphological condition

0.70

0.36

1.97

.048

0.82

Underlying Voicing x
Morphological Condition

0.16

0.44

0.36

.723

0.37

Note: All factors were coded using contrast coding, as follows: word learning condition (-.5 = No Orthography, .5 =
Orthography), underlying voicing (-.5 = voiced, .5 = voiceless), morphological condition (-.5 = plural, .5 = singular).
a
Omnibus analysis model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition * Word Learning
Condition  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Word Learning Condition 
Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition  Word Learning
Condition | CoderID).
b
No Orthography group model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition  (1  Underlying
Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing 
Morphological Condition | CoderID).
c
Orthography group model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition  (1  Underlying
Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing 
Morphological Condition | CoderID).

530

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

suffixed (plural) forms (main effect of morphological condition). The interaction of
morphological condition and underlying voicing was marginal. Although this interaction was not significant, it was the case that the simple effect of morphological
condition within the No Orthography group was significant for underlyingly voiced
words (estimate = 1.32, SE = 0.37, z = 3.53, p = .003) and nonsignificant for underlyingly voiceless words (estimate = 1.56, SE = 1.39, z = 1.449, p = .62), suggesting
that a differential effect of morphological condition was observed for the two levels
of underlying voicing. The results of the No Orthography group analysis are
reported in Table 1b.
Significant main effects of underlying voicing and of morphological condition
were also observed for the Orthography group. Of importance here, the interaction
of morphological condition and underlying voicing was not significant, nor were
the simple effects of morphological condition observed for underlyingly voiced
(estimate = 0.75, SE = 0.38, z = 1.972, p = .28) or underlyingly voiceless words
(estimate = 0.74, SE = 0.42, z = 1.785, p = .39), suggesting that, unlike the
Orthography group, no statistical evidence for the acquisition of the final devoicing
process was observed for the Orthography group. The results of the Orthography
group analysis are reported in Table 1c.
Pairwise comparisons of the word learning groups confirmed that the two groups
differed in the voiceless productions made for the underlyingly voiced words in the
singular (estimate = -2.61, SE = 0.61, z = -4.269, p < .001) and plural (estimate =
-2.04, SE = 0.62, z = -3.274, p < .01), with the Orthography group producing fewer
voiceless productions than the No Orthography group in each case. As expected, the
groups did not differ in the voiceless productions made for the underlyingly
voiceless words in the singular (estimate = 0.95, SE = 0.59, z = 1.616, p = .50) or
the plural (estimate = 0.77, SE = 0.61, z = 1.265, p = .75).
Discussion of Experiment 1

In Experiment 1 we asked whether native English-speaking adult L2 learners acquire
a German-like pattern of final devoicing when they have auditory evidence for both
the voiced and the voiceless alternants (RQ1). We observed that both groups of
participants produced more underlyingly voiced forms as voiceless in the singular
than the plural condition, suggesting that they picked up on the alternation in the
auditory input to some degree. However, the pattern was only significant for the No
Orthography group.
We also asked whether orthographic input interferes with the acquisition of the
phonological process even when evidence of the alternation is available in the auditory input (RQ2). The answer to this question appears to be "yes." The significant
three-way interaction of word learning condition, morphological condition, and
underlying voicing indicates that the alternation was learned differentially as a result
of exposure (or not) to written input. In particular, our follow-up analyses suggest
that the No Orthography group, but not the Orthography group, showed evidence
of having acquired the final devoicing process. Moreover, a comparison of the two
word learning groups revealed that learners who had been exposed to written forms
erroneously produced more underlyingly voiced stops as voiced word-finally (i.e., in
the singular) than those who did not see written forms, corroborating past findings

Applied Psycholinguistics

531

(Hayes-Harb et al., 2018). However, the Orthography group correctly produced
more underlyingly voiced obstruents as voiced in the plural than did participants
in the No Orthography group. This pattern suggests a potential trade-off of exposure to written input, which will be taken up in further detail in the General
Discussion section.
Our findings thus far are restricted to learners' performance on trained items.
That is, participants were exposed to words in both their suffixed (plural) and unsuffixed (singular) forms and were tested on the same set of singular and plural words.
As a result, we cannot conclude that participants have necessarily acquired a phonological process. Instead, they may have simply memorized which auditory forms
match which images. The hallmark of having learned a phonological process is productivity, or the ability to generalize a pattern beyond known forms. In order to
ensure the robustness of our findings from Experiment 1, as well as to investigate
whether learners have acquired knowledge of a phonological process that generalizes to a set of untrained items, we conducted a second experiment. Experiment 2A
involves a direct replication of Experiment 1 in a new group of learners and coders,
with the exception that coding was carried out online rather than in the laboratory.
Experiment 2B addresses the nature of the knowledge acquired by the learners. In
Experiment 2B, participants were exposed to a new set of words in only their plural
forms (which provides evidence for the underlying form of the target obstruents). At
test, they were asked to name the words in their singular forms, providing an opportunity to produce final devoicing for underlyingly voiced final obstruents. If learners
inferred a phonological process that extends across the lexicon, rather than memorized patterns of surface voicing for trained items, underlyingly voiced obstruents in
new plural words should be devoiced in their unsuffixed (i.e., singular) form when
they occur in word-final position.

Experiment 2: generalization of the final devoicing alternation
Participants

Participants were 20 new native English speakers with no prior experience with
German or any other final devoicing language (8 male, 11 female, 1 other; mean
age = 24.5 years; range = 18-51 years). They met the same inclusionary criteria
as participants in Experiment 1. They were randomly assigned to one of two word
learning conditions: Orthography or No Orthography.

Stimuli

The stimuli used in Experiment 2A were identical to those used in Experiment 1.
Only one of the two speakers from Experiment 1 was able to return to record the
new words for Experiment 2B, so the generalization words in Experiment 2B were
produced by one familiar and one new female speaker. The new words were paired
with six new images portraying their meanings. The full set of stimuli used in
Experiment 2B is provided in Appendix B. Experiment 2B stimuli consisted of
six German-like words of the form C(C)VC, with the onsets [f], [b], [gl], [f],
or [sm], the vowels [o], [i], [a], or [u], and the codas [t/d], [p/b], or [k/g].

532

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Figure 5. Example of a word learning trial for the Orthography group in Experiment 2B.

Figure 6. An example of a match and a mismatch trial from the criterion test for Experiment 2B.

Procedure

The procedure for Experiment 2A was identical to that of Experiment 1. Following
Experiment 2A, participants immediately participated in Experiment 2B.
Word learning phase (Experiment 2B)

During the word learning phase, participants were exposed to the auditory forms of
the six new German-like words in their plural forms, and a picture depicting the
word's meaning would appear on the screen in front of them. As for Experiment
2A, participants in the Orthography group additionally saw the spelled form of
the word below the image. Figure 5 provides an example of a word learning trial
for the Orthography group.
Each of the six words was presented in its plural form in a random order four
times per block, with each presentation of a word involving a unique production
from the two female German speakers. There were four blocks per word learning
cycle separated by a participant-controlled break for a total of 96 trials.
Criterion test phase (Experiment 2B)

Participants completed a criterion test of 12 trials (6 match and 6 mismatch) presented in a random order to ensure that they had sufficient knowledge of the new
words to complete the final test. Figure 6 shows an example of a match and a mismatch trial from the criterion test for Experiment 2B.
Picture naming test (Experiment 2B)

Two productions of each of the 6 singular forms followed by the 6 plural forms were
elicited for a total of 24 productions per participant for Experiment 2B. Figure 7
provides an example of the singular and plural test trials.
Coding

PRAAT software (Boersma & Weenink, 2018) was used to extract each of the 1,440
productions (18 words x 2 morphological conditions x 2 tokens x 20 speakers)

Applied Psycholinguistics

533

Figure 7. An example of the singular and plural test trials for Experiment 2B.

elicited during the final tests of Experiments 2A and 2B. Globally correct productions (1,076/1,440 or 74.7% of productions) again had the target place and manner
of the final consonant and differed from the target by no more than one segment
(added/changed/deleted) beyond the voicing of the final segment. Global accuracy
for Experiment 2A was 76.7% (737/960 productions), and for Experiment 2B it was
70.6% (339/480). It is worth noting that this is somewhat lower than global accuracy
in Experiment 1; however, the mean global accuracy in Experiments 2A/2B for the
No Orthography group (71.8%) did not differ significantly from the Orthography
group (77.6%); t (18) = -0.99, p = .33.
All globally correct productions from each participant were presented to a new
group of 75 coders (40 male, 35 female; mean age = 22.09 years; range = 18-46
years) in a two-way forced-choice task. Data was collected online via Qualtrics
(www.qualtrics.com), and tokens were randomly assigned to coders. Each coder
judged approximately 200 productions total (mean = 196; range = 192-199), and
each individual production was coded by between 6 and 21 coders (mean = 14).
Twelve non-test items involving three-syllable English words (4 words x 3 repetitions) were interspersed among the test items in both the singular and the plural
blocks as a sound check and to ensure that the participants were attending sufficiently
to the task. The words were presented auditorily, and subjects were required to select
the word that they heard from among four options: arrival, tornado, determine, and
seventeen. Only a single error was made on these items by one participant, allowing us
to be fairly confident that all the coders performed the task with care.
Results of Experiment 2
Experiment 2A

The mean proportion of voiceless productions by word learning condition, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 2A are shown in
Figure 8. As expected, participants in both groups produced underlyingly voiceless
obstruents as voiceless the majority of the time and the proportion of voiceless consonants produced in underlyingly voiceless (non-alternating) words varied little
as a function of morphological condition (underlyingly voiceless singular = .92,
plural = .85 for the No Orthography group and singular = .94, plural = .93 for
the Orthography group). Relative to the non-alternating words, words containing
underlyingly voiced consonants were produced as voiceless relatively less often
and the proportion of voiceless productions varied considerably more as a
function of word learning group and morphological condition (No Orthography,
singular = .79, plural = .54; Orthography, singular = .43, plural = .35).

534

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Figure 8. Mean proportion voiceless productions by word learning group, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 2A. Error bars represent one SE of the mean.

It is also worth noting that the data look quite similar to the data from
Experiment 1, particularly for the No Orthography group, with a few minor differences. Relative to the participants in the Orthography group in Experiment 1, the
participants in the Orthography group in Experiment 2A produced numerically
more voiceless productions for three of the four conditions. The magnitude of
the difference between the two morphological conditions for the underlyingly voiced
words is also smaller in Experiment 2A than in Experiment 1. It is likely that these
differences reflect individual variation in how evidence from written input impacts
learners' inferences about the phonolexcial representation of new words, and/or individuals' inferences about whether or not particular words alternate. If this is true, then it
may be the case that participants in Experiment 2A relied less on written input and/or
were less likely to infer that alternating words undergo an alternation.
The statistical analysis consisted of an omnibus analysis following the analysis
procedures detailed for Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, more voiceless productions were observed for underlyingly voiceless than for underlyingly voiced words (a
main effect of underlying voicing) and for unsuffixed (singular) than for suffixed
(plural) forms (a main effect of morphological condition). The two-way interactions
of word learning condition and underlying voicing, and word learning condition
and morphological condition, were also significant. A significant three-way interaction
of word learning condition, underlying voicing, and morphological condition was also
observed, suggesting that the magnitude of the devoicing effect varied as a function of
word learning group and underlying voicing. No other main effects or interactions
reached significance. The results of the omnibus model are reported in Table 2.
To follow up on the three-way interaction and answer RQ1, we examined the
effects of underlying voicing and morphological condition separately for the No
Orthography and Orthography groups. If either of the groups has acquired a
German-like pattern of final devoicing, we should observe an interaction of morphological condition and underlying voicing and/or a simple effect of morphological condition in underlyingly voiced forms but not underlyingly voiceless forms.
The model of the data subset by word learning group included fixed effects

Applied Psycholinguistics

535

Table 2. (a) Mixed effects model omnibus analysis examining the effects of underlying voicing,
morphological condition, and word learning condition, and individual mixed effects analyses for (b)
the No Orthography group and (c) the Orthography group for Experiment 2A
Random effects
By
By
By
speaker word coder

Fixed effects
Parameters
(a) Omnibus analysis

Estimate

SE

z

p

SD

SD

SD

1.41

0.22

6.39

<.001

0.68

0.51

0.44

0.50

0.36

0.59

0.24

0.52

0.39

a

(Intercept)
Underlying voicing

2.90

0.37

7.80

<.001

0.82

Morphological condition

0.76

0.21

3.68

<.001

0.55

Word learning condition

-0.43

0.36

-1.22

.224

Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition

-0.44

0.32

-1.34

.180

Underlying Voicing x Word Learning
Condition

2.24

0.52

4.30

<.001

-0.95

0.28

-3.39

<.001

0.70

0.27

2.57

.010

Morphological Condition x Word
Learning Condition
Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition x Word Learning Condition

0.87

(b) No Orthography groupb
(Intercept)

1.66

0.27

6.18

<.001

0.67

Underlying voicing

1.79

0.40

4.51

<.001

0.71

Morphological condition

1.31

0.34

3.86

<.001

0.60

0.89

0.42

-0.71

0.56

-1.27

.203

0.66

0.51

Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition

0.71

(c) Orthography groupc
(Intercept)

1.24

0.30

4.11

<.001

0.68

Underlying voicing

4.08

0.52

7.84

<.001

0.95

Morphological condition

0.24

0.19

1.27

.205

0.46

Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition

0.07

0.23

0.30

.764

1.16
0.16

0.22

Note: All factors were coded using contrast coding, as follows: word learning condition (-.5 = No Orthography,
.5 = Orthography), underlying voicing (-.5 = voiced, .5 = voiceless), morphological condition (-.5 = plural, .5 = singular).
a
Omnibus analysis model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition * Word Learning
Condition  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Word Learning Condition 
Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition  Word Learning Condition |
CoderID).
b
No Orthography group model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition  (1  Underlying
Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing 
Morphological Condition | CoderID).
c
Orthography group model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition  (1  Underlying
Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing 
Morphological Condition | CoderID).

536

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

underlying voicing and morphological condition and their interaction, as well as
random intercepts for speaker, word, coder, and by-speaker and by-coder
random slopes for underlying voicing and morphological condition, and by-word
random slopes for morphological condition (Table 2a and 2b).
For the No Orthography group, fixed effects indicated that more voiceless productions were observed for the underlyingly voiceless than for the underlyingly
voiced words (a main effect of underlying voicing) and for unsuffixed (singular)
than for suffixed (plural) forms (a main effect of morphological condition). To our surprise, the interaction of morphological condition and underlying voicing was not significant. However, the simple effect of morphological condition within the No
Orthography group was significant for underlyingly voiced words (estimate = 1.63,
SE = 0.30, z = 5.49, p < .001), but was marginal for underlyingly voiceless words
(estimate = 0.84, SE = 0.31, z = 2.71, p = .05).
For the Orthography group, the main effects of underlying voicing and of morphological condition were again observed. The interaction of morphological condition and underlying voicing was not significant, nor was the simple effect of
morphological condition observed for underlyingly voiced words (estimate = 0.33,
SE = 0.29, z = 1.12, p = .84) or underlyingly voiceless pairs (estimate = 0.24,
SE = 0.31, z = 0.76, p = .96), suggesting that, unlike the No Orthography group,
we do not find evidence for the acquisition of a German-like final devoicing process
by the Orthography group.
Pairwise comparisons of the two word learning conditions confirmed that the
groups differed in the number of voiceless productions they produced for the underlyingly voiced words in the singular (estimate = -2.20, SE = 0.53, z = -4.14,
p < .001), but not for the underlyingly voiced words in the plural (estimate = -0.91,
SE = 0.45, z = -2.02, p = .25). As expected, no difference between the groups was
observed for the underlyingly voiceless words in the singular (estimate = 0.39,
SE = 0.45, z = 0.87, p = .94) or in the plural (estimate = 0.99, SE = 0.44, z = 2.26,
p = .15). Together, the three-way interaction, the significant two-way interaction
between morphological condition and underlying voicing for the No Orthography
group but not the Orthography group, and the pairwise comparisons just described
provide evidence for an interfering effect of written input (RQ2).
Experiment 2B

Experiment 2B was designed to examine whether knowledge of a German-like final
devoicing process acquired during Experiment 2A extended to new words. We
addressed two research questions:
* RQ3: Do naive adult learners generalize knowledge of a German-like pattern of
final devoicing to new words?
* RQ4: Does orthographic input interfere with the generalization of the phonological process to novel forms?
The answer to RQ3 lies in a differential effect of morphological condition on the
two levels of underlying voicing, and crucially, more voiceless productions in the
singular (unsuffixed) than the plural (suffixed) forms of the underlyingly voiced
words. This could be observed as an interaction of morphological condition by

Applied Psycholinguistics

537

Figure 9. Mean proportion voiceless productions by word learning group, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 2B. Error bars represent one SE of the mean.

underlying voicing and/or a simple effect of morphological condition in underlyingly voiced forms but not underlyingly voiceless forms.
The answer to RQ4 comes from a comparison of the performance of the
Orthography and No Orthography groups with respect to evidence of the generalization of devoicing. A three-way interaction (Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition x Word Learning Condition), where the Orthography group exhibits less
robust generalization of the final devoicing process, relative to the No Orthography
group, would provide evidence of interference from written input.
Figure 9 presents the mean proportion of voiceless productions by word learning
condition, underlying voicing, and morphological condition for Experiment 2B. As
expected, participants in both groups produced underlyingly voiceless obstruents as
voiceless the majority of the time. Moreover, the proportion of voiceless productions
for the underlyingly voiceless (non-alternating) words varied very little as a function
of morphological condition (No Orthography, singular = .86, plural = .83;
Orthography, singular = .88, plural = .84). Relative to the underlyingly voiceless
consonants, underlyingly voiced consonants produced as voiceless relatively less
often and the proportion of voiceless productions varied more as a function of word
learning group and morphological condition (No Orthography, singular = .52,
plural = .29; Orthography, singular = .25, plural = .11).
It is also worth noting that the data from Experiment 2B look quite similar to the
data from Experiments 1 and 2A. However, while the magnitude of the difference
between the two morphological conditions for the underlyingly voiced words for the
No Orthography group is similar across experiments, relatively fewer voiceless productions were observed for underlyingly voiced words overall in Experiment 2B.
This may reflect the frequency of voiced and voiceless consonants in the auditory
input during the word learning phase. Voiceless consonants were less frequent in
Experiment 2B (.5) than in Experiments 1 and 2A (.75) due to exposure to only
suffixed (plurals) forms.
The statistical analysis again consisted of an omnibus analysis following the analysis procedures detailed for Experiment 1. The results indicated that participants

538

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Table 3. Mixed effects model omnibus analysis examining the effects of underlying voicing,
morphological condition, and word learning condition, and individual mixed effects analyses for the
No Orthography group and the Orthography group for Experiment 2B
Random effects
By
By
By
speaker word coder

Fixed effects
Parameters
Omnibus analysis

Estimate

SE

z

0.37

0.35

1.04

p

SD

SD

SD

0.95

0.66

0.56

0.37

0.87

1.00

0.45

a

(Intercept)

.298

Underlying voicing

4.07

0.69

5.89

<.001

1.74

Morphological condition

0.98

0.29

3.37

<.001

0.86

Word learning condition

-0.34

0.60

-0.56

.577

Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition

-0.52

0.38

-1.38

.169

Underlying Voicing x Word Learning
Condition

0.48

1.15

0.42

.676

-0.23

0.44

-0.53

.599

0.04

0.42

0.09

.929

Morphological Condition x Word
Learning Condition
Underlying Voicing x Morphological
Condition x Word Learning Condition

1.26

Note: All factors were coded using contrast coding, as follows: word learning condition (-.5 = No Orthography,
.5 = Orthography), underlying voicing (-.5 = voiced, .5 = voiceless), morphological condition (-.5 = plural, .5 = singular)
a
Omnibus analysis model formula: Voiceless ~ Underlying Voicing * Morphological Condition * Word Learning
Condition  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition | SpkrID)  (1  Word Learning Condition 
Morphological Condition | Word)  (1  Underlying Voicing  Morphological Condition  Word learning Condition |
CoderID).

produced more voiceless productions for underlyingly voiceless words than underlyingly voiced words (a main effect of underlying voicing). Participants also produced more voiceless productions for unsuffixed (singular) than for suffixed
(plural) forms (a main effect of morphological condition). There were no other significant main effects or interactions. The omnibus model results are reported in
Table 3.
Discussion of Experiment 2

Experiment 2 set out to investigate the robustness of the pattern observed in
Experiment 1, as well as to test the productivity of learners' knowledge of the
German final devoicing pattern. The results of Experiment 2A generally replicate
the findings of Experiment 1 in a new group of participants and with a new group
of coders who completed the coding task online. In particular, we observed that both
the participants who were exposed to words' written forms and those who were not
produced more voiceless productions for underlyingly voiced words in the singular
than in the plural. However, the difference between the two morphological conditions for the underlyingly voiced words was again only significant for the No
Orthography group, providing additional evidence that naive adult learners

Applied Psycholinguistics

539

demonstrate knowledge of a German-like final devoicing process when their auditory input contains both the voiced and the voiceless variants of alternating words
(RQ1). Moreover, the unexpected marginal simple effect of morphological condition for underlyingly voiceless (non-alternating words) may reflect knowledge of
this final devoicing process. Participants may have picked up on the devoicing pattern but have imperfect knowledge of which words alternate (and which do not),
causing them to overgeneralize the devoicing rule to some non-alternating words.
With respect to RQ2, the magnitude of the devoicing effect for the two word
learning groups varied as a function of morphological condition and underlying
voicing, resulting in a three-way interaction of word learning group, morphological
condition, and underlying voicing. Moreover, while both groups of learners demonstrate some sensitivity to the alternation in their input, statistical evidence of
robust devoicing was only observed for the No Orthography group, suggesting that
written input interfered with the acquisition of the final devoicing process by the
Orthography group. In addition, the Orthography group again produced significantly more voiced productions (non-targetlike surface forms) for the underlyingly
voiced singulars than did the No Orthography group in this condition, replicating
Experiment 1. It is worth noting that results for the so-called singular condition
exhibit the pattern previously reported in Hayes-Harb et al. (2018).
As participants in both groups appeared to acquire some knowledge of the
German final devoicing process, in Experiment 2B we asked whether adult L2 learners generalize a German-like pattern of final devoicing to newly learned words that
they are exposed to only in their suffixed (i.e., plural) forms. While we observe a
pattern similar to that found in Experiments 1 and 2A, there is no statistical support
for generalization of the final devoicing process to new words (RQ3), and thus no
evidence that written input interferes in the generalization of the final devoicing
process (RQ4).

General Discussion
Here we have reported the results of two experiments exploring the acquisition of a
German-like final devoicing process by adult native English speakers. In
Experiments 1 and 2A, we observed differential voicing of alternating (underlyingly
voiced) words in their unsuffixed (singular) and suffixed (plural) forms by participants in the No Orthography groups, but not the Orthography groups, suggesting
that participants exposed to auditory evidence for the alternation acquire some
knowledge of the final devoicing process (RQ1). This finding is consistent with
the results reported by Smith and Peterson (2012), who found limited devoicing
in German words relative to orthographically similar English words by native
English-speaking learners in their second semester of German. The fact that the
effect was only significant for the No Orthography group speaks to RQ2 (whether
access to written input during word learning interfered with the acquisition of the
German-like final devoicing process). We observed a significant three-way interaction of word learning condition, underlying voicing, and morphological condition,
suggesting differential acquisition of the final devoicing process and providing evidence that access to words' written forms interfered with participants' ability to
learn the alternation. We have thus provided evidence of an effect of orthographic

540

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

input on the acquisition of the final devoicing process, building on earlier findings
reported by Hayes-Harb et al. (2018).
In Experiment 2B, we examined whether participants acquired knowledge of the
final devoicing process that generalizes to a set of untrained items. The lack of evidence for generalization in Experiment 2B (RQ3; and thus a lack of evidence that
written input interferes with generalization; RQ4) is consistent with previous findings
suggesting that productive generalized knowledge of morphophonological alternations emerges late in first language acquisition (Kerkhoff, 2007; van de Vijver &
Baer-Henney, 2011; Zamuner et al., 2006, 2012). The difficulty associated with
generalization is ubiquitous in L1 and L2 acquisition more generally. For example,
perceptual training studies have demonstrated that generalization beyond trained
stimuli (e.g., to new tokens, talkers, phonological environments, etc.) requires both
a high degree of variability in the training stimuli and substantial training duration
(see, e.g., Bradlow, Pisoni, Akahane-Yamada, & Tohkura, 1997), neither or
which was involved in the present study. Moreover, as Pierrehumbert (2003) states,
"generalization about word-forms depends on knowing sufficient number or words.
Knowledge of morphophonological relations likewise depends on having sufficient
vocabulary, and a sufficient knowledge of syntactic and semantic relations amongst
words, for relevant word pairs to be identified and for generalizations to be formed
over these pairs" (p. 116). Future studies should consider the acquisition of other
morphophonological alternations, as well as explore the factors that influence their
acquisition and generalization by adult learners of a L2.
In order to acquire alternations, learners must infer both the underlying representations of the alternating words and the phonological rule that will allow them to
derive the surface forms from those underlying forms. By investigating the influence
of written input during the acquisition of a phonological process, we observed that
written input plays a more complex role in phonolexical acquisition than previously
thought. Our data suggests there may be an orthographic input trade-off. In both
Experiments 1 and 2A we observed that participants in the Orthography group were
at a disadvantage relative to the No Orthography group with respect to producing
target-like surface voicing for underlyingly voiced words in their singular forms.
That is, exposure to written input during word learning interfered with the acquisition of target-like surface voicing in this morphological condition. However,
the Orthography group appeared to have an advantage over participants in the
No Orthography group with respect to underlyingly voiced plural words
(Experiment 1), where the devoicing process does not apply and written input provides a helpful clue to the words' underlying forms. That is, learners who had access
to written forms while they learned the words were more likely than those who did
not to correctly produce underlyingly voiced plurals as voiced. The Orthography
group demonstrated a bias to represent the alternating (underlyingly voiced) words
as non-alternating and voiced throughout the paradigm (consistent with the orthographic representations), whereas the No Orthography participants, who did not
have access to the biasing effect of written forms, were more likely to infer that
the words are underlyingly voiceless (and thus produced underlyingly voiced forms,
both singular and plural, more often as voiceless, at >75% and >50%, respectively)
in Experiments 1 and 2A. That both groups (to some extent) favored uniformity
across the morphological paradigm is in line with previous research on the child

Applied Psycholinguistics

541

acquisition of final devoicing languages, such as German and Dutch (Kerkhoff,
2007; van de Vijver & Baer-Henney, 2011; Zamuner et al., 2006, 2012), and suggests
that paradigm uniformity (Steriade, 2000) may generally be favored at early stages of
acquisition regardless of whether learners are acquiring a L1 or L2. As the present
study focused on the acquisition of a German-like pattern of alternation within a
simplified plural paradigm by naive participants, additional research focused on
the acquisition of morphophonological alternations by adult L2 learners will be
needed to assess the robustness of these findings for other types of phonological
alternations. Moreover, research that looks at phonological acquisition over time
will also be important to understand the impact of orthographic input for individual
learners and the short- and long-term consequences of exposure to written input for
learners' phonolexical acquisition more generally. For example, it is possible that for
phonological alternations, such as German final devoicing, the advantage of having
established target-like underlying forms early on outweighs the disadvantage of not
producing target-like surface voicing early in the acquisition process, or vice versa.
We expect these will prove to be fruitful avenues for future research on the influences of written input in the acquisition of phonological alternations. Ultimately,
the findings of this line of research should support language teachers' decisions
regarding the use of written input at early stages of L2 instruction: understanding
how and why written forms encourage or discourage the development of target-like
lexicophonological representations is essential to leveraging written input effectively
in instructed settings.
Acknowledgments. We are grateful to the members of the Speech Acquisition Lab, the audiences of PSLLT
2016 and SLRF 2017, Johanna Watzinger-Tharp, Dave Kush, Veronika Mayerhofer, and Natalia Muller, as
well as the editor and two anonymous reviewers for their contributions to this research.
Conflict of Interest. Author Rachel Hayes-Harb currently serves as Editor of Applied Psycholinguistics,
and played no role in the editorial process for this manuscript, which was handled by the journal's previous
Editor.

References
Aksu-Koc, A., & Slobin, D. I. (1985). The acquisition of Turkish. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic
study of language acquisition (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Albright, A., & Hayes, B. (2011). Learning and learnability in phonology. In J. Goldsmith, J. Riggle, & A. C.
L. Yu (Eds.), The handbook of phonological theory (2nd ed., pp. 661-690). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Baer-Henney, D., & van de Vijver, R. (2012). On the role of substance, locality, and amount of exposure in
the acquisition of morphophonemic alternations. Laboratory Phonology, 3. doi: 10.1515/lp-2012-0013
Bals, B. A. (2004). The acquisition of grade alternation in North Saami. Nordlyd, 32, 1-27.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68, 255-278. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.01
Bassetti, B. (2006). Orthographic input and phonological representations in learners of Chinese as a foreign
language. Written Language & Literacy, 9, 95-114.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen
and S4 (Version R package 1.1-1.10). Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word, 14, 150-177.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2018). PRAAT: Doing phonetics by computer (Version 6.0.37). Retrieved
from http://www.praat.org/

542

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Bradlow, A. R., Pisoni, D. B., Akahane-Yamada, R., & Tohkura, Y. i. (1997). Training Japanese listeners
to identify English /r/ and /l/: IV. Some effects of perceptual learning on speech production. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 101, 2299-2310.
Broselow, E., Chen, S.-I., & Wang, C. (1998). The emergence of the unmarked in second language phonology. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 261-280.
Buckler, H., & Fikkert, P. (2016). Using distributional statistics to acquire morphophonological alternations:
Evidence from production and perception. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 540. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00540
Cristia, A., & Seidl, A. (2008). Is infants' learning of sound patterns contrained by phonological features?
Language Learning and Development, 4, 203-227. doi: 10.1080/15475440802143109
Durham, K., Hayes-Harb, R., Barrios, S., & Showalter, C. E. (2016). The influence of various visual input
types on L2 learners' memory for the phonological forms of newly-learned words. In J. Levis, H. Le., I.
Lucic, E. Simpson, & S. Vo (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and
Teaching Conference (pp. 98-107). Ames, IA: Iowa State University.
Eckman, F. R. (1977). Markedness and the contrastive analysis hypothesis. Language Learning, 27, 315-330.
Eckman, F. R. (1981). On the naturalness of interlanguage phonological rules. Language Learning, 31,
195-216.
Escudero, P. (2015). Orthography plays a limited role when learning the phonological forms of new words:
The case of Spanish and English learners of novel Dutch words. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36, 7-22. doi:
10.1017/s014271641400040x
Escudero, P., Hayes-Harb, R., & Mitterer, H. (2008). Novel second-language words and asymmetric lexical
access. Journal of Phonetics, 36, 345-360. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2007.11.002
Escudero, P., Simon, E., & Mulak, K. E. (2014). Learning words in a new language: Orthography doesn't
always help. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17, 384-395. doi: 10.1017/s1366728913000436
Fikkert, P., & Freitas, M. J. (2006). Allophony and allomorphy cue phonological acquisition: Evidence from
the European Portuguese vowel system. Catalan Journal of Linguistics, 5, 83-108.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. (2003). DMDX: A windows display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35, 116-124.
Grantham O'Brien, M., & Fagan, S. M. B. (2016). German phonetics and phonology: Theory and practice.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hayes-Harb, R., Brown, K., & Smith, B. L. (2018). Orthographic input and the acquisition of German final
devoicing by native speakers of English. Lang Speech, 61, 547-564. doi: 10.1177/0023830917710048
Hayes-Harb, R., & Cheng, H.-W. (2016). The influence of the Pinyin and Zhuyin writing systems on the
acquisition of Mandarin word forms by native English speakers. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00785
Hayes-Harb, R., & Hacking, J. (2015). The influence of written stress marks on native English speakers'
acquisition of Russian lexical stress contrasts. Slavic and East European Journal, 59, 91-109.
Hayes-Harb, R., Nicol, J., & Barker, J. (2010). Learning the phonological forms of new words: Effects of
orthographic and auditory input. Language and Speech, 53, 367-381. doi: 10.1177/0023830910371460
Hayes-Harb, R., Smith, B. L., Bent, T., & Bradlow, A. R. (2008). The interlanguage speech intelligibility
benefit for native speakers of Mandarin: Production and perception of English word-final voicing contrasts. Journal of Phonetics, 36, 664-679. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2008.04.002
Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., & Westfall, P. (2008). Simultaneous inference in general parametric models.
Biometrical Journal, 50, 346-363. doi: 10.1002/bimj.200810425
Jessen, M., & Ringen, C. (2002). Laryngeal features in German. Phonology, 19, 189-218. doi: 10.1017/
S0952675702004311
Kerkhoff, A. (2007). The acquisition of morpho-phonology: The Dutch voicing alternation. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Utrecht University.
Kleber, F., John, T., & Harrington, J. (2010). The implications for speech perception of incomplete neutralization of final devoicing in German. Journal of Phonetics, 38, 185-196. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2009.10.001
Mok, P. P. K., Lee, A., Li, J. J., & Xu, R. B. (2018). Orthographic effects on the perception and production
of L2 Mandarin tones. Speech Communication, 101, 1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2018.05.002
Pierrehumbert, J. (2003). Phonetic diversity, statistical learning, and acquisition of phonology. Language
and Speech, 46, 115-154. doi: 10.1177/00238309030460020501
Port, R., & O'Dell, M. (1985). Neutralization of syllable-final voicing in German. Journal of Phonetics, 13,
455-471.

Applied Psycholinguistics

543

Pytlyk, C. (2011). Shared orthography: Do shared written symbols influence the perception of L2 sounds?
Modern Language Journal, 95, 541-557. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-4781.2011.01244.x
Roettger, T. B., Winter, B., Grawunder, S., Kirby, J., & Grice, M. (2014). Assessing incomplete neutralization of final devoicing in German. Journal of Phonetics, 43, 11-25. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2014.01.002
Showalter, C. E. (2018). Impact of Cyrillic on native English speakers' phono-lexical acquisition of Russian.
Language and Speech, 61, 565-576. doi: 10.1177/0023830918761489
Showalter, C. E., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2013). Unfamiliar orthographic information and second language
word learning: A novel lexicon study. Second Language Research, 29, 185-200. doi: 10.1177/
0267658313480154
Showalter, C. E., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2015). Native English speakers learning Arabic: The influence of novel
orthographic information on second language phonological acquisition. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36,
23-42. doi: 10.1017/s0142716414000411
Simon, E., Chambless, D., & Kickhofel Alves, U. (2010). Understanding the role of orthography in the
acquisition of a non-native vowel contrast. Language Sciences, 32, 380-394. doi: 10.1016/j.langsci.
2009.07.001
Smith, B. L., & Peterson, E. A. (2012). Native English speakers learning German as a second language:
Devoicing of final voiced stop targets. Journal of Phonetics, 40, 129-140. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2011.09.004
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement,
image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 6, 174-215.
Steriade, D. (2000). Paradigm uniformity and the phonetics-phonology boundary. In M. B. Broe & J. B.
Pierrehumbert (Eds.), Papers in Laboratory Phonology V. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van de Vijver, R., & Baer-Henney, D. (2011). Acquisition of voicing and vowel alternations in German. In
N. Danis, K. Mesh, & H. Sung (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development (Vol. 2, pp. 603-615). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
van de Vijver, R., & Baer-Henney, D. (2014). Developing biases. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1-8. doi: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2014.00634
Wilson, C. (2006). Learning phonology with substantive bias: An experimental and computational study of
velar palatalization. Cognitive Science, 30, 945-982. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog0000_89
Young-Scholten, M. (2002). Orthographic input in L2 phonological development. In P. Burmeister, T.
Piske, & A. Rohde (Eds.), An integrated view of language development: Papers in nonour of Henning
Wode (pp. 263-279). Trier: Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier.
Young-Scholten, M. (2004). Prosodic constraints on allophonic distribution in adult L2 acquisition.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 8, 67-77.
Young-Scholten, M., & Langer, M. (2015). The role of orthographic input in second language German:
Evidence from naturalistic adult learners' production. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36, 93-114. doi: 10.
1017/s0142716414000447
Zamuner, T. S., Kerkhoff, A., & Fikkert, P. (2006). Acquisition of voicing neutralization and alternations in
Dutch. Paper presented at the Boston University Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA.
Zamuner, T. S., Kerkhoff, A., & Fikkert, P. (2012). Phonotactics and morphophonology in early child
language: Evidence from Dutch. Applied Psycholinguistics, 33, 481-499. doi: 10.1017/s0142716411000440

544

Shannon L. Barrios and Rachel Hayes-Harb

Appendix A: Experimental stimuli used in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2a

Applied Psycholinguistics

545

Appendix B: Experimental stimuli for Experiment 2B

Cite this article: Barrios, S.L. and Hayes-Harb, R. (2020). Second language learning of phonological
alternations with and without orthographic input: Evidence from the acquisition of a German-like
voicing alternation. Applied Psycholinguistics 41, 517-545. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716420000077

