Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Visual working memory capacity is limited by two systems that change
across lifespan

T

Anka Slana Ozimia,b,, Grega Repova
a
b

Department of Psychology, University of Ljubljana, Akereva 2, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Active maintenance
Bilateral field advantage
Healthy aging
Representational potential
Visual working memory capacity

To better understand the sources of visual working memory limitations we explore the possibility that its capacity is limited by two systems: a representational system that enables formation of independent representations of visual objects, and an active maintenance system that enables sustained activation of the established
representations in the absence of external stimuli. A total of 392 participants took part in four experiments in
which they were asked to maintain orientation of items presented to the left, right or both visual hemifields. In
all four experiments participants were able to maintain more items when they were distributed across both
versus one visual hemifield, consistent with the proposal that bilateral display enables utilization of representational capacities of both hemispheres. Bilateral capacity, however, did not reach the combined representational potential of both hemispheres, indicating that the capacity is further limited by a second, unitary
active maintenance system. Our study further suggests that both systems' capacities change throughout the
lifespan very similarly. They both increase through development, reach a peak at the same age and decrease in
healthy aging. This indicates that systems beyond executive processes, which receive most attention in the
literature, are contributing to the decline in working memory in healthy aging.

Introduction
Working memory, the ability to maintain and actively manipulate a
set of information needed to carry out current tasks, is one of the basic
cognitive abilities (Baddeley, 1996a). It is used in everyday activities
such as planning, reasoning, problem solving, reading and learning, and
so forms the basis for goal-directed behaviour (Baddeley, 1996b).
Working memory capacity changes throughout the lifespan and declines in healthy aging (Braver & West, 2007; Park & Festini, 2017). It
correlates strongly with general intelligence (Cowan, 2005), and is
among the first abilities affected in various diseases and injuries of the
brain, from schizophrenia (Goldman-Rakic, 1994) to Parkinson's disease (Bublak, Muller, Gron, Reuter, & von Cramon, 2002). Due to its
central role in cognition, investigation of the core components and
mechanisms of working memory is crucial for understanding of human
cognition in both health and disease.
Working memory comprises a number of subsystems. Whereas the
focus of working memory research was initially on verbal working
memory, it has recently shifted to the study of visual and spatial
working memory (Repovs & Baddeley, 2006). An important effort of
this research is to understand the reasons for the highly limited capacity



to maintain visual representations, which spans from three to five
meaningful items in young adults, varies significantly across individuals
(Cowan, 2010) and changes as a function of age (for review see Sander,
Lindenberger, & Werkle-Bergner, 2012). Intense debates have arisen
about the sources of the limitations, such as whether capacity is limited
by a number of discrete representations or by an infinitely divisible
resource (e.g. Luck & Vogel, 2013; Ma, Husain, & Bays, 2014), and
whether the limitations reside in modality-specific working memory
stores or general attentional processes (Cowan, 2010).
In this study we explore the possibility that visual working memory
capacity is limited at two levels. First by the ability to form independent
visual representations, and second by the ability to actively maintain
them in the absence of external stimuli. Furthermore, we investigate
how these two abilities change throughout the lifespan. We specifically
focus on two questions relevant to the extant literature. First, whether
the capacities of the two systems follow the same (e.g. Brockmole &
Logie, 2013) or different (e.g. Hartshorne & Germine, 2015; Johnson,
Logie, & Brockmole, 2010) development curves. Second, whether the
capacity to actively maintain representations might show a more pronounced decline in healthy aging, which due to its closer relation to
executive processes would be predicted by most of the literature (see

Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana, Akereva 2, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia.
E-mail addresses: anka.slana@ff.uni-lj.si (A. Slana Ozimi), grega.repovs@ff.uni-lj.si (G. Repov).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104090
Received 10 August 2018; Received in revised form 17 December 2019; Accepted 12 January 2020
Available online 24 January 2020
0749-596X/ (c) 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Braver & West, 2007).
A number of working memory models contributing to the understanding of the limitations of working memory capacity have been
proposed. One of the most influential of these is Baddeley and Hitch
(1974) multicomponent model of working memory. The model with its
updates (Baddeley, 2000, 2012; Repovs & Baddeley, 2006) still form
the main theoretical framework for the study of working memory
within cognitive psychology. One of the essential contributions of the
model is the division of working memory into four core components.
Specifically, the central executive is regarded as a system of limited
attentional capacity, which controls the entire system and focuses on
and manipulates the relevant information in other subcomponents
(Baddeley, 2012). The phonological loop, visuospatial sketchpad, and
episodic buffer are assumed to be limited capacity subsystems responsible for storage and maintenance of verbal, visuospatial, and integrated information, respectively. Each component is assumed to
consist of a passive store of limited capacity (e.g. phonological store,
visual cache) and an active rehearsal process (e.g. articulatory control
process, the inner scribe) (Logie, 2011; Logie & Van Der Meulen,
2009)--independent of the central executive (Bruyer & Scailquin, 1998;
Klauer & Zhao, 2004)--that reactivates and helps maintain the degrading memory traces.
The multicomponent model considers working memory as a system
separate though tightly integrated with long-term memory (Baddeley,
2012). In contrast, the so called "state-based" models (D'Esposito &
Postle, 2015) assume that allocation of attention to internal representations either stored in long-term memory (e.g. Cowan, 1995;
Oberauer, 2002, 2009) or established by the sensory-motor systems
(Magnussen & Greenlee, 1999; Magnussen, 2000; Zaksas, Bisley, &
Pasternak, 2001) underlie the short-term maintenance of information in
working memory. They further assume that the focus of attention,
crucial for selection of mental representations to be held in working
memory, can support only a limited number of activated representations. These models are consistent with recent neurophysiological
findings on the roles of prefrontal and posterior areas of the cerebral
cortex for the maintenance of information in visual-spatial working
memory (Riggall & Postle, 2012). Specifically, studies indicate that
posterior regions of the occipital and parietal cortex support the formation and/or temporary storage of visuo-spatial representations
(Bettencourt & Xu, 2016), whereas prefrontal regions control the allocation of sustained attention to maintain relevant information
(Eriksson, Vogel, Lansner, Bergstrom, & Nyberg, 2015).
Despite some key differences, both the multicomponent model of
working memory as well as state-based models assume that two systems
are involved in information maintenance. One enables the formation
and storage of information representations, whereas the other its active
maintenance or refreshing. The multicomponent model assumes
(Baddeley, 2012; Logie, 2011) that representations are formed and
maintained in component specific stores (e.g. phonological store, visual
cache, episodic buffer) and that their active maintenance is enabled
through the related rehearsal processes (e.g. subvocal rehearsal, the
inner scribe). According to state-based models (D'Esposito & Postle,
2015) representations are established within either sensory-motor or
long-term memory systems while the central executive supports their
active maintenance in the focus of attention. Whereas both models
acknowledge the relevance of the two systems, they differ in the specifics related to the source of working memory limited capacity.
In the multicomponent model of working memory, limited capacity
is primarily explained "as an emergent property of the coordinated
operation of the multiple components and may vary depending on
which combination of components is deployed" (Logie, 2011, p. 242).
Specifically, for the phonological loop, assuming trace decay, the capacity is "determined jointly by the durability of the memory trace and
the time required to refresh the trace by subvocal rehearsal" (Baddeley,
2000, p. 419, Box 2). Whereas the phonological store itself is assumed
to be of limited capacity (Baddeley, 2012), the process of refreshing

itself does not seem to be encumbered by any limitations in the number
of items it can (sub)vocalize, as long as they are still available in the
store.
Analogous to the phonological loop, Logie (2011) proposes that the
static content of the visual cache is limited by the visual complexity of
the representation, which decays in about two seconds, if the constituting visually based codes are not mentally rehearsed by the inner
scribe, which, however, is itself of a limited capacity. Based on multiple
lines of evidence (for a review see Logie & Van Der Meulen, 2009) the
dynamic content of the visuo-spatial sketchpad is proposed to further
rely on the limited central executive resources.
The case of the episodic buffer is less clear, though. As explained by
Baddeley (2012), the episodic buffer is believed to be--contrary to the
initial assumptions--a passive system of limited capacity of three to
four chunks for which active engagement of the central executive is
only required when maintaining the binding against distraction. As
Baddeley (2012) acknowledges, both the specific source of limitation--number of chunks or their similarity--as well as the process of
rehearsal and maintenance of integrated information--currently
speculated to rely on attentionally based refreshing--are, however,
uncertain, as are their possible limitations.
State-based models (Cowan, 2005), on the other hand, assume that
limitations in working memory primarily--if not exclusively--arise
from the limited capacity of the focus of attention. Namely, the central
executive can support active maintenance of the focus of attention for
only a limited number of representations established in the essentially
capacity-free sensory-motor or long-term memory systems, in which the
activation of the relevant representations (i.e. activated memory) "is
limited only by interference effects and possibly the passage of time"
(Cowan, 2005, p. 42).
In this study, we directly explore the possibility that both systems
(herein referred to as the representational system and active maintenance system) are of limited capacity and--resonating with Logie
(2011)--that the final working memory capacity is determined by their
interaction. This proposal echoes a recent proposal for a two-component framework by Sander et al. (2012) who, based on a review of
lifespan differences in working memory and age-differential trajectories
of posterior and frontal brain regions, conclude that multiple processes
jointly limit visual working memory performance. The aim of this study
is to explicitly test the proposed hypothesis that visual working memory
capacity is jointly limited by capacities of two systems supporting
working memory and to explore how these two systems interact and
limit working memory capacity throughout development and healthy
aging.
Active maintenance and representational potential: two limits of visual
working memory capacity
As outlined above, we propose a conceptual model which assumes
that two systems are engaged for information to be maintained in visual
working memory. First, we propose the existence of a representational
system that enables establishing independent representations of visual
features and their bindings (e.g. colours, orientations, etc.)--analogous
to the visual cache (Logie, 2011) and episodic buffer in the multiple
component model (Baddeley, 2012) and sensory-motor or long term
memory representational systems in state-based models (D'Esposito &
Postle, 2015). Second, we propose the existence of an active maintenance system that enables ongoing activation of the representations
established in the representational system in the absence of the external
stimuli, and protects them from possible distractors--analogous to refreshing processes (e.g. visual scribe) and in some cases engagement of
the central executive in the multiple component model (Baddeley,
2012; Logie, 2011), and the central executive directing attention to
establish the focus of attention in state-based models (Cowan, 2005;
D'Esposito & Postle, 2015).
Further, we propose that both systems present an independent
2

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Fig. 1. Hypothetical results of a visual working memory task illustrated within the proposed model in which an individual is asked to remember items presented to
the left (remember left), right (remember right) or across both (remember both) visual hemifields, taking into account that across studies the capacity of visual
working memory is estimated between three to four items. A: In the first scenario, the estimated capacity is always four items irrespective of where they were
presented. The possible conclusions in this case are first, that active maintenance capacity is either equal or lower than the unilateral representational capacity,
second, that the representational system is of an unlimited capacity, or third (not illustrated) that the representational system is not lateralized. B: In the second
scenario the estimated bilateral capacity (four items) is equal to the sum of left and right unilateral capacities (two items each). The possible conclusions in this case
are that the active maintenance system either has a capacity equal or higher than the limited representational potential across both hemispheres, or is of an unlimited
capacity. C: In the third scenario the estimated bilateral capacity (four items) is higher than the unilateral capacity (three items), but lower than the bilateral
representational potential, estimated as the sum of unilateral capacities (six items). In this case, the most parsimonious conclusion is that both the active maintenance
system and the representational system are of limited capacity. Please note, that "torn" edges signify an unknown capacity / representational potential, that can be
equal to or higher than the one pictured, and rounded edges a limited capacity/representational potential of the respective systems. Lightly coloured boxes represent
established representations of visual features that, however, cannot be actively maintained.

source of visual working memory capacity limitation. Specifically, we
propose first that the representational system is able to establish only a
limited number of independent representations at a given time, which
sets the basic representational potential, the "upper limit", for the capacity of visual working memory. As outlined in the previous section, in
the multicomponent model of working memory (Baddeley, 2012) these
limitations are proposed to be inherent to individual stores and present
even in cases where the engagement of the central executive is not
required.
Second, we propose that the active maintenance system itself possesses only limited resources available to focus on and actively maintain
the established representations in the absence of external stimuli. This
further limits visual working memory capacity, possibly preventing it
from reaching its full representational potential. The evidence for the
limitation of the active maintenance system is reviewed in detail in
descriptions of state-based models (e.g. Cowan, 2005), and its engagement in maintenance of visual information is extensively supported
by fMRI studies. Specifically, whereas novel studies employing inverse

encoding models (IEM) and multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) show
that the specific content of visual working memory is represented in
various brain systems linked to perception (e.g. Christophel, Hebart, &
Haynes, 2012), classical activation studies of visual working memory
(e.g. Dolcos, Miller, Kragel, Jha, & McCarthy, 2007) show persistent
dorsolateral prefrontal activity in the absence of distractors, while the
level of delay related activation predicts task performance (e.g. Pessoa,
Gutierrez, Bandettini, & Ungerleider, 2002).
The key challenge in testing the proposed model of dual limits to
working memory capacity is obtaining separate estimates of the capacities of the representational system and active maintenance system. To
achieve that, we took advantage of the contralateral organization of the
visual system--specifically, the fact that in the early stages of visual
perception the information presented to the left visual hemifield is
processed in the visual areas of the right hemisphere, and vice versa
(Bullier, 2003). When both hemispheres are involved in the processing
of visual information, as when the items to be processed are spread
across both versus a single visual hemifield, a superior ability of visual
3

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

processing known as bilateral field advantage can be observed. Bilateral
field advantage was shown in a number of visual processing tasks such
as orientation (Chakravarthi & Cavanagh, 2009) and letter identification (Kraft et al., 2013), multiple object tracking (Alvarez & Cavanagh,
2005) and enumeration of small sets of items (Railo, 2014). These
studies point to existence of separate resources for left and right
hemifields (Chakravarthi & Cavanagh, 2009) and are in line with suggestions that parallel processing is more efficient across hemifields
versus within a single hemifield (Kraft et al., 2013).
Though both hemispheres are involved in the processing of higherorder visual information (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2005) by exchanging
information via the corpus callosum (Delvenne, 2012) regardless of the
hemifield to which the information was presented, findings of several
studies (e.g. Delvenne, 2012; Umemoto, Drew, Ester, & Awh, 2010;
Vogel & Machizawa, 2004) suggest that analogously to the organization
of early visual processing, the representations maintained in working
memory are at least to some extent stored in the hemisphere contralateral to the visual field in which the information to be remembered
was shown. For instance, a series of EEG studies (e.g. Vogel &
Machizawa, 2004, for a review see Luria, Balaban, Awh, & Vogel,
2016), have repeatedly shown an increase in electrical activity, known
as contralateral delay activity (CDA), above the parietal-occipital cortex
of the hemisphere contralateral to the visual hemifield in which the tobe-remembered items are presented. Further, a number of studies have
shown that participants are able to maintain more information in their
visual working memory when the items to be remembered are distributed across both visual hemifields than if the same number of items
are presented to one hemifield only. Such a bilateral field advantage
effect has been demonstrated in tasks requiring the retention of spatial
locations (Delvenne, 2005), orientations (Umemoto et al., 2010), and
also colours (Holt & Delvenne, 2014). Moreover, Holt and Delvenne
(2015) show that attentional pre-cues strongly influence both the
transfer of items into visual short term memory--a feature of attentional selection--and their maintenance. It has recently been shown
that bilateral display enhances both probability of storage of items as
well as their precision (Zhang et al., 2017).
Taken together, these findings suggest that in early stages of visual
processing the left and right hemispheres provide separate neuronal
resources for visual representations of items presented to the right and
left hemifield, respectively, and function--to at least some extent--as
separate working memory stores, which when utilized in parallel enable
bilateral field advantage. This enabled us to develop a more detailed
model of visual working memory maintenance and propose specific
hypotheses to test it (Fig. 1).

task in which we asked the participants to encode and maintain visual
items that were presented to left, right or both visual hemifields.
Depending on the relationship between the single hemisphere's representational capacity (unilateral representational capacity), bilateral
representational potential, and active maintenance capacity, we identified three possible outcomes, visually illustrated in Fig. 1, each
leading to a different conclusion about the validity of the proposed
model.
First, if the number of items successfully recalled when they are
presented to the left, right or both hemifields is the same, this can only
be explained by two possibilities. Either--contrary to previously presented evidence--the representational system is not hemisphere specific but unified, or there is another system limiting the total number of
sustained items at or below the capacity of unilateral representational
systems. Within our proposed model we would conclude that it is the
ability for active maintenance that is equal to or lower than the representational capacity of a single hemisphere (Fig. 1A). In such a case
we could not differentiate between two alternative possibilities regarding the limits of the representational system. One possibility is that
the representational system is of limited capacity, however the limit of
each unilateral representational system exceeds the limits of the active
maintenance system. Another possibility is that the representational
system itself is unlimited.
Second, if the number of items successfully recalled, when they are
presented across both visual hemifields, is equal to the sum of items
successfully recalled when presented to the left and right visual hemifields alone, this could only be explained by either the absence of an
additional limiting system or by the limit of such a system being equal
to or exceeding the limits of the representational system. Specifically,
based on our model (Fig. 1B), we would conclude that the capacity of
active maintenance is equal to or exceeds the bilateral representational
potential or is itself of unlimited capacity.
Third, if the number of items successfully recalled, when they are
presented across both visual hemifields, is larger than when the items
are presented to either hemifield alone, but smaller than their joint
representational potential, this suggests that visual working memory is
limited at two levels. If a system was limited at the representational
level only, then a full bilateral capacity should be reached, when the
items are presented across both hemifields. If a system was limited at
the maintenance level only, then the same limit should be observed in
unilateral and bilateral presentation. Therefore, based on our model
(Fig. 1C), we would conclude that the capacity of active maintenance
system exceeds the representational capacity of individual hemispheres
but is lower than their joint bilateral representational capacity. Again,
such a situation would present strong evidence that visual working
memory is limited at two levels. By extension this would provide support in favour of the proposed model itself, specifically, for the claim
that visual working memory capacity is limited both by the limited
ability to form independent visual representations, as well as the limited ability for their active maintenance.
In the case of the third outcome, which we argue would suggest two
limits of visual working memory capacity, the sum of the unilateral
capacities indicates the potential maximum of items a person can represent and so can be used as a measure of the representational system's
capacity. The bilateral capacity on the other hand directly reflects the
limits of the active maintenance system, and so can be taken as the
measure of the active maintenance system's capacity.

Specific proposals and hypotheses
Based on the review in the previous section, we have expanded our
initial model with further specific assumptions. First, in line with a
number of studies (e.g. Umemoto et al., 2010; Vogel & Machizawa,
2004, for a review see Delvenne, 2012), we assumed that items presented to a single hemifield are primarily encoded and represented in
the contralateral hemisphere. Though each hemisphere can support
only a limited number of independent representations, we further
propose that the total number of possible visual representations across
both hemispheres is determined by their joint capacity, which we refer
to as bilateral (or full) representational potential of the representational
system. Next, similar to state-based models (Cowan, 2005; D'Esposito &
Postle, 2015), we assumed that the successful maintenance of representations is ensured by a single limited capacity active maintenance
system that can independently maintain representations in any or both
of the hemispheres. In our model, the final capacity is then determined
by the number of independent representations established in the representational system, that the active maintenance system is able to
actively maintain.
To test these assumptions, we designed a visual working memory

Age-related changes of working memory capacity
Observing working memory capacity throughout the lifespan provides important information both about healthy aging as well as the
component structure and processes of working memory. In addition to
testing the proposition that visual working memory capacity is jointly
limited by the representational and active maintenance systems, the
aim of our study was also to explore how these two systems interact and
4

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

limit working memory capacity throughout development and healthy
aging. Specifically, we were interested in to what extent changes in
working memory capacity with age reflect changes in the ability of the
representational system to form independent representations, and to
what extent they reflect changes in the capacity for their active maintenance. The comparison of their developmental curves further enabled
us to address open theoretical and empirical questions regarding the
development of visual working memory capacity, as well as its decline
in healthy aging.
A large study assessing cognitive abilities throughout the lifespan
(Hartshorne & Germine, 2015) shows that different abilities, including
performance on a number of working memory tasks, peak at different
ages. Johnson et al. (2010), employing a range of tests tapping into
different working memory modalities and processes, report that
whereas a single common factor could be observed throughout the
lifespan, it did not contribute consistently to test performance across
age, indicating that specific abilities change with different trajectories
leading to their differential use at different stages of development.
Alloway and Alloway (2013) employed a verbal and visual working
memory task requiring maintenance and manipulation across a large
sample of subjects aged five to 80. They discovered that a structural
model with latent visual and verbal components explained the data
better than models assuming a single working memory factor or separate maintenance and manipulation components. In contrast Swanson
(2017), though observing steeper rise and decline in visuo-spatial than
verbal working memory performance, reported that confirmatory factor
analysis best supported a domain general factor across children and
adult groups.
Brockmole and Logie (2013) focused specifically on visual working
memory in a large sample of eight- to 75-year-olds. They found that
memory for individual (colour and shape) features and their binding
follows the same developmental curve. The authors concluded that a
decline in colour-shape binding is driven largely by a decline in the
capacity for maintenance of individual features. As the percent of
bound features in memory also changes throughout development, it is
thought possible that maintenance of individual features and their
binding in working memory are subserved by separable systems.
Reviewing a number of studies on aging as well as their own research, Sander et al. (2012) propose that changes in working memory
throughout the lifespan should be understood as the result of an interplay between two components of working memory, low-level feature
binding processes and top-down control. In our model, these could be
mapped to our distinction between the representational system and
active maintenance system, respectively. The authors (Sander et al.,
2012) point out a lack of studies investigating both ends of the lifespan
with the same paradigm, and suggest that the differentiation and specification of the two components, and interactions between them,
presents an important research question.

early in development, and active maintenance capacity to have a more
pronounced peak later in development, both decreasing significantly in
older adults. This would predict an initial rise and a subsequent decline
in the observed bilateral advantage.
A study by Souza (2016), investigating attentional and maintenance
processes in young and older adults, finds that though baseline capacity
to retain colours in visual working memory declined in older adults,
their ability to use the attentional pre- and post-cues remained the
same. Assuming that the decline in baseline capacity reflects a decline
in the representational system and the retained ability to use attentional
cues a stable active maintenance system, this would predict bilateral
advantage to increase in aging, possibly to the point where it reaches
full representational potential.

Specific predictions related to lifespan changes in working memory capacity

Method

The ability to separately estimate the capacities of the two systems
afforded by our visual working memory span task provides a unique
possibility to study how the interaction between the two systems
changes throughout development and aging. Specifically, a decline in
cognitive abilities in healthy aging has been mostly ascribed to reduced
ability of executive processes (Braver & West, 2007). A recent study by
Rhodes et al. (2019), for instance, finds that the cost of concurrent
processing tasks on maintenance of items in working memory increases
with age. In this case, with advanced aging, we would expect the visual
working memory capacity to be primarily limited by the ability of active maintenance of visual representations, reflected in a reduction or
even absence of bilateral advantage.
Sander et al. (2012) provide a more nuanced prediction of the
change in the two systems capacities throughout the lifespan, expecting
representational potential to be already close to maximum capacity

Participants
Sixty-two psychology students (55 females) aged between 19 and 22
(M = 19.6, SD = 0.89; years of education: M = 13.2, SD = 0.55)
signed an informed consent to participate in a 15-minute experimental
session in which they completed a visual working memory span task.
All participants had normal or corrected to normal eyesight. None of
the participants reported any neurological illnesses or conditions. All
but two participants were right handed. The sample size was determined by the number of students in the Cognitive Psychology lab
course that agreed to participate, with the expectation that it would
match or exceed the sample size in similar studies (e.g. Delvenne, 2005;
Holt & Delvenne, 2014, 2015; Kraft et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2017).
The participants did not receive any compensation for participation in
the study. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the
Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana.

Overview of the present study
Using a lateralized working memory span task for orientations, we
conducted four experiments. The aim of Experiment 1 was to test our
basic assumption that working memory capacity is limited by two
systems. The aim of the Experiment 2 was to additionally assess agerelated changes in the two systems by including a larger sample of
participants that spanned ages from 10 to 70. In Experiments 1 and 2
we used spatial pre-cues which were shown to be important in inducing
bilateral advantage (Holt & Delvenne, 2015) by allowing participants to
allocate their attention to target locations prior to their presentation.
Spatial pre-cues, however, also provided participants with an opportunity to move their gaze toward targets, which could result in bilateral
encoding of unilaterally presented stimuli, and invalidation of the key
experimental manipulation. To address this concern, a subset of participants taking part in Experiment 1 was tested again in Experiment 3 in
which no spatial pre-cues were presented. Our reasoning was that if
subjects are not forewarned about the location of the targets, they are
less likely to shift the gaze to their location. However, Experiment 3
could not entirely exclude the possibility that the participants moved
their gaze to the target location once they were shown it. For that
reason we conducted Experiment 4 in which we used an eye tracker to
explicitly control for eye movements. This enabled us to more robustly
address the initial question without the concern of undesired target
stimuli fixations, as well as investigate the role of spatial pre-cue.
Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to test our basic assumption that two
systems--purportedly a representational and an active maintenance
system--limit working memory capacity. The experiment involved a
homogeneous group of participants in terms of age and education and
included the use of spatial pre-cues to indicate the location of the to-be
presented target items.

5

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Fig. 2. Task progression and trial structure. See main text for full description.

their reconstruction with a mouse-click on the fixation point. Feedback
was given by changing the colour of the fixation point briefly (500 ms)
to either green (for a correct response) or red (for an incorrect response), before turning to light grey, indicating the rest period. Both the
accuracy and reaction times of the responses were recorded, though
reaction times were not analysed.
Two main factors were manipulated in the task: target location,
which corresponded to the side of the screen on which the target stimuli
were shown (left, right, up, down), and load, corresponding to the
number of targets presented in the trial. The targets were always presented in a contiguous group around the virtual circle (see Fig. 2).
When the load was even the targets were presented in equal numbers
on both sides of the 12, 3, 6, and 9o'clock positions, for top, right, down
and left presentations, respectively. For odd loads, the odd target was
sometimes presented immediately clockwise, other times immediately
counter-clockwise from the main group, with the exact position changing randomly from trial to trial.
For each of the target location conditions (left, right, up, down)
visual working memory span was estimated separately using the following procedure. For each target location the procedure started with
an initial load of one item. If the first trial at a given load was successful, the load was increased by one. If the first trial at a given load
was unsuccessful, the participant was given up to four additional
chances at that load. If three attempts at a given load were successful,
the load was increased by one. If none of the five attempts at a given
load were successful, the load was decreased by one. Once five attempts
were made at the highest load in which the subject made at least one
successful attempt, the estimation procedure for that target set location
ended and the span was estimated using the formula:

Apparatus and materials
Data were collected in sound-isolated experimental cabins, allowing
the participants to attend to the task without any interruption.
Participants were asked to bring their personal computers with
PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007) installed to participate in the study, as the
experiment was conducted as a part of Cognitive Psychology lab course.
A custom script prepared in PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007) was used to present the stimuli and collect mouse-click responses.
Target stimuli were keys (see Fig. 2), 35 px in length, with the main
circle 19 px in diameter and the line 7 px wide. The orientation of each
stimulus was randomly selected from eight possible principal directions
pointing towards 0, 45, 90, 135, 180, 225, 270 and 315. Stimuli
were presented in black on a grey background on an invisible circle 520
px in diameter, with the centre of the circle located in the middle of the
screen. To mark possible positions of the target stimuli, 12 grey placeholders 35 px in diameter were distributed equally across the invisible circle and presented throughout the trial. Fixation point was a
small grey circle 20 px in diameter. Probe stimuli were simplified eightpoint compass roses (see Fig. 2) 35 px in diameter. As the experiment ran
on different monitor sizes and resolutions, the visual angles of the stimuli were not consistent across participants and are therefore not reported.
Task
The participants completed multiple trials of the visual working
memory span task. The timing structure of each trial is presented in
Fig. 2. Briefly, a fixation point and 12 light grey placeholders forming a
circle around the fixation point were shown throughout the duration of
the task. The participant initiated a trial by clicking on the fixation
point circle using a computer mouse, making the task self-paced and
ensuring that the participant's gaze was on the fixation point at the
onset of the trial. To signal that the trial was in progress, the fixation
point changed from light grey to dark grey for the duration of the trial.
After a delay of 500 ms a spatial pre-cue (change of the relevant placeholder's colour from grey to white) was displayed for 50 ms, indicating which positions to attend to while keeping their eye gaze at the
centre of the screen. After a delay of 500 ms, a set of target stimuli
("keys") of different rotations were presented for 500 ms. The participants were instructed to remember the orientations of the targets.
Following a 2 s delay, probe stimuli were presented at the position of
the targets. Using a computer mouse, the participants had to indicate
the orientation of each of the target stimuli by clicking on the desired
direction point of the relevant compass rose, at which time the compass
rose changed to a key pointing in the direction indicated by the mouseclick. The participants were free to provide their responses in any order
and were able to change them until they were satisfied with their reconstruction of the orientation of the target stimuli. They confirmed

K = (Lmax

1) +

Smax
Nmax

(1)

where Lmax is the maximum load achieved, Smax is the number of successful trials at maximum load (at least 1) and Nmax is the number of
attempts at the highest maximum load (always five). The location of the
target set probed changed randomly from trial to trial until spans were
estimated for all four target set locations.
Procedure
After signing the consent form, the participants were told how to
perform the task. The experimenter presented them with examples of
the visual working memory span task until they reported they were
confident they knew how to perform the task. The participants then
completed the test part of the task in which the visual working memory
span was estimated, as described above. By observing the participant
throughout the task performance, the experimenter ensured that the
participants were seated so that the screen was centred with respect to
their face and body orientation.
6

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

All analyses were performed in R (R Core Team, 2014), using builtin functions t.test, lm, shapiro.test, ks.test and wilcox.test for t-test, linear
regression, Shapiro-Wilk test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum, respectively. The ezANOVA function of the ez library
(Lawrence, 2013) was used for ANOVA analyses, cohensD function from
lsr library (Navarro, 2015) for computing Cohen's d effect size and lme
function of the lme4 library for generalized linear mixed-effects models
(Bates, Machler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015). Data were visualized using
ggplot2 library (Wickham, 2009).
Fig. 3. Graphical representation of measures used in statistical analyses: bilateral representational potential, RP (indicated with a grey dashed line) and
bilateral capacity index, CIB (indicated by a red solid line). (For interpretation
of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

Results
Bilateral capacity exceeds unilateral capacity
First, we assessed whether there is an advantage in working memory
performance when stimuli are presented bilaterally in comparison to
unilateral presentation (Fig. 4A). The results of the one-tailed paired ttest revealed significantly higher K for bilateral versus unilateral target
location conditions, t(61) = 8.92, p  .001, d = 1.13. Note that each
individual's lower unilateral capacity KMIN = min(KL, KR) was used in
the test. The reason for using KMIN is that it is both sufficient as well as
the most sensitive test of the hypothesis that active maintenance capacity (estimated by KB) exceeds the capacity of any individual unilateral representational system (estimated by KL and KR). The test is
sufficient as we only need to show that the estimated active maintenance capacity exceeds the capacity of at least one of the unilateral
representational system to conclude that capacity is already limited at
the level of the representational system. It is also the most sensitive, as
in the case of a difference between capacities of the left and right
unilateral representational systems, when the capacity of the active
maintenance system might exceed the capacity of the lower performing
but not the higher performing unilateral representational system, which
would reduce the otherwise present effect of interest.
Though, as argued above, KMIN is the most relevant measure of
unilateral representational system capacity for the purpose of addressing the current research question, we additionally checked whether the
bilateral capacity is higher than unilateral capacity when compared to
the average unilateral capacity KAVG = mean(KL, KR) or the capacity of
the better performing hemisphere KMAX = max(KL, KR). The one-tailed
paired t-test confirmed that bilateral capacity is also higher than both
average unilateral capacity, t(61) = 6.49, p  .001, d = 0.82, as well
as each individual's maximum unilateral capacity, t(61) = 2.61,
p = .006, d = 0.33.

Data analysis
The statistical analyses performed throughout this study were based
on the obtained estimates of working memory capacity (K). Again, K
was estimated as the highest achieved load minus the proportion of
failed trials at that load (Formula (1)). To evaluate the robustness of the
results, the analyses were repeated with two alternative estimates of
working memory capacity: the highest achieved load, and the mean
number of correctly reported target items across the trials at the highest
achieved load. As the results were qualitatively the same, only the results obtained using the first method (Formula (1)) are reported here.
Two additional measures were computed for each participant based
on the estimated capacities in the four target location conditions
(Fig. 3): bilateral representational potential (RP) and bilateral capacity
index (CIB). Bilateral representational potential was computed as the
sum of capacities estimated for left (KL) and right (KR) unilateral presentation conditions. The bilateral capacity index was computed by
dividing the mean capacity estimated in bilateral presentation conditions (up and down; KB) by the bilateral representational potential
(KL + KR):

CIB =

KB
KL + KR

(2)

A bilateral capacity index of 1 would indicate that participant's
ability to maintain information presented bilaterally equals their bilateral representational potential. An index lower than 1 would indicate
that the capacity for items presented bilaterally does not reach bilateral
representational potential. Capacity indices for left (CIL) and right (CIR)
visual fields were computed in the same manner, indicating the proportion of the representational potential observed in left and right visual hemifields, respectively.

Bilateral capacity does not reach full representational potential
Further, we tested whether the working memory capacity for the
bilateral target location condition reaches the participants' bilateral
Fig. 4. The estimated number of successfully retained items in working memory (K) in the performed experiments. A: Mean K is shown for bilateral (KB) and unilateral (KMIN) target location
conditions. B: Mean K is shown separately for all
target location conditions (up, down, left, right).
Error bars represent 95% Cousineau-Morey within
subjects confidence intervals (CI) adjusted so that
non-overlap of CIs corresponds to statistically significant difference as calculated with a withinsubjects ANOVA or a t-test (Baguley, 2012). Experiment 1*: results of a subset of participants from
Experiment 1 that also took part in Experiment 3.

7

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

would not be appropriate when CIB would be close to 1, as its distribution could be highly asymmetrical. The results though showed that
CIB is normally distributed, W = 0.98, p = .355. The analysis revealed
that bilateral capacity index is significantly lower than 1, t
(61) = -52.4, p  .001, d = -6.66, confirming that, across participants, bilateral capacity does not reach the full bilateral representational potential.
Unilateral capacity differs between hemispheres
To test whether there were systematic differences between the capacities estimated for left and right visual hemifields (Fig. 4B), we
computed a two-tailed paired t-test between KL and KR. The results
showed a somewhat higher capacity when items were presented to the
left visual field, t(61) = 2.02, p = .048, d = 0.26. Similarly, we
checked for significant differences in K when presenting stimuli above
(KU) versus below (KD) the fixation point (Fig. 4B). A two-tailed paired
t-test did not reveal significant differences between KU and KD, t
(61) = 0.524, p = .602, d = 0.07. Further, we investigated whether the
difference in the measured capacity depending on the position of the
presented items differs between unilateral and bilateral presentation. A
two-tailed paired t-test comparing the absolute difference between KL
and KR with the absolute difference between KU and KD did not reveal
significant differences, t(61) = -1.44, p = .155, d = 0.18.
It is possible that hemispheric differences in estimated unilateral
capacity differ across individuals not just in magnitude, but also in
primacy. To visualize the imbalance between the unilateral capacities
of the two hemispheres, we plotted a distribution of absolute differences between them. More specifically, to take into account individual
differences in overall working memory capacity we computed the absolute difference between CIL and CIR. Additionally, to test whether the
differences between "dominant" and "non-dominant" hemispheres are
significant across participants, we created a comparison normal distribution and tested whether the two distributions differed significantly.
Specifically, we estimated a standard deviation of a complete distribution of differences by combining the original set of absolute differences in unilateral CI with a mirror set (all values were multiplied by
-1) and computing the standard deviation of the new set. We then
created a normally distributed random sample of 10,000 values with a
mean of 0 and the previously estimated standard deviation, and converted the set to absolute values. This now served as a null distribution,
which we would expect to get if the differences between the unilateral
CI were normally distributed. We then compared the two distributions
using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Significant differences between the
two distributions would indicate that the differences between the unilateral CI are not random, and that across individuals in the sample the
unilateral capacity of hemispheres differs significantly. The results
shown in Fig. 6 confirm the significant difference from an expected
trimmed normal distribution with a mean of 0.

Fig. 5. Capacity indices in the performed experiments. Left: Box plots of bilateral capacity index (red), as well as capacity indices for left (green) and right
(blue) target location conditions. Right: Bilateral, left and right capacity indices
for each subject separately, sorted by bilateral capacity index magnitude. Note
that the sum of capacity indices for left and right side equals 1 and corresponds
to the bilateral representational potential as marked by the grey dashed line.
Box plot: The bottom and top of the box plot are Q1 and Q3, the line between
them is the median. The lower whisker is Q1 + 1.5 x IQR. The upper whisker:
Q3 + 1.5 x IQR. The black circle is the mean. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)

Bilateral capacity index varies across individuals
Lastly, a comparison of the bilateral capacity index across participants revealed marked differences in their ability to use both hemispheres' full representational potential (Fig. 5A, right). We further explored this variability. Specifically, we hypothesized that individuals
with lower unilateral representational capacity are able to utilize their
full representational capacity in the case of the bilateral presentation of
targets to a larger extent in comparison to individuals with a higher
unilateral representational capacity. In the latter case, due to the limits
of the active maintenance system, we would predict that the individuals
with a high unilateral representational capacity have fewer resources
free to take advantage of the bilateral encoding of stimuli.

representational potential (Fig. 5A, left). We used a one-tailed onesample t-test to compared the bilateral capacity index against 1, corresponding to full representational potential (RP). As in theory bilateral
capacity index (CIB) is limited to 1, the use of a t-test in this situation

8

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Fig. 6. Distribution of absolute differences in unilateral capacity indices across participants and their estimated densities in experiments 1-4. D and p values shown
are a result of Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, comparing the observed distributions with a one-sided normal distribution that had the same standard deviation as the
observed distribution (see main text for details).

To test this possibility, we computed a linear regression model,
predicting the bilateral capacity index (CIB) from representational potential (RP) (Fig. 7). Based on Formula (2), if bilateral capacity (KB) is
not dependent on the capacity of the active maintenance system, but
rather reflects a fixed proportion of the full representational potential
(RP), then the CIB = KB/(KL + KR) should stay constant and the  in the
linear regression should be 0. Alternatively, if the extent of bilateral
advantage indeed depends on the magnitude of the representational
potential, then we should observe the  to be significantly lower than 0.

observed bilateral capacity is higher than the individual unilateral capacity but lower than the joint bilateral representational potential can
only be explained by visual working memory being limited at two levels. Additionally, such a result would indicate that it is possible to
obtain separate estimates of the representational potential, and the
capacity for active maintenance.
As expected, the results revealed higher estimates of working
memory capacity, when stimuli were presented across both versus a
single hemifield, by utilizing the representational potential of both re-

Fig. 7. The relationship between the bilateral capacity index, CIB and bilateral representational potential, RP, in the performed experiments. Each individual is
represented by a single dot, the red line shows the linear regression, and grey shading indicates the standard error of the predicted value. (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The results confirm a slight but significant decrease in the bilateral
capacity index with an increase in representational potential, t
(61) = -3.13, p = .003,  = -0.03, R2adj = 0.13, reflecting that participants with a higher representational potential have more difficulties
in utilizing both of their hemispheres' capacities in the case of the bilateral presentation of stimuli, leading to a smaller bilateral advantage.

presentational systems. Though each individual's lower unilateral capacity, KMIN, was considered as the key measure for unilateral capacity,
we additionally showed that bilateral capacity also exceeds both the
average unilateral capacity KAVG as well as the capacity of the better
performing hemisphere KMAX. This provides robust evidence that in the
case of visual working memory its total capacity--in our model reflecting the capacity of the active maintenance system--is higher than
the capacity of any of the individual unilateral representational systems.
Next, we showed that bilateral capacity did not reach the full representational potential, defined as the sum of unilateral representational
capacities. Among the three theoretical possibilities, namely, that the capacity is limited by the representational system, the active maintenance
system, or both, the obtained results strongly indicate the latter.
Specifically, the results supported the proposition that the capacity for
active maintenance exceeds the capacity of each hemispheric representational system, but is lower than their joint representational potential.
For comparability with previous research on bilateral field

Discussion
The goal of this experiment was to investigate whether working
memory capacity is limited at two levels. Specifically, as suggested by
our model, by the ability to form independent visual representations as
well as the ability for their active maintenance. Previous studies (for a
review see Luria et al., 2016) indicate that maintenance of visual information follows the hemispheric organization of the visual system,
and is supported by two independent representational systems. By estimating the capacity when either or both of the representational systems were engaged, we argued that the results in a case when the
9

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

advantage (e.g. Holt & Delvenne, 2015), we additionally tested for
possible systematic differences between capacity estimates when stimuli are presented to the left versus right visual hemifields as well as
above versus below the fixation points. The results did not reveal significant differences between the capacities for upper and lower visual
hemifields, justifying our decision to average the two as the relevant
measure of bilateral capacity. The results, however, did show significant differences between the capacity for the left and right visual
hemifields in favour of the left. The significant difference between the
capacity of the two hemifields was additionally confirmed by an analysis of the distribution of differences in unilateral capacity indices with
no assumption about the dominance of a specific hemifield, which can
potentially vary across participants.
The observed hemispheric dominance provides additional evidence
that the visual working memory capacity is limited at the level of the
representational system. Specifically, if the capacity of the visual
working memory was limited only by the active maintenance system,
no differences in capacity should be observed when presenting items to
the left versus right visual fields. The observed results therefore indicate
that left and right hemispheres have--at least to some extent--independent representational systems with limited capacity.
Further exploration of the results revealed noticeable differences in
the participants' bilateral capacity indices. In other words, the relationship between the participants' bilateral capacity and representational potential was not constant across participants, suggesting that
participants differ in their ability to use their full representational potential. The observed negative relationship between the bilateral capacity index and the representational potential supported our assumption that individuals with lower unilateral representational
capacity have more free resources of the active maintenance system left
to take advantage of bilateral representation, leading to higher bilateral
advantage.

Second, we have assumed that a difference in the capacity of the
active maintenance system should be reflected in the bilateral capacity
index. Specifically, if there is no difference in representational potential
across age then the bilateral capacity index should be reduced when the
capacity of the active maintenance system is reduced (see Fig. S1B). The
situation is more complex in the case of an observed reduced unilateral
representational capacity with age. In such a case, if the capacity of the
active maintenance system is constant then the bilateral capacity index
should increase with age (see Fig. S1A). Alternatively, a decrease in the
bilateral capacity index would indicate a disproportionally larger decrease in the active maintenance capacity compared to the unilateral
representational potential.
To validate the described hypotheses and better understand the
relationships between possible changes in unilateral representational
and active maintenance capacities, as well as the resulting estimates of
working memory capacity and bilateral advantage, we performed a
simulation testing a number of key scenarios (see Supplemental information and Fig. S1), as well as exploring the space of possible
parameters (Fig. 8). The results validate the hypotheses presented
above.
Method
Participants
Two hundred and nineteen participants (130 females) aged between
10 and 70 (M = 33.1, SD = 19.1; years of education: M = 12.5,
SD = 4.0) participated in Experiment 2. All participants had normal or
corrected to normal eyesight. None of the participants reported any
neurological illnesses or conditions. Based on the visual inspection of
results, none of the participants was identified as an outlier in their age
group on their summary QFC (Cognitive Failures Questionnaire) or
measures of verbal WM span, Stroop colour-word tasks, Trail Making
Task, Verbal Fluency, Visual Search or Tower of London task. All but 13
participants were right handed. Tests were administered by students of
psychology as part of their lab course. Before the start of data collection
all the students conducted all the tests themselves. Additionally, the
students received both detailed written instructions as well as hands-on
training in the use of the instruments, the study protocol, and the importance and practice of obtaining informed consent. We emphasized
that the prospective participants, even if they were interested in performing the task, were in no way obliged to sign an informed consent
form, and that their data would not be used in that case. Each student

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 suggested that the capacity of visual
working memory is limited by both the ability to form independent
visual representations as well as the ability for their active maintenance. These findings, together with the observation of high interindividual variability in terms of bilateral advantage, open new questions and possibilities for the study of working memory in aging and
disease.
The aim of the second experiment was to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 in a larger, heterogeneous sample of participants, and to
explore changes in working memory capacity throughout development
and healthy aging. Specifically, we focused on the question of to what
extent previously observed changes in working memory capacity with
age reflect changes in the ability of the representational system to form
independent representations, and to what changes in the capacity for
their active maintenance. Additionally we explored how the developmental curves match with existing empirical findings and theoretical
positions on the development and later decline in visual working
memory capacity.
To address these questions, we first assumed that a difference in
representational capacity should be reflected in a significant relationship between unilateral working memory capacity and age.
Importantly, this assumption depends on the capacity of the active
maintenance system (reflected in the bilateral working memory capacity, KB) to exceed the unilateral representational potential. If this assumption is not met, the observed working memory capacity would
only reflect the capacity of the active maintenance system (see Fig. S1B)
and underestimate representational capacity. Given the observed differences in the capacities of the left and right unilateral representational systems, this assumption is less likely to be violated in the case of
the lower performing hemisphere. For this reason, we have specifically
focused on the relationship of age with KMIN.

Fig. 8. Estimated linear rate of change in bilateral capacity index (CIB) for a
parameter space of simulated decreases in active maintenance (CA) and unilateral representational (CU) systems' capacities. Notice that bilateral capacity
index increases when both unilateral and active maintenance systems decrease
at the same rate. A stable rate of decreases in bilateral capacity index is only
observed when active maintenance capacity decreases at a faster rate than the
capacity of the unilateral representational system.
10

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

was tasked to recruit and test four participants from four distinct age
groups. In this manner the data collection protocol was designed to
recruit a heterogenous and large sample of participants of different
ages. The final sample size reflects the number of participants that
passed the exclusion criteria, for which all the relevant data was
properly collected, and the participants gave their signed informed
consent. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the
Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana.
Apparatus, materials, task and procedure were the same as in
Experiment 1, with the exception that all the participants were tested
outside of the laboratory, mostly in their home environments.

location, which yielded a significant effect of target location
2(1) = 150.0, p < .001, R2adj = 0.53. Together the results reflect a
rapid increase in visual working memory capacity through childhood
and adolescence, a slow decrease through early and middle adulthood,
and finally, a rapid decrease in late adulthood. Bilateral presentation of
target stimuli resulted in significantly higher working memory capacity
than unilateral presentation throughout the lifespan. The predicted
peaks of unilateral and bilateral capacity, based on separate fourthdegree regression models, were 22.75 and 22 years, respectively.
Further, we also tested whether the bilateral capacity index (CIB)
changes as a function of age. A forward selection procedure was used to
build a hierarchical regression model. The linear regression model best
fitted our data, F(1, 217) = 4.00, p = .047, R2adj = .02, revealing a
slight but significant decrease in CIB across lifespan,  = -0.0005, t
(217) = -2.0 (Fig. 9B).
As different memory capacities and related processes can be differentially affected during development, early adulthood and healthy
aging (Johnson et al., 2010), we have--based on estimated peak performance at year 22 and an apparent inflection point at year 50--repeated the above analyses for three age groups: 10 to 22 (young), 23 to
50 (adult) and 51 to 70 (aging). Whereas in the young group memory
capacity was best modelled using a second-degree polynomial,
2(3) = 126.48, p < .001, R2adj = 1.08, age1 = 2.18, age2 = -1.63,
bilateral presentation = 0.379, for the adult, 2(2) = 44.58, p < .001,
R2adj = 0.517, age = -0.012, bilateral presentation = 0.262, and the aging,
2(2) = 33.07, p < .001, R2adj = 0.479, age = -0.029, bilateral presentation = 0.232 the groups' linear models sufficed. In all three groups
age--young: 2(2) = 24.67, p < .001, R2adj = 0.194; adult:
2(1) = 7.54, p = .006, R2adj = 0.434; aging: 2(1) = 13.46, p < .001,
R2adj = 0.169--as well as target location--young: 2(1) = 101.81,
p < .001, R2adj = 0.920; adult: 2(1) = 37.041, p < .001, R2adj = 0.434;
aging: 2(1) = 19.62, p < .001, R2adj = 0.282--were significant predictors of the estimate of working memory capacity, whereas no
age x target location interaction was observed (all p > .20).
We used the fourth-degree polynomial regression model, fitted separately for the estimated bilateral (KB) and unilateral working memory
capacities (KMIN), to compute the predicted unilateral and bilateral
capacities at three time points: their peaks, at 50 and at 70 years of age.
Based on the estimated capacities, we computed their yearly decline in
adulthood and healthy aging. As shown in Table 1, the yearly decline is
more pronounced in aging, and relative declines for unilateral and bilateral capacities are comparable.
Separate linear regressions of age on bilateral capacity index (CIB)
for the three age groups revealed no significant relationship for the
young, F(1, 99) < 1, p = .440,  = 0.0013, R2adj = -.004, the adult, F
(1, 67) < 1, p = .808,  = -0.0001, R2adj = -.014, or the aging, F(1,
47) < 1, p = .694,  = -0.0006, R2adj = -0.018, groups. The relationship of bilateral capacity index (CIB) with age was effectively flat.

Results
Bilateral capacity exceeds unilateral capacity and does not reach full
representational potential
To replicate the results from Experiment 1, we first checked for an
advantage in working memory capacity when stimuli are presented
bilaterally versus unilaterally (Fig. 4A). A one-tailed paired t-test revealed significantly higher capacity for bilateral (KB) versus unilateral
(KMIN) target set location conditions, t(218) = 14.6, p  .001,
d = 0.989.
Next, we tested whether the working memory capacity for bilateral
presentation reaches the participants' bilateral representational potential (Fig. 5B). As the CIB scores did not significantly deviate from the
normal distribution, W = 0.99, p = .107, we used a one-tailed onesample t-test, which revealed that bilateral capacity index is significantly lower than 1, t(218) = -107.6, p  .001, d = -7.27,
confirming that, across participants, bilateral capacity does not reach
the full bilateral representational potential.
Lastly, as the relationship between the participants' bilateral capacity and representational potential, i.e. the bilateral capacity index, was
not constant across participants, we computed a linear regression model
to test whether representational potential (RP) is negatively associated
with bilateral capacity index (CIB) (Fig. 7). The results confirmed a
slight but significant decrease in the bilateral capacity index (CIB) with
an increase in the representational potential, t(217) = -3.05,
p = .003,  = -0.02, R2adj = 0.04. Together, these results fully replicate those from Experiment 1.
Both unilateral and bilateral working memory capacity change across
lifespan
We used linear regression to explore how the working memory capacity of both systems changes throughout development and healthy
aging. Specifically, we built a linear regression model predicting the
measured visual working memory capacity with the factors of age and
target location (bilateral vs. unilateral), and subject as a random factor.
Note that due to the reasons explained above we used KMIN as the
working memory capacity estimate in the unilateral target presentation
condition. Due to the expected and observed (Fig. 9A) nonlinear relationship of working memory capacity with age, we used a forward
selection procedure to select the appropriate hierarchical regression
model.
A fourth-degree polynomial regression model best fitted our data,
2(5) = 230.0, p < .001, R2adj = 0.814, age1 = -3.36, age2 = -2.96,
age3 = 1.35, age4 = -1.63, for the fourth-degree polynomial relationship with age, and unilateral presentation = 0.310 for target location.
To test whether the capacities of the two systems evolve differently
with age, we compared models with and without the age x target location interaction. Though we cannot exclude the possibility of an interaction, this comparison did not provide clear evidence for one,
2(4) = 9.36, p = 0.053, R2adj = 0.016. To test the effect of age, we
compared models with and without the inclusion of age, and the results
yielded a significant effect of age, 2(4) = 80.0, p < .001, R2adj = 0.27.
To test the difference between unilateral and bilateral target presentation, we compared models with and without the factor of target

Discussion
The goal of this experiment was, first, to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 in a larger heterogeneous sample of participants, and
second, to explore changes in visual working memory capacity through
the lifetime as a function of the changes in the two proposed systems.
Experiment 2 fully replicated the findings of Experiment 1. The
results showed higher bilateral versus unilateral working memory capacity, i.e. bilateral field advantage, suggesting a limited capacity of
unilateral representational systems. Next, we showed that bilateral
capacity did not reach the full representational potential, supporting
the proposal that visual working memory capacity is limited by an
additional, active maintenance system. Moreover, the results replicate
initial finding of a significant relationship between bilateral capacity
index and representational potential, suggesting that participants with
lower representational capacity can more fully employ the capacities of
both hemispheres in the case of bilateral presentation of the stimuli.
11

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Fig. 9. Visual working memory capacity and bilateral capacity index (CIB) as a function of age in Experiment 2. A: Estimated visual working memory capacity for
bilateral (KB; red) and unilateral (KMIN; green) target locations across age. The two regression lines show the predicted unilateral and bilateral capacities based on the
fourth-degree polynomial regression model (see main text). The grey shading indicates the standard error of the prediction. The two vertical lines show the age of the
predicted highest unilateral and bilateral working memory capacities. B: Bilateral capacity index for each subject separately, sorted by the participants' age. The line
shows a linear regression, the grey shading indicates the standard error of the prediction. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

of a steeper decline in active maintenance capacity cannot be ruled out,
and should be further investigated using novel experimental designs or
longitudinal studies.
Whereas our span task followed the design of a series of other experiments employing a change detection paradigm (for a review see
Delvenne, 2012; Luria et al., 2016) we identified a potential issue in the
study design that could affect the obtained results. Specifically, though
the participants were asked to fixate their gaze at the fixation point in
the centre of the screen throughout the trial, we had no means to
control and enforce their compliance. If the participants failed to follow
instructions and shifted their gaze to the side of the screen relevant for a
particular trial, as indicated by a pre-cue, this could lead to bilateral
encoding of stimuli even in nominally unilateral encoding conditions.
Such a situation would result in overestimation of both hemispheres'
unilateral capacities, as well as full representational potential. It would
consequently result in underestimation of the bilateral capacity index,
as an indicator of bilateral encoding advantage.
To address this concern, we designed a third experiment in which
we did not provide a spatial pre-cue before the presentation of the
target items in order to minimize the possibility that the participants
would direct their gaze toward the target items.

Table 1
Predicted unilateral and bilateral capacities at different ages, and their decline
in adulthood and aging.
Capacity [K]

Yearly decline [%]

Laterality

Max

At 50

At 70

In adulthood

In aging

Unilateral
Bilateral

2.51
2.88

2.21
2.46

1.64
1.82

0.43
0.54

1.14
1.12

Next, we focused on the question of whether differences in working
memory capacity across age reflect differences in capacity to form independent representations (assessed by unilateral capacity, KMIN), differences in the capacity for active maintenance (reflected in bilateral
capacity KB), or both. The results showed a significant and similar relationship of both KMIN and KB with age, revealing that the representational system's capacity as well as active maintenance system's
capacity change throughout the lifespan.
Whereas the age of peak performance closely matches that obtained
by Brockmole and Logie (2013), in contrast to their data, showing a
linear decline in maintenance of individual features and their binding,
in our study we observe an intermediary plateau between the ages of 40
and 50 and differential rates of decline in adulthood and healthy aging
for both unilateral and bilateral capacities. A possible explanation for
the observed differences, and one that would require empirical testing
to confirm, could be differences in the task requirements and related
working memory processes engaged by the two tasks.
As emphasized by Johnson et al. (2010) the differences in decline in
the capacity of different components and processes of working memory
in later adulthood are of key interest. Our results indicate a significant
decrease in both representational potential and active maintenance
capacity in adulthood and healthy aging. Though we observed a small
but significant decline in the bilateral capacity index (CIB) across lifespan, the relationship was basically flat both in adulthood and healthy
aging. Based on the lack of a significant interaction between unilateral
and bilateral capacity, there is no evidence of a differential decline in
the two systems. However, as the results of the simulation indicate
(Fig. 8), a flat relationship between bilateral capacity index and age is
more consistent with a steeper decline in active maintenance capacity
than the unilateral representational potential. Additionally, due to the
nature of the relationship, the lack of a significant negative relationship
between age and bilateral capacity index could be due to a floor effect--also observed in the simulation (Fig. 8)--and the observed significant individual variation in bilateral advantage. Thus, the possibility

Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2, the location of the participants' gaze at the
time of the target presentation was not controlled. As the location of the
target set was indicated using a location pre-cue, this could lead the
participants to move their gaze away from the fixation point to the
location of the to-be-presented target set. In such a case the items would
be encoded bilaterally, which could inflate the estimates of capacity for
the unilateral presentation (KR, KL) and representational potential, and
lead to underestimation of the bilateral capacity index (CIB).
To minimize the possibility of fixation on the target items, we repeated Experiment 1 without providing a spatial pre-cue before their
presentation. Even though previous studies have shown that attentional
pre-cues strongly influence bilateral advantage in change detection
working memory tasks (Holt & Delvenne, 2015), to the best of our
knowledge span tasks have never been used to test for the presence of
bilateral advantage, and the role of a spatial pre-cue is not known in
this context.

12

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

Method

with an increase in representational potential, t(54) = -4.36,
p < .001,  = -0.04, R2adj = 0.25 (Fig. 7).

Participants
The participants who took part in Experiment 1 were invited to
participate in Experiment 3. Of the initial 62 participants, 56 students
(50 females) aged between 19 and 22 (M = 19.7, SD = 0.87; years of
education: M = 13.1, SD = 0.58) decided to take part in the modified
task. None of the participants reported any neurological illnesses or
conditions. All but two participants were right handed. All participants
signed the informed consent form to participate in the study, which was
approved by the Ethical Committee of the Faculty of Arts, University of
Ljubljana.

Discussion
The aim of the third experiment was to address the potential
shortcomings of the first and second experiments. Specifically, our
concern was that the design of the experiment allowed participants to
direct their gaze towards the unilateral targets, which would enable
their bilateral encoding and lead to the underestimation of bilateral
advantage. The aim of this experiment was to replicate the initial
findings by removing attentional pre-cues from the task paradigm, and
consequently reducing the probability that the participants would shift
their gaze from the fixation point and focus it on the target stimuli.
Though previous studies have indicated the importance of attentional pre-cues for inducing bilateral advantage (Holt & Delvenne,
2015), our results revealed not only that a significant bilateral advantage can still be observed in a working memory span task regardless
of attentional pre-cue, but also that the results are essentially unaffected
by the presence of a pre-cue.
The obtained results suggest that the participants in Experiments 1
and 2 did not move their gaze to the location indicated by the spatial
pre-cue, and that the presence of a pre-cue does not affect the extent of
the bilateral advantage. However, we should not dismiss alternative
possibilities. One, that in Experiments 1 and 2 the participants did move
their gaze, in effect reducing bilateral advantage, and that the absence
of a pre-cue--though not completely removing it--also reduces the
bilateral advantage to a comparable extent, resulting in no observable
difference in the results between Experiments 1 and 3. This possibility is
though unlikely, as the analysis showed no significant effect of pre-cue
on the observed capacity and in the no pre-cue condition the observed
capacities are actually numerically higher than in the pre-cue condition
(see Fig. 4). The second possibility is that the duration of the target
presentation afforded enough time for the participants in Experiment 3
to move their gaze and encode items bilaterally, resulting in both reduced bilateral advantage as well as no significant difference in the precue versus no pre-cue conditions.
Though Experiments 1, 2 and 3 clearly demonstrate the existence of
a bilateral advantage, the stricter control of eye movements--preventing bilateral encoding of unilaterally presented stimuli--and the use of a pre-cue--previously shown to be crucial for bilateral advantage (Holt & Delvenne, 2015)--could potentially further
increase bilateral advantage to the point of reaching the full representational potential. Such results could support an alternative explanation to our conclusion that the capacity of visual working memory
is limited by two systems. To test this possibility we designed an additional experiment in which we explicitly controlled the gaze position
using an eye tracker.

Apparatus and materials
The apparatus and materials were the same as in Experiment 1, with
the following exceptions. All the data were collected in the same experimental conditions. Specifically, the experiment ran on a Mac Mini
computer (Intel Core 2 Duo processor with 2.0 GHz and 8 GB RAM)
running Mac OS X 10.12 (El Capitan). Stimuli were presented on a 24
PC monitor screen (ASUS VG248QE, 1920 x 1080-pixel resolution;
60 Hz refresh rate). The participants were seated 55 cm from the screen.
Target stimuli were 35 px (1.08 visual angle) in length, with the
main circle 19 px (0.59 visual angle) in diameter and the line 7 px
(0.22 visual angle) wide. The invisible circle was 520 px (15.65 visual
angle) in diameter. Placeholders and probe stimuli were 35 px (1.08
visual angle) in diameter, and the fixation point was 20 px (0.62 visual
angle) in diameter.
Task and procedure
The task and procedure were the same as in Experiment 1, with the
exception that no spatial pre-cue was shown before the presentation of
the target stimuli, as indicated in Fig. 2.
Results
Absence of pre-cue does not reduce bilateral advantage
First, we checked whether an attentional pre-cue is crucial for inducing bilateral advantage. To test this we combined the data of
matching participants from Experiment 1 and Experiment 3 and performed a 2-way repeated measures ANOVA with the factors of laterality
(bilateral vs. unilateral) and pre-cue (absent vs. present). Note that for
Experiment 1 only the data from participants who also took part in
Experiment 3 (subset denoted as Experiment 1*, Fig. 4) were included
in the analysis. The results showed a significant main effect of laterality,
F(1, 55) = 148.1 , p < .001, 2 = 0.177, revealing significantly higher
capacity for the bilateral (KB) versus unilateral (KMIN) presentation of
stimuli. Both the main effect of pre-cue, F(1, 55) = 1.72, p = .195,
2 = 0.004, as well as laterality x pre-cue interaction, F(1, 55) = 2.02,
p = .161, 2 = 0.003, were not significant, suggesting that the presence
of a pre-cue does not substantially affect the estimate of bilateral advantage (Fig. 4A).
Next, to fully replicate the analyses of Experiment 1, we tested
whether the working memory capacity for the bilateral presentation of
targets reaches the participants' bilateral representational potential.
As the bilateral capacity index (CIB) scores did not significantly differ
from normal distribution, W = 0.98, p = .348, a one-tailed onesample t-test was used to compare bilateral capacity index (CIB)
against 1 (full representational potential). The results revealed that in
the absence of a pre-cue the bilateral capacity index remains significantly lower than 1, t(55) = -51.14, p < .001, d = -6.83, indicating that bilateral capacity does not reach the full bilateral representational potential (Fig. 5C).
Lastly, we computed a linear regression model to test whether representational potential (RP) is negatively associated with bilateral
capacity index (CIB). The absence of a pre-cue did not change the original finding of a significant decrease in bilateral capacity index (CIB)

Experiment 4
The results of the Experiments 1 and 2 suggested that the capacity of
visual working memory is limited both by the ability to form independent visual representations as well as the ability for their active
maintenance. However, we did not explicitly control for participants'
gaze. In Experiment 3 we omitted the spatial pre-cue to minimize the
possibility of fixating gaze on the target items. The results replicated
those of the first two experiments and additionally showed that the
absence of a pre-cue does not affect the extent of bilateral advantage in
the span task. The design though did not completely exclude the possibility that the participants did move their gaze after the presentation
of the target items. Moving the gaze toward the target items would
result in bilateral encoding of unilaterally presented stimuli, and
therefore in underestimation of bilateral advantage. It could lead to the
false conclusion that the bilateral advantage does not reach participants' full representational potential, which is key support for the claim
13

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

that the two systems limit the visual working memory capacity. To
ensure that the participants did not move their gaze and instead fixated
on the target items, and to estimate the effect of the pre-cue in a more
controlled manner, we repeated the task both with and without a precue while controlling for the participants' gaze with the use of an eyetracker.

procedure. By visual inspection of the proportion of aborted trials in
both pre-cue present and pre-cue absent conditions we identified one
participant as an outlier (64.6% of aborted trials in pre-cue present
condition, Fig. S3), and excluded their data from all further analyses.

Method

Gaze control does not change bilateral advantage
First, we checked whether Experiment 4, in which we ensured that
the participants held their gaze on the fixation point during target
presentation, replicated the results obtained in Experiments 1 and 3.
Specifically, we performed a 3-way mixed design ANOVA on the results
of Experiments 1*, 3, and 4, with pre-cue (absent vs. present) and laterality (bilateral vs. unilateral) as within subject factors and gaze
control (absent vs. present) as the between subject factor. The results
revealed a significant main effect of laterality, F(1, 113) = 215.8,
p < .001, 2 = 0.180, reflecting significantly higher capacity for bilateral (KB) versus unilateral (KMIN) presentation of stimuli, as well as
gaze control, F(1, 113) = 21.7, p < .001, 2 = 0.107, reflecting overall
lower capacities when eye fixation during target presentation was enforced. The main effect of pre-cue, F(1, 113) = 1.27, p = .262,
2 = 0.002, was not significant, suggesting that the presence of a spatial
pre-cue does not noticeably affect bilateral advantage (Fig. 4A). None of
the interactions between main effects were significant (all p > .578).
Next, we tested whether the working memory capacity for bilateral
presentation of targets measured in Experiment 4 reaches the participants' bilateral representational potential. As CIB scores in the pre-cue
present condition were not normality distributed, W = 0.96, p = .038,
a Wilcoxon Signed-rank test was used to compare the bilateral capacity
index (CIB) against 1 (full representational potential). As the bilateral
capacity index (CIB) did not significantly differ from a normal distribution in the pre-cue absent condition, W = 0.97, p = .115, we used
a one-tailed one-sample t-test. The results revealed that both with the
presence, V = 0, p < .001, d = -6.25, and absence, t(58) = - 47.1,
p < .001, d = -6.13, of a pre-cue, the bilateral capacity index remains
significantly lower than 1, confirming that bilateral capacity does not
reach the full bilateral representational potential (Fig. 5D & E). Additionally, we checked whether bilateral capacity indices differ between
pre-cue present and pre-cue absent conditions. A paired Wilcoxon
Signed-rank test did not reveal significant differences, V = 755.5,
p = .441, d = 0.17.
Lastly, to test whether the representational potential (RP) is negatively associated with the bilateral capacity index (CIB) and investigate a possible interaction with the presence of a pre-cue, we
computed a multiple linear regression model with the predictors of
RP, pre-cue (present vs. absent) and their interaction. To test whether
RP significantly predicted CIB, we compared the models with and
without inclusion of RP, which yielded a significant effect of RP, F
(114, 2) = 13.8, p < .001,  = -0.05, R2adj = 0.18. To test the effect
of the pre-cue, we compared models with and without inclusion of a
pre-cue and found no evidence for an effect of a pre-cue, F (114,
2) = 0.67, p = .513,  = -0.0002, R2adj < 0.01. To test the effect of
the RP x pre-cue interaction, we compared models with and without
this interaction, and the results did not reveal a significant effect, F
(114, 1) = 0.28, p = .868,  = -0.003, R2adj < 0.01 .These results
reflect a decrease in bilateral capacity index (CIB) with an increase in
the representational potential with no detectable effect of a spatial
pre-cue (Fig. 7).

Results

Participants
Sixty psychology and cognitive science students (56 females) aged
between 19 and 31 (M = 20.4, SD = 2.25; years of education:
M = 13.6, SD = 1.19) signed an informed consent form to participate
in a 45-minute experimental session in which they completed both
versions of the visual working memory span task (pre-cue present and
pre-cue absent) while their eye-movements were tracked. All participants had normal or corrected to normal eyesight. None of the participants reported any neurological illnesses or conditions. All but four
participants were right handed. For comparability, the sample size
approximately matched those in Experiments 1 and 3. By participating
in the experiment the students earned research credits that counted
towards fulfilment of requirements for a course in cognitive psychology. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the
Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana.
Apparatus and materials
The apparatus and materials were the same as in Experiments 1, 2
and 3, with the following exceptions. The experiment ran on a Mac Mini
computer (3.6 GHz quad-core Intel Core i3 processor with 8 GB RAM)
running 64 bit version of Windows 10. Stimuli were presented on 24
LCD screen (BenQ XL2420G, 1920 x 1080-pixel resolution; 60 Hz refresh rate).
To control for eye-movements, we used an EyeLink 1000 (SR
Research, 2010) system. Gaze direction was calibrated using a ninepoint calibration procedure. Gaze direction of the eye that allowed most
reliable eye-tracking was recorded with a frequency of 1000 Hz. To
ensure reliable eye-tracking, a stable head position, and constant 70 cm
distance to the screen, the participants rested their chin on a fixed
headrest. This resulted in slightly smaller visual angles of the presented
stimuli compared to Experiment 3.
Target stimuli were 35px (0.78 visual angle) in length, with the
main circle 19 px (0.42 visual angle) in diameter and the line 7 px
(0.16 visual angle) wide. The invisible circle was 520 px (11.38 visual
angle) in diameter. Placeholders and probe stimuli were 35 px (0.78
visual angle) in diameter, and the fixation point was 20 px (0.44 visual
angle) in diameter.
Task and procedure
The participants completed both versions of the visual working
memory span task: with pre-cue present and pre-cue absent. To avoid a
possible training or fatigue effect, we alternated the order of the two
versions across the participants.
To allow for control of the gaze during target presentation the task
was adjusted in the following manner. First, at the start of the task the
eye tracking parameters were set, the tracker was calibrated and the
tracking accuracy validated. Next, during the presentation of the target
stimuli and the delay before the response period, the position of the
gaze was continuously monitored. If the gaze deviated from the central
fixation point more than 100 px (2.22 visual angle), a red circle was
shown in the middle of the screen for 500 ms, indicating a fixation
break, and the trial was aborted. Aborted trials did not count towards
computation of the span. Fixation breaks were triggered by saccades
from the fixation point, blinks, as well as accumulated drift due to loss
of accurate calibration. If the experimenter observed a drift in the accuracy of eye tracking, the task was paused to perform a drift correction, and--if necessary--repeat the calibration and validation

Fixation breaks
During task performance we recorded fixation breaks on average in
19.6% (SD = 11.5) of trials when a pre-cue was present and in 14.4%
(SD = 8.6) when a pre-cue was not present. Specifically, fixation breaks
during target presentation occurred in 5.7% of trials when a pre-cue
was present and 4.6% of trials when a pre-cue was not present, whereas
fixation breaks during the delay period occurred in 14.0% of trials
14

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

when a pre-cue was present and 9.7% of trials when a pre-cue was not
present.
We specifically focused on the question of whether the participants
were more likely to break fixation for unilateral versus bilateral target
presentation, and whether the presence of a pre-cue led to a higher
probability of fixation breaks (Fig. S4). To answer these questions we
focused on fixation breaks during target presentation only, as only these
are relevant for ensuring unilateral versus bilateral target presentation
and encoding. A 2-way repeated measures ANOVA with the factors of
laterality (bilateral vs. unilateral) and pre-cue (absent vs. present) revealed no significant main effect of either pre-cue, F(1, 58) = 1.15,
p = .288, 2 < 0.001, or laterality, F(1, 58) < 0.001, p = .983,
2 < .001, as well as no evidence of laterality x pre-cue interaction, F
(1, 58) = 0.374, p = .543, 2 < .001.

Overall, though only eye tracking can ensure unilateral target presentation and valid estimation of unilateral VWM capacity, our results
suggest that--possibly due to the design of the task--the participants in
Experiments 1-3 complied with the request to hold their gaze at the
fixation point, even when their gaze was not explicitly controlled, indicating that the explicit enforcement of fixation might not be needed.
As the presence of a pre-cue does not affect the results, and although we
found no evidence that a pre-cue increases the probability of a fixation
break, we would still recommend the omission of a pre-cue in a situation when either technical limitations or other considerations preclude
the use of eye tracking.
General discussion
The first aim of this study was to directly investigate whether rather
than reflecting a single limitation (e.g. limited focus of attention)
(Cowan, 2005), working memory capacity might be, as suggested by
Logie (2011), determined by the capacity of a number of systems that
jointly enable representation, maintenance and manipulation of information. Specifically, we proposed that the capacity of visual working
memory might reflect the capacities of two systems: a representational
system, which enables establishment of a limited number of distinct
visual representations, and an active maintenance system that enables
sustained activation of all or some of the established representations in
the absence of external stimuli, and protects them from possible distractors.
To test the proposed hypothesis we designed a visual working
memory span task in which the participants were asked to maintain
orientations of items that were presented to the left, right or across both
visual hemifields. We reasoned that an increase in visual working
memory capacity with the bilateral compared to unilateral presentation
of items would indicate that each hemisphere functions as an independent representational system with limited capacity. Further, if in
the case of the bilateral presentation of items visual working memory
capacity does not reach the full representational potential of both
hemispheres, we argue that this reflects a limitation of a second system
necessary to maintain the representation of items established across the
hemispheres.
Were the hypothesis to be confirmed, this would provide us with the
possibility to obtain separate capacity estimates for the two systems
limiting visual working memory capacity--in our model the representational and active maintenance systems--and enable us to explore how the two capacities change and interact throughout development and healthy aging, the second aim of this study.
To fulfil the two aims--first, to test and validate our model, and
second, to explore the changes in the two proposed systems throughout
development and healthy aging--we performed four experiments. In
the following paragraphs the main findings and their implications will
be discussed.

Discussion
The aim of the fourth experiment was to address the limitation of
Experiments 1-3 by explicitly controlling for the participants' gaze. Our
concerns were that a gaze directed toward the targets instead of the
centre of the screen would enable bilateral encoding of unilaterally
presented stimuli. This would result in overestimation of unilateral
capacity, underestimation of bilateral advantage and possibly the false
conclusion that bilateral capacity does not reach full representational
potential.
Controlling for the participants' gaze, however, did not qualitatively
change the results compared to Experiments 1 and 3. Regardless of the
use of a spatial pre-cue, the capacities were higher when stimuli were
presented bilaterally. Moreover, the bilateral capacity index did not
reach the full representational potential. These results not only addressed the stated concerns, but also provided a second replication of
the key findings in an independent sample of participants, jointly providing strong support for the proposition that visual working memory
capacity is limited at two levels. Further exploration of the results also
replicated the previously observed negative relationship between the
bilateral capacity index and the representational potential both in the
presence or absence of a spatial pre-cue.
Strict control of the participants' gaze also enabled estimation of the
effect of the pre-cue without a possible confounding factor of overt eyemovements. In contrast to the studies of bilateral advantage in change
detection working memory tasks (e.g. Holt & Delvenne, 2014, 2015; for
a review see Delvenne, 2012) that reveal a strong effect of attentional
pre-cues and often found no effect of bilateral advantage without a
presence of an attentional pre- or post-cue, our results consistently and
conclusively show no appreciable effect of attentional pre-cuing on
visual working memory performance or bilateral advantage on reconstruction of orientation in a working memory span task. A possible
explanation for the differences between the experimental results could
be that in studies where pre- or post-cues had a significant impact on
the results the target stimuli were typically shown only briefly
(150 ms), and the attentional cues were a pre-requisite for their efficient encoding. In contrast, the relatively long presentation time
(500 ms) in our study gave the participants enough time to focus their
attention and efficiently encode stimuli to effectively eliminate the need
for and the effect of a pre-cue. Interestingly, additional analyses also
revealed no evidence that the participants would be more likely to
commit a fixation break when a spatial pre-cue was given.
Furthermore, the use of the eye-tracker resulted in overall lower
estimates of VWM capacity, which could be ascribed to increased task
difficulty as some of the attentional resources are diverted to maintenance of precise fixation and inhibition of blinks. This, together with
possible frustration due to aborted trials even when participants made
their best efforts to maintain fixation (e.g. due to blinks, drift in calibration or loss of reliable eye-track), could speak against the use of an
eye-tracker, especially in populations that find the added burden of eyetracking particularly taxing.

Visual working memory capacity is limited by two systems, the ability to
form visual representations and the ability for their active maintenance
The results of all four experiments support the key proposition of
the proposed model, namely that visual working memory capacity is
limited by two systems. This conclusion is based on two observed results. First, the presence of bilateral advantage, and second, the fact that
it fails to reach full representational potential. These results and their
implications are discussed below.
First, we have shown that the participants performed better on a
visual working memory span task when the items they had to encode
and maintain were presented across both visual hemifields versus left or
right visual hemifield only. The observed bilateral advantage is congruent with a number of previous studies (e.g. Delvenne, 2005; Holt &
Delvenne, 2014, 2015; Umemoto et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2017)
showing that visual working memory performance is better when the
15

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

items to be remembered are distributed across both versus one visual
hemifield. These results suggest that the left and right hemispheres
have independent and limited abilities to establish visual representations, and that utilizing both can lead to better visual working memory
performance. Importantly, this finding strongly indicates that the capacity of the visual working memory for orientations is limited at the
level of the representational system.
To support this claim, alternative explanations need to be considered and addressed. Some potential explanations were addressed by
the study design. Namely, by organizing the stimuli equidistantly in a
circle we ensured that the spatial separation between the items was the
same when they were shown across versus within a hemifield. Spatial
separation therefore could not contribute to the observed differences in
capacity in unilateral versus bilateral presentations. In a similar
manner, it might be claimed that there is less interference between the
items when they are encoded across the hemispheres versus within a
hemisphere. However, rather than disputing that the representational
system has a limited capacity, such an explanation would speak to the
mechanism underlying the limitation.
Alternatively, it might be claimed (e.g. Holt & Delvenne, 2015) that
it is easier to split attention--or another mechanism of maintenance--between hemispheres rather than within a hemisphere. In
this view the properties of attention rather than the limited capacity of
the hemisphere specific representational system would be the reason for
the observed unilateral disadvantage. However, this alternative is hard
to reconcile with the observation that across participants there are robust differences between the capacities observed when the items are
shown to one or the other hemifield (Fig. 6). It would require one to
posit the existence of separate limited capacity maintenance mechanisms or systems for left and right hemispheres. These would in turn
become a part of the hemisphere specific representational systems
themselves. Additionally, shifting the limitation from the level of representation to the level of maintenance would be in conflict with the
finding of bilateral advantage in a stimulus tracking task (Alvarez &
Cavanagh, 2005) in which the stimuli were presented throughout the
tracking period, and so in principle required no mechanism of representation maintenance.
Second, we have shown that the bilateral advantage does not reach
the full, joint potential of representational abilities of both hemispheres, i.e. bilateral representational potential. This finding can only
be explained by the existence of a second source of limited visual
working memory capacity. In our model, we have related the second
source of limited visual working memory capacity to an active maintenance system that is required to maintain the representations established by the representational system. Though it is probable that additional mechanisms (some addressed in the limitations section)
contribute to the observed inability to use the full representational
potential, the limited ability to actively maintain visual representations
in the absence of target stimuli is probably most widely accepted by the
visual working memory literature.
These findings complement results of previous studies on bilateral
field advantage. For example, Alvarez and Cavanagh (2005) demonstrated an almost twofold increase in capacity for tracking multiple
objects when they were distributed across both versus a single hemifield. Consistent with a series of studies on the bilateral field advantage
in working memory, our results, while clearly demonstrating bilateral
advantage, showed a substantially smaller effect. However, this apparent discrepancy between bilateral field advantage in visual processing and working memory tasks naturally follows from the difference in
the engagement of the purported active maintenance system. Namely,
in Alvarez and Cavanagh (2005 the stimuli were presented throughout
the tracking period, activating and updating the representations within
the representational system and allowing the participants to make full
use of the bilateral representational potential, when the tracked objects
were distributed across both visual hemifields. In contrast, the visual
working memory task in our and other studies requires sustained

maintenance of representations in the absence of external stimuli,
limiting the number of active representations--and with it the extent of
bilateral advantage--to the capacity of the active maintenance system.
Together these results support the two key assertions of the proposed model: first, that visual working memory is limited by capacities
of two systems--in our model a representational and an active maintenance system--and second, that whereas the representational system
consists of two independent subsystems--one supported by the left and
the other by the right hemisphere--there is a single active maintenance
system that supports both representational systems. As suggested by
Sander et al. (2012), this provides a novel framework for understanding
the mechanisms of the formation and maintenance of information in the
visual working memory.
Bilateral advantage differs across participants
The results of all three experiments show pronounced individual
differences in the extent of their ability to make use of bilateral presentation of target items. The bilateral advantage varied from subjects
that successfully utilize joint representational potential of the two
hemispheres to those in which bilateral presentation does not provide
any advantage in visual working memory task performance. Within the
model explored in this study, the bilateral advantage reflects the relationship between representational potential--an estimate of the representational system's ability to form independent representations of
visual features--and bilateral capacity, an estimate of the active
maintenance system's ability to actively sustain representations of visual features in the absence of external stimuli.
The observed variability in bilateral advantage enabled further investigation of the basic assertion of the model, the relationship between
the capacities of the two proposed systems, and the resulting bilateral
advantage. The results showed a negative relationship between bilateral advantage and representational potential. This result is incongruent with the possibility that bilateral visual working memory capacity reflects a fixed proportion of the representational potential.
Instead it indicates that the capacities of the representational and active
maintenance systems--at least to some, significant extent--vary independently across participants, and that individuals with lower unilateral representational capacity have more free resources of the active
maintenance system left to take advantage of bilateral representation,
leading to higher observed bilateral advantage.
Working memory capacity changes with age
As with many cognitive abilities, visual working memory and its
capacity develops at a young age, peaks in early adulthood and declines
with aging (Brockmole & Logie, 2013). Studies have shown that specific
cognitive abilities can peak at different times (Hartshorne & Germine,
2015) and change with different trajectories (Johnson et al., 2010).
Using the ability to separately estimate the visual working memory
representational and active maintenance systems' capacities, we used
our paradigm to explore their changes and interaction throughout the
lifespan. We compared the results with the main theoretical positions
and empirical findings, with a specific emphasis on healthy aging.
A decline in working memory has previously been identified as a
characteristic of healthy aging (Braver & West, 2007; Park & Festini,
2017). As noted by Braver and West (2007), observations of a more
pronounced decrease in working memory based on complex rather than
simple measures of working memory, and coincident findings of significant differences in delay related activity in the prefrontal cortex (for
a review see also Reuter-Lorenz & Sylvester, 2017), led many researchers to believe that whereas maintenance abilities and basic storage capacity are relatively spared, executive components of working
memory are disproportionately affected. This led the research on
working memory in aging to focus primarily on executive processes in
behavioural research (e.g. Blair, Vadaga, Shuchat, & Li, 2011) and
16

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

prefrontal cortex in cognitive neuroscience research (e.g. Rypma &
D'Esposito, 2000).
Recently, though, Park and Reuter-Lorenz in their Scaffolding
Theory of Aging and Cognition (Park & Reuter-Lorenz, 2009; ReuterLorenz & Park, 2014) propose that a disbalance in the observed impairments in maintenance and executive control components of
working memory might be due to the first being compensated by the
second, and the observed increase in prefrontal activation a reflection
of this process. Relatedly, Sander et al. (2012) point out that differences
in working memory performance through the lifespan are best understood as an interplay between top-down and binding processes, the first
not yet fully mature until young adulthood and characterized by a
marked decline with advancing age, and the second relatively mature in
children, but still showing senescent decline in older adults.
Our study joins a number of recent efforts (Alloway & Alloway,
2013; Brockmole & Logie, 2013; Hartshorne & Germine, 2015; Rhodes
et al., 2019) that address--as pointed out by Sander et al. (2012)--a
significant lack of studies that would investigate both ends of the lifespan using the same paradigm. Specifically, our results show that the
progression of change in the capacity of visual working memory is
observed both in the capacity of the representational as well as the
active maintenance systems. In contrast to findings by Sander et al.
(2012) suggesting that representational potential might peak early and
maintenance later in development, we have found both peaking at almost the same age and declining similarly in adulthood. Though not
robustly different from the representational system's capacity, active
maintenance system's capacity, however, seems to decline at a somewhat higher rate--a possibility that should be investigated further.
Importantly, though we have used a relatively simple visual
working memory task that primarily depends on representation and
maintenance processes (although see Section 6.5), we still observed a
significant decline in performance in healthy aging. Together with recent studies e.g. showing a decrease in the resolution of visual working
memory representations with age (Peich, Husain, & Bays, 2013) and a
decline in representational capacity (Souza, 2016), these results, especially the robust decline in the capacity of the representational system
capacity, suggest that broader research on working memory in aging
beyond the currently predominant focus on executive components and
prefrontal cortex is merited.

between the limited capacity visual cache that holds visual codes, and
the limited capacity inner scribe tasked with refreshing (Logie, 2011). A
few challenges and questions persist, though. First, based on a careful
review of multiple studies (Logie & Van Der Meulen, 2009) the visual
cache is currently envisioned as a unitary system that is distinct from
early phases of visual processing and visual imagery, the latter supported by the visual buffer as envisioned by Kosslyn (2005). Specifically, the visual cache is proposed to store visual codes that are either
mapped from long term memory or result from thorough perceptual
processing of visual input. Such a specification of the visual cache is not
congruent with the demonstrated hemisphere specific independent representational systems.
In line with Logie (2011), the visual sensory information presented
to either hemisphere should undergo full perceptual processing and be
stored as abstracted visual codes in a unitary visual cache, which,
however, does not leave room for bilateral advantage. To allow for
bilateral advantage the model would need to be extended to allow separate visual caches for the two hemispheres. Given that the visual
cache holds processed visual codes that can be generated from sources
other than visual input, this seems unlikely.
An alternative possibility to explain bilateral advantage within the
current conception of the visual cache would be that the transfer of
visual information to, and their encoding within, the visual cache is
made more efficient when transferred in parallel from two separate
visual perceptual systems. Given the relatively long display of visual
targets (500 ms) and lack of demonstrable effect of attentional precueing, this explanation seems unlikely as well. It could, however, be
explored empirically by changing the duration of target displays.
The second question pertains to the potential role of the episodic
buffer. The episodic buffer was envisioned (Baddeley, 2000, 2012) to
enable storage of bound multidimensional information and its access to
conscious awareness. Recently (e.g. Allen, Baddeley, & Hitch, 2006;
Allen, Hitch, Mate, & Baddeley, 2012, for a review see Baddeley, Allen,
& Hitch, 2011) it has been mostly explored in the visual domain,
binding individual visual features (such as colour and shape), which are
primarily stored in the visuo-spatial sketchpad. As in this study only a
single visual feature (orientation) had to be maintained in working
memory, it is unclear whether engagement of the episodic buffer would
be required. This could be explored by using multiple bound and unbound features in future studies. However, as visual information
reaches the episodic buffer through the visuo-spatial sketchpad (Alan
Baddeley, 2012), the dilemmas related to the visual cache remain.

Relevance and open questions
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study focusing on
direct evidence that the capacity of the visual working memory is
limited by two systems, purportedly a system that supports the establishment of independent visual representations and a system for their
active maintenance in absence of external stimuli, and showing that
both systems' capacities change throughout development and healthy
aging.
The data obtained challenge some of the leading models of visual
working memory. To address the disparity we proposed a conceptual
model that explicitly integrates the obtained results. In this section we
review how the proposed model and the obtained results relate to existing models of working memory and implicated brain systems.

State-based models of working memory
As presented in the introduction, state-based models (e.g. Cowan,
2005) propose that the capacity of the working memory, operationalized as the focus of attention, is limited only by attentional resources controlled by the central executive or pulled by automatic orienting responses. If that were the case, no bilateral advantage should
be observed. We see two possible explanations within state-based
models. The first is proposed by Holt and Delvenne (2015), who--citing
multiple sources--suggest "that the focus of attention can be split to
non-contiguous locations more easily when the locations are divided
across hemifields relative to within a hemifield" (p. 55). This explanation would keep limited attentional resources as the only source of
limited working memory capacity. We see two problems with this explanation. First, as discussed in the previous section, the bilateral advantage obtained in previous studies often seems to rely on attentional
pre-cuing, which enables encoding of only briefly presented visual
items (Holt & Delvenne, 2015), whereas in our study no effect of precuing is observed. The second, and more problematic, issue with this
explanation are the observed differences in the unilateral capacity between the two hemispheres observed in all experiments (see Fig. 6). As
the items and their arrangement were the same when displayed to the
left or right hemispheres, it is difficult to explain why attention would
be easier to divide within one versus the other hemisphere. A more

Multicomponent model of working memory
As explicitly stated by Logie (2011), the multicomponent model of
working memory proposes that the limited capacity of the working
memory arises as an emergent phenomenon of multiple interactive
systems of limited capacity. The specific nature of limitation is though
not always clear or explicitly stated. Here we propose that in the case of
visual working memory the limitation is both in the number of individual representations that can be established, which are independent
for each hemifield, as well as the number of representations that can be
actively maintained.
The dual limitation matches well with the proposed interaction
17

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

parsimonious explanation is that the two hemispheres support independent representational systems with limited capacity that varies
between them.
The second alternative is related to the statement that the activation
of the relevant representations "is limited only by interference effects
and possibly the passage of time" (Cowan, 2005, p. 42). As the passage
of time was equal in the unilateral and bilateral presentations of items,
the bilateral advantage could then only be ascribed to stronger interference within than between visual hemifields. In relation to our conceptual model and results, the limitation of the representational system
would then stem from item interference. The same question remains,
though: why would interference be more debilitating in one versus the
other hemifield and the related representational system? Again, in our
opinion the more parsimonious explanation is that the representational
system itself is of limited capacity in the ability to form distinct representations, and that the specific capacity may differ between the two
hemispheric representational systems. Interference though can be a
candidate mechanism for limited representational system capacity, and
this possibility should be explored further.
The issue of the specific source of limitation--interference versus
ability to form independent representations--could possibly be resolved by exploring to what extent the unilateral capacity is affected by
the distinctiveness of the items to be remembered. If the key limitation
is interference, then unilateral capacity should increase to the point of
matching bilateral capacity with more distinct items, and conversely
unilateral capacity should decrease and bilateral advantage increase
with reduced distinctiveness between the items to remember. If the key
limitation is the ability to form independent representations, then the
bilateral advantage should remain constant with changes in item distinctiveness. Though the experiment was not optimal with regard to
addressing this question, Holt and Delvenne (2015) (Experiment 2)
failed to obtain a bilateral advantage with a decrease in item distinctiveness (colour contrast), despite a significant effect on overall performance--a finding more congruent with a limited ability to form
independent representations.
An additional support for limited capacity representational system
and a challenge for the focus of attention as the single source of limitation comes from the previously cited study by Alvarez and Cavanagh
(2005). Their study showed that even when visual objects are present
and can directly activate their representations in the representational
system, the unilateral capacity to track them is significantly below the
bilateral capacity, which indicates an inherent limitation with regard to
the number of objects that can be concurrently represented in the representational system, irrespective of attentional limitations. Additionally, the disparity between bilateral advantage in visual tracking
versus working memory indicates that different resources are engaged
in the two cases. One possibility is that a visually presented object can
directly become part of the focus of attention--a possibility that goes
against much evidence on the accessibility of unattended objects (for a
review see Cowan, 2005). Another possibility is that--similar to the
assumptions of the multicomponent model of working memory--active
maintenance of visual objects is separable from the central executive
attentional resources.

sustained activity of the neurons coding for a specific visual representation in posterior regions is needed for the representation to
survive the retention period, a second, active maintenance system, is
engaged. This system depends on top-down processing most often associated with frontal brain areas (Eriksson et al., 2015; Liang, Liu, &
Hu, 2016; Nee et al., 2013) that with their recurrent loops support
ongoing activation of the representations established in the representational system in the absence of the external stimuli and protect
them from possible distractors.
Though widely accepted (e.g. Eriksson et al., 2015; Reuter-Lorenz &
Park, 2014; Riggall & Postle, 2012; Sander et al., 2012), as recently
discussed by Christophel, Klink, Spitzer, Roelfsema, and Haynes (2017)
the distinction between the roles of prefrontal and posterior regions
might not be that clear. Many studies (for a review see Christophel
et al., 2017) jointly suggest that information held in working memory
can be represented by one or more of a widely distributed network of
regions--including the prefrontal cortex--supporting representations at
different levels of abstraction. Due to the nature of the task, and the
observed bilateral advantage indicating the use of independent lateralized representational systems, we argue that the visual information
required to perform the task in our study was most likely represented in
posterior visual brain areas. Based on the proposal by Christophel et al.
(2017), however, we would predict that the bilateral advantage might
not be observed in studies in which the participants find it advantageous to represent the information to be maintained in a more abstract
form.
Additionally, while present in other literature (e.g. Eriksson et al.,
2015), a division between representation and maintenance processes is
currently absent in the proposal by Christophel et al. (2017). Whereas
our finding of strong support for the engagement of two systems that
jointly limit visual working memory capacity is most easily mapped to
the representation of information and its active maintenance, the results could be reframed as reflecting a difference in the capacities of two
systems representing and maintaining information at different levels of
abstraction, both necessary for successful completion of the task. Further insights to differentiate between these possibilities could be gained
by future brain imaging studies.
Utility and limitations
Enabling separate capacity estimates of the representational and
active maintenance systems, the lateralized visual working memory
span paradigm developed for this study provides a novel and useful tool
in the exploration of the two working memory systems and their interactions not only in research on healthy aging, but also on disease. As
working memory is most often among the first abilities to be impaired
in many neurodegenerative (Bublak et al., 2002) and neuropsychiatric
(Goldman-Rakic, 1994) diseases, more specific information on which
component is primarily affected in individual diseases, and how the
interaction between the two systems changes as a disease progresses,
could assist in better understanding of the disease, its prevention, diagnosis and treatment.
When evaluating the obtained results as well as the potential of the
paradigm for its use in other settings, the specific nature and complexity
of the task needs to be considered. Specifically, in comparison with
other paradigms used to measure visual working memory capacity, e.g.
change detection or item recognition tasks in which the participant only
compares the items held in memory with the presented probe stimuli
(Rouder, Morey, Morey, & Cowan, 2011), the participants in our study
had to reconstruct the previously presented items, a task that requires
maintenance of the content of visual working memory in the face of
novel visual stimulation and processing, engaging inhibition and related executive processes to a larger extent than a "simple" maintenance task. From this perspective the task might be regarded as closer
to complex than simple span tasks, and at least some of the limitation
ascribed to the active maintenance system could be related to the

Implicated brain systems
Though our study provides behavioural evidence of two limits to
visual working memory, it does not provide information about their
neuroanatomical substrate. Based on previous studies and the literature
(Eriksson et al., 2015; Nee et al., 2013; Riggall & Postle, 2012; Sander
et al., 2012) we can, however, speculate that what we describe as representational and active maintenance systems reflect the function of
posterior and prefrontal brain regions, respectively. The representational system would include posterior regions that are responsible for
early processing of visual information and their encoding by establishing their neuronal representations that are retained when the information is no longer present in the external environment. As
18

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

second factor of executive control, as described by Engle and Kane
(2003). In a similar manner, the limitation ascribed to the active
maintenance system could to some extent be ascribed to response interference.
Whereas these considerations do not undermine the key finding of
two limits to visual working memory, they jointly highlight the need to
better understand the specific contributions to the observed limits of
the purported active maintenance system. Additional research should
help discern whether they are to be considered as constituent processes
of the active maintenance system and its limitation, or rather as additional working memory independent sources of interference resulting in
underestimation of the active maintenance system, the observed bilateral capacity of visual working memory and related bilateral capacity
index, an indicator of bilateral field advantage.
Further, in our study, specifically due to the fact that the orientations had to be reconstructed in the correct locations, we tacitly considered that the items to be recalled were held in the working memory
as visual objects and not only as individual features. As the task required no other binding than that of a single visual feature (orientation)
to a specific location, this, however, might not have been the case.
Therefore, an open question remains as to whether a larger capacity for
single features might be obtained if the specific location was not important, and whether the results might be different if the task required
the participant to maintain and report objects that included additional
(e.g. colour-shape) binding. Addressing these questions will be the
focus of future research.
Lastly, though the presented findings are stable and were replicated
over four experiments with different samples, it has to be acknowledged--as indicated in previous paragraphs--that they currently pertain to a single visual feature (orientation) and task paradigm. They
need to be extended with additional research to explore other visual
features (e.g. colours and shapes) as well as other factors (e.g. response
interference) determining the observed results.

Visualization, Writing - original draft, review & editing. Grega Repov:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Software, Supervision,
Visualization, Writing - original draft, review & editing, Funding acquisition.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104090.
References
Allen, R. J., Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (2006). Is the binding of visual features in
working memory resource-demanding? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
135(2), 298-313 https://doi.org/10/bf5jx9.
Allen, R. J., Hitch, G. J., Mate, J., & Baddeley, A. D. (2012). Feature binding and attention
in working memory: A resolution of previous contradictory findings. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(12), 2369-2383 https://doi.org/10/ggbs8h.
Alloway, T. P., & Alloway, R. G. (2013). Working memory across the lifespan: A crosssectional approach. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(1), 84-93 https://doi.org/10/
ggbs8j.
Alvarez, G. A., & Cavanagh, P. (2005). Independent resources for attentional tracking in
the left and right visual hemifields. Psychological Science, 16(8), 637-643 https://
doi.org/10/bnzxbt.
Baddeley, A. (1996b). Exploring the central executive. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A, 49(1), 5-28 https://doi.org/10/ch8mb6.
Baddeley, A. (1996a). The fractionation of working memory. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 93(24), 13468-13472 https://doi.org/10/d6t7wm.
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 4(11), 417-423 https://doi.org/10/d4tmmh.
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working memory: Theories, models, and controversies. Annual
Review of Psychology, 63(1), 1-29 https://doi.org/10/cw5hjb.
Baddeley, A., Allen, R. J., & Hitch, G. J. (2011). Binding in visual working memory: The
role of the episodic buffer. Neuropsychologia, 49(6), 1393-1400 https://doi.org/10/
dnh2hg.
Baddeley, A., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In G. A. Bower (Vol. Ed.), Recent
advances in learning and motivation: Vol. 8, (pp. 47-89). . https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0079-7421(08)60452-1.
Baguley, T. (2012). Calculating and graphing within-subject confidence intervals for
ANOVA. Behavior Research Methods, 44(1), 158-175 https://doi.org/10/bqs9d3.
Bates, D., Machler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models
using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.
i01.
Bettencourt, K. C., & Xu, Y. (2016). Decoding the content of visual short-term memory
under distraction in occipital and parietal areas. Nature Neuroscience, 19(1), 150-157
https://doi.org/10/f749bh.
Blair, M., Vadaga, K. K., Shuchat, J., & Li, K. Z. H. (2011). The role of age and inhibitory
efficiency in working memory processing and storage components. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 64(6), 1157-1172 https://doi.org/10/fm3d3d.
Braver, T. S., & West, R. (2007). Working memory, executive control, and aging. In F. I.
M. Craik, & T. A. Salthause (Eds.). The handbook of aging and cognition(3rd ed.).
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203837665.ch7.
Brockmole, J. R., & Logie, R. H. (2013). Age-related change in visual working memory: A
study of 55,753 participants aged 8-75. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1-5 https://
doi.org/10/gdz7v2.
Bruyer, R., & Scailquin, J.-C. (1998). The visuospatial sketchpad for mental images:
Testing the multicomponent model of working memory. Acta Psychologica, 98(1),
17-36 https://doi.org/10/cjwx57.
Bublak, P., Muller, U., Gron, G., Reuter, M., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2002). Manipulation of
working memory information is impaired in Parkinson's disease and related to
working memory capacity. Neuropsychology, 16(4), 577-590 https://doi.org/10/
c3qz8n.
Bullier, J. (2003). Communications between cortical areas of the visual system. In L. M.
Chalupa, & J. S. Werner (Eds.). The visual neurosciences (pp. 522-540). . http://
cognet.mit.edu/erefschapter/communications-between-cortical-areas-of-visualsystem.
Chakravarthi, R., & Cavanagh, P. (2009). Bilateral field advantage in visual crowding.
Vision Research, 49(13), 1638-1646 https://doi.org/10/br79m3.
Christophel, T. B., Hebart, M. N., & Haynes, J.-D. (2012). Decoding the contents of visual
short-term memory from human visual and parietal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience,
32(38), 12983-12989 https://doi.org/10/f397vp.
Christophel, T. B., Klink, P. C., Spitzer, B., Roelfsema, P. R., & Haynes, J.-D. (2017). The
distributed nature of working memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(2), 111-124
https://doi.org/10/gc7nn3.
Cowan, N. (1995). Attention and memory: An integrated framework. Retrieved from DOI:
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195119107.001.0001.
Cowan, N. (2010). The magical mystery four: How is working memory capacity limited,
and why? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(1), 51-57 https://doi.org/10/
bftsc5.
Cowan, N. (2005). Working memory capacity (1st ed.). Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/
10.4324/9780203342398.
D'Esposito, M., & Postle, B. R. (2015). The cognitive neuroscience of working memory.

Conclusions
In this study we have shown that visual working memory capacity is
limited by two systems, purportedly a representational system consisting of two independent stores tasked with forming distinct representations of visual objects, and a unitary active maintenance system
enabling their sustained activation in absence of external stimuli. This
finding supports novel perspectives in theoretical debates, offers alternative interpretations of existing empirical data and invites future research. Moreover, investigation of the two systems across lifespan revealed significant developmental and aging changes in both systems.
Despite a slight indication that the active maintenance system might
decline faster in aging, this finding emphasizes the need to widen the
research on working memory in healthy aging from the predominant
focus on executive components to also consider a decline in the ability
to form representations of items to be held in working memory.
Author notes
This research was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency
grants J7-5553, J3-9264, P5-0110 and P3-0338.
Materials related to this paper are publicly available on Open
Science Framework repository: osf.io/gbujw.
The authors would like to thank Andreja Speh, Ana Rejec, Hana
Stela Hrovatin, Katja Skoda and students of the Cognitive psychology
lab course for help with data collection, as well as the reviewers and
editors for constructive comments and suggestions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Anka
Slana
Ozimi:
Conceptualization,
Methodology,
Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Project administration,
19

Journal of Memory and Language 112 (2020) 104090

A. Slana Ozimi and G. Repov

411-421 https://doi.org/10/bpqg2q.
Oberauer, K. (2009). Design for a working memory. In B. Ross (Ed.). Advances in research
and theory: Vol. 51. Psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 45-100). . https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0079-7421(09)51002-X.
Park, D. C., & Festini, S. B. (2017). Theories of memory and aging: A look at the past and a
glimpse of the future. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences, 72(1), 82-90 https://doi.org/10/gbmkxg.
Park, D. C., & Reuter-Lorenz, P. (2009). The adaptive brain: Aging and neurocognitive
scaffolding. Annual Review of Psychology, 60(1), 173-196 https://doi.org/10/brfr7z.
Peich, M.-C., Husain, M., & Bays, P. M. (2013). Age-related decline of precision and
binding in visual working memory. Psychology and Aging, 28(3), 729-743 https://
doi.org/10/gdz7r7.
Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy--Psychophysics software in Python. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 162(1-2), 8-13 https://doi.org/10/b5dqq8.
Pessoa, L., Gutierrez, E., Bandettini, P. A., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2002). Neural correlates
of visual working memory: FMRI amplitude predicts task performance. Neuron, 35,
975-987 https://doi.org/10/fjf22w.
Railo, H. (2014). Bilateral and two-item advantage in subitizing. Vision Research, 103,
41-48 https://doi.org/10/f6jq2q.
R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. http://www.R-project.org/.
Repovs, G., & Baddeley, A. (2006). The multi-component model of working memory:
explorations in experimental cognitive psychology. Neuroscience, 139(1), 5-21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.12.061.
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., & Park, D. C. (2014). How does it STAC Up? Revisiting the scaffolding theory of aging and cognition. Neuropsychology Review, 24(3), 355-370
https://doi.org/10/gdz7ss.
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., & Sylvester, C.-Y. C. (2017). The cognitive neuroscience of working
memory and aging. In R. Cabeza, L. Nyberg, & D. C. Park (Eds.). Cognitive neuroscience
of aging. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rhodes, S., Jaroslawska, A. J., Doherty, J. M., Belletier, C., Naveh-Benjamin, M., Cowan,
N., ... Logie, R. H. (2019). Storage and processing in working memory: Assessing
dual-task performance and task prioritization across the adult lifespan. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 148(7), 1204-1227 https://doi.org/10/ggbtgc.
Riggall, A. C., & Postle, B. R. (2012). The relationship between working memory storage
and elevated activity as measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Journal of Neuroscience, 32(38), 12990-12998 https://doi.org/10/f397jj.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Morey, C. C., & Cowan, N. (2011). How to measure working
memory capacity in the change detection paradigm. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
18(2), 324-330 https://doi.org/10/dm53bp.
Rypma, B., & D'Esposito, M. (2000). Isolating the neural mechanisms of age-related
changes in human working memory. Nature Neuroscience, 3(5), 509-515 https://
doi.org/10/bwrzx2.
Sander, M. C., Lindenberger, U., & Werkle-Bergner, M. (2012). Lifespan age differences in
working memory: A two-component framework. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(9), 2007-2033 https://doi.org/10/f4cpkd.
Souza, A. S. (2016). No age deficits in the ability to use attention to improve visual
working memory. Psychology and Aging, 31(5), 456-470 https://doi.org/10/ggbtdd.
SR Research (2010). EyeLink 1000 user manual. Mississauga, ON, Canada: SR Research
Ltd.
Swanson, H. L. (2017). Verbal and visual-spatial working memory: What develops over a
life span? Developmental Psychology, 53(5), 971-995 https://doi.org/10/ggbtdf.
Umemoto, A., Drew, T., Ester, E. F., & Awh, E. (2010). A bilateral advantage for storage in
visual working memory. Cognition, 117(1), 69-79 https://doi.org/10/bt3v9n.
Vogel, E. K., & Machizawa, M. G. (2004). Neural activity predicts individual differences in
visual working memory capacity. Nature, 428(6984), 748-751 https://doi.org/10/
dpb3j5.
Wickham, H. (2009). ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. New York: Springer.
Zaksas, D., Bisley, J. W., & Pasternak, T. (2001). Motion information is spatially localized
in a visual working-memory task. Journal of Neurophysiology, 86(2), 912-921 https://
doi.org/10/ggbtdj.
Zhang, Y., Ye, C., Roberson, D., Zhao, G., Xue, C., & Liu, Q. (2017). The bilateral field
advantage effect in memory precision. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
17470218(2016), 1 https://doi.org/10/gcx85t.

Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 115-142.
Delvenne, J. (2005). The capacity of visual short-term memory within and between
hemifields. Cognition, 96(3), B79-B88 https://doi.org/10/bcff9h.
Delvenne, J. (2012). Visual short-term memory and the bilateral field advantage. In G.
Kalivas, & S. F. Petralia (Eds.). Short-term memory: New research (pp. 129-154). Nova
Science Publishers.
Dolcos, F., Miller, B., Kragel, P., Jha, A., & McCarthy, G. (2007). Regional brain differences in the effect of distraction during the delay interval of a working memory task.
Brain Research, 1152, 171-181 https://doi.org/10/db5jq8.
Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2003). Executive attention, working memory capacity, and a
two-factor theory of cognitive control. Psychology of learning and motivation: Vol. 44,
(pp. 145-199). . https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(03)44005-X.
Eriksson, J., Vogel, E. K., Lansner, A., Bergstrom, F., & Nyberg, L. (2015). Neurocognitive
architecture of working memory. Neuron, 88(1), 33-46 https://doi.org/10/f3ndqg.
Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1994). Working memory dysfunction in schizophrenia. The Journal
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 6, 348-357 https://doi.org/10/ggbtgb.
Hartshorne, J. K., & Germine, L. T. (2015). When does cognitive functioning peak? The
asynchronous rise and fall of different cognitive abilities across the life span.
Psychological Science, 26(4), 433-443 https://doi.org/10/f69q6p.
Holt, J. L., & Delvenne, J.-F. (2014). A bilateral advantage in controlling access to visual
short-term memory. Experimental Psychology, 61(2), 127-133 https://doi.org/10/
ggbs8z.
Holt, J. L., & Delvenne, J.-F. (2015). A bilateral advantage for maintaining objects in
visual short term memory. Acta Psychologica, 154, 54-61 https://doi.org/10/f6x4jg.
Johnson, W., Logie, R. H., & Brockmole, J. R. (2010). Working memory tasks differ in
factor structure across age cohorts: Implications for dedifferentiation. Intelligence,
38(5), 513-528 https://doi.org/10/fmzkwx.
Klauer, K. C., & Zhao, Z. (2004). Double dissociations in visual and spatial short-term
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(3), 355-381 https://
doi.org/10/b48hdx.
Kosslyn, S. M. (2005). Mental images and the brain. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22(3-4),
333-347 https://doi.org/10/d6p2w4.
Kraft, A., Dyrholm, M., Bundesen, C., Kyllingsbaek, S., Kathmann, N., & Brandt, S. A.
(2013). Visual attention capacity parameters covary with hemifield alignment.
Neuropsychologia, 51(5), 876-885 https://doi.org/10/f4w6rg.
Lawrence, M. A. (2013). Easy analysis and visualization of factorial experiments. (Version
3.1.2) [R]. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=ez.
Liang, T., Liu, Q., & Hu, Z. (2016). Bilateral field advantage and its brain mechanism
during visual processing. Advances in Psychological Science, 24(7), 1032 https://
doi.org/10/ggbtdc.
Logie, R. H. (2011). The functional organization and capacity limits of working memory.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(4), 240-245 https://doi.org/10/dgspjx.
Logie, R. H., & Van Der Meulen, M. (2009). Fragmenting and integrating visuospatial
working memory. In J. R. Brockmole (Ed.). The visual world in memory (pp. 1-32).
New York: Routledge.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (2013). Visual working memory capacity: From psychophysics
and neurobiology to individual differences. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(8),
391-400 https://doi.org/10/39v.
Luria, R., Balaban, H., Awh, E., & Vogel, E. K. (2016). The contralateral delay activity as a
neural measure of visual working memory. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
62, 100-108.
Ma, W. J., Husain, M., & Bays, P. M. (2014). Changing concepts of working memory.
Nature Neuroscience, 17(3), 347-356 https://doi.org/10/gd8cbs.
Magnussen, S. (2000). Low-level memory processes in vision. Trends in Neurosciences,
23(6), 247-251 https://doi.org/10/fktsb6.
Magnussen, S., & Greenlee, M. W. (1999). The psychophysics of perceptual memory.
Psychological Research, 62(2-3), 81-92 https://doi.org/10/bkp239.
Navarro, D. (2015). lsr: Companion to "Learning Statistics with R" (Version 0.5) [R].
Retrieved from https://cran.r-project.org/package=lsr.
Nee, D. E., Brown, J. W., Askren, M. K., Berman, M. G., Demiralp, E., Krawitz, A., &
Jonides, J. (2013). A meta-analysis of executive components of working memory.
Cerebral Cortex, 23(2), 264-282 https://doi.org/10/f4hhnk.
Oberauer, K. (2002). Access to information in working memory: Exploring the focus of
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(3),

20

